                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      WHO'S THE BOSS? THE EFFECT OF STRONG LEADERSHIP ON EMPLOYEE
                                TURNOVER

                                     Susan Payne Carter
                                      Whitney Dudley
                                       David S. Lyle
                                       John Z. Smith

                                     Working Paper 22383
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22383


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           July 2016, Revised March 2017




Previously circulated as “The Effects of Mentor Quality, Exposure, and Type on Junior Officer
Retention in the United States Army.” We thank Dean Dudley, William Skimmyhorn, and
seminar participants at the Western Economics Association, the Association for Public Policy
Analysis and Management, the Office of Economic and Manpower Analysis, and the U.S.
Military Academy. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not reflect the
position of the United States Military Academy, the Department of the Army, the Department of
Defense, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Susan Payne Carter, Whitney Dudley, David S. Lyle, and John Z. Smith. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Who's the Boss? The Effect of Strong Leadership on Employee Turnover
Susan Payne Carter, Whitney Dudley, David S. Lyle, and John Z. Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 22383
July 2016, Revised March 2017
JEL No. J01,J08,J24,J53,J63

                                         ABSTRACT

Despite the importance placed on supervision in the workplace, little is known about the effects
of a boss’ leadership quality on labor market outcomes such as employee job retention. Using
plausibly exogenous assignment of junior officers to bosses in the U.S. Army, we find positive
retention effects for those assigned to immediate and senior bosses who are good leaders. These
effects are strongest for officers with high SAT scores. Junior officers who share the same home
geographic region, high SAT, and undergraduate institution as their bosses who also have strong
leadership qualities retain at the highest rates.


Susan Payne Carter                             David S. Lyle
United States Military Academy                 Department of Social Sciences
Department of Social Sciences                  United States Military Academy
607 Cullum Road                                West Point, NY 10996
West Point, NY 10996                           and NBER
susan.carter@usma.edu                          david.lyle@usma.edu

Whitney Dudley                                 John Z. Smith
United States Army, SOCOM                      Department of Social Sciences
Ft. Bragg, NC                                  607 Cullum Road
whitney.dudley.ctr@socom.mil                   United States Military Academy
                                               West Point, NY 10996
                                               John.Smith2@usma.edu
1. Introduction
       Employee turnover costs are a significant challenge for many firms. 1
Studies show that employee turnover can cost between twenty and seventy-five
percent of salary in terms of recruiting, training, and lost productivity. 2 In
response to these high costs, firms often design compensation structures to
encourage longer employee tenure. Firms also make investments in the work
environment and offer nonpecuniary benefits, such as free lunches or access to
fitness rooms, to enhance employee work experience. While firms continue to
experiment with innovative ways to improve employee retention, perhaps one of
the most enduring aspects of a job that impacts worker satisfaction is the
relationship that workers have with their boss. What often differentiates a good
boss from a bad one is leadership ability. From motivating and rewarding effort,
organizing capital and labor, establishing the work pace, serving as a role model
for employees, and setting the overall tone of an organization’s work
environment, a boss’ leadership ability is apt to impact how employees view their
job.
       Using rich administrative data from the U.S. Army, we explore how the
leadership ability of a boss – both immediate and more senior – impacts junior
officer retention. The U.S. Army is an ideal setting to study the impact of
leadership ability because of the exogenous nature of officer assignments in the
Army, the emphasis and clear distinction of who the Army considers to have the


1
  One study found that turnover costs represented 12%-40% of pre-tax income
(Driving the Bottom Line, 2006).
2
  Boushey and Glynn (2012) estimate that the cost of replacing an employee
whose annual salary is less than $75,000 is roughly 20 percent of annual pay. The
Society of Human Resource Managers offers a higher replacement cost heuristic
for salaried employees: 50 to 75 percent of annual pay (Merhar, 2016).
https://www.zanebenefits.com/blog/bid/312123/employee-retention-the-real-cost-
of-losing-an-employee.




                                           3
highest leadership ability, and the fact that wages are set in the Army by rank and
tenure as opposed to ability. 3 The granularity of our data allows us to further
investigate the impact of leadership effects when employees and bosses share the
same race, SAT, home of record, or attendance at the same undergraduate
institution.
        In part, our paper contributes to the managerial skills literature. While
most papers have focused on the effects of managers on firm productivity (see for
examples Bloom et al., 2013, Bertrand and Schoar, 2003, and Bloom and Van
Reenen, 2007), 4 a few focus on the effects of manager quality on employees.
Bender et al. (2016) find that better managed firms (using an index that measures
advanced management practices in place) in Germany attract higher quality
employees, which are the type of employees that are less likely to be fired or laid
off. Hoffman and Tadelis (2016) use data from a technology and service firm and
find that manager quality is significantly correlated with reductions in employee
turnover, employee promotions, and employee salary increases for both low and
high skilled employees.


3
  We define a good leader as one who received an early promotion to the rank of
major. For both the junior and senior leaders in our study, this early promotion
occurred outside of the time frame of the employee-employer relationships we
study. Early promotion to major is highly selective; typically less than 10 percent
of an officer cohort is promoted early.
4
  Bloom et al. (2013) perform a randomized control trial at Indian Textile firms
where they give five months of management consulting to the treatment firms and
only once moth of training to the control firms, and they find increases in
productivity of 17%. Bertrand and Schoar (2003) follow the top five paid
employees in large publically traded firms in the U.S. across time and different
companies. They find that manager fixed effects have important explanatory
power on firm decisions. Bloom and Van Reenen (2007) collect information on
management practices in firms in the United States, the United Kingdom, France,
and Germany using a new survey instrument. Their instrument is strongly
correlated with multiple measures of firm success, including profitability,
productivity, etc.




                                          4
        Our research also contributes to the growing literature on mentorship and
role models. It is not hard to imagine how bosses may serve in some mentorship
capacity through career development and social support (Raabe and Beehr, 2003).
In fact, studies dating from the late 1970s to the 2000s find that employees often
see their direct boss as a mentor. 5 The challenge with measuring the effects of
mentorship is that mentor relationships are often formed voluntarily and mentors
may select high-potential employees that are expected to continue with the firm.
Most studies find that mentor relationships make employees less likely to leave
the firm. 6
        A similar strand of literature studies the theoretical and empirical impacts
of type-based role modeling in which the advisor and junior protégé share some
demographic characteristic. For example, junior protégés might be more inclined
to believe an organization is a better fit if they have a superior who is similar to
them in some respect. 7 Neumark and Gardecki (1998) and Hilmer and Hilmer
(2007) find minimal differences on job placement and research productivity for
female Ph.D. students with male versus female dissertation advisors. Carrell et al.
(2010) find that females at the Air Force Academy randomly assigned to female
professors in introductory math and science courses were more likely to both do
well in those courses and to subsequently choose an academic major in those
fields. 8 Hoffman and Oreopoulos (2009) find small positive impacts of same-sex


5
  See Roche (1979), p. 19 and Ragins et al. (2000). Scandura and Schriesheim
(1994) and Tepper (1995) both argue that bosses clearly perform mentoring
functions and are considered mentors.
6
  See Laband and Lentz (1998), Holincheck (2006), and Mills and Mullins (2008),
Bettinger and Baker (2014), Blau et al. (2010), and Rodriguez-Planas (2012) for
other examples of cases where participating in a mentorship program improves
retention and productivity.
7
  For examples of theoretical models, see Athey et al. (2000) and Chung (2000).
8
  Bettinger and Long (2005) find that female undergraduates assigned female
instructors in initial mathematics and statistics courses are more likely to enroll in




                                          5
instructors on academic achievement and course completion for a sample of first-
year undergraduates. Recent investigations of the impact of race-matched student-
instructor effects for undergraduates find large, positive gains in achievement and
continuation for underrepresented minorities (Fairlie et al., 2014; Lusher et al.,
2015). Although we are unable to explore gender-matched boss effects, our data
allow us to study boss effects matched by race, SAT score, home of record at the
Census division level, and undergraduate institution. 9
       One of the most important characteristics of a boss that impacts employees
is the boss’s leadership quality. Research has found that leadership skills
developed during high school result in higher earnings ten years later (Kuhn and
Weinberger, 2005). Lyle (2007) also finds that freshmen assigned to West Point
squad leaders with high leadership scores are more likely to stay in the Army after
their initial service obligation. There is also a developing literature on what makes
a good leader. For example, Lazear (2012) finds that good leaders are more
generalists than specialists, and Hermalin (1998) shows theoretically that leading
by example is the most effective form of leadership. How those leadership skills
influence employees, however, has not been studied extensively.
       Lazear et al. (2015) presented one of the first major works on the effect of
a high quality boss on technology-based service workers. In addition to providing
a tractable theoretical model, they provide empirical estimates that show that
better bosses increase employee productivity and reduce employee turnover. Our
work builds on their paper by providing answers to many of the empirical
questions raised by their theoretical framework. In addition, we extend this vein



follow-on courses and major in those subjects, but similar results were not found
for female students with female instructors in physics and biology courses.
9
  During the time-period of our data, Congress stipulated that the Army
differentiate assignments by gender based on combat exposure, and thus we
cannot guarantee the random assignment of mentor quality for females.




                                          6
of research in a number of important ways. First, we study type-based effects on
retention, which to our knowledge has not been addressed in the literature on
managers and bosses to date. Second, we extend our study of type-based effects
to further examine whether type-based effects are more important when strong
leadership of the boss is also present. Third, we are able to measure the effect of
both immediate bosses and more senior bosses (the boss’s boss) on employee
labor supply decisions. Fourth, we are able to study whether there is a persistent
boss effect with regard to the length of time between working under a boss and
the retention decision. Fifth, the Army provides a clean natural experiment and
perhaps one of the most ideal settings to empirically identify the causal effects of
a boss’s leadership quality on employee turnover.
       Identifying causal effects of a boss’ leadership ability on employee
retention requires a setting where other potential determinants of job retention are
unrelated to the leadership ability of an employee’s boss. The Army provides a
unique setting where employee assignments are based on changing needs of the
Army in response to changing national security requirements. As the Army
responds to these changing conditions, it adjusts personnel assignments
throughout its ranks. Based on changes in open positions across military units
over time, two young officers with the same military occupation and reporting to
the same Army post merely days apart are frequently assigned to different units
(and hence different bosses). These relationships do not form voluntarily, and all
young officers are assigned an immediate and a senior boss.
       Drawing on a similar identification strategy demonstrated by Lyle and
Smith (2014) in a study of mentorship effects on officer performance, we
demonstrate that assignments for both immediate and senior bosses are made
without regard for observable characteristics of either these junior officers or their




                                          7
bosses. 10 Although our paper exploits similar exogenous variation as Lyle and
Smith (2014), our paper differs from theirs in a number of respects. First, we
study an employee’s labor supply decision at various points in a career rather than
the firm’s decision to promote an employee. Second, we use an entirely different
population of officers; we study newly commissioned lieutenants instead of more
senior captains as they did. Third, we investigate the leadership effects of both
immediate and senior bosses. Fourth, we explore type-based effects in greater
detail. Finally, we are able to estimate the impact of the leadership quality of the
senior boss on the immediate boss.
       More specifically, in this paper we find that having an immediate boss
with strong leadership increases retention rates by 2.7 percentage points and
having a senior boss with strong leadership increase retention rates by 2.1
percentage points. 11 Having both an immediate and senior boss with high levels
of leadership ability has an additive effect of 4.8 percentage points. These
findings are amplified when we condition our sample of junior officers based on
SAT score. Junior officers with high SAT scores – a group that is less likely to
stay in the Army – who have both junior and senior bosses with good leadership
abilities are more likely to retain in the Army by 7.7 percentage points. 12
       In our investigation of type-matched effects, we find evidence that a boss
from the same Census division as the young junior officer increases retention by
3.6 percentage points. 13 We also find that for those junior officers who have high


10
   Lyle and Smith (2014) find evidence that having a high-performing mentor
improves early promotion prospects by 29 percent.
11
   Retention rates to eight years of service for young officers without a high-
performing mentor are approximately 49-50 percent.
12
   We define a “high” SAT score as a composite SAT score in the top 50 percent
of the cohort distribution of SAT scores.
13
   The nine Census divisions are: New England, Middle Atlantic, East North
Central, West North Central, South Atlantic, East South Central, West South




                                          8
SAT scores, having a boss who also has high SAT scores and is a good leader
significantly increases retention rates by 8.0 percentage points for immediate
bosses and 5.4 percentage points for senior bosses. Again, the effect is nearly
cumulative, 15.9 percentage points, for junior officers that have strong leaders
with high SAT scores as both immediate and senior bosses. We find additional
enhanced retention effects for junior officers serving under strong leadership who
also share a common home of record at the Census division level or a common
undergraduate institution. We do not find type-matched effects for minorities.
         2. Background on U.S. Army Officers and Army Leadership
       Each year the Army commissions roughly 4,000 new officers as second
lieutenants. 14 The Army invests a great deal in its young officers, providing most
with a college education, significant leadership training, and both an immediate
and a senior boss. In exchange for these investments in human capital, these
young officers agree to an eight-year military service obligation. Depending on
the source of commission, officers must serve about half of their obligation on
active duty and can serve the remainder in a reserve status. Those who attend the
United States Military Academy have a 5-year active duty obligation, while those
who go through ROTC or who are commissioned after a shorter training period
have 3 or 4 years of active-duty obligation. We will study the likelihood that an
officer stays on active-duty through 8 years of service, which represents three to
five years after their initial active-duty service obligation. All officers of the same
rank and tenure in the Army earn the same base salary, regardless of their source
of commission or outside job market opportunities.




Central, Mountain, and Pacific. See Appendix 1 for a listing of states by Census
division.
14
   The officer rank structure within the U.S. Army is as follows: second
lieutenant, first lieutenant, captain, major, lieutenant colonel, colonel, and general.




                                           9
          The Army primarily organizes its formations around ten divisions. Each
division typically has three or more brigades, and each brigade has approximately
five battalions. Commanders of these battalions have been in the Army for more
than 15 years and serve as senior bosses to the young officers in our study. Within
each battalion, there are typically four companies, each commanded by a different
officer. These company commanders have been in the Army for five or more
years and serve as immediate bosses to newly commissioned officers. The
employees in this study are the junior officers who serve as platoon leaders.
Junior officers typically interact with their immediate boss on a daily basis during
such events as physical training, vehicle maintenance, supply room inventories,
and weapons training. Weekly interactions between junior officers and their
senior bosses generally involve readiness reporting on items such as vehicle
mission capability status, weapons qualification status, and discipline issues.
Figure 1 depicts this relationship structure. Both immediate and senior bosses
provide a formal rating of their junior officers in an annual officer evaluation
report.
          First-line and senior bosses provide critical leadership for young Army
officers. Since the labor market for officers is almost exclusively internal, the
nation’s future security depends in large part on the Army’s ability to develop
young officers into senior officers capable of effectively leading military units on
increasingly complex missions. As such, the Army places significant emphasis
on leader development. 15 Like many private sector firms, the Army is particularly



15
   The opening statement of the 2013 Army Leader Development Strategy (p.1)
states:
        “The U.S. Army builds leaders for our Nation. Developing leaders is a
        competitive advantage the Army possesses that cannot be replaced by
        technology or substituted for with advanced weaponry and platforms. If
        we do not develop leaders well we cannot build quality units, design




                                          10
interested in retaining high-potential officers. As documented in Wardynski et al.
(2010) and noted anecdotally in Kane (2013), the Army tends to lose a higher
share of its high-potential officers, especially as measured by pre-service
performance on the SAT. 16
       Each year the Army reviews the evaluation reports for the cohort of
officers eligible for promotion to major (typically between 8 and 10 years of
service). The promotion board reviews officer records and typically selects
between 5-10 percent for promotion prior to the rest of their cohort based on their
past and potential for future leadership. This distinction of early promotion
increases the likelihood of assignment to competitively selected command
positions (battalion commander, brigade commander) and also increases the
likelihood of attaining a general officer rank. We, therefore, define a good leader
as either an immediate boss (company commander) who will be promoted early to
the rank of major or the senior boss (battalion commander) who was previously
promoted early to the rank of major.
                                       3. Data
       The administrative data for our study come from the Office of Economic
and Manpower Analysis at West Point, NY. Junior officers in our data are male
lieutenants commissioned into the active duty Army between 1994 and 2005 who
served as platoon leaders at any time between fiscal years 1998 and 2008. 17 We
link junior officers to their immediate and senior bosses through annual Army



        cogent campaigns, or execute effective operations in theater…Leader
        development is fundamental to our Army.”
16
   Wardynski et al. 2010 demonstrate the decline in junior officer retention within
the Army over the past 30 years.
17
   We restrict our sample of junior officers to male officers in one of the 14
military occupations other than Aviation and Medical Services. Aviation and
Medical Services have longer initial service obligations. See appendix 1 for a list
of occupations.




                                         11
officer evaluation reports. On average, young officers serve in platoon leader
positions for approximately 14 months.
       Table 1 contains summary statistics for all junior and senior bosses in the
Army during our sample time period. Using the Army’s personnel database, we
selected all variables potentially related to the characteristics of a boss that could
affect the junior officer’s decision to stay in the Army: race, SAT score,
admissions selectivity of undergraduate institution, and source of commission. 18
We provide summary statistics for the universe of possible immediate and senior
bosses at the time of our study in column 1 of each panel. Column 2 contains
summary statistics for the sample of actual officers who serve as immediate and
senior bosses in our sample in panels A and B, respectively. 19 Comparisons
reveal very similar underlying distributions, suggesting that the sample of bosses
in our study reflects the larger underlying population of potential bosses.
       Approximately 10 percent of immediate bosses are deemed strong leaders
whereas nearly 30 percent of senior bosses have received this designation.
Immediate bosses have not gone through the promotion board process at the time
when they serve as first-line bosses, so the 10 percent represents the share of
officers who will eventually appear before a promotion board and be selected
early for promotion. Meanwhile, senior bosses have already gone through the
promotion board. This three-fold increase in the percentage of strong leaders
between immediate and senior bosses reflects the increased likelihood of
receiving high-ranking positions in which to serve as bosses by virtue of being
designated as a good leader at the major promotion board.




18
   Admissions selectivity is characterized by a college’s Peterson ranking, taken
from Peterson’s annual Undergraduate Databases. Appendix 1 provides a
complete description of this measure.
19
   Appendix 1 outlines the sample selection in detail.




                                          12
       Shifting to junior officers, the object of our study, Table 2 contains
summary statistics for the young officers who the Army assigns to immediate and
senior bosses through the process described above. Panel A shows statistics on
junior officers, with column 1 containing the population of all junior officers and
column 2 containing junior officers who could be linked successfully to their
bosses using evaluation report data. As with the bosses, our sample is
representative of the underlying population of potential junior officers.
                               4. Empirical Framework
       To test the effect of a boss on employee or junior officer retention, we
estimate the following linear probability model.
        Ri = λ + γ ⋅ Bi + θ ⋅ X i + δ 1994 − 2005 + ω Branch + τ SOC + κ LOC + ε i .   (1)
       The left-hand side variable, Ri, is a binary variable that equals 1 if a junior
officer remains in the Army through eight years of service. 20 The estimate of γ
on the variable of interest, Bi, represents the boss effect. We use four different
measures of this boss effect throughout the paper: 1) ever having a boss with
designated as a strong leader; 2) the amount of time with a strong leader; 3) ever
having a boss of the same type; and 4) ever having a boss of the same type who is
also a strong leader. Xi represents control variables that account for race, marital
status, SAT score quartiles, college admissions selectivity, unit type, and
cumulative deployment time at three years of service. These variables include all
the information available to Human Resources when making decisions on where
to place individuals, and each of these variables is also a potential determinant of

retention behavior.   δ1994−2005 represents a set of year group controls to account for
any cohort-specific effects, including idiosyncrasies of the promotion boards over



20
  The eight year mark is convenient because after eight years on active duty, the
junior officers in our sample have completed their initial service obligation.




                                              13
time that may affect bosses differentially.   ω Branch includes controls for military
occupations, accounting for any differences in management of junior officers by

occupation;   τ SOC are a set of controls for the source of officer commission; and
κ LOC includes dummies for assignment locations and indicators for special units.
A junior officer’s commissioning year, commission source, military occupation,
location, and special unit status are included as controls in all of our
specifications.
       To interpret γ as identifying the causal effect of having a boss with good
leader qualities on retention, condition on observable characteristics, the
assignment to a boss with strong leadership skills must be uncorrelated with other
potential determinants of the junior officer’s likelihood of staying in the Army.
The assignment convention – described in the introduction and characterized in
official doctrine as “needs of the Army” – supports our claim that the Army
assigns junior officers to units and their associated bosses without regard for their
boss’ leadership ability or the retention likelihood of the junior officer. We are
confident that our description of this assignment process is accurate in practice
and in our sample for a number of reasons. At the time of original assignment,
the Army has limited information on its new officers. Beyond their
undergraduate education and basic demographic characteristics, which we control
for in Xi, these new officers have not had enough time to differentiate themselves.
Moreover, we have access to all variables that Army Human Resource managers
have to assign officers, and we include them as controls in all of our regressions.
On top of the lack of information on junior officers, immediate bosses in our data
are company commanders who have yet to appear before the critical promotion
board when they serve as immediate bosses to our junior officers. There is,
therefore, minimal concern that specific junior officers are placed under the




                                          14
direction of immediate bosses with strong leadership, as these immediate bosses
do not even have the designation as promoted early at the time of assignment.
        To further bolster our claim that junior officers are not assigned to strong
leaders based on characteristics that are related to their retention likelihood, we
show that even our observable characteristics are not related to assignment
decisions. As discussed, Table 2 shows summary statistics for junior officers.
Panel B divides the junior officers by whether they ever had an immediate boss
who was a good leader, and panel C contains the same statistics for having a
senior boss who was a good leader. Comparisons of columns 1 and 2 in both
panels B and C show nearly identical summary statistics across all of the potential
determinants of retention behavior that are available in Army administrative data.
The similarity across samples reinforces our claim that the Army assigns junior
officers to their bosses without regard for other observable potential determinants
of junior officer retention.
        We provide additional evidence in Appendix Table 1. The specification in
column 1 in each panel is a regression of boss’s leadership rating (1 equals a
junior officer who is assigned to a boss with strong leadership ability) on controls
for commissioning year, commission source, location, and military occupation.
These basic structural controls account for about three to eight percent of the
variation in boss’ leader quality, depending on the definition of leader quality as
defined in the panel headings. Column 2 contains estimates from a regression of
boss’ leadership on both structural and observable demographic controls. These
additional observable controls, which human resource managers could possibly
use to assign junior officers to their bosses, explain less than one percent of the
total variation in boss’ leader quality, as seen by the change in the R2.
        Overall, our evidence suggests that observable characteristics do not
explain assignments to bosses with strong leadership, which suggests that
unobservable characteristics are also unrelated to assignment. Even if it was a




                                          15
concern, as already mentioned, we include all available data that the Army could
use to make junior officer assignments in the full retention specifications reported
in Tables 3-6. In keeping with the approach described in Altonji et al. (2005) and
Oster (Forthcoming), we will also evaluate the stability of our estimate of γ along
with changes in R2 as we sequentially add additional controls in Table 3.
                               5. Empirical Results
        Table 3 presents results from estimating our main retention
specifications. 21 Panel A reports estimates for ever serving under an immediate or
senior boss with strong leadership, panel B reports results for the time spent under
either. About 15 percent of our sample had an immediate boss with strong
leadership, 43 percent had a senior boss with strong leadership, and 7 percent had
both.
        Panel A contain estimates from a regression where Bi is a dichotomous
variable and a 1 reflects a junior officer who had a boss with good leadership.
Columns 1-3 and 4-6 reflect a gradual inclusion of control variables as noted
below each estimate. The stability across our estimate of having a strong leader
with the inclusion of additional controls provides further evidence for our
identification assumption, suggesting that there are likely few unobservable
variables that are both correlated with boss quality and retention behavior of
young officers. 22 Note that the stability holds in column 7, when both the
immediate boss and senior boss are included in the same regression.


21
   Appendix Table 2 confirms these results by estimating the retention
specifications using a probit model. Probit marginal effects are almost identical to
the linear probability model coefficients reported in Table 3.
22
   We also conduct a test to consider coefficient stability as outlined in Oster
(Forthcoming), which accounts for how much of the unobservable variation is
explained by the observable characteristics using conservative estimates of the
max R2 of 1, 0.5, and 0.10. For each of these max R2 thresholds, we get greater
bounded coefficients than reported for having an immediate boss who is a strong




                                         16
       Estimates in Panel B, Columns 1 and 3 are from a separate regression
where Bi is a measure of boss duration: months spent serving under a boss with
good leadership. Finally, Panel B Columns 2 and 4 allow the impact of boss
duration to vary nonlinearly and include indicators for time served under a boss
with strong leadership (6-12 months and greater than 12 months are the included
categories).
       Our estimates in the first row of panel A indicate that young officers who
ever serve under an immediate boss with strong leadership are around 2.7
percentage points (5.4 percent) more likely to remain in the Army through eight
years of service relative to a young officer who never served under an immediate
boss with strong leadership. For junior officers who have ever served under an
immediate boss with strong leadership, the average duration of this boss
relationship is approximately 10.5 months. Panel B Column 1 shows that an
additional year spent with an immediate boss with strong leadership increases the
likelihood the junior officer remains on active duty through 8 years of service by
2.4 percentage points (0.002*12 months). Results reported in Panel B Column 2
suggest that there is not much additional impact of spending over a year, versus 6-
12 months, under an immediate boss with strong leadership.
       Although the stability in these estimates supports our description of the
conditional random assignment mechanism, one concern about interpreting the
estimates of interest in Columns 1 - 3 as causal is that the Army does not
designate the immediate boss as a strong leader until well after the junior officer
has served under his leadership. While this helps in our argument that the Army
cannot possibly be assigning junior officers to immediate bosses based on their
leadership quality, it does introduce the concern that the immediate boss’



leader or having both an immediate and senior boss who is a strong leader. The
bounded coefficients are smaller for senior bosses, but remain positive.




                                         17
leadership quality may be jointly determined with the junior officer’s retention
decision. In other words, the Army could base an immediate boss’s evaluation
report, which would impact the future “good leader” designation, on the retention
decision of his or her junior officers.
          One piece of evidence that weighs heavily against this concern is that
junior officers do not make retention decisions until well after they have finished
serving under the immediate boss. Therefore, it is not possible for the Army to
give higher evaluation marks to the immediate boss based on the retention
decision of his or her junior subordinates. Another way to evaluate this concern is
to compare the strong leader effect of the immediate boss with that of the senior
boss. Senior bosses were designated well in advance of junior officer
assignments, and therefore cannot be jointly determined. Finding similar effects
from immediate and senior bosses would further bolster our claim that the
designation of an immediate boss as a strong leader is not jointly determined with
junior officer retention decisions.
          Estimates in Panel A Columns 4-6 show that indeed the effect of having a
senior boss with strong leadership is similar to that of an immediate boss. Junior
officers who have ever had a senior boss with strong leadership are 2.1 percentage
points (4.4 percent) more likely to remain through 8 years of service. Months
spent with a senior boss with strong leadership (Panel B Column 3) also have a
similar effect: an additional year with such a senior boss increases the likelihood
of remaining through 8 years of service by roughly 2 percentage points. Similar to
the results for the immediate boss, estimates in Panel B Column 4 show that there
does not seem to be much of an additional retention lift from spending more than
12 months with a senior boss who is a strong leader. 23



23
     The average duration
                       of junior officers who serve under senior bosses that are
strong leaders is approximately 12 months. For the period of our assignment,




                                          18
        Panel A Columns 7 and 8 focus on junior officers who have experienced
both immediate and senior bosses with strong leadership. Recall that only about 7
percent of junior officers have access to strong leadership at both immediate and
senior levels. Nevertheless, the effects of having access to both is 4.8 percentage
points, equal to the effect of an immediate boss (2.7) plus the effect of a senior
boss (2.1). In addition to being interesting in its own right, this additive effect
provides additional evidence for our identification assumption: there appears to be
no effort on the Army’s part to assign junior officers to either immediate or senior
bosses based on their leadership quality.
        To better understand which types of officers are most likely influenced by
bosses with strong leadership, Table 4 conditions our sample of junior officers by
race and pre-service achievement as measured by the SAT score. We again run
our regressions for junior officers having an immediate boss with strong
leadership (Panel A), senior boss with strong leadership (Panel B), or both with
strong leadership (Panel C). Column 1 includes our main results from Table 3,
and column 5 estimates the same specification but drops officers with a missing
SAT score. 24
        Estimates in columns 3 and 4 for black and other non-white junior officers
are not statistically significant, although we cannot reject that the coefficients are
different than those for white junior officers in column 2. When splitting the
sample by junior officer SAT score, junior officers in the top half of the SAT
distribution exhibit a differential retention effect from serving under a senior boss
with strong leadership (panels B and C of column 7). Junior officers with SAT
scores in the top half are 3.3 percentage points and 7.7 percentage points (18%)


officers will likely have at most 2 distinct first line bosses and 2 distinct senior
bosses.
24
   In our main results, we include indicators if a junior officer has a missing SAT
score.




                                          19
more likely to stay in the Army when they have just a senior boss, or both a junior
and senior boss with strong leadership respectively. The same is not true for
junior officers in the lower half of the SAT distribution. In fact, even for those
with both a junior and senior boss with strong leadership, there is less than a 1.5
percentage point increase and it is not statistically significant. We can reject at the
10% level that the coefficients for those in the low versus the high SAT groups
are the same (p = 0.096). This result suggests that for young officers with high
SAT scores (a group that has lower retention rates), pairing with strong leaders is
especially important.
       As discussed in the introduction, type-based effects have received
considerable attention in the mentoring and role-model literature. Individuals who
have bosses who are “like them” in the organization may be more likely to stay
and perform well because they see it is possible for someone “like them” to
succeed. Table 5 contains estimates from standard type-matched specifications
similar to equation 1 where the variable of interest, Li, is a dummy variable for
whether the junior officer had the same demographic characteristic as the boss, by
race (columns 1 and 2), by position in the SAT score distribution (columns 3 and
4), by home Census division (column 5), and by graduation from the United
States Military Academy (column 6). For example, column 2 of Panel A shows
the effect of a black junior officer having a black immediate boss on the
likelihood of staying in the Army. The effect is not statistically significant. All of
the estimated retention impacts in Panel A are small, and only one (matching by
home Census division) is statistically significant. We find no robust evidence that
having a boss, either immediate or senior, who has similar race, SAT scores,
home census division, or same college influences junior officer retention. 25



25
  The small share of some of our minority groups prevent us from estimating
precise effects.




                                          20
       As a final consideration, in Table 6 we investigate whether there is a
differential effect of type-matched advising on junior officer retention when the
boss is also designated as a strong leader. Specifically, Li, is a dummy variable for
whether the junior officer had both the same demographic characteristic as the
boss (same groups as Table 5) and is a strong leader. While we find statistical
significance for a few groups, we first focus our attention on race. In column 1 of
all three panels, we find similar results to our main sample in Table 3 for white
junior officers, which is not surprising since around 80% of both junior officers
and bosses are white. When we look at blacks in column 2, there are no
statistically significant effects due to a very small sample size of junior black
officers who serve under other black bosses who are strong leaders.
       Estimates for SAT level reinforce the estimated effects reported in Table
4. In column 4 of Table 6 we find that having an immediate boss in the top half
of the SAT distribution who is also a strong leader leads to a large and significant
increase in retention of 8.0 percentage points (18.9 percent) for junior officers
who are also in the top half of the SAT distribution. This result suggests that
junior officers with a boss of similar achievement who is designated by the Army
as a strong leader are more likely to stay in the Army. We find a smaller effect for
senior bosses and an additive effect when someone with a high SAT score has
both junior and senior bosses with strong leadership. Column 3 shows no
significant retention effects for those in the lower half of the SAT distribution.
Although not reported in the table, we find no statistically significant effects of
having a boss in the top half of the SAT distribution who is also a strong leader
for junior officers who have low SAT scores.
       Those with immediate or senior bosses from the same Census division
who are also strong leaders are more likely to retain in the Army (column 5).
Finally, junior officers from the United States Military Academy with a boss who
is also an Academy graduate and is a strong leader are more likely to retain.




                                          21
Taken together, these results are consistent with a richer characterization of
successful bosses than our one-dimensional description of a strong leader.
        To account for the fact that individuals with the same bosses share similar
experiences, we further cluster our standard errors at the boss level. To do this, we
create unique combinations of immediate bosses, senior bosses, and immediate and
senior bosses for each of our estimation strategies. Appendix 1 contains a complete
description of our construction of these unique boss clusters. Clustered errors in
Appendix Table 3, are only slightly larger than the previous reported standard errors
from Table 3 and do not change the significance of any of the results. We also run
similar checks for Tables 4-6 and the statistical significance holds in all cases.
        We next estimate boss effects for a group of longer-serving officers who
might also be positively affected by the leadership of their boss. The nature of the
Army’s hierarchical structure means that what we have been referring to as the
immediate boss is also an employee of the senior boss. For this part of the
analysis, therefore, we designate what we have been calling the immediate boss as
the employee and we designate what we have been calling the senior boss as the
immediate boss’s first-line supervisor. The employees (company commanders in
this sample) interact with their immediate boss (battalion commanders) frequently
and are evaluated annually by this same individual. We again measure the effect
of having a boss with strong leadership on retention in the Army, although we
look at the effect on retention at 12 years of service, rather than eight. 26
        In Appendix Table 4, we report summary statistics for these company
commanders we now designate as employees. Panel A includes all company
commanders who were in the previous analysis, with summary statistics reported
separately by whether they served under a boss (battalion commander) with


26
   Recall that to be in the original immediate boss sample, captains had to remain
in the Army long enough to be considered for early promotion to major.




                                           22
strong leadership. In Panel B, we drop those company commanders for whom we
are missing retention to 12 years of service. We also condition our sample of
company commanders to include only those who had four to eight years of Army
service when they appeared in our original sample and served as immediate
bosses to the junior officers. In Panel C, we further restrict the sample to only
male company commanders. Across all three samples, individual characteristics
are very similar, although those with strong leaders are more likely to have been
promoted early to major and be in divisional units. The similarity of the sample
again suggests that, as was the case for junior officers, these company
commanders are not paired with their boss based on individual characteristics. In
unreported results, we also run a similar covariate regression as done in Appendix
Table 1. The p-value on the F-statistic measuring the joint significance of the non-
structural control variables was 0.33 for the sample of captains and 0.35 when we
restrict to only male captains, suggesting that observable characteristics (race,
SAT, school competitiveness, and unit type) do not predict whether a company
commander was assigned a boss with strong leadership.
       Table 7, Panel A reports the effect of having a boss with strong leadership
on longer term retention of officers, analogous to our results in Table 3. In column
1, we include only our structural controls: commissioning source, commissioning
year, location, special unit dummies, and military occupation. In column 2, we
add in demographic, undergraduate college selectivity, and unit controls. In
column 3, we include a dummy for whether the captain (the employee in this
sample) was promoted early to the rank of major. We do the same in columns 4
through 6, but we restrict the company commander sample to men only, as we did
in the previous analysis. All these results together consistently show that having a
boss with good leadership skills– even for more experienced employees –
improves retention by around 2.4 to 2.2 percentage points (2.5 to 2.7 percent).




                                         23
        Panel B restricts the sample by race and SAT categories, as done in Table
4. Once again, there is a differential long-term retention effect of good leadership
on employees with high SAT scores: a statistically significant 4.1 percentage
point increase in retention compared to a 1.1 percentage point increase for low
SAT employees. In unreported results, we also run the regressions for bosses of
the same type and bosses of the same type who are also good leaders. Except for
whites, we do not find any statistically significant retention effects for
specifications that focus on type-matched junior officer-boss relationships, with or
without regard for whether the boss is a good leader. These results again show
that assigning an individual to a good leader, regardless of initial tenure in the
Army, leads to increased retention rates.
                          7. Implications and Conclusions
        The Army affords a unique opportunity to examine how a boss’s
leadership quality affects employee retention. The Army clearly designates
exceptional bosses as “good leaders,” assigns employees to bosses without regard
for their boss’s leader quality, and has a standardized pay schedule so that there
are no differential earnings to impact retention decisions.
        Results from our study also help inform some of the empirical questions
that arise from the theoretical framework presented by Lazear et al. (2015). To
begin with, the natural experiment exploited in our paper provides a way to
characterize the ability level of the mean worker in terms of SAT score as well as
the ability level of the boss in terms of both leader quality and SAT score. This
distinction is a point that Lazear et al. (2015, p. 827) argue is difficult to identify
in practice.
        Another item of concern raised by the theoretical framework in Lazear et
al. (2015) is the pairing of bosses by specific types. Our finding that junior bosses
with strong leadership and high SAT scores had an 8 percentage point (19
percent) higher retention effect provides strong evidence that firms can experience




                                           24
an even greater retention lift from their high potential (high SAT) employees by
pairing them with bosses that have high SAT scores and are strong leaders. This
result is an important findings for firms who place a premium on retaining high
potential employees, like the U.S. Army. Recall that the Army’s internal labor
market coupled with the increasing job complexity as officers progress through
the ranks makes retaining high potential officers especially important. 27 We also
find evidence that other affiliations such as Census division home of record and
like undergraduate institution can improve retention behavior. This finding
suggests that having things in common with a boss can help improve employee-
boss relations, a point firms may consider when they assign bosses.
       Unlike some of the recent literature on type-matched by race in college
continuation and course performance (Fairlie et al. (2014); Lusher et al. 2015),
we do not find convincing evidence of type-matched effects by race impacting
officer retention. However, we do point out that our sample sizes for these groups
are small, which hurts our ability to report precise effects. Since racial diversity is
such an important issue for many firms, more research is needed in this area
before employers can implement appropriate policy.
       Our study also provides insight into the persistent nature of the effect that
Lazear et al. (2015) raise. Our main findings show that junior officers who
experienced immediate bosses with strong leadership abilities in their first four
years in the Army were 2.7 percentage points (5.4 percent) more likely to remain
on active duty at eight years of service. This positive retention effect persists for
at least four years after the junior officer finished working for the immediate boss.
Estimates of the positive retention effect of the senior bosses on the immediate


27
   More senior officers command larger formations and serve in executive
positions often at the Pentagon. Approximately 60% of those the Army has
designated as good leaders in our sample have high SAT scores as compared to
less than 50% for those who do not achieve that designation.




                                          25
bosses at twelve years of service shows that the effect can persist for up to six
years after the immediate boss finished working for the senior boss.
       Beyond addressing empirical questions rasied by Lazear et al. (2015), we
also show that retention is not just an issue for first line supervisors. We present
multiple specifications that demonstrate the impact that senior bosses can play on
employee retention. This finding may work indirectly through the leadership
environment created by the senior boss, or it may be a direct effect that the senior
boss has on the employee. In the case of the U.S. Army, junior officers probably
experience a mix of both effects. While the command climate for the organization
is largely established by the senior boss, the junior officers also have face to face
interactions with their senior bosses on a weekly basis.
       This study also sheds light on the length of time required for an employee
to serve under a boss with strong leadership skills. Junior officers received a
retention lift of 2.2 percentage points (4.5 percent) when paired with a senior boss
who was a strong leader for six to twelve months. The results is only slightly
higher (2.78 percentage points or 5.7 percent) when that relationship lasts for
more than a year. Firms that move employees between bosses on a routine basis,
like the U.S. Army, may find this result particularly informative. Such firms may
benefit more broadly by reassigning their strong bosses every six to twelve
months to maximize retention across their entire work force. This effect may
operate differently, however, in firms that assign employees to bosses for long
periods of time.
       Although it is important to interpret our findings within the unique context
of the Army’s officer corps, private firms are not exempt from similar issues. In
general, the results from this study provide credible evidence that the leadership
quality of bosses matters when it comes to employee turnover. Pairing employees
with strong leaders is a fruitful way to incentivize retention for individuals,
particularly those with high potential.




                                          26
                                  8. References
Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R Taber. 2005. “Selection on
Observed and Unobserved Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic
Schools.” Journal of Political Economy 113(1): 151-184.


Army Leader Development Strategy. 2013.
http://usacac.army.mil/sites/default/files/documents/cal/ALDS5June%202013Rec
ord.pdf.


Army Regulation 25-70. 2000. “Troop Program Sequence Number.” Washington,
DC: Headquarters, Department of the Army.
http://www.apd.army.mil/pdffiles/r25_70.pdf


Athey, Susan, Christopher Avery, and Peter Zemsky. 2000. “Mentoring and
Diversity.” American Economic Review 90(4): 765-786.


Bettinger, Eric P., and Rachel Baker. 2014. “The Effects of Student Coaching:
An Evaluation of a Randomized Experiment in Student Advising.” Educational
Evaluation and Policy Analysis 36(1): 3-19.


Bettinger, Eric P., and Bridget Terry Long. 2005. “Do Faculty Serve as Role
Models? The Impact of Instructor Gender on Female Students.” American
Economic Review 95(2): 152-157.


Bender, Stefan, Nicholas Bloom, David Card, John Van Reenen, and Stephanie
Wolter. 2016. “Management Practices, Workforce Selection and Productivity.”
NBER Working Paper 22101.




                                       27
Bertrand, Marianne, and Antoinette Schoar. 2003. “Managing with Style: The
Effect of Managers on Firm Policies.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 118(4):
1169-1208.


Blau, Francine D., Janet M. Currie, Rachel T.A. Croson, and Donna K. Ginther.
2010. “Can Mentoring Help Female Assistant Professors? Interim Results from a
Randomized Trial.” American Economic Review 100(2): 348-352.


Bloom, Nicholas, Benn Eifert, Aprajit Mahajan, David McKenzie, and John
Roberts. 2013. “Does Management Matter? Evidence from India.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics. 128(1): 1-51.


Bloom, Nicholas, and John Van Reenen. 2007. “Measuring and explaining
management practices across firms and countries.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics. 122(4): 1351-1408.


Boushey, Heather, and Sarah Jane Glynn. 2012. There are Significant Business
Costs to Replacing Employees. Center for American Progress. November 16.
https://www.americanprogress.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/11/CostofTurnover.pdf


Carrell, Scott E., Marianne E. Page, and James E. West. 2010. “Sex and Science:
How Professor Gender Perpetuates the Gender Gap.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 125(3): 1101-1144.


Chung, Kim-Sau. 2000. “Role Models and Arguments for Affirmative Action.”
American Economic Review 90(3): 640-648.




                                       28
Driving the Bottom Line. 2006. Pricewaterhouse Cooper: Saratoga.
https://www.pwc.com/us/en/hr-saratoga/assets/saratoga-improving-retention.pdf


Fairlie, Robert W., Florian Hoffman, and Philip Oreopoulos. 2014. “A
Community College Instructor Like Me: Race and Ethnicity Interactions in the
Classroom.” American Economic Review 104(8): 2567-2591.


Hermalin, Ben E. 1998. “Toward an Economic Theory of Leadership: Leading
by Example.” The American Economic Review 88(5): 1188-1206.


Hilmer, Christina, and Michael Hilmer. 2007. “Women Helping Women, Men
Helping Women? Same-Gender Mentoring, Initial Job Placements, and Early
Career Publishing Success for Economics PhDs.” The American Economic
Review 97(2): 422-426.


Hoffman, Florian, and Philip Oreopoulos. 2009. “A Professor Like Me: The
Influence of Instructor Gender on College Achievement.” Journal of Human
Resources 44(2): 479-494.


Hoffman, Mitchell, and Steven Tadelis. 2016. “How Do Managers Matter?
Evidence from Performance Metrics and Employee Surveys in a Firm.”
December. Working Paper. http://www-
2.rotman.utoronto.ca/facbios/file/Managers_HT.pdf


Holincheck, James. 2006. “Case Study: Workforce Analytics at Sun.” Gartner
Research, October 27.




                                      29
Lazear, Edward. 2012. “Leadership: A Personnel Economics Approach.” Labour
Economics. 19(1): 92-101.


Lazear, Edward P., Kathryn L. Shaw, and Christopher T. Stanton. 2015. “The
Value of Bosses.” Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 33, no. 4: 823-861


Kane, Tim. 2013. Bleeding Talent: How the U.S. Military Mismanages Great
Leaders and Why It’s Time for A Revolution. New York: Palgrave MacMillan.


Kuhn, Peter, and Catherine Weinberger. 2005. “Leadership Skills and Wages.”
Journal of Labor Economics. 23(3): 395-436.


Laband, David N., and Bernard F. Lentz. 1999. “The Impact of Having a Mentor
on Earnings and Promotion: Evidence from a Panel Study of Lawyers.” Applied
Economics Letters 6(12): 785-787.


Lusher Lester, Doug Campbell, and Scott Carrell. 2015. “TAs Like Me: Racial
Interactions Between Graduate Teaching Assistants and Undergraduates.”
Working Paper 21568. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.


Lyle, David S. 2007. “Estimating and Interpreting Peer and Role Model Effects
from Randomly Assigned Social Groups at West Point.” Review of Economics
and Statistics 89(2): 289-299.


Lyle, David S., and John Z. Smith. 2014. “The Effect of High-Performing
Mentors on Junior Officer Promotion in the US Army.” Journal of Labor
Economics 32(2): 229-258.




                                      30
Merhar, Christina. 2016. Employee retention – the real cost of losing an
employee. Zane Benefits. February 4. 2016.
http://www.zanebenefits.com/blog/bid/312123/Employee-Retention-The-Real-
Cost-of-Losing-an-Employee


Mills Joyce F., and Anna C. Mullins. 2008. “The California Nurse Mentor
Project: Every Nurse Deserves a Mentor.” Nursing Economics 26(5): 310-315.


Neumark, David, and Rosella Gardecki. 1998. “Women Helping Women? Role
Model and Mentoring Effects on Female Ph.D. Students in Economics.” Journal
of Human Resources 33(1): 220-46.


Oster Emily. Forthcoming. “Unobservable Selection and Coefficient Stability:
Theory and Evidence.” Journal of Business Economics and Statistics.


Raabe, Babette, and Terry A. Beehr. 2003. “Formal Mentoring versus Boss and
Coworker Relationships: Differences in Perceptions and Impact.” Journal of
Organizational Behavior 24(3): 271-293.


Ragins Belle Rose, John L. Cotton, and Janice S. Miller. 2000. “Marginal
Mentoring: The Effects of Type of Mentor, Quality of Relationship, and Program
Design on Work and Career Attitudes.” Academy of Management Journal 43(6):
1177-1194.


Roche, Gerald R. 1979. “Much Ado about Mentors.” Harvard Business Review
57(January/February): 14-28.




                                       31
Rodriguez-Planas, Nuria. 2012. “Longer-term Impacts of Mentoring, Educational
Services, and Learning Incentives: Evidence from a Randomized Trial in the
United States.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4(4): 121-139.


Scandura, Terri A., and Chester A. Schriesheim. 1994. “Leader-Member
Exchange and Boss Career Mentoring as Complementary Constructs in
Leadership Research.” Academy of Management Journal 37(6): 1588-1602.


Schneider, D., and N. J. Dorans. 1999. “Concordance between SAT 1 and ACT
Scores for Individual Students.” Research Note RN-07. New York: The College
Board.


Tepper, Bennett J. 1995. “Upward Maintenance Tactics in Bossy Mentoring and
Nonmentoring Relationships.” Academy of Management Journal 38(4): 1191-
1205.


Wardynski, Casey, David S. Lyle, and Michael Colarusso. 2010. “Towards a U.S.
Army Officer Corps Strategy: Retaining Talent.” Officer Corps Strategy Series 3.
Carlisle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute.




                                             32
                                      Appendix 1
Sample Qualification Rules
       The Army commissions officers from a number of different sources.
Between 1994 and 2005, the United States Military Academy (USMA) produced
roughly 17 percent of officers commissioned into the active duty Army. The
Reserve Officer Training Corps (ROTC) offered programs at more than 270
colleges and universities and produced another 56 percent. Some ROTC cadets
receive no scholarship support from the Army and are referred to as ROTC non-
scholars. All other ROTC cadets receive scholarships covering from 2 to 4 years,
with 4-year scholarships being the most competitive. The remaining 27 percent of
active duty officers commissioned into the Army from the following sources:
Officer Candidate School (OCS), roughly 11.5 percent; direct commissions,
roughly 7 percent; or other sources, 8.5 percent. Officers commissioned through
OCS are disproportionately former enlisted personnel with 10 or more years of
active duty service, so they are typically older and have lower educational
attainment than officers from other commissioning sources. Officers receiving
direct commissions are health care professionals, lawyers, and chaplains; they
enter the Army with advanced rank (first lieutenant or captain) and are subject to
different active duty service obligations and promotion timetables. As a result,
we drop all OCS, direct commission and other source of commission officers
from our sample of junior officers.
       Within the combat arms branches, women were restricted from serving in
certain occupations and positions. As a result, we restrict our sample of junior
officers to include only male officers.
       Officers in the Army initially serve in one of sixteen occupational
branches: Air Defense Artillery, Adjutant General, Armor, Aviation, Chemical
Corps, Engineers, Field Artillery, Finance, Infantry, Military Intelligence,
Military Police, Medical Services, Ordnance, Quartermaster, Signal Corps, and




                                          33
Transportation Corps. We exclude officers in the Aviation and Medical Services
branches from our analysis as they have longer initial active duty service
obligations.
       We further condition our sample on officers who have complete
information on both time serving as a platoon leader and junior and senior boss
quality. Column 1 of Table 2 reports summary statistics for the 19,774 male
officers who were commissioned from USMA or ROTC. For roughly 25 percent
of our column 1 officers, we have incomplete information on an individual’s unit
(198 observations); are unable to link platoon leader junior officers to their
company commander (immediate) and battalion commander (senior) boss (1,043
observations); are missing the race of the boss (33); or we are missing boss’ high-
performance indicator (early promotion to major) (3,740). For 1,842 of these
observations, the performance indicator is missing because the immediate boss
did not remain in the Army long enough to be considered for early promotion to
major. Our final sample consists of 14,760 lieutenants who served as platoon
leaders and could be linked to their company and battalion commanders. As
columns 1 and 2 of Table 2 demonstrate, our selected sample of lieutenant junior
officers is comparable to the pool of lieutenants from which it is drawn on all
observables.
Control Variable Descriptions
Married: We coded Lieutenants (junior officers) as married if they were ever
married during their first three years in service.
SAT: We include SAT quartiles in the regressions as controls. As shown in
Tables 1 and 2, a large percentage of officers have missing SAT scores. While
SAT scores are recorded for all individuals attending the United States Military
Academy and most with ROTC 3-4 year scholarships, they are not always
recorded for other sources of commission, 2 year ROTC scholars and ROTC non-




                                          34
scholars. Officers who reported ACT scores have this score converted to an SAT
score using a concordance table. (Schneider and Dorans 1999)
Undergraduate Admissions Selectivity: We use Peterson’s Annual Guides to
Undergraduate Study: Four-Year Colleges from 1983-1984 to 2004-2005 to
control for the admissions selectivity of the college from which an officer
graduated. Those bosses commissioned prior to 1984 are assigned the 1983-1984
Peterson ranking. The admissions selectivity categories are defined as follows:
Noncompetitive (virtually all accepted), Minimally Difficult (95% or more
accepted), Moderately Difficult (85% or fewer applicants accepted), Very
Difficult (60% or fewer applicants accepted), and Most Difficult (30% or fewer
applicants accepted). USMA graduates are in the Most Difficult category.
Source of Commission: In each regression we include controls for those who
graduate from USMA, those with a 3-4 year ROTC scholarship, those with a 2
year ROTC scholarship, and those with no scholarship but who participated in the
ROTC commissioning program (ROTC non-scholars).
Deployment Time: Months deployed is calculated at 3 years of service and
measures the cumulative time officers have served in a combat zone since
receiving their commission.
Commissioning Year: Since the Army manages officers by cohort, we include
controls for the year in which a lieutenant was commissioned. Lieutenants in our
sample were commissioned in the calendar years 1994 through 2005 and served
as platoon leaders at some time between fiscal years 1998 and 2008.
Military Occupation: We include branch controls as listed in the Sample
Qualification section.
Unit: Our unit controls are based on 5-digit Troop Program Sequence Numbers
(TPSNs), from which we construct indicators for divisional units (e.g. First
Armored Division, Fourth Infantry Division) and non-divisional combat units




                                        35
(e.g. 173rd Airborne Brigade, 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment). 28 Lieutenants who
are about to become platoon leaders are assigned to a particular post, and then
assigned to a unit at that post. Within that unit, they are assigned to a brigade,
battalion, and company, and then placed in charge of a particular platoon.
Census Division: Army administrative data lists an officer’s home of record state,
typically the state in which they pay income taxes as a resident. We classified
anyone not from one of the 50 states (or DC) into their own category. The U.S.
Census Bureau classifies states (and DC) into nine Census divisions as follows:
        Northeast
        1. New England: ME, VT, NH, MA, CT, RI
        2. Middle Atlantic: NY, PA, NJ
        South
        3. South Atlantic: MD, DE, VA, WV, NC, SC, GA, FL, DC
        4. East South Central: KY, AL, MS, TN
        5. West South Central: AR, LA, TX, OK
        Midwest
        6. East North Central: OH, MI, IN, IL, WI
        7. West North Central: MN, IA, MO, KS, NE, SD, ND
        West
        8. Mountain: MT, WY, CO, NM, AZ, UT, ID, NV
        9. Pacific: CA, OR, WA, AK, HI
Correcting Standard Errors for Clustering by Boss
        Junior officers could share the same set of junior and senior boss, so we
may be concerned about correlated shocks across junior officers which robust
standard errors would not correct. In Appendix Table 3 we report results where
we cluster standard errors at the junior, senior, and junior and senior levels. For

28
  For further information on Troop Program Sequence Numbers, see Army Regulation 25-70
(2000).




                                            36
example: if two junior officers each had the same two junior boss (regardless of
duration spent with each), they would be in the same cluster; if a junior officer
only had one junior boss, then he/she would only be in a cluster with those who
also only had that same junior boss; and so on. The same would be true for senior
boss. We depict this relationship in Figure A1. For panel C, we create clusters
for unique junior and senior combinations. Again, we ignore duration spent with
each boss, but cluster based on common boss groups. We depict this relationship
in Figure A2.


Figure A1: Clustering Groups for Junior or Senior Boss

          Cluster 1              Cluster 2                 Cluster 3                    Cluster 4




   Boss 1 (Immediate or Sr.)    Boss 1 and 2                 Boss 3                    Boss 3 and 4


         Jr. Officer A          Jr. Officer C             Jr. Officer F                Jr. Officer I


         Jr. Officer B          Jr. Officer D             Jr. Officer G


                                Jr. Officer E             Jr. Officer H




Figure A2: Clustering Groups for Junior and Senior Boss
            Cluster 1                  Cluster 2                       Cluster 3                        Cluster 4




          Senior Boss 1         Senior Bosses 1 and 2              Senior Boss 2                       Senior Boss 3


        Immediate Boss 1       Immediate Bosses 1 and 2     Immediate Bosses 1 and 2              Immediate Boss 3


          Jr. Officer A              Jr. Officer C                 Jr. Officer E                       Jr. Officer F


          Jr. Officer B              Jr. Officer D                                                     Jr. Officer G


                                                                                                       Jr. Officer H




                                                     37
  Figure 1. Officer Organizational Structure within the Army

                          Battalion Commander
                          Rank: Lieutenant Colonel
                            Oversees: 16 Officers




Company Commander          Company Commander         Company Commander
        A                          B                         C
     Rank: Captain             Rank: Captain            Rank: Captain
   Oversees: 3 Officers      Oversees: 3 Officers     Oversees: 3 Officers



Platoon Leader                  Platoon Leader                   Platoon Leader
      A                               B                                C
Rank: Lieutenant                Rank: Lieutenant                 Rank: Lieutenant
                             Table 1: Summary Statistics on Bosses
                                      Panel A: Immediate Boss           Panel B: Senior Boss
                                           (1)         (2)                (1)           (2)
                                      All Possible  Sample           All Possible    Sample
Strong Leader (Early Promotion) (%)       9.7           10.2            27.6          31.2
White (%)                                78.3           78.2            84.3          84.2
Black (%)                                11.2           11.5            10.9          11.0
Non-White / Non-Black (%)                10.5           10.3             4.8           4.8
                                        1121.0        1115.5           1135.8        1151.6
SAT                                     (175.8)       (177.6)          (209.3)       (214.9)
Missing SAT (%)                          38.9          33.3             70.7          67.7
Non-Competitive (%)                       4.5            4.4             5.0           4.6
Minimal (%)                               8.4            9.0             9.2           9.3
Moderate (%)                             53.7           53.9            50.4          49.9
Very/Most Difficult (%)                  30.4           30.3            31.3          34.1
Missing (%)                               3.0            2.4             4.1           2.2
United States Military Academy (%)       20.6           20.6            21.0          24.3
ROTC scholar (%)                         36.9           34.9            36.5          35.6
ROTC non-scholar (%)                     30.0           32.0            31.0          30.6
Other Source of Commission (%)           12.5           12.6            11.5           9.5
N                                       13,455         7,868           3,673         2,455

NOTE. – This table reports mean values for immediate (Panel A) and senior (Panel B) bosses who
served as company and battalion commanders in the Army between 1998 and 2008. Columns 1
include the full universe while Columns 2 include those in our sample. We define a strong leader
as one who was promoted early to the rank of major. Refer to Appendix 1 for a complete
discussion of missing SAT, Peterson Rankings, and other variable descriptions. Standard
deviations of continuous variables are in parentheses.
                          Table 2: Summary Statistics for Junior Officers
                                                                 Panel B: Jr.        Panel C: Jr.
                                             Panel A: Jr.        Officer and         Officer and
                                               Officer        Immediate Boss         Senior Boss
                                             (1)     (2)        (1)      (2)        (1)      (2)
                                                               Strong Leader       Strong Leader
                                             All    Sample      No       Yes        No         Yes
Retention at 8 YOS (%)                      49.9     49.9      49.42   52.72 *      48.6    51.7 *
White (%)                                   77.9     78.3      77.9     80.4 *      77.4    79.5 *
Black (%)                                    9.2      9.1       9.3      8.0         9.7     8.3 *
Non-White / Non-Black (%)                   12.9     12.6      12.7     11.5        12.8    12.2
Ever Married at 3 Years of Service (%)      44.5     44.5      44.7     43.4        44.9    43.9
                                           1168.3 1168.1      1166.4 1177.3 *      1167.3 1169.1
SAT                                        (158.9) (159.6)    (160.3) (155.1)      (159.1) (160.2)
Missing SAT (%)                              27.8   27.3       27.5    26.3         28.8    25.4 *
Non-Competitive (%)                          3.0      2.9       3.0      2.5         3.2     2.5 *
Minimal (%)                                  5.0      4.8       4.9      4.1         4.9     4.7
Moderate (%)                                51.6     51.5      51.6     51.3        52.1    50.7
Very/Most Difficult (%)                     38.7     39.1      38.8     40.7        37.9    40.7 *
Missing (%)                                  1.6      1.6       1.7      1.3         1.8     1.3 *
USMA (%)                                    25.9     26.2      25.9     28.2 *      24.6    28.4 *
ROTC 3-4 Year Scholar (%)                   30.2     29.7      29.6     30.4        30.9    28.1 *
ROTC 2 Year Scholar (%)                     18.7     19.1      19.3     18.1        18.8    19.5
ROTC Non-Scholar (%)                        25.1     24.9      25.1     23.2        25.5    24.0 *
                                          4.9         4.6       4.5     5.3    *     4.8     4.3     *
Months Deployed up to 3 Years of Service (5.3)       (5.2)     (5.2)   (5.3)        (5.3)   (5.0)
Divisional Unit (%)                      67.0        69.1      68.7    71.7    *    65.7    73.8     *
Combat Non-Divisional Unit (%)           11.7        11.7      11.3    14.1    *    11.1    12.6     *
Other Unit (%)                           20.3        19.1      20.0    14.2    *    23.2    13.7     *
N                                         19,774 14,760       12,556   2,204       8,443    6,317

NOTE. – This table reports means for all male junior officers commissioned into the Army through
USMA or ROTC between 1994 and 2005 and who served as platoon leaders at any time between
1998 and 2008. See Appendix 1 for variable descriptions and sample selection. Panel B splits the
sample by whether the junior officer ever served under a immediate boss with strong leadership and
Panel C does the same for senior bosses. Standard deviations of continuous variables are in
parentheses. A single asterisk denotes p < 0.05 for individual t-tests.
                                Table 3: Junior Officer Retention at 8 Years of Service
                                                            Panel A. Ever Had Strong Leader
                                (1)         (2)            (3)       (4)        (5)            (6)      (7)        (8)
Control Mean                   0.494      0.494           0.494     0.486     0.486           0.486    0.483      0.495
                             0.0256*     0.0282*     0.0268*                                          0.0256*
Immediate Boss
                             (0.0115)    (0.0114)    (0.0114)                                         (0.0114)
                                                                  0.0218*    0.0228*     0.0214*      0.0206*
Senior Boss
                                                                  (0.0085)   (0.0084)    (0.0084)     (0.0084)
                                                                                                                 0.0479*
Immediate and Senior Boss
                                                                                                                 (0.0155)
Demographic and College
                                NO         YES            YES        NO        YES            YES      YES        YES
Admissions Selectivity
Deployment Time and Unit
                                NO         NO             YES        NO        NO             YES      YES        YES
Controls

Observations                  14,760      14,760      14,760       14,760     14,760      14,760      14,760     14,760
R-squared                     0.0486      0.0717      0.0725       0.0487     0.0718      0.0726      0.0729     0.0728

                                                            Panel B. Time with Strong Leader
                                            (1)            (2)                 (3)             (4)
                                           Immediate Boss                        Senior Boss
Control Mean                                      0.494                               0.486
                                         0.0020*                             0.0016*
Months with Strong Leader
                                         (0.0010)                            (0.0006)
                                                      0.0268                             0.0220*
6-12 Months with Strong Leader
                                                     (0.0142)                            (0.0102)
                                                      0.0299                             0.0278*
12+ Months with Strong Leader
                                                     (0.0223)                            (0.0118)
Demographic and College
                                           YES            YES                  YES            YES
Admissions Selectivity
Deployment Time and Unit
                                           YES            YES                  YES            YES
Controls

Observations                              14,760      14,760                  14,760      14,760
R-squared                                 0.0725      0.0725                  0.0727      0.0727

NOTE. – This table reports coefficient estimates of officer retention at 8 years of service on serving under a strong
leader (either immediate, senior, or both). See Equation 1. All regressions include a constant and controls for
military occupation, source of commissioning, location, special units, and year of commissioning. Additional
controls are added to the specifications as follows: Panel A Columns 2 and 5 add race, marriage at 3 years of service,
SAT quartile, undergraduate competitiveness; Panel A Columns 3 and 6 add deployment at 3 years of service and
unit type. Panel A Columns 7 and 8 and all columns in Panel B include all controls. See Appendix 1 for a complete
description of sample selection and variables. The first row of each panel reports the control mean retention rates for
those who did not have a strong leader (either immediate, senior, or both) as a boss. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses. A single asterisk denotes p < 0.05.
                         Table 4: Retention at 8 Years of Service, by Race and SAT Score
                         (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)              (5)         (6)            (7)

                                                             Non-White/  All, Not          SAT 0-50     SAT 50-100
                         All        White         Black      Non-Black Missing SAT         Percentile    Percentile
                                                          Panel A. Immediate Boss
Control Mean            0.494        0.472        0.620         0.539         0.455          0.493         0.420
                      0.0268*      0.0272*       0.0694         -0.0036       0.0220         0.0215        0.0215
Strong Leader
                      (0.0114)     (0.0128)     (0.0379)       (0.0342)      (0.0133)       (0.0196)      (0.0182)
Observations           14,760       11,560        1,347         1,853         10,725        5,102          5,623
R-squared              0.0725       0.0638       0.1267         0.1065        0.0702        0.0736         0.0753
                                                           Panel B. Senior Boss
Control Mean            0.486        0.462        0.625         0.525         0.442          0.486         0.402
                      0.0214*      0.0224*       -0.0085        0.0260       0.0255*         0.0184       0.0334*
Strong Leader
                      (0.0084)     (0.0095)     (0.0280)       (0.0243)      (0.0098)       (0.0143)      (0.0136)
Observations           14,760       11,560        1,347         1,853         10,725        5,102          5,623
R-squared              0.0726       0.0639       0.1246         0.1070        0.0706        0.0737         0.0760
                                                  Panel C. Immediate and Senior Boss
Control Mean            0.495        0.473        0.626         0.538         0.455          0.495         0.419
                      0.0479*      0.0547*       0.0492         0.0055       0.0493*         0.0176       0.0769*
Strong Leader
                      (0.0155)     (0.0174)     (0.0551)       (0.0456)      (0.0179)       (0.0264)      (0.0243)
Observations           14,760       11,560        1,347         1,853         10,725        5,102          5,623
R-squared              0.0728       0.0643       0.1251         0.1065        0.0707        0.0735         0.0767

NOTE. – This table reports coefficient estimates of junior officer retention at 8 years of service on serving under a
strong leader (either immediate, senior, or both) when conditioning on demographic subgroups, as denoted in the
column titles. All regressions include a constant and controls for military occupation, source of commissioning,
location, and year of commissioning, as well as officer demographics: SAT score, college admissions selectivity,
cumulative months deployed at 3 years of service, and unit controls. Columns 1-4 include an indicator for officers
with missing SAT scores, whereas columns 5-7 are estimated over only those officers with non-missing SAT scores.
See Appendix 1 for a complete description of sample selection and variables. The first row of each panel reports
the control mean retention rates for those who did not have a strong leader (either immediate, senior, or both) as a
boss. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. A single asterisk denotes p < 0.05.
               Table 5: Retention at 8 Years of Service, Type-Matched Junior Officer and Boss
                                      (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)            (5)         (6)
                                                              SAT below SAT above        Census         USMA
                                    White         Black        Median    Median          Division      Graduate
                                                              Panel A. Immediate Boss
Control Mean                        0.456         0.637          0.485       0.420         0.492         0.401
                                    0.0139      -0.0395         0.0064       0.0116      0.0356*        0.0274
Boss with Same Characteristic
                                   (0.0131)     (0.0348)       (0.0181)     (0.0175)     (0.0104)      (0.0171)
Observations                        11,560       1,347          3,101        3,487        14,737        3,871
R-squared                           0.0636       0.1255         0.0869       0.0826       0.0728        0.0869
Percent of Population with
                                     86%          19%            55%          62%          18%           34%
Boss of Same Characteristic
                                                                Panel B. Senior Boss
Control Mean                        0.487         0.630          0.536       0.384         0.499         0.416
                                   -0.0108       0.0144        -0.0483       0.0360       0.0013        0.0072
Boss with Same Characteristic
                                   (0.0145)     (0.0362)       (0.0287)     (0.0257)     (0.0128)      (0.0165)
Observations                        11,560       1,347          1,393        1,717        11,187        3,871
R-squared                           0.0635       0.1247         0.1106       0.0829       0.0687        0.0863
Percent of Population with
                                     88%          15%            46%          60%          16%           38%
Boss of Same Characteristic
                                                         Panel C. Immediate and Senior Boss
Control Mean                        0.468         0.631          0.507       0.420         0.498         0.414
                                    0.0047      -0.0243        -0.0443      -0.0528       0.0222        0.0376
Boss with Same Characteristic
                                   (0.0109)     (0.0637)       (0.0446)     (0.0327)     (0.0244)      (0.0229)
Observations                        11,560       1,347            880        1,108        11,187        3,871
R-squared                           0.0635       0.1247         0.1369       0.1190       0.0687        0.0869
Percent of Population with
                                     76%           4%            20%          37%             4%         14%
Boss of Same Characteristic


NOTE. – This table reports coefficient estimates of junior officer retention at 8 years of service on serving
under a boss (either immediate, senior, or both) with the same characteristic. The junior officers are further
restricted based on the variable in the column title. All regressions include a constant and controls for military
occupation, source of commissioning, location, and year of commissioning, as well as officer demographics:
SAT score, college admissions selectivity, cumulative months deployed at 3 years of service, and unit controls.
The first row of each panel reports the control mean retention rates for those who did not have a boss (either
immediate, senior, or both) with the same characteristic as the junior officer. The percent of each subsample
that is type-matched (junior officer and boss share the same characteristic) is reported below the regression R-
squared in each panel. See Appendix 1 for a complete descriptions of sample selection and variables. Robust
standard errors are in parentheses. A single asterisk denotes p < 0.05.
     Table 6: Retention at 8 Years of Service, Type-Matched Junior Officer and Boss with Strong Leadership
                                          (1)           (2)            (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
                                                                      Low         High        Census        USMA
                                         White         Black
                                                                      SAT         SAT         Division     Graduate
                                                                   Panel A. Immediate Boss
Control Mean                             0.472         0.630          0.490       0.424         0.497        0.417
                                        0.0328*       0.0711         -0.0284     0.0802*      0.0887*        0.0514
Type-Matched and Strong Leader
                                        (0.0136)     (0.1194)       (0.0395)     (0.0275)     (0.0274)      (0.0323)
Observations                            11,560         1,347          3,101        3,487       14,737         3,871
R-squared                               0.0640        0.1248         0.0870       0.0849       0.0727        0.0869
Percent of Population with Strong
Leader of Same Type or                    13%           1%             5%          11%             2%          6%
Characteristic
                                                                     Panel B. Senior Boss
Control Mean                             0.463         0.634          0.525       0.398         0.498        0.413
                                        0.0218*       -0.1352        -0.0249      0.0538       0.0008       0.0439*
Type-Matched and Strong Leader
                                        (0.0096)     (0.0803)       (0.0340)     (0.0278)     (0.0194)      (0.0206)
Observations                            11,560         1,347          1,393        1,717       11,187         3,871
R-squared                               0.0639        0.1267         0.1090       0.0839       0.0687        0.0874
Percent of Population with Strong
Leader of Same Type or                    40%           3%            22%          30%             6%         19%
Characteristic
                                                              Panel C. Immediate and Senior Boss
Control Mean                             0.474         0.629          0.495       0.412         0.498        0.421
                                        0.0532*       0.1063         -0.1757     0.1587*       0.1050        0.1302
Type-Matched and Strong Leader
                                        (0.0189)     (0.0838)       (0.1517)     (0.0761)     (0.1007)      (0.0687)
Observations                            11,560         1,347           880         1,108       11,187         3,871
R-squared                               0.0641        0.1246         0.1371       0.1200       0.0688        0.0872
Percent of Population with Strong
Leader of Same Type or                    6%           0.1%            1%          4%           0.2%           1%
Characteristic

NOTE. – This table reports coefficient estimates of junior officer retention at 8 years of service on serving under a
boss (either immediate, senior, or both) with the same characteristic who is also a strong leader. The junior officers
are further restricted based on the variable in the column title. All regressions include a constant and controls for
military occupation, source of commissioning, location, and year of commissioning, as well as officer
demographics: SAT score, college admissions selectivity, cumulative months deployed at 3 years of service, and
unit controls. For example, column 5 reports the impact on junior officer retention of ever serving under an
immediate boss from the same home of record Census division who is also a strong leader. The first row of each
panel reports the control mean retention rates for those who did not have a boss (either immediate, senior, or both)
with the same characteristic as the junior officer who was also a strong leader. The percent of each subsample that
is type-matched and who served under a strong leader is reported below the regression R-squared in each panel.
See Appendix 1 for a complete descriptions of sample selection and variables. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses. A single asterisk denotes p < 0.05.
                                Table 7: Retention at 12 Years of Service for Immediate Bosses
                                                                       Panel A. Senior Boss
                                                   All                                                Men Only
                                     (1)           (2)          (3)                           (4)       (5)            (6)
Control Mean                                     0.875                                                  0.881
                                   0.0248*      0.0247*      0.0238*                      0.0228*     0.0226*       0.0217*
Strong Leader
                                   (0.0081)     (0.0081)     (0.0081)                     (0.0083)    (0.0084)      (0.0084)
Demographic, College                                                                          NO        YES           YES
Admissions Selectivity, Unit,        NO           YES          YES
and Location Controls
Designated as Strong Leader          NO           NO           YES                            NO         NO           YES
Observations                       6,872         6,872        6,872                       6,385        6,385          6,385
R-squared                          0.0184        0.0221       0.0252                      0.0201       0.0223        0.0260
                                                                          Panel B & C.
                                     (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)             (5)        (6)           (7)
                                                                          Non-White/  All, Not  SAT 0-50          SAT 50-100
                                     All         White         Black
                                                                          Non-Black Missing SAT Percentile         Percentile
                                                                           Panel B. All
Control Mean                        0.875        0.872         0.900         0.871          0.868       0.877         0.859
                                   0.0238*      0.0251*       0.0143         0.0165       0.0286*      0.0165       0.0410*
Strong Leader
                                   (0.0081)     (0.0092)     (0.0238)       (0.0284)      (0.0098)    (0.0141)      (0.0137)
Demographic, College
Admissions Selectivity, Unit,        YES          YES          YES           YES            YES         YES           YES
and Location Controls
Designated as Strong Leader          YES          YES          YES           YES            YES         YES           YES
Observations                       6,872         5,356          794           722         4,709        2,338          2,371
R-squared                          0.0252        0.0297       0.1028        0.1167        0.0343       0.0484        0.0563
                                                                        Panel C. Only Men
Control Mean                        0.881        0.877         0.905         0.882          0.872       0.884         0.860
                                   0.0217*      0.0239*       0.0142         0.0143       0.0255*      0.0110       0.0413*
Strong Leader
                                   (0.0084)     (0.0094)     (0.0265)       (0.0296)      (0.0101)    (0.0146)      (0.0141)
Demographic, College
Admissions Selectivity, Unit,        YES          YES          YES           YES            YES         YES           YES
and Location Controls
Designated as Strong Leader          YES          YES          YES           YES            YES         YES           YES
Observations                       6,385         5,068          658           659         4,389        2,145          2,244
R-squared                          0.0260        0.0309       0.1056        0.1157        0.0362       0.0521        0.0581

NOTE. – Table reports coefficient estimates of retention based on serving under a boss who is a strong leader where the
employee is now the immediate bosses from Tables 3-6. Coefficients are estimated from the main regression specification
(Equation 1) where the outcome of interest is now retention at 12 years of service. All regressions include a constant and
controls for military occupation, source of commissioning, location, and year of commissioning. Additional controls are
included as noted. In Panel A, Columns 1 through 3 report the impact of ever having a strong leader as a boss for our sample,
while columns 4-6 report the same estimates for the subsample of just males. Panel B reports the same results by demographic.
Panel C replicates the specifications in Panel B, but for males only. See Appendix 1 for a complete description of sample
selection and variables. The first row of each panel reports the control mean retention rates for those who did not have a boss
who was a strong leader. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. A single asterisk denotes p < 0.05.
                                       Appendix Table 1: Covariate Regression
                                                                                                     Panel C.
                                          Panel A.                     Panel B.                DV: Immediate and Sr.
                                     DV: Strong Leader as         DV: Strong Leader as         Bosses are both Strong
                                       Immediate Boss                 Senior Boss                     Leaders
                                        (1)          (2)            (1)           (2)             (1)           (2)
Black                                               -0.0080                     -0.0123                       -0.0052
                                                   (0.0104)                    (0.0144)                      (0.0073)
Non-White / Non-Black                               -0.0118                     0.0124                        -0.0005
                                                   (0.0088)                    (0.0122)                      (0.0065)
Ever Married at 3 YOS                               -0.0021                     -0.0023                       -0.0030
                                                   (0.0060)                    (0.0081)                      (0.0044)
SAT Quartile 1                                      0.0038                      0.0098                        0.0031
                                                   (0.0119)                    (0.0159)                      (0.0086)
SAT Quartile 2                                      0.0043                      0.0044                        0.0031
                                                   (0.0109)                    (0.0148)                      (0.0079)
SAT Quartile 3                                      0.0042                      0.0178                        0.0076
                                                   (0.0102)                    (0.0141)                      (0.0075)
Missing SAT                                         0.0061                      -0.0147                       0.0013
                                                   (0.0101)                    (0.0145)                      (0.0076)
Peterson Non-Competitive                            -0.0142                     -0.0268                       0.0003
                                                   (0.0164)                    (0.0228)                      (0.0118)
Peterson Minimum                                    -0.0118                     0.0126                        -0.0032
                                                   (0.0136)                    (0.0194)                      (0.0096)
Peterson Most/Very Competitive                      -0.0035                     -0.0183                       -0.0037
                                                   (0.0094)                    (0.0128)                      (0.0069)
Peterson Ranking Missing                            -0.0220                    -0.0671*                       -0.0098
                                                   (0.0212)                    (0.0308)                      (0.0153)
Deployment Duration at 3 YOS                       0.0023*                      0.0018                       0.0019*
                                                   (0.0008)                    (0.0010)                      (0.0006)
Other Unit                                          -0.0437                     -0.0703                       0.0053
                                                   (0.0563)                    (0.0620)                      (0.0346)
Non-Divisional Combat Unit                          -0.0024                     0.0250                        0.0361
                                                   (0.0563)                    (0.0618)                      (0.0346)
Location Controls                      YES           YES            YES          YES             YES           YES
Special Unit Controls                  YES           YES            YES          YES             YES           YES
Military Occupation Controls           YES           YES            YES          YES             YES           YES
Commissioning Source Controls          YES           YES            YES          YES             YES           YES
Commissioning Year Controls            YES           YES            YES          YES             YES           YES
Observations                          14,760       14,760         14,760        14,760          14,760        14,760
R-Squared                             0.0285       0.0301         0.0779        0.0807          0.0280        0.0297
F-Test p-value                                      0.202                        0.151                         0.248

NOTE. – Table tests whether characteristics of junior officers that are observable to the Army are related to the
likelihood that they served under a strong leader. In each Panel, Column 1 estimates a linear probability model in
which the dependent variable is an indicator for ever serving under a strong leader, and the explanatory variables are
structural controls: controls for military occupation, commissioning source, location, special units, and commissioning
year. Column 2 adds all the characteristics of the junior officer observable to the Army (demographics, pre-service
achievement, college admissions selectivity, deployment time, and unit type). Omitted categories are: Whites, SAT
Quartile 4, Peterson Ranking Moderate, Divisional Units. The p-value from a F-Test of all the individual
characteristics listed, excluding Unit Type, is reported on the last row. Robust standard errors are reported in
parentheses. See Appendix 1 for a complete description of the selected sample and included variables. A single
asterisk denotes p < 0.05.
               Appendix Table 2: Junior Officer Retention at 8 Years of Service using Probit Analysis
                                                            Panel A. Ever Had Strong Leader
                                (1)         (2)            (3)       (4)        (5)            (6)      (7)        (8)
Control Mean                   0.494      0.494           0.494     0.486     0.486           0.486    0.483      0.495
                             0.0254*    0.0278*      0.0264*                                          0.0253*
Immediate Boss
                             (0.0115)   (0.0113)     (0.0113)                                         (0.0113)
                                                                  0.0216*    0.0226*     0.0212*      0.0204*
Senior Boss
                                                                  (0.0084)   (0.0083)    (0.0083)     (0.0084)
Immediate and Senior                                                                                             0.0477*
Boss                                                                                                             (0.0155)
Demographic and College
                                NO         YES            YES        NO        YES            YES      YES        YES
Admissions Selectivity
Deployment Time and
                                NO         NO             YES        NO        NO             YES      YES        YES
Unit Controls

Observations                  14,753     14,753       14,753       14,753     14,753      14,753      14,753     14,753
                                                            Panel B. Time with Strong Leader
                                           (1)             (2)                 (3)             (4)
                                          Immediate Boss                         Senior Boss
Control Mean                                      0.494                               0.486
Months with Strong                       0.0020*                             0.0016*
Leader                                   (0.0010)                            (0.0006)
                                                      0.0263                             0.0217*
6-12 Months with Strong Leader
                                                     (0.0141)                            (0.0101)
                                                      0.0301                             0.0274*
12+ Months with Strong Leader
                                                     (0.0221)                            (0.0118)
Demographic and College
                                          YES             YES                  YES            YES
Admissions Selectivity
Deployment Time and
                                          YES             YES                  YES            YES
Unit Controls

Observations                             14,753       14,753                  14,753      14,753

NOTE. – This table reports coefficient estimates of officer retention at 8 years of service on serving under a strong
leader (either immediate, senior, or both) using Probit Analysis. All regressions include a constant and controls for
military occupation, source of commissioning, location, special units, and year of commissioning. Additional
controls are added to the specifications as follows: Panel A Columns 2 and 5 add race, marriage at 3 years of service,
SAT quartile, undergraduate competitiveness; Panel A Columns 3 and 6 add deployment at 3 years of service and
unit type. Panel A Columns 7 and 8 and all columns in Panel B include all controls. See Appendix 1 for a complete
description of sample selection and variables. The first row of each panel reports the control mean retention rates for
those who did not have a strong leader (either immediate, senior, or both) as a boss. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses. A single asterisk denotes p < 0.05.
               Appendix Table 3: Junior Officer Retention at 8 Years of Service, Clustering on Bosses
                                                            Panel A. Ever Had Strong Leader
                                 (1)        (2)            (3)       (4)        (5)            (6)      (7)        (8)
Control Mean                   0.494      0.494           0.494     0.486     0.486           0.486    0.483      0.495
                              0.0256*    0.0282*     0.0268*                                          0.0256*
Immediate Boss
                              (0.0116)   (0.0115)    (0.0115)                                         (0.0115)
                                                                  0.0218*    0.0228*     0.0214*      0.0206*
Senior Boss
                                                                  (0.0091)   (0.0090)    (0.0090)     (0.0085)
                                                                                                                 0.0479*
Immediate and Senior Boss
                                                                                                                 (0.0158)
Demographic and College
                                NO         YES            YES       NO         YES            YES      YES        YES
Admissions Selectivity
Deployment Time and
                                NO         NO             YES       NO         NO             YES      YES        YES
Unit Controls

Observations                  14,760      14,760      14,760       14,760     14,760      14,760      14,760     14,760
R-squared                     0.0486      0.0717      0.0725       0.0487     0.0718      0.0726      0.0729     0.0728
Number of Clusters            10,314      10,314      10,314        4,294      4,294       4,294      11,316     11,316
                                                            Panel B. Time with Strong Leader
                                            (1)            (2)                 (3)             (4)
                                           Immediate Boss                        Senior Boss
Control Mean                                      0.494                               0.486
                                         0.0020*                             0.0016*
Months with Strong Leader
                                         (0.0010)                            (0.0006)
                                                      0.0268                             0.0220*
6-12 Months with Strong Leader
                                                     (0.0143)                            (0.0105)
                                                      0.0299                             0.0278*
12+ Months with Strong Leader
                                                     (0.0229)                            (0.0127)
Demographic and College
                                           YES            YES                  YES            YES
Admissions Selectivity
Deployment Time and
                                           YES            YES                  YES            YES
Unit Controls
Observations                              14,760      14,760                  14,760      14,760
R-squared                                 0.0725      0.0725                  0.0727      0.0727
Number of Clusters                        10,314      10,314                   4,294       4,294

NOTE. – This table reports coefficient estimates of officer retention at 8 years of service on serving under a strong
leader (either immediate, senior, or both) while clustering for unique boss groups. All regressions include a constant
and controls for military occupation, source of commissioning, location, special units, and year of commissioning.
Additional controls are added to the specifications as follows: Panel A Columns 2 and 5 add race, marriage at 3 years
of service, SAT quartile, undergraduate competitiveness; Panel A Columns 3 and 6 add deployment at 3 years of
service and unit type. Panel A Columns 7 and 8 and all columns in Panel B include all controls. See Appendix 1 for a
complete description of sample selection, variables, and clustering method. The first row of each panel reports the
control mean retention rates for those who did not have a strong leader (either immediate, senior, or both) as a boss.
Clustered standard errors are in parentheses. A single asterisk denotes p < 0.05.
                       Appendix Table 4: Summary Statistics for Company Commanders
                                Panel A: Previous Sample      Panel B: New Sample          Panel C: Men Only
                                     (1)          (2)             (1)         (2)            (1)          (2)
                                      Strong Leader               Strong Leader              Strong Leader
                                     No          Yes              No        Yes              No        Yes
Female (%)                           8.2          5.0             8.5         5.2            0.0          0.0
Retain at 12 (%)                    87.5         89.7            87.5        90.1            88.1        90.2
Missing Retain at 12 (%)             1.3          1.6             0.0         0.0            0.0          0.0
Strong Leader (%)                    9.3         11.4             9.9        11.7            10.2        11.7
White (%)                           76.7         80.2            76.2        80.3            77.9        81.3
Black (%)                           12.7          9.9            12.9         9.8            11.3         9.0
Non-White / Non-Black (%)           10.6          9.9            10.9         9.9            10.7         9.8
                                  1108.25      1124.30         1113.69     1130.78        1116.60      1132.96
SAT
                                  (177.80)     (174.47)        (176.45)    (173.89)       (175.77)     (173.85)
Missing SAT (%)                     34.6         31.5            32.8        29.6            32.5        29.6
Peterson Non-Competitive (%)         4.7          4.0             4.5         3.6            4.5          3.6
Peterson Minimal (%)                 9.3          8.7             9.0         8.3            8.7          8.3
Peterson Moderate (%)               55.1         52.2            54.1        51.2            54.3        51.3
Peterson Most/Very (%)              28.3         33.0            29.6        34.7            29.7        34.8
Peterson Missing (%)                 2.6          2.1             2.7         2.1            2.7          2.0
USMA (%)                            18.8         23.0            19.9        24.8            20.1        25.0
ROTC Scholar (%)                    36.0         33.4            36.4        33.4            35.8        33.0
ROTC Non-Scholar (%)                32.0         31.9            30.1        30.0            30.8        30.0
Other SOC (%)                       13.3         11.6            13.6        11.8            13.3        12.0
Division Unit (%)                   58.6         70.6            59.2        71.8            62.0        74.0
Combat Non-Division (%)             11.8         13.0            11.7        12.5            11.7        12.1
Other Unit (%)                      29.6         16.4            29.0        15.7            26.3        13.9
N                                  4,540         3,328          3,964        2,908          3,627       2,758
NOTE. – This table reports mean characteristics of the immediate bosses in our sample who did and did not
have strong leaders as their boss. In Panel A, we show the sample of captains that were immediate bosses in
Tables 3-6. In Panel B we drop individuals where we are missing retention information and further condition
on being in the Army for 4 to 8 years at the time of being the boss. In Panel C, we further restrict to only men.
Explations of the variables can be found in Appendix 1. Standard deviations of continuous variables are in
parentheses.
