                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           CURRENCY WARS, COORDINATION, AND CAPITAL CONTROLS

                                      Olivier Blanchard

                                     Working Paper 22388
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22388


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2016




Prepared for the Asian Monetary Policy Forum, Singapore, May 2016. Thanks to Vivek Arora,
Tam Bayoumi, Ricardo Caballero, Steve Cecchetti, Bill Cline, Xavier Gabaix, Taka Ito, Olivier
Jeanne, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan for discussions and comments, and to Julien Acalin for
outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Olivier Blanchard. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Currency Wars, Coordination, and Capital Controls
Olivier Blanchard
NBER Working Paper No. 22388
July 2016
JEL No. F3,F33,F42

                                          ABSTRACT

The strong monetary policy actions undertaken by advanced economies' central banks have led to
complaints of “currency wars” by some emerging market economies, and to widespread demands
for more macroeconomic policy coordination. This paper revisits these issues. It concludes that,
while advanced economies' monetary policies indeed have had substantial spillover effects on
emerging market economies, there was and still is little room for coordination. It then argues that
restrictions on capital flows were and are a more natural instrument for advancing the objectives
of both macro and financial stability.


Olivier Blanchard
Peterson Institute for International Economics
1750 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
and NBER
oblanchard@piie.com
    Introduction

    In September 2010, Guido Mantega, then minister of finance of Brazil,
declared: “We are in the midst of an international currency war, a general
weakening of currency. This threatens us because it takes away our compet-
itiveness.” His complaint was relayed and amplified by others, notably by
Raghu Rajan, governor of the Central Bank of India. In April 2014 for exam-
ple, Rajan said: “The disregard for spillovers could put the global economy
on a dangerous path of unconventional monetary policy tit for tat. To en-
sure stable and sustainable economic growth, world leaders must re-examine
the international rules of the monetary game, with advanced and emerging
economies alike adopting more mutually beneficial monetary policies.”
    Complaints by emerging market economies about advanced economies’
monetary policies, together with calls for coordination, have been a staple
of the last seven years. The purpose of this paper is to examine the validity of
these complaints and the scope for coordination. It reaches two conclusions.
The scope for coordination was and is limited. Restrictions on capital flows
were and are the more natural instrument to achieve a better outcome.

    The paper is organized as follows.
    Section 1 briefly reviews the cross-border eﬀects of advanced economies’
monetary policies on emerging economies, through goods markets, foreign ex-
change markets, and financial markets.
    Section 2 examines the scope for coordination, and concludes that it was
and still is rather limited. It argues that, given the limits on fiscal policy,
restrictions on capital flows were and still are the appropriate macroeconomic
instrument to achieve better outcomes, both in advanced economies and in
emerging economies.
    Section 3 returns to the eﬀects of capital flows on the financial systems in
emerging economies, and argues for a second role for restrictions on capital
flows, not only as a macroeconomic tool but also as a financial stability tool.


1    Cross-border eﬀects
Expansionary monetary policy in advanced economies (AEs in what follows),
conventional or unconventional, has aﬀected emerging market economies (EMs


                                       2
in what follows) through three channels: increased exports, exchange rate
appreciation, and the eﬀects of capital flows on the financial system. The first
two are fairly well understood; the crisis has led economists to looking at the
third one more closely.1

  Expansionary AE monetary policy leads to a higher demand for
EM exports.

    This channel is straightforward: Lower interest rates lead to higher AE
output, thus to higher AE imports, including higher imports from EMs.
    It is useful for later to get a sense of potential magnitudes: For most EMs,
exports to AEs represent between 5% and 10% of their GDP.2 For example,
Chinese exports to the AEs are equal to 10% of Chinese GDP, Brazilian and
Indian exports are equal to 5% of their respective GDP.3 Using these numbers
suggests small eﬀects of higher output in AEs: A 1% increase in AE output
leads to an increase of 0.10% in Chinese output, and less than half that in the
other two countries.
    The relevant numbers are however higher. First, for any EM, higher AE
output leads not only to a direct increase in exports to AEs, but to an indirect
eﬀect through higher induced output in other EM countries. Second, the
elasticity of AE imports to GDP is higher than unity, reflecting the share
of investment in imports, and the higher cyclicality of investment. Recent
estimates suggest an elasticity between 1.5 and 2.0.4
    Overall, this suggests that an increase in US output of 1% may lead,
through higher imports (at a given exchange rate) to an increase in output
in China around 0.2%, and to a smaller number for most other emerging mar-
kets. Putting things together, and with all the proper caveats, if we assume
that a 1% sustained decrease in the AE real policy rate—or the equivalent of
a 1% decrease in the policy rate in the case QE is used to decrease long rates
instead— leads to a 1% increase in AE output, this suggests eﬀects ranging
from 0.1% to 0.2% of GDP in EMs, with the size of the eﬀect depending on
the ratio of exports to AEs to GDP.
   1
     For a set of studies of the various cross-border eﬀects, see the “Selected Issues” part of
the 2011 IMF United States Spillover Report.
   2
     Data from http://wits.worldbank.org/
   3
     Given the relevance of supply chains, and the fact that higher exports mechanically
imply higher imports, the numbers somewhat overstate the relevant numbers.
   4
     For example, Bussiere et al 2015.


                                              3
    This heterogeneity in the size of the eﬀects of AE growth on EMs is am-
plified through another related channel, namely the eﬀect of AE output on
commodity prices. An increase in AE output increases the demand for com-
modities and therefore increases their price. This implies further heterogeneity
of the eﬀects on AE output on EMs. Net commodity exporters benefit more
from an increase in US output, commodity importers benefit less and possibly
not at all.

  Expansionary AE monetary policy leads to EM exchange rate
appreciation.

    This eﬀect has been in evidence since the beginning of the crisis, although
monetary policy has been only one of the factors moving exchange rates. The
acute phase of the crisis was dominated by an increase in market risk aversion
and by repatriations of funds by AE banks, leading to large capital outflows
and depreciations of EM currencies despite a sharp decrease in AE policy rates.
Thereafter, low interest rates in advanced economies led to a return of capital
flows to EMs. Adjustments in policies, current or anticipated, have led to large
exchange rate movements, among them the “taper tantrum” of 2013 when the
Fed indicated that it would slow down its purchases of bonds, leading to large
depreciations in a number of EMs.
    EM policy makers have complained about the “unconventional” charac-
ter of monetary policy in this context, but there is no reason to think that,
with respect to exchange rate movements, unconventional monetary expansion
works very diﬀerently from conventional monetary policy: To the extent that
unconventional policy decreases spreads on domestic bonds, whatever their
type or maturity, it makes them less attractive, and leads to depreciation.
    Depreciation in turn leads to an increase in net exports. The argument has
been made that exchange rate changes no longer improve the trade balance.
The evidence suggests however that they still do. A recent IMF study con-
cludes that the (appropriately modified to account for incomplete passthrough)
Marshall-Lerner condition still holds: A real depreciation of 10% leads, on av-
erage, to an increase in real net exports over time of 1.5% of GDP, with a
fairly wide range from 0.5% to 3.0% of GDP, reflecting in part the variation
in export shares across AEs and EMs.5
  5
      IMF World Economic Outlook, 2015, Chapter 3.



                                          4
    Again, it is useful for later to do a back of the envelope computation.
Assuming that uncovered interest parity holds at least as an approximation,
assuming that AE real interest rates are expected to be lower than EM interest
rates by 1% for, say, 3 years, this implies an initial EM real appreciation of
3%. Putting this together with the previous numbers, and with all the proper
caveats, the exchange rate channel suggests an average decrease in EM real
net exports of 0.45% of GDP, with a range going from 0.15% to 0.9% of GDP,
taking place over a number of years. For later reference, note that there is
clearly more uncertainty about the strength of this second channel than about
the first.

      Expansionary AE monetary policy aﬀects EMs’ financial systems.

    Perhaps the loudest complaints aimed at AE monetary policies have been
those aimed at gross inflows, at the so-called “tsunamis of liquidity” 6 triggered
by AE monetary policies, and their perceived adverse eﬀects on EMs financial
stability.
    The image of tsunamis of liquidity rushing into EM financial systems, is
a very powerful one. It is however also a very misleading one. A decrease in
the AE policy rate indeed leads AE investors to increase their demand for EM
assets. Thus, at a given exchange rate, it indeed leads to an increase in gross
inflows to EMs. In the absence of FX intervention, and on the assumption
that net exports only adjust over time, these gross inflows must however be
matched by equal gross outflows in order for the foreign exchange market to
clear. Put another way, whatever “tsunami” of inflows is triggered by monetary
policy must be matched by an equal tsunami of outflows: ”Net tsunamis must
be equal to zero. This is achieved through the decrease in the AE exchange
rate—equivalently the appreciation of the EM currency.
    This does not mean however that EM policy makers are wrong when they
think that AE monetary policy aﬀects their financial system. Empirical work,
in particular by Helène Rey, suggests that US monetary policy indeed has
important and complex eﬀects on other countries financial systems.7 . Why
might this be? It is fair to say that, despite a great deal of recent and on-
going research, we do not yet a good sense of the specific channels and of their
relative importance. For this reason, I shall leave the eﬀect of AE monetary
  6
      I believe the expression was first used by Dilma Rousseﬀ in 2012
  7
      For example, see Miranda-Agrippino and Rey 2015.


                                              5
policy on financial stability out of the model in the next section. I shall however
return to the issue in Section 3, review what we know and do not know, and
discuss potential implications.


2       The scope for coordination
Do these cross-border eﬀects, these spillovers, imply a scope for coordination,
as the Rajan quote in the introduction suggests? The first step in exploring
the answer is to define coordination more precisely, and here I want to take
exception with some of the existing rhetoric:
    Coordination is not about more communication. Surely, in the current
environment, a better understanding of each other’s macroeconomic policies
can only help. Thus, G7 or G20 meetings and discussions are clearly desirable.
This is however too unambitious a definition of coordination.
    Coordination is not about asking some countries to modify their policies
to help others, even if it is at their own expense. This is too ambitious a
definition of coordination, and unlikely to ever happen. The argument that
countries play repeated games, and thus may be willing to sacrifice in the short
run in order to have others do the same in the future if and when needed, is
unlikely to convince policy makers.
    Coordination is not about asking policy makers to take into account “spill-
backs”, i.e. the eﬀects of their policies on their country through their eﬀects
on other countries.8 This may be the case if, for example, AE policies lead to
major diﬃculties in EMs, which lead in turn to doubts about financial claims
on EMs, which, finally, lead to financial problems for AE banks. Typically,
these spillbacks are small, and, in any case, policy makers should take them
into account. This does not qualify as coordination.
    Coordination is not about asking policy makers to follow policies which
they feel they cannot or simply do not want to adopt. I feel that this is part
of what the “G20 map” process, which is the G20 version of coordination,
does.9 It suggests to countries that they should do more structural reforms,
and appropriately modify monetary and fiscal policies. This may be the right
    8
    See for example Caruana 2015
    9
    See https://www.imf.org/external/np/exr/facts/g20map.htm for a description of
the process, and the 2012 Umbrella Report for G-20 Mutual Assessment Process
(http://www.imf.org/external/np/g20/pdf/062012.pdf) for more details.



                                        6
advice, but if it is correct, countries should do much of it on their own, whether
or not other countries do what is asked of them.

    I shall instead take coordination to mean a set of changes in policies which
makes all countries better oﬀ. More formally, I shall ask whether the decen-
tralized equilibrium, which I shall take to be the Nash equilibrium, is eﬃcient,
or whether it can be improved upon.10 , 11

    With this definition, the general answer is simple and well known: If coun-
tries have as many non-distorting instruments as they have targets, then the
Nash equilibrium is eﬃcient. Coordination cannot deliver a better outcome for
all countries. A general discussion of whether countries have as many instru-
ments as targets can get very abstract and sterile. One can think of targets
as being the output gap, inflation, the exchange rate, financial stability, and
instruments as being monetary policy, fiscal policy, macro prudential policy,
FX intervention, capital controls. Simple counting of instruments and targets
is unlikely to resolve the issue: Some of the policy instruments are likely to
create distortions, so that they enter both as targets (minimizing the distor-
tion) and as instruments. If all instruments are distortionary for example,
then it follows that there will always be more targets than instruments and
there will always be room for coordination to improve the outcome. But if the
distortions are small, the gains from coordination may be limited. It is more
useful to work through a simple formal model and show what this implies.

       A two-country Mundell Fleming model

    For my purposes, let me start with a simple and old fashioned two-country
Mundell-Fleming model. The model is old fashioned in two ways: First, it is
static and not derived from micro foundations.12 Given the logic behind the
conclusions, I am confident that they would hold in a more micro-founded and
more general model. Second, it leaves out the third channel discussed earlier,
  10
     This is the standard academic definition, and the one used for example by Jeﬀ Frankel
in the paper he presented last year at this Forum, called ”International coordination”. . His
paper touches on many of the same points I do.
  11
     I leave aside the international provision of public goods, such as the provision of liquidity
by the IMF or by central banks, the harmonisation of financial regulations, etc. These are
obviously important, but are a very diﬀerent form of coordination.
  12
     For a treatment of the scope for coordination in a micro founded model, see Obstfeld
and Rogoﬀ 2002.


                                                7
the eﬀects of AE monetary policy on EM financial stability. The reason is that
I feel we/I do not know how to best extend the model to capture these eﬀects.
Thus, I leave this extension to an informal discussion in the next section.
    The model has two (blocks of) countries, a domestic economy (as a stand
in for advanced economies) and a foreign economy (as a stand in for emerging
market economies). Foreign variables are denoted by a star.
    Domestic output is given by:

                                Y = A + NX

                               A = G − cR + X

                           N X = a(Y ∗ − Y ) − bE

   Domestic output, Y is equal to the sum of absorption, A, and net exports,
N X. Absorption depends on fiscal policy, summarized by G, on the mon-
etary policy rate, R, and on a shock to domestic demand, X. Net exports
depend positively on foreign output, Y ∗ , negatively on domestic output, Y ,
and negatively on the real exchange rate, E.
   Symmetrically, foreign output is given by:

                               Y ∗ = A∗ − N X

                             A∗ = G∗ − cR∗ + X ∗

                           N X = a(Y ∗ − Y ) − bE

   Finally, following UIP, the exchange rate depends on the diﬀerence between
the domestic and the foreign policy rates. Under the UIP interpretation, the
coeﬃcient d measures the expected persistence of the interest diﬀerential:

                                E = d(R − R∗ )

    A decrease in the domestic policy rate over the foreign policy rate leads
to a depreciation of the domestic currency—equivalently to an appreciation of
the foreign currency.
    Absent shocks, G, G∗ , X, X ∗ are normalized to zero. Equilibrium output
in the absence of shocks, which I take to be potential output, is equal to zero.
So are net exports, interest rates and the exchange rate.
    Each country cares about the deviation of output from potential and about


                                       8
the deviation of net exports from zero.



                                Ω = min Y 2 + α N X 2

                               Ω∗ = min Y ∗2 + β N X 2


    Note, in relation to the previous discussion, that neither monetary nor
fiscal policies are assumed to aﬀect output in the way characterized above,
and not to create additional distortions.
    To start with, assume that each country can use both fiscal and monetary
policy. As they are two targets and two non-distorting instruments in each
country, the theorem applies: The Nash equilibrium is eﬃcient, and there is
no room for coordination. Suppose we capture what has happened during the
crisis by assuming that, starting from steady state in both countries—so all
variables are equal to zero—the domestic economy is hit by an adverse demand
shock, so X < 0. Then, the Nash equilibrium is trivially characterized: The
domestic economy uses fiscal policy, G = −X to oﬀset the shock, and the
foreign economy does not need to change either G∗ or R∗ .13
    One may worry about the fact that, in the model and clearly counterfactu-
ally, the two countries have the tools to completely oﬀset the shock, and can
return to the pre-shock equilibrium. This is not essential. The shock may be
(and indeed was) a more complex one, aﬀecting for example the supply side,
so that the countries want to return to a diﬀerent equilibrium after the shock.
And the model is easily extended to limit the ability of policy to oﬀset the
shocks. If for example, decisions about fiscal and monetary policy are taken
before X is fully revealed, the economies will be aﬀected by the shock, but the
eﬃciency of the Nash equilibrium will remain. Coordination cannot improve
the outcome.

       Coordination when fiscal policy cannot be used

    Why does the above result feel too strong? Probably because the potential
role attributed to fiscal policy is too optimistic. Policy makers may/do care
  13
     Actually, the equilibrium set of policies is not unique. One can verify that any equi-
librium where R and R∗ move together, implying no change in the exchange rate, and G
and G∗ adjust so as to maintain demand constant in each country is eﬃcient. But this is a
curiosity.


                                            9
about the fiscal balance, in which case, formally, there are now three targets
and only two instruments. Related, and more relevant at this point, given the
large increase in debt associated with the crisis, are the perceived limits on
the current use of fiscal policy. Indeed, a recurring theme of policy discussions
has been the extreme reliance on monetary policy due to the sharp limits on
the use of fiscal policy.
    What happens if we assume that fiscal policy cannot be used, so that
G = G∗ = 0?14 In this case, each country has two targets and only one
instrument. The Nash equilibrium is ineﬃcient, and there is a set of policies
which improve welfare in both countries.
    The set of utilities which can be achieved through coordination is obtained
by maximizing a weighted average of the two countries’ welfare functions,
Ω + λΩ∗ for diﬀerent values of λ. Figure 1 plots the Nash equilibrium, A, and
the utility frontier for a given set of parameters (the qualitative feature of the
Figure does not depend on the specific set of parameters.) All the points to
the southwest of A yield higher welfare for both countries.15


                         Figure 1. AE and EM welfare under Nash and coordination

              0.01

             0.009

             0.008

             0.007

             0.006
 Country B




             0.005

             0.004
                                       A
             0.003

             0.002

             0.001

                     B
                0
                     0   0.001 0.002 0.003 0.004 0.005 0.006 0.007 0.008 0.009   0.01
                                              Country A




    The improvement in welfare is small, and this conclusion is consistent with
the literature, starting with Oudiz and Sachs (1984). Given however the sim-
plicity of the model and the lack of a serious calibration, this conclusion should
   14
     Equivalently, we could assume that fiscal policy can be used, but that it creates dis-
tortions, with these distortions entering the objective function. This would lead to a more
limited role for fiscal policy, and the essence of the results below would go through.
  15
     Given that we are minimizing a loss function, the closer to the origin, the better.


                                                                      10
not be given too much weight. More important is the question of what form
coordination should take. Should coordination lead AEs to adopt a more or a
less aggressive monetary policy?
    The answer turns out to depend on the sign of (ac − bd). This expression
has a simple interpretation. The first term, ac, reflects the strength of the first
channel (higher AE output, leading to a stronger demand for EM exports)
above, with c measuring the eﬀect of the policy rate on domestic demand, and
a measuring the share of imports. The second term, bd reflects the strength of
the second channel (EM appreciation, leading to a decrease demand for EM
exports), with d measuring the eﬀect of the policy rate on the exchange rate,
and b measuring the eﬀect of the exchange rate on net exports.
    When the first channel dominates the second, the net eﬀect of a decrease in
the domestic policy rate is to increase foreign net exports and foreign output.
The coordination equilibria (I use “equilibria” as there is a (small) range of
equilibria which dominate the Nash equilibrium, namely all the points to the
southwest of A) are associated with a stronger response of the domestic policy
rate, a weaker response of the foreign policy rate than under Nash. When
the second channel dominates the first however, the coordination equilibria
are associated with a weaker response of the domestic policy rate, a stronger
response of the foreign rate.
    Table 1 shows the outcomes for two sets of parameters. The shock is taken
to be a decrease in domestic demand, X by 1, while X ∗ is unchanged. The
parameters α, β, c and d are the same in both cases, and equal respectively
to 0.5, 0.5, 1.0 and 1.0. The two lines diﬀer in the values of a and b (and thus
the implied value of ac − bd, which is positive in the first case, negative in the
second).
    The coordinated equilibria which dominate the Nash equilibrium all have
very similar interest rates, so we can just look at one of them. The table reports
the Nash equilibrium domestic and foreign interest rates, and those associated
with one of the dominating coordinated equilibria, the equilibrium associated
with λ = 1. In the first case, the first channel dominates, and coordination
yields a stronger response of the domestic rate, -88.2 bps compared to -86.8
bps. In the second case, the second channel dominates, and coordination yields
a weaker response, -75.9 bps compared to 76.7 bps.16
  16
    The diﬀerences between the rates under Nash and coordination are small, but again,
the calibration is too crude for this aspect to be given too much weight.



                                         11
        Table 1. Policy Rates under Nash and Coordination

        a   b     R (Nash)    R∗ (Nash)    λ   R (Coord)    R∗ (coord)
       0.4 0.2      -.868       -.131      1     -.882        -.117
       0.2 0.4      -.767       -.230      1     -.759        -.241


    These results point to the practical problem in achieving coordination in
this context, namely whether we know which way the inequality goes. The
history of the last seven years is one of major disagreements about the strength
of the two eﬀects, and by implication, disagreements about what coordination
should achieve.
    To go back to the quotes at the beginning, both Guido Mantega and Raghu
Rajan emphasized the second channel, the eﬀect on AE monetary policy the
exchange rate. To again quote Rajan: “Rather the mandates of systemically
influential central banks should be expanded to account for spillovers, forcing
policymakers to avoid unconventional measures with substantial adverse eﬀects
on other economies, particularly if the domestic benefits are questionable”. In
terms of our model, Rajan had in mind a small eﬀect of the policy rate on
domestic demand, a small value for c. In the limit where c tends to zero, this
is indeed a zero sum game between the two countries, and coordination should
lead to smaller policy rate cuts. Thus, the use of the term “currency wars”.
    Advanced economy policy makers, on the other hand, have emphasized
the first channel. Strong AE growth, they have argued, is essential for the
world in general, and for EMs in particular. In terms of the model, they
have emphasized the importance of a, the eﬀect of AE output on AE imports.
In his 2015 Mundell Fleming lecture, which deals very much with the same
topics as this paper, Ben Bernanke argued: “US growth during the recent
recovery has certainly not been driven by exports, and, as I will explain, the
expenditure-augmenting eﬀects of US monetary policies (adding to global ag-
gregate demand) tend to oﬀset the expenditure-switching eﬀects (adding to
demand in one country at the expense of others).
    Who is right? The back of the envelope computations given in Section 1
suggest that it is hard to assess which way the inequality works. Simulations
using IMF models and reported in IMF spillover reports suggest that monetary
expansion in AEs was on net good for emerging economies. Such a simulation
is reported in Table 2. It shows the dynamic eﬀects of an AE monetary


                                      12
expansion in response to a decrease in domestic demand in AEs, on both AE
and EM output, from year 1 to 6.17 In that simulation, the net eﬀects on EMs
are small, but positive.


 Table 2. Eﬀects of an AE monetary expansion on AEs and EMs.

                  Year                  1     2         3    4          5      6
           Advanced Economies          1.00 1.60      1.38 0.94       0.61    0.39
           Emerging Economies          0.17 0.39      0.39 0.33       0.28    0.22


    While such a simulation is much more sophisticated than the simple com-
putations in Section 1, it still comes with many caveats. In particular, it
comes with large diﬀerences across EMs. EM countries with strong trade links
to AEs, such as China, may indeed be better oﬀ, and be in favor of more AE
expansion. EM countries with weaker links to AEs, such as Brazil or India,
may be worse oﬀ, and want less AE expansion; this may explain why Brazil
and India may have been among the most vocal critics of AE policy.
    In short, given the diverging views, coordination means something diﬀerent
for AE and EM policy makers, so it is unlikely to happen.

       A Deus ex machina? Capital controls

    If, because of limits on fiscal policy, the Nash equilibrium is ineﬃcient and
the room for coordination is limited, can policy makers improve on the Nash
outcome? The short answer is yes, if they are willing to use an additional
instrument, restrictions on capital flows, capital controls.18
    The logic for why capital controls are useful in this context is straightfor-
ward. Advanced economies suﬀer from a lack of domestic demand. As we
saw earlier, if they could freely use fiscal policy, they could just oﬀset the de-
crease in domestic demand through a fiscal expansion. This would return both
countries at the pre-shock equilibrium levels of output and exchange rate. If
fiscal policy is not available, they must use monetary policy. Monetary policy
  17
      The table shows the diﬀerence between output with monetary expansion and output
without monetary expansion. Courtesy of the IMF modelling team.
   18
      Many economists have questioned whether fiscal policy is really not available. They have
argued that, even at the currently high debt levels, there may be room for fiscal expansion.
I leave this debate aside. All I need for the argument made here is that there are some
limits on the use of fiscal expansion.


                                             13
however not only increases domestic demand but also aﬀects the exchange rate
through interest diﬀerentials. Capital controls can, at least within the logic
of the model, eliminate the eﬀect of the interest diﬀerential on the exchange
rate.
    This argument can be formalized as follows. Extend the equation for the
exchange rate to:

                             E = d(R − (R∗ − x))

    where x may be interpreted as a tax per unit on foreign inflows (such as has
been used in Chile, or more recently in Brazil). Assume, as above, that fiscal
policy cannot be used, that AEs can use monetary policy, and EMs can use
monetary policy R and the tax x. Assume again that the shock is a decrease
in X by 1.
    Then the Nash equilibrium takes a simple form. AEs decrease the policy
rate R by 1/c. EMs increase x by 1/c, leaving the exchange rate unchanged.
AE output and net exports return to their pre-shock level (zero, by normaliza-
tion). In terms of Figure 1, the two countries achieve the point at the origin, a
large improvement relative to the Nash or the coordinated equilibrium absent
controls. Not only do EMs protect themselves, but AEs also benefit from be-
ing able to use monetary policy without having to worry about the exchange
rate.
    In short, (varying) capital controls are the logical macroeconomic instru-
ment to use when fiscal policy is not available. It reduces the problems asso-
ciated with an increased reliance on monetary accommodation. Such an en-
dorsement of capital controls comes with many caveats. Before listing them,
I turn to the case for capital controls as a financial instrument.


3     Monetary policy, capital controls and FX
      intervention
In the previous section, I left aside the third channel, i.e. the potential eﬀects
of AE monetary policy on gross inflows into EMs and on the EM financial
system. But, as I discussed earlier, many of the EM complaints have been
aimed precisely at those gross inflows and their perceived adverse eﬀects on
financial stability.

                                       14
   How does AE monetary policy aﬀect gross flows to EMs and the EM fi-
nancial system? Despite a lot of recent work, the answers are less clear than
one would like, on both theoretical and empirical grounds.

       Gross flows and AE monetary policy. Theoretical considerations

    Return to the “tsunami” argument briefly discussed in Section 1. Does
expansionary AE monetary policy trigger larger gross flows to EMs? Simple
arithmetic will again help here. Assume that gross inflows into EMs and gross
outflows from EMs are given by:

                         F I = α + β(d(R∗ − R − z) + E)

                       F O = α∗ − β ∗ (d(R∗ − R − γz) + E)

       Equilibrium in the foreign exchange market is given by:

                                  FI = FO + FX

    where F X is foreign exchange intervention, and the current account is
assumed not to change in the short run so I ignore it here.19
    Both inflows and outflows are now assumed to be less than fully elastic
with respect to expected returns. Both α and α∗ , and β and β ∗ are allowed
to diﬀer, reflecting potentially diﬀerent preferences and types of AE and EM
investors.
    The variable z shifts inflows and outflows; it can be thought of as reflecting
a risk premium, reflecting the convolution of perceptions of risk and risk aver-
sion; its eﬀect may be diﬀerent for AE and EM investors, and this is captured
by the presence of coeﬃcient γ. For example, “risk oﬀ” may lead AE investors
to become more risk averse, while having less of an eﬀect on EM investors, in
which case γ < 1.
    Note that as β and β ∗ go to infinity, and z is equal to zero, the equilibrium
tends to the uncovered interest parity condition E = d(R − R∗ ).
  19
    This assumption is surely correct over short periods of time, such as the minute or
the day. Over time, net exports will adjust in response to the movement in the exchange
rate, and the equation should be modified to include N X. The conclusions below—namely
that, in the short run, changes in gross inflows have to be matched by changes in gross
outflows—would still apply.




                                          15
   Suppose now that the AE central bank decreases its policy rate R by
∆R < 0, that the EM central bank does not adjust its policy rate, so ∆R∗ = 0,
and does not intervene, so F X = 0. Solving for the equilibrium gives:

                     ∆E = d∆R        and        ∆F I = ∆F O = 0

    In words, the exchange rate adjusts so as to keep expected relative returns
the same, just as under the UIP condition, and the decrease in the exchange
rate leads to unchanged gross inflows (and outflows). This is true despite less
than fully elastic flows, diﬀerent preferences of AE and EM investors, and
possibly diﬀerent risk premia.20
    How can the result of unchanged gross flows be overturned? In one of two
ways:
    Demands for domestic and foreign investors diﬀer in more fundamental
ways than introduced here. I do not however have a sense of what plausible
deviations to introduce.
    Or monetary policy works partly through its eﬀects on the risk premium.
Suppose for example that lower AE rates decrease the risk premium z by ∆z.
Then:

                                        β + β ∗γ
                               ∆E = d            ∆z
                                         β + β∗
                                                β ∗ (γ − 1)
                        ∆F I = ∆F O = d                     ∆z
                                                  β + β∗
    If γ is less than one, that is if EM investors are less sensitive to z than AE
investors, then the exchange rate appreciation is more limited, and gross in-
flows and outflows increase. Thus, if a decrease in the policy rate is associated
with a decrease in the risk premium, and if γ < 1, then a monetary expansion
is associated with higher gross flows.
    This line of explanation suggests a complex relation between monetary
policy—conventional or unconventional—and gross flows. For example, QE1
may have reassured AE investors that US markets would be less dysfunctional,
leading to a return of AE investors to the US, and a decrease in gross flows
to EMs. In contrast, QE2 may have had little eﬀect on perceived risk, and
led AE investors to increase gross flows to EMs. The taper tantrum may have
  20
    This remains true even if R∗ adjusts. The adjustment has an eﬀect on the exchange
rate, not on the gross flows.



                                           16
led to a decrease in gross flows to EMs not so much by tightening future US
monetary conditions but rather by increasing uncertainty about the course of
future US monetary policy.

      Gross flows and AE monetary policy. Empirical evidence

    Despite a large number of empirical studies, the evidence on the eﬀects of
AE monetary policy on gross flows is also unclear. The empirical diﬃculties
are many, from the usual diﬃculty of identifying monetary policy shocks, com-
pounded since the crisis by the zero bound and the lack of movement in the
policy rate, to the use of unconventional instruments, to the issue of separating
out expected and unexpected monetary policy actions, to quality or coverage
issues with the flow data.
    A number of studies have found an eﬀect of monetary policy on specific
gross flows.21 Bruno and Shin (2015) for example, using a VAR methodology
over the pre-crisis period (1995:4 to 2007:4) find an eﬀect of the federal funds
rate on cross-border bank to bank flows; the eﬀect is however barely signifi-
cant. Fratzscher et al (2013), using daily data on portfolio equity and bond
flows, find significant eﬀects of diﬀerent monetary policy announcements and
actions since the beginning of the crisis.22 . Their results however point to the
complexity of the eﬀects of apparently largely similar monetary measures. For
example, they find QE1 announcements decreased bond flows to EMs, while
QE2 announcements increased them. In terms of the equations above, this
indeed suggests that, in each case, monetary policy worked partly through its
eﬀects on the risk premium.
    These studies cannot settle however the issue of whether total gross in-
flows increase with AE monetary expansions: The increase in the inflows the
researchers have identified may be oﬀset by a decrease in other inflows. Studies
of total inflows, or of the set of inflows adding up to total inflows, yield mixed
conclusions. A representative and careful paper, by Cerutti et al (2015), us-
ing quarterly flows over 2001:2 to 2013:2, suggests two main conclusions. The
most significant observable variable in explaining flows into EMs is the VIX
index: An increase in the VIX leads to a decrease in inflows to EMs. The
coeﬃcients on the monetary policy variables, namely the expected change in
the policy rate and the slope of the yield curve, typically have the expected
 21
      For obvious reasons, I ignore the studies which look at the eﬀects of policy on net flows.
 22
      See also Koepke 2015.


                                               17
sign, but are rarely significant. Together, these two variables explain only a
small part of overall variations in capital flows.
    Thus, on both theoretical and empirical grounds, the relation of monetary
policy to gross inflows into EMs is less clear than is often believed by policy
makers and even by researchers.23

    Gross inflows and EM financial systems. Other channels?

    Leaving aside the eﬀects if any on the volume of gross flows, how may
AE monetary policy aﬀect the EM financial systems? One can think of two
channels:
    The first channel, which the Asian crisis put in evidence, is through the ef-
fect of the exchange rate itself on the financial system. To the extent that finan-
cial institutions, the government, firms, or households, have FX-denominated
claims and liabilities, the appreciation triggered by AE monetary policy will
aﬀect their balance sheets. Even if financial institutions are largely hedged,
unhedged positions by the others will aﬀect the value of their claims, and
aﬀect financial stability. The eﬀects on financial stability are likely to vary
in magnitude, and even in sign, across countries, depending on the structure
of FX claims. In general, given that most EM countries still borrow largely
in foreign currency, the eﬀect of an appreciation triggered by AE monetary
policy, should be favorable. The exact structure of claims and liabilities will
however matter.
    The second channel is through changes in the composition of gross inflows
and outflows triggered by AE monetary policy. If for example foreign investors
increase their holdings of sovereign bonds and domestic investors decrease
theirs, then the eﬀects on the financial system are likely to be limited. If
instead, inflows take the form of additional funds to domestic banks, and
outflows come from a decrease in holdings of sovereign bonds, then this is
likely to lead to an increase in domestic credit supply. Depending on its nature
and intensity, this increase may be desirable, or instead lead to an unhealthy
credit boom.
    It is clear for example that, at the beginning of the crisis, the repatriation
   23
      This suggests that statements like “The empirical literature has long established that
US interest rates are an important driver of international portfolio flows, with lower rates
“pushing” capital to emerging markets” (Koepke 2015) are too strong. To be clear, the
issue is not whether they aﬀect exchange rates—they do— but whether they lead to large
increases in gross flows—which is less settled.


                                            18
of funds by AE banks had such a composition eﬀect. The decrease in funding
in EM banks by AE banks was not compensated by an increase in funding of
EM banks by EM investors, leading to a tightening of credit. The issue at hand
is however about the eﬀects of monetary policy per se. Just as for the eﬀect
of AE monetary policy on overall gross flows, the evidence on the composition
of the flows triggered by AE monetary policy is not clear. In Cerutti et al
(2015), for example, there is no clear diﬀerence between the estimated eﬀects
of monetary policy variables on bank, portfolio debt and portfolio equity flows.
    Thus, overall, it is diﬃcult to conclude that AE monetary policy has had
major, predictable, eﬀects on EM financial systems. Nevertheless, it is a clearly
a potentially important dimension that EM policy makers must monitor. This
takes us back to the issue of capital controls, now in the context of financial
stability.

   Capital controls versus FX intervention

    While the use of capital controls has been limited, many countries have
relied on FX intervention to limit the movements in exchange rate caused
by AE monetary policy. From the point of view of the previous section, i.e.
leaving implications for gross inflows aside, controls and FX intervention are
largely substitutes. Under the assumption that the elasticity of flows to return
diﬀerentials is finite—a necessary condition for FX intervention to have an
eﬀect—both can limit the eﬀects of lower AE interest rates on the exchange
rate, and achieve the same macroeconomic outcome. If however, we take into
account the third channel discussed in this section, the two have very diﬀerent
implications. Capital controls, by assumption, can limit gross inflows. FX
intervention, by limiting the exchange rate adjustment, increases gross inflows.
This can be seen straightforwardly from above. If, in response to a decrease in
the AE policy rate, FX intervention keeps the exchange rate unchanged, gross
flows increase by

                              ∆F I = −bd∆R > 0

  Thus, if the purpose is to limit the eﬀects of AE monetary policy on the
EM financial system, capital controls dominate FX intervention.




                                       19
4     Conclusions
I have looked at the interactions between AE and EM macro policies since the
beginning of the crisis, interactions characterized by complaints of “currency
wars” and demands for more coordination. I have oﬀered three main sets of
conclusions.
    In AEs, limits on fiscal policy have led since the beginning of the crisis
to an over reliance of monetary policy. This potentially opens the scope for
coordination. Whether coordination would entail an increase or a decrease
in interest rates in AEs is however diﬃcult to assess, with AEs and EMs
disagreeing about the sign. This has made and still makes coordination de
facto impossible to achieve.
    If there are limits on the use of fiscal policy, leading to the overreliance
on monetary policy and undesirable eﬀects on the exchange rate, the natural
instrument in this context is the use of capital controls by EMs. It allows AEs
to use monetary policy to increase domestic demand, while shielding EMs of
the undesirable exchange rate eﬀects. In the context of limits on fiscal policy,
controls are a natural macroeconomic instrument. Given the high levels of
debt in many countries, this is likely to remain the case for some time to
come.
    Despite some progress, how AE monetary policy aﬀects EM financial sys-
tems remains largely to be understood, both theoretically and empirically. To
the extent that AE monetary policy leads to gross inflows into EMs, to the
extent that these gross flows aﬀect the EM financial systems, and to the ex-
tent that EMs want to avoid these eﬀects, capital controls rather than FX
intervention are the right instrument.
    These conclusions come with the usual and strong caveats. Technical and
political issues associated with the use of capital controls as contingent instru-
ments are still relevant. This is not an unconditional endorsement of controls,
but an exploration and a starting point to a discussion.




                                       20
References
 [1] Ben Bernanke. Federal reserve policy in an international context. IMF
     Review, forthcoming, 2016. Mundell Fleming lecture.

 [2] Emine Boz, Matthieu Bussiere, and Clement Marsilli. Recent slowdown
     in global trade: Cyclical or structural? E-book, VoxEU, pages 55–70,
     June 2015. Bernard Hoekman, editor.

 [3] Valentina Bruno and Hyun Song Shin. Capital flows and the risk-taking
     channel of monetary policy. Journal of Monetary Economics, 71:119–132,
     2015.

 [4] Jaime Caruana. The international monetary and financial system: Elim-
     inating the blind spot. April 2015. BIS.

 [5] Eugenio Cerutti and Stijn Claessens and Damien Puy. Push factors and
     capital flows to emerging markets: Why knowing your lender matters
     more than fundamentals. 2015. IMF WP 15/127.

 [6] Jeﬀrey Frankel. International coordination. 2015. NBER working paper
     21878.

 [7] Marcel Fratzscher, Marco Lo Duca, and Roland Straub. On the interna-
     tional spillovers of us quantitative easing. June 2013. ECB working paper
     1557.

 [8] IMF. United states spillover report. July 2011.

 [9] IMF. World Economic Outlook, Exchange Rates and Trade Flows: Dis-
     onnected? October 2015. Chapter 3.

[10] Robin Koepke. Fed policy expectations and portfolio flows to emerging
     markets. June 2015. IIF working paper.

[11] Guido Mantega. Brazil in ‘currency war” alert. Financial Times, 1992.
     Interview.

[12] Maurice Obstfeld and Kenneth Rogoﬀ. Global implications of self oriented
     national monetary rules. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(2):503–
     535, 2002.


                                     21
[13] Gilles Oudiz and Jeﬀrey Sachs. Macroeconomic policy coordination
     among the industrial economies. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
     (1):1–75, 1984.

[14] Raghu Rajan. Containing competitive monetary easing. April 2015.
     Project Syndicate.

[15] Helene Rey and Silvia Miranda-Agrippino. World asset markets and the
     global financial cycle. October 2015. NBER working paper 21722.




                                    22
