NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REDISTRIBUTION OF LOCAL LABOR MARKET SHOCKS THROUGH FIRMS’
INTERNAL NETWORKS
Xavier Giroud
Holger M. Mueller
Working Paper 22396
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22396

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2016

Previously circulated as "Redistribution of Local Demand Shocks through Firms' Internal
Networks." We would like to thank Scott Baker, Itamar Drechsler, Xavier Gabaix, Ben Keys,
Theresa Kuchler, Andres Liberman, Ulrike Malmendier, Atif Mian, Daniel Paravisini, Thomas
Philippon, Alexi Savov, Johannes Stroebel, Amir Sufi, Stijn van Nieuwerburgh, and seminar
participants at NYU and the 2016 NBER SI for helpful comments. We are grateful to Manuel
Adelino and Albert Saiz for providing us with data. Any opinions and conclusions expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census
Bureau or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All results have been reviewed to ensure
that no confidential information is disclosed.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Xavier Giroud and Holger M. Mueller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Redistribution of Local Labor Market Shocks through Firms’ Internal Networks
Xavier Giroud and Holger M. Mueller
NBER Working Paper No. 22396
July 2016, Revise July 2016
JEL No. E24,E32,G31,J23,J63
ABSTRACT
Local labor market shocks are difficult to insure against. Using confidential micro data from the
U.S. Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Business Database, we document that firms redistribute the
employment impacts of local demand shocks across regions through their internal networks of
establishments. During the Great Recession, the massive decline in house prices caused a sharp
drop in consumer demand, leading to large employment losses in the non-tradable sector.
Consistent with firms smoothing out the impacts of these shocks across regions, we find large
elasticities of non-tradable establishment-level employment with respect to house prices in other
counties in which the firm has establishments. At the same time, establishments of firms with
larger regional networks exhibit lower employment elasticities with respect to local house prices
in the establishment’s own county. To account for general equilibrium adjustments, we aggregate
non-tradable employment at the county level. Similar to what we found at the establishment level,
we find that non-tradable county-level employment responds strongly to local demand shocks in
other counties linked through firms’ internal networks. These results are not driven by direct
demand spillovers from nearby counties, common shocks to house prices, or local demand shocks
affecting non-tradable employment in distant counties indirectly via the trade channel. Our results
suggest that firms play an important role in the extent to which local labor market risks are shared
across regions.

Xavier Giroud
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-639
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
xgiroud@mit.edu
Holger M. Mueller
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street
Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
hmueller@stern.nyu.edu

1

Introduction

Incomplete markets and credit constraints make it diﬃcult to fully insure against local
labor market shocks.1 While labor mobility can mitigate the impacts of local shocks,
there is mounting evidence that the movement of labor across regions in the aftermath
of shocks is sluggish and, at best, incomplete.2 Accordingly, economists have focused
on the role of public policy in alleviating the adverse impacts of local shocks, including
regional transfers, redistributive taxation, and “place-based” policies that directly target
disadvantaged regions: “redistributive countercyclical policies that target localities hit
by negative shocks can act as government-provided insurance against housing and labor
market risks that are diﬃcult to insure”(Kline and Moretti (2014b, p. 655)).3
Using confidential micro data from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Business
Database (LBD), this paper shows that firms redistribute the adverse impacts of local
labor market shocks across regions through their internal networks of establishments.
In principle, such a redistribution can be optimal if firms face binding overall resource
constraints and individual firm units exhibit decreasing marginal returns. In that case,
firms may smooth out local shocks by eﬀectively spreading their impacts across multiple
firm units, a manifestation of the well-known “coinsurance eﬀect” (Lewellen (1971)).4 As
a result, local shocks may induce employment losses at remote establishments.
1

A large regional risk-sharing literature rejects the null of perfect insurance across regions, e.g.,
Asdrubaldi, Sørensen, and Yosha (1996), Hess and Shin (1998), Del Negro (2002), and Lustig and Van
Nieuwerburgh (2010).
2

See, e.g., Blanchard and Katz (1992), Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013, 2016), Autor et al. (2014),
and Yagan (2016). Labor mobility may be low either due to high mobility costs or because workers
are compensated for declining wages and employment through cost-of-living adjustments (Notowidigo
(2013)).
3

See, e.g., Bartik (1991), Glaeser and Gottlieb (2008), Busso, Gregory, and Kline (2013), Kline and
Moretti (2013, 2014a, 2014b), Moretti (2014), and Hurst et al. (2016).
4

The coinsurance eﬀect is well grounded both in theory and prior empirical work. For instance, in
the theory model by Inderst and Mueller (2003), the firm’s headquarters smoothes out cash-flow shocks
by cross-subsidizing individual firm units with resources from other firm units. Cross-subsidization is
optimal because the firm is overall resource constrained and individual firm units exhibit decreasing
marginal returns to scale. As for prior empirical work, Lamont (1997) shows that in response to the
oil price shock of 1986–in which oil prices fell by 50 percent–diversified oil companies cut investment
not only in their oil extraction segments but also in unrelated segments, such as chemicals, railroads,
and shipbuilding. Likewise, Peek and Rosengren (1997, 2000) find that Japanese banks cut their lending
activities in the U.S. in response to a domestic liquidity shock in Japan.

2

We document how firms smooth out the impacts of local labor market shocks by
exploiting county-level variation in house prices during the Great Recession. As prior
research has shown, the collapse in house prices during the Great Recession caused a
sharp drop in consumer demand by households (Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013), Kaplan,
Mitman, and Violante (2016)). This drop in consumer demand, in turn, led to massive
employment losses in the non-tradable sector: across U.S. counties, those with larger
declines in housing net worth experienced significantly larger declines in non-tradable
employment (Mian and Sufi (2014), Giroud and Mueller (2016)).
An important feature of non-tradable employment (e.g., restaurants, supermarkets,
retail stores) is that it relies on local consumer demand. This makes it a desirable outcome
variable to study the eﬀects of local demand shocks, such as those originating from falling
house prices. The same feature also makes it a desirable outcome variable to study
redistributive firm policies, albeit for a slightly diﬀerent reason: while local demand shocks
may directly aﬀect non-tradable employment at the local level, they should not directly
aﬀect non-tradable employment in distant regions. Hence, if an establishment in the nontradable sector experiences a decline in employment in response to a local demand shock
in some other region in which the firm has establishments, then it is unlikely that this
employment decline is due to a direct demand eﬀect from that region.
We find that non-tradable establishment-level employment responds strongly to local
demand shocks in other counties in which the firm has establishments. In fact, the
elasticity of non-tradable establishment-level employment with respect to house prices
in other counties is about thirty percent of the elasticity with respect to local house prices
in the establishment’s own county.5 Our main specification includes county fixed eﬀects.
Accordingly, we can compare non-tradable establishments in the same county that are
exposed to the same local demand shock but that belong to diﬀerent firms and hence
5

As in Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013), Mian and Sufi (2014), Stroebel and Vavra (2015), Kaplan,
Mitman, and Violante (2016), and Giroud and Mueller (2016), we equate falling house prices during the
Great Recession with shocks to local consumer demand. Indeed, Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013) and Kaplan,
Mitman, and Violante (2016) provide direct evidence showing that counties or CBSAs experiencing larger
declines in housing net worth exhibit larger declines in consumer spending during the Great Recession.
Likewise, Stroebel and Vavra (2015) find that homeowners become more price-sensitive and cut back
more on their retail spending in ZIP codes experiencing larger drops in house prices.

3

are exposed to diﬀerent demand shocks in other counties. Importantly, the county fixed
eﬀects absorb any common shocks at the county level, including those arising in general
equilibrium through spillovers from other counties (e.g., price eﬀects).
Consistent with theory, we find that the elasticity of establishment-level employment
with respect to house prices in other counties increases with firms’ financial constraints.
Indeed, with respect to the least financially constrained firms in our sample, we find no
evidence that local demand shocks spill over to remote establishments within the same
firm. Furthermore, and consistent with the notion that firms smooth out the impacts of
local labor market shocks across regions, we find that establishments of firms with more
expansive regional networks exhibit significantly lower elasticities with respect to local
house prices in the establishment’s own county.
Firms’ redistributive policies may be irrelevant in general equilibrium if workers laid
oﬀ due to demand shocks in other counties are re-employed by local firms that are less
exposed to these counties. To see whether firms’ redistributive policies matter in the
aggregate, we examine total non-tradable employment at the county level. Building on
our establishment-level analysis, we construct a network of U.S. counties by aggregating
county-level linkages across establishments based on firms’ internal networks. Similar to
what we found at the establishment level, we find that non-tradable county-level employment responds strongly to local demand shocks in other counties linked through firms’
internal networks.6 Indeed, the elasticity of non-tradable county-level employment with
respect to house prices in other counties is about twenty percent of the (local) elasticity with respect to a county’s own house prices. While this is a large magnitude, it is
somewhat smaller than what we found at the establishment level, possibly reflecting the
impacts of general equilibrium adjustments.
Restaurants, supermarkets, and retail stores cater to local consumer demand. The
question, however, is: how “local” is consumer demand? Arguably, consumers may go to
restaurants and grocery stores across county borders, especially if they live close to the
6

It is important that county-level linkages are based on firms’ internal networks. If we assign equal
weight to all other counties–or to a randomly selected sample of counties–there is no significant effect. Likewise, there is no significant eﬀect if we randomly assign county-level linkage weights from the
population of actual linkage weights or use placebo weights based on tradable firms’ internal networks.

4

border. Hence, one might be worried that our estimates are picking up direct demand
eﬀects from other counties. We find that direct demand spillovers are small at best. If
we control for proximity-weighted house prices in other counties, our estimates become
only slightly weaker, and they remain highly significant. The same is true if we exclude
adjacent counties or those within a 50, 100, 150, or 250 mile radius.
Common factors aﬀecting house prices in counties in which non-tradable firms have
their establishments may introduce collinearity, making our estimates diﬃcult to interpret.
We address this issue in three ways. First, we consider demographic and other factors
that constitute potential sources of common shocks (income, education, age, mortgage
debt, mortgage delinquencies, household debt). We find that controlling for “similarityweighted” house prices in other counties based on similarities in these factors has little
eﬀect on our results. Second, we instrument house prices using the housing supply elasticity instrument from Saiz (2010). Third, we consider a subset of counties in which house
prices did not fall during the Great Recession. Linking such counties to other counties in
which house prices fell sharply makes it unlikely that our results are driven by common
shocks to house prices. Our results always remain similar.
Finally, local demand shocks may indirectly aﬀect non-tradable employment in other
counties via the trade channel. Precisely, they may lead to employment losses in other
counties in the tradable sector, which in turn may spill over to the non-tradable sector if
workers that were laid oﬀ cut back on their local grocery shopping and restaurant visits.
A necessary condition for this (trade) channel to work is that local house prices aﬀect
tradable employment in other counties. As it turns out, however, local house prices have
no significant eﬀect on employment in the tradable sector, neither at the local level nor
in distant counties.
Our paper contributes to three strands of literature. First and foremost, it is related
to the literature mentioned earlier that studies how risk is shared across regions and
how public policy can mitigate the adverse impacts of local labor market shocks through
redistributive taxation, regional transfers, and “place-based” policies that directly target
disadvantaged regions. Our paper adds to this literature by showing that firms play an
important role in redistributing the impacts of local labor market shocks across regions
5

through their internal networks of establishments.
Second, a recent literature studies cross-sectional variation in house prices during the
Great Recession and its implications for consumer demand and non-tradable employment
(e.g., Mian, Rao and Sufi (2013), Mian and Sufi (2014), Stroebel and Vavra (2015),
Kaplan, Mitman, and Violante, (2016), Giroud and Mueller (2016)). Our paper shows
that local consumer demand shocks not only aﬀect local non-tradable employment but
also non-tradable employment in distant regions. Indeed, we find economically large
elasticities of non-tradable employment with respect to demand shocks in other regions,
echoing a point made in Beraja, Hurst, and Ospina (2016) that it is diﬃcult to draw
inferences about aggregate economic activity based on local elasticities alone. In our
empirical setting, local elasticities and those with respect to demand shocks in other
regions have the same sign. Accordingly, including elasticities with respect to demand
shocks in other regions strengthens the role of consumer demand in explaining the sharp
decline in U.S. employment during the Great Recession.
Third, our paper is related to empirical studies documenting how shocks propagate
through networks. Prior research has focused on production (i.e., input-output) networks
(Acemoglu, Akcigit, and Kerr (2015), Acemoglu et. al (2016), Barrot and Sauvagnat
(2016)), social networks (Bailey et al. (2016)), and banking networks (Peek and Rosengren (1997, 2000), Schnabl (2012)). By contrast, our paper studies how shocks propagate
across diﬀerent regional labor markets within the same (non-tradable) industry sector
through firms’ internal networks of establishments. An important benefit of using U.S.
Census Bureau data is that we can characterize the entire network structure: the Longitudinal Business Database includes the ZIP codes and firm aﬃliations of all (payroll)
establishments in the U.S.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data, variables,
and summary statistics. Section 3 shows how firms redistribute the adverse impacts of
local labor market shocks across regions through their internal networks of establishments. Section 4 considers the implications of redistributive firm policies for aggregate
non-tradable employment at the county level. Section 5 concludes.

6

2

Data, Variables, and Summary Statistics

2.1

Data

We use data on employment, location, industry aﬃliation, and firm aﬃliation at the
establishment level. An establishment is a “single physical location where business is
conducted” (Jarmin and Miranda (2002, p. 5)), e.g., a restaurant, grocery store, gas
station, or department store. The establishment-level data are provided by the U.S.
Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Business Database (LBD). The LBD covers all business
establishments in the U.S. with at least one paid employee.
Our focus is on establishments in the non-tradable industry sector. An important
feature of non-tradable employment is that it relies on local consumer demand. Thus,
if an establishment experiences a decline in employment in response to a local demand
shock in some other region, then it is unlikely that this employment decline is due to
a direct demand eﬀect from that region. We classify establishments as non-tradable
based on the industry categorization in Mian and Sufi (2014). Accordingly, 26 four-digit
NAICS industries are classified as non-tradable. Among those, the largest ones in terms
of U.S. employment shares in 2007 are full-service restaurants (3.76%), limited-service
eating places (3.40%), grocery stores (2.13%), department stores (1.36%), other general
merchandise stores (1.12%), clothing stores (1.06%), automobile dealers (1.05%), health
and personal care stores (0.89%), and gasoline stations (0.73%).
We match establishments to county-level house prices. Our house price data are from
Zillow.7 Changes in house prices from 2006 to 2009 based on Zillow data are highly
correlated with the “housing net worth shock” in Mian, Rao and Sufi (2013) and Mian
and Sufi (2014), ∆ Housing Net Worth, 2006—2009. The correlation at the MSA level
is 86.3 percent. Likewise, they are highly correlated with changes in house prices from
2006 to 2009 based on data from the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA). The
correlation at the MSA level is 96.4 percent. We have data on house prices for 1,000
counties representing 86.8 percent of total U.S. employment and 85.8 percent of non7

Zillow house price data have been used in, e.g., Keys et al. (2014), Mian, Sufi, and Trebbi (2015),
Giroud and Mueller (2016), Kaplan, Mitman, and Violante (2016), and Bailey et al. (2016).

7

tradable employment.8
In addition, we use data on population, age, and education from the 2000 Decennial
Census, data on adjusted gross income per capita in 2006 from the IRS, and data on
mortgage debt, mortgage delinquencies, and household debt (mortgage, auto, and credit
card debt), all per capita in 2006, from the FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel. Also,
we use measures of housing supply elasticity and “share of unavailable land” from Saiz
(2010). Lastly, we compute measures of firms’ financial constraints–firm leverage and the
financial constraints indices of Kaplan and Zingales (1997) and Whited and Wu (2006),
all in 2006–using information from Compustat. We match establishments in the LBD
to firms in Compustat using the Compustat-SSEL bridge maintained by the U.S. Census
Bureau. As this bridge ends in 2005, we extend the match to 2009 using employer name
and ID number (EIN) following the procedure described in McCue (2003).

2.2

Variables and Empirical Specification

We examine how firms redistribute the impacts of local consumer demand shocks by
exploiting county-level variation in house prices during the Great Recession. As prior
research has shown, the massive decline in house prices during the Great Recession caused
a sharp drop in consumer demand by households. This drop in consumer demand, in turn,
led to substantial employment losses in the non-tradable sector: across U.S. counties, those
with larger declines in housing net worth experienced significantly larger declines in nontradable employment. Given that we wish to examine how firms redistribute the adverse
employment impacts of local consumer demand shocks across regions, our establishmentlevel analysis focuses on firms operating in multiple counties. As our house price data
are at the county level, we aggregate across all establishments of a firm within a given
county. Accordingly, the unit of observation is at the firm-county level. In robustness
tests, we alternatively aggregate at the firm-county-industry level. For simplicity, we
refer to individual units as “establishments.”

8

All sample sizes in this paper are rounded to the nearest hundred following disclosure guidelines by
the U.S. Census Bureau.

8

We estimate the following equation:
∆ Log(Emp )07−09 =  + 1 ∆ Log(HP )06−09 + 2

P

6=

  ∆ Log(HP )06−09 +  

where ∆ Log(Emp )07−09 is the percentage change in employment from 2007 to 2009 at
establishments of firm  in county , ∆ Log(HP )06−09 is the percentage change in house
P
prices from 2006 to 2009 in county , and 6=   ∆ Log(HP )06−09 is the linkage-

weighted percentage change in house prices from 2006 to 2009 in counties  6= . For
P
brevity, we write ∆ Log(HP)06−09 (other) in lieu of 6=   ∆ Log(HP )06−09 in our
figures and tables. The (partial) elasticities of interest are  1 and, especially, 2  All

regressions are weighted by establishment (i.e., firm-county) employment and include
either county fixed eﬀects or the county-specific employment shares of all 23 two-digit
NAICS industries in 2006 as controls. Some regressions include county × industry fixed
eﬀects in place of county fixed eﬀects. Naturally, in the regressions that include either
county or county × industry fixed eﬀects, the percentage change in county-level house
prices, ∆ Log(HP )06−09  is absorbed by the fixed eﬀects. Standard errors are double
clustered at both the firm and county level.
Our regression specification provides us with (partial) elasticities of non-tradable
establishment-level employment with respect to local house prices in the establishment’s
own county ( 1 ) as well as other counties in which the firm has establishments (2 ).
The variant of our specification that includes fixed eﬀects is equivalent to a diﬀerencein-diﬀerences specification with either county × year or county × industry × year fixed
eﬀects and one “before” and one “after” period. Accordingly, identification comes from
saturating the model with highly granular fixed eﬀects. Importantly, these fixed eﬀects
account for any common shocks at the county level, including those arising in general
equilibrium through spillovers from other counties (e.g., price eﬀects).
The linkage weights  specify the relative weight of house prices in county  for
establishments of firm  in county  We impose the minimal assumption that linkage
weights be proportional to firms’ (non-tradable) employment in a county:

9

Emp

6= Emp

  = P

Hence, a local demand shock in county  matters more for an establishment of firm  in
county  if the firm is more exposed to county  as measured by its employment in county
 relative to other counties  6= 9 Simply put, an establishment is more exposed to a
given county if its firm is more exposed to that county. Naturally, a county’s weight is
zero if the firm has no employees in that county.
If firms redistribute the adverse employment impacts of local demand shocks across
regions, we would expect that  2  0 The null is that firms do not reallocate internal
resources in response to local shocks, i.e., 2 = 010 Finally, there is a third possibility,
namely, 2  0 Under this possibility, firms do not cross-subsidize units in adversely
aﬀected regions but, quite the contrary, reallocate resources away from such units and
toward units in less aﬀected regions.11
In the second part of this paper, we consider aggregate employment at the county
level to examine if firms’ redistributive policies matter in general equilibrium. Countylevel employment is total non-tradable employment by all firms in a county. Thus, we
no longer focus exclusively on multi-county firms. This accounts for the possibility that
workers laid oﬀ due to demand shocks in other counties are re-employed either by other
multi-county firms or by local single-county firms.
Analogous to above, we estimate the following equation:
∆ Log(Emp )07−09 =  + 1 ∆ Log(HP )06−09 +  2

P

6=

 ∆ Log(HP )06−09 +  

where ∆ Log(Emp )07−09 is the percentage change in non-tradable employment from 2007
9
10

Bailey et al. (2016) use analogous county-level linkage weights in the context of social networks.
Alternatively,  2 = 0 could imply that firms do not face binding resource constraints.

11

This third possibility is consistent with a view whereby drops in consumer spending during the Great
Recession reflect long-term changes in consumer preferences rather than cyclical shocks to households’
budget constraints due to falling house prices (and/or household deleveraging). See Stein (1997) for a
theory model in which the firms’ headquarters reallocates internal resources toward firm units whose
relative investment opportunities have increased and Stein (2003) for a comprehensive overview of the
literature on internal resource allocation within firms.

10

to 2009 in county , ∆ Log(HP )06−09 is the percentage change in house prices from 2006
P
to 2009 in county , and 6=  ∆ Log(HP )06−09 is the linkage-weighted percentage

change in house prices from 2006 to 2009 in counties  6= . Like above, we write ∆
P
Log(HP)06−09 (other) instead of 6=  ∆ Log(HP )06−09 in our figures and tables for
brevity. All regressions are weighted by county size (number of employees) and includethe
county-specific employment shares of all 23 two-digit NAICS industries in 2006 as controls.
Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
The linkage weights  specify the relative weight of house prices in county  for nontradable employment in county  They are obtained by taking the employment-weighted
average of individual establishment-level linkage weights   within a county:
 =
where

P



Emp
P
  
 Emp

¢
P
P ¡
 Emp 
 Emp = 1 Hence, a local demand shock in county  matters

more for county  if its establishments are more exposed to county  (high  ) and these
establishments have relatively high employment shares within county .

2.3

Summary Statistics

Table I provides basic summary statistics. In the top part of Panel (A), the sample is
restricted to multi-county firms and the unit of observation is at the firm-county level,
consistent with our empirical analysis in Section 3. As can be seen, non-tradable firmcounty units have on average 75.9 employees and are linked to 192.5 other counties through
their firms’ internal networks of establishments.12 During the Great Recession, nontradable firm-county units experienced a decline in employment of 2.9 percent, while
house prices at the county level fell by 14.5 percent.13
The bottom part of Panel (A) provides county-level summary statistics based on all

12

Based on 2006 figures. Firm-county units are obtained by aggregating across all establishments of
a firm within a given county. Individual establishments have 29.5 employees on average, implying that a
typical firm-county unit consists of 2.5 establishments.
13

All percentages in Table I are weighted by either firm-county or county-level employment in 2006.

11

non-tradable firms in a county–including single-county firms–consistent with the empirical analysis in Section 4. As is shown, the average county has 1,074 establishments
and 18,490 employees in the non-tradable sector, accounting for 18.6 percent of total
county-level employment. During the Great Recession, aggregate non-tradable countylevel employment fell by 3.6 percent, which is slightly higher than the figure reported
above for multi-county firms.
Linkages across counties based on firms’ internal networks are pervasive. If we impose
the minimal requirement that linkages be based on 10+ employees, almost all counties
are connected with each other (“Starbucks eﬀect”). If we impose the requirement that
linkages be based on 1,000+ employees, the average county is connected to about half of
the other counties. This is a sizable network, reflecting the prominent role of national
restaurant and retail chains in the non-tradable sector. That most counties are connected
with each other is not a concern. Variation in ∆ Log(HP)06−09 (other) comes primarily
from variation in the linkage weights, not variation in the number of connections. Indeed,
Figures I and II show that there is substantial variation in ∆ Log(HP)06−09 (other).
Panel (B) of Table I reports correlations between county-level linkages based on firms’
internal networks of establishments and either county or county-pair characteristics. The
first two correlations show that non-tradable firms have more employees in nearby and
more populous counties. Both correlations are intuitive. The first reflects the fact that
some non-tradable firms are regional firms. The second correlation reflects the fact that
national restaurant and retail chains have more employees in regions with more potential
customers. The remaining correlations document that, on average, non-tradable firms
operating in a given county do not have more employees in “similar” counties based
on similarities in either income, age, education, mortgage debt, mortgage delinquencies,
household debt, or changes in house prices in the Great Recession. While individual nontradable firms may well choose the locations of their establishments based on demographic
factors–e.g., dollar stores may primarily target low-income areas–our sample includes
a large number of non-tradable firms, with potentially diverse target audiences, implying
that similarities across counties based on individual firms’ target audiences “wash out” in
the aggregate.
12

3

Spatial Redistribution of Local Demand Shocks

This section attempts to shed light on the mechanism underlying the redistribution of
local demand shocks across regions. To do so, we look inside the firm and examine how
non-tradable employment at the establishment level responds to local demand shocks as
well as demand shocks in other regions in which the firm has establishments. Section 4
below examines the aggregate implications of redistributive firm policies.

3.1

Redistribution through Firms’ Internal Networks

Figure I provides a visual impression by plotting the relationship between changes in nontradable establishment-level employment during the Great Recession and either changes
in county-level house prices (top panel) or changes in house prices in other counties in
which the firm has establishments (bottom panel). To filter out any confounding eﬀects
of ∆ Log(HP)06−09 (other) when plotting the relationship between ∆ Log(Emp)07−09 and
∆ Log(HP)06−09 , we compute the residuals from a regression of ∆ Log(Emp)07−09 on a
constant and ∆ Log(HP)06−09 (other). These residuals represent the component of ∆
Log(Emp)07−09 that is orthogonal to, and thus unexplained by, ∆ Log(HP)06−09 (other).
For each percentile of ∆ Log(HP)06−09  the plot shows the mean values of the residuals
and ∆ Log(HP)06−09  respectively. We proceed analogously in the bottom panel when
plotting the relationship between ∆ Log(Emp)07−09 and ∆ Log(HP)06−09 (other).
The top panel shows that there is a positive association between changes in nontradable employment at the establishment level and changes in (local) county-level house
prices, consistent with prior literature. The elasticity with respect to local house prices is
0.117, meaning a ten percent decline in local house prices is associated with a 1.17 percent
decline in establishment-level employment. (The average decline in county-level house
prices between 2006 and 2009 is 14.5 percent.) The bottom panel depicts the relationship
between changes in non-tradable employment at the establishment level and house prices
in other counties in which the firm has establishments. As is shown, the elasticity with
respect to house prices in other counties is 0.031, which is almost thirty percent of the
elasticity with respect to local house prices. This is a large magnitude, suggesting that
13

employment at the establishment level is highly sensitive to demand shocks in other
counties in which the firm has establishments.
Table II confirms this visual impression using regression analysis. Columns (1) and
(2) include the county-specific employment shares of all 23 two-digit NAICS industries
in 2006 as controls to account for the possibility that counties with exposure to certain
industries are harder hit during the Great Recession (Mian and Sufi (2014)). As column
(1) shows, local demand shocks have a profound eﬀect on non-tradable employment at the
establishment level. The elasticity with respect to local house prices is 0.104, implying
that a ten percent decline in local house prices is associated with a 1.04 percent decline
in establishment-level employment.
Column (2) includes the eﬀect of changes in house prices in other counties in which
the firm has establishments. While the coeﬃcient associated with changes in local house
prices, ∆ Log(HP)06−09  drops slightly to 0.092, that associated with changes in house
prices in other counties, ∆ Log(HP)06−09 (other), is large and significant. Indeed, the
elasticity with respect to house prices in other counties is 0.029, which is more than thirty
percent of the elasticity with respect to local house prices.
In column (3), we replace our county-specific industry controls with county fixed effects. Accordingly, we can compare non-tradable establishments in the same county that
are exposed to the same local demand shock but that belong to diﬀerent firms and hence
are exposed to diﬀerent demand shocks in other counties. More generally, the county
fixed eﬀects account for any common shocks at the county level, including those arising
in general equilibrium through spillovers from other counties (e.g., price eﬀects). As can
be seen, the elasticity with respect to house prices in other counties is almost identical to
that in column (2).
Columns (4) to (6) provide robustness tests in which we aggregate establishments
at the firm-county-industry level instead of the firm-county-level. In principle, doing so
allows for tighter identification, as we can compare non-tradable establishments in the
same county and 4-digit NAICS industry as opposed to the same county. As it turns out,
however, this has virtually no eﬀect on our estimates. In particular, the elasticity with
respect to house prices in other counties in column (6), which includes county × industry
14

fixed eﬀects, is practically identical to that in column (3), which includes county fixed
eﬀects (0.028 versus 0.027). In the remainder of this section, we therefore use column (3)
as our main specification. Presumably, the reason why it makes little diﬀerence whether
we aggregate at the firm-county or firm-county-industry level is that all establishments
in our sample belong to the non-tradable industry sector, which is already a relatively
homogeneous group of industries. Perhaps more important, 89.9% of the firms in our
sample have all of their non-tradable establishments in a single 4-digit NAICS industry.
For these firms, it makes literally no diﬀerence whether we aggregate at the firm-county
or firm-county-industry level.
Overall, our results are consistent with firms smoothing out the adverse employment
impacts of local demand shocks across diﬀerent regions. However, while our results are
consistent with (co-)insurance, they are not consistent with full insurance: elasticities
with respect to “own” demand shocks are several times larger than those with respect
to demand shocks in other regions. One possible explanation is that firms associate, at
least to some extent, drops in consumer spending in hard-hit regions with permanent
declines in investment opportunities in these regions. Another explanation is that agency
problems and frictions inside the firm (e.g., lobbying) impair the eﬃcient redistribution
of resources across establishments. Lastly, it may simply be easier to justify laying oﬀ
workers in regions that are harder hit during the Great Recession.

3.2

Financial Constraints

Theory predicts that the extent to which firms reallocate internal resources in response to
shocks depends on their financial constraints, given that it is costly to withdraw resources
from other firm units that are positive NPV at the margin. In Table III, we take this
prediction to the data using diﬀerent measures of firms’ financial constraints: firm leverage, the Kaplan-Zingales index (Kaplan and Zingales (1997)), and the Whited-Wu index
(Whited and Wu (2006)), all measured in 2006. The first measure is based on Giroud
and Mueller (2016), who argue that firms with higher leverage in 2006, at the onset of
the Great Recession, were more financially constrained during the Great Recession. The

15

second and third measures are widely used in the finance literature. All three measures
are only available for public firms. Accordingly, we restrict our sample to firms that have
a match in Compustat.
Regardless of which measure of financial constraints (FC) we use, we find that the
interaction term ∆ Log(HP)06−09 (other) × FC is positive and significant. Thus, establishments of more financially constrained firms exhibit significantly larger elasticities of
employment with respect to house prices in other counties in which the firm has establishments. Indeed, with regard to the least financially constrained firms in our sample, we
find no evidence that these firms redistribute the employment impacts of local demand
shocks across their establishments. Finally, and consistent with prior literature, we find
that establishments of more financially constrained firms exhibit larger elasticities with
respect to local house prices in the establishment’s own county. Altogether, these results
suggest that financial constraints matter, both for how firms respond locally to labor
market shocks and for how they smooth out the impacts of these shocks across regions.

3.3

Scope of Firms’ Regional Networks

If firms smooth out the impacts of local labor market shocks across regions, then establishments of firms with more expansive regional networks should respond less strongly
to local labor market shocks in the establishment’s own county. We test this prediction
in Table IV using diﬀerent proxies for the scope of firms’ regional networks: a dummy
indicating whether a firm is a multi-county firm, the number of counties in which the
firm has non-tradable employment, and a firm-level Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI)
measuring the extent of the firm’s geographic concentration based on its non-tradable
employment at the county level. (We use one minus the HHI to allow all three proxies
to have the same economic interpretation.) The first proxy requires that we expand our
sample to all non-tradable firms within a county, including single-county firms. As for the
second and third proxy, we use our original sample of multi-county firms to avoid picking
up diﬀerences between single- and multi-county firms, given that these diﬀerences have
already been captured by our multi-county dummy.

16

Irrespective of how we measure the scope of firms’ regional networks (RN), we find
that the interaction term ∆ Log(HP)06−09 × RN is negative and significant. Accordingly,
establishments of firms with more expansive regional networks exhibit significantly smaller
elasticities of employment with respect to local house prices. Given that firms with larger
regional networks may also diﬀer along other dimensions, we view the evidence provided
in Table IV as suggestive. In particular, firms with larger regional networks may be larger
in general. For instance, our sample includes restaurant, supermarket, and department
store chains; these are often both large and widely spread across regions. In columns
(4) to (6), we therefore include as additional controls firm size (number of employees)
in 2006 as well as its interaction with ∆ Log(HP)06−09 . While this reduces the eﬀect of
regional networks somewhat, the latter remains large and significant. Hence, accounting
for diﬀerences in firm size, establishments belonging to firms with larger regional networks
respond less strongly to local demand shocks in the establishment’s own county.

4

Aggregate Employment at the County Level

Firms’ redistributive policies may be irrelevant in general equilibrium if workers laid oﬀ
due to demand shocks in other counties are re-employed by firms that are less exposed
to these counties. In principle, such general equilibrium adjustments may be impaired
by wage and price stickiness as well as imperfect substitutability in the goods market.
In addition, the extent of labor reallocation depends on search and matching frictions
in the labor market as well as labor adjustment costs. Empirical evidence suggests that
labor market frictions were particularly severe during the Great Recession (e.g., Davis,
Faberman, and Haltiwanger (2013), Şahin et al. (2014)). Notably, Foster, Grim, and
Haltiwanger (2014) document that the intensity of labor reallocation fell rather than
rose during the Great Recession, in stark contrast to previous recessions. The authors
conclude: “job reallocation (creation plus destruction) is at its lowest point in 30 years
during the Great Recession and its immediate aftermath” (p. 10).
To examine whether firms’ redistributive policies matter in the aggregate, we turn
to county-level regressions. We consider total non-tradable employment by all firms in
17

a county, including single-county firms. Hence, our setting accounts for the possibility
that workers laid oﬀ due to demand shocks in other counties are re-employed either by
other multi-county firms or by local single-county firms. Linkages across counties are
based on individual firms’ internal networks of establishments as described in Section 2.2.
All regressions include the county-specific employment shares of all 23 two-digit NAICS
industries in 2006 as controls to account for the possibility that counties with exposure
to certain industries are harder hit during the Great Recession.

4.1

Main County-Level Results

Figure II plots the relationship between changes in non-tradable county-level employment
during the Great Recession and either changes in county-level house prices (top panel)
or changes in house prices in other counties linked through firms’ internal networks of
establishments (bottom panel). The figure is constructed the same way as Figure I.
As can be seen, both plots are similar to those in our establishment-level analysis. In
the top panel, there is a positive association between changes in non-tradable countylevel employment and changes in county-level house prices, confirming similar results in
prior literature. The elasticity with respect to county-level house prices is 0.129. This
is slightly larger than in our establishment-level analysis, reflecting the fact that countylevel employment is based on all firms in a county, including single-county firms. In
the bottom panel, the elasticity with respect to house prices in other counties is 0.030,
suggesting that county-level employment is highly sensitive to local demand shocks in
other counties linked through firms’ internal networks. Indeed, the elasticity with respect
to house prices in other counties is more than twenty percent of the elasticity with respect
to a county’s own house prices. While this is a large magnitude, it is somewhat smaller
than what we previously found at the establishment level, possibly reflecting the impacts
of general equilibrium adjustments.
Table V confirms this visual impression using regression analysis. In column (1),
the elasticity of non-tradable county-level employment with respect to county-level house
prices is 0.122, which is only slightly lower than in our graphical analysis. Column (2),

18

which is our main specification, includes the eﬀect of changes in house prices in other
counties linked through firms’ internal networks. While the coeﬃcient associated with
a county’s own change in house prices, ∆ Log(HP)06−09  drops slightly to 0.115, the
coeﬃcient associated with changes in house prices in other counties, ∆ Log(HP)06−09
(other), is large and significant. Indeed, the elasticity of non-tradable employment with
respect to house prices in other counties is 0.024, which is about twenty percent of the
elasticity with respect to a county’s own house prices.
A quick back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that consumer demand shocks can
explain a significant portion of the drop in non-tradable employment during the Great
Recession. As the summary statistics in Table I show, non-tradable employment at the
county level dropped by 3.6 percent, while county-level house prices fell by 14.5 percent.
Given the elasticities of 0.115 and 0.024 in column (2), a drop in house prices of 14.5
percent therefore implies a drop in non-tradable employment of (0115 + 0024) × 145% =
195% amounting to more than half of the overall decline in non-tradable employment.
Notably, more than twenty percent of the decline in non-tradable employment explained
by consumer demand shocks (00240115 = 0209) is due to shocks originating in other
counties linked through firms’ internal networks.
What is important for our results is that county-level linkages are based on firms’
internal networks of establishments. In column (3), we construct counterfactual linkages
by assigning equal weight to all other counties. As can be seen, there is no significant
spillover eﬀect. Similarly, in column (4), we assign equal weight to a randomly selected
sample of counties. Precisely, we draw for each county a random sample of 1,000 counties
(with replacement) and compute ∆ Log(HP)06−09 (other) using equal weights. We repeat
this process 1,000 times and estimate our baseline specification for each of the 1,000
bootstrap samples. As can be seen, there is again no significant spillover eﬀect. In
column (5), we randomly assign linkage weights from the population of actual linkage
weights based on firms’ internal networks. That is, for each county, we take its actual
set of 1,000 linkage weights but assign them randomly (with replacement). We repeat
this process 1,000 times and estimate our baseline specification for each of the 1,000
bootstrap samples. Again, there is no significant spillover eﬀect. Finally, in column
19

(6), we use placebo weights based on tradable firms’ internal networks.14 That is, we
construct linkage weights the same way as before, except we use tradable firms in lieu of
non-tradable firms. As in the other placebo tests, there is no significant spillover eﬀect.

4.2

Direct Demand Spillovers

How “local” is consumer demand? Arguably, consumers may go to restaurants and grocery
stores in neighboring counties, especially if they live close to the county border. Hence,
one might be worried that our estimates of spillovers from other counties are picking
up direct demand eﬀects from these counties. That is, falling house prices in county 
may aﬀect non-tradable employment in county  not through firms’ internal networks of
establishments but rather because consumers in county  cut back on their restaurant
visits and grocery shopping in county 
Table VI explores whether our results are driven by direct demand spillovers from
nearby counties. In column (1), we directly control for proximity-weighted changes in
house prices in other counties. While the coeﬃcient associated with this control is marginally significant, the coeﬃcient associated with ∆ Log(HP)06−09 (other) drops only
slightly, and it remains highly significant. Hence, direct demand spillovers from nearby
counties have a small eﬀect at best. In column (2), we exclude adjacent counties when
computing ∆ Log(HP)06−09 (other). This rules out any direct demand spillovers from
these counties by construction. As can be seen, the coeﬃcient on ∆ Log(HP)06−09 (other)
is practically identical to that in column (1), and it remains highly significant. Finally, in
columns (3) to (6), we exclude all counties within a 50, 100, 150, or 250 mile radius based
on the counties’ geographical centroids. As is shown, our results always remain similar.

4.3

Common County-Level Shocks

Common factors aﬀecting house prices in counties in which non-tradable firms have their
establishments may introduce collinearity, making our estimates diﬃcult to interpret. We
14

An industry is classified as as tradable if imports plus exports exceed $10,000 per worker or $500M
in total (Mian and Sufi (2014)). Tradable industries are essentially manufacturing industries.

20

address this issue in three ways. First, we directly control for changes in house prices
in other counties based on similarities in demographic and other factors. Second, we
instrument changes in house prices during the Great Recession using the housing supply
elasticity instrument from Saiz (2010). Third, we consider a subset of counties in which
house prices did not fall during the Great Recession.
Demographic Factors, Household Debt, and House Prices
Non-tradable firms may choose the locations of their establishments based on specific
demographic factors. For instance, dollar stores may primarily target low-income areas,
while high-end luxury retailers may primarily target aﬄuent areas. That being said,
the summary statistics in Table I show that there is no significant correlation between
county-level linkages based on firms’ internal networks and county-level linkages based
on similarities in either income, education, or age. As we argued previously, our sample
includes a large number of non-tradable firms, with potentially diverse target audiences,
implying that similarities across counties based on individual firms’ target audiences “wash
out” in the aggregate.
In columns (1) to (3) of Table VII, we control for “similarity-weighted” changes in
house prices in other counties based on similarities in either income, education, or age.
Similarity weights place higher weight on counties that are more similar (i.e., smaller
absolute diﬀerence) to the given county with respect to a particular characteristic. As
can be seen, including these controls makes little diﬀerence, consistent with there being
no significant correlation between linkages based on firms’ internal networks and those
based on similarities in demographic factors. Importantly, these results do not say that
demographics do not matter for house prices. All they say is that the eﬀect of changes
in house prices in county  on non-tradable employment in some other county  does not
depend on common demographic factors.
Mian and Sufi (2011, 2014), Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013), and Baker (2015) emphasize
the role of household debt during the Great Recession. In columns (4) to (6), we control
for similarity-weighted changes in house prices in other counties based on similarities in
either mortgage debt, mortgage delinquencies, or household debt (mortgage, auto, and
21

credit card debt). As previously, including these controls makes no diﬀerence. And again,
we would like to caution that this does not mean that mortgage or household debt does
not matter for house prices. Rather, it means the eﬀect of changes in house prices in
county  on non-tradable employment in county  is unrelated to similarities in either
mortgage or household debt among both counties.
If there are common shocks aﬀecting house prices in multiple counties, then house
prices should behave similarly in these counties. Accordingly, we can test the “commonshock hypothesis” more directly by controlling for similarity-weighted changes in other
counties’ house prices based on similarities in ∆ Log(HP)06−09  As column (7) shows,
including this control makes little diﬀerence, implying that our results are not driven by
counties experiencing similar changes in house prices during the Great Recession.
Instrumenting House Price Changes
In Table VIII, we instrument changes in house prices during the Great Recession using
the housing supply elasticity instrument from Saiz (2010). This instrument captures
geographical and regulatory constraints to new construction. Accordingly, areas with
inelastic housing supply face supply constraints due to their topography (steep hills and
water bodies) as well as local regulations. The Saiz instrument has been widely used
in the literature as a source of exogenous variation in house price changes (e.g., Mian
and Sufi (2011, 2014), Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013), Baker (2015), Stroebel and Vavra
(2015), Kaplan, Mitman, and Violante (2016), Giroud and Mueller (2016)). In our specific
context, the identifying assumption is that housing supply elasticity in counties  6= 
aﬀects changes in non-tradable employment in county  only through its eﬀect on changes
in house prices in counties  6= 
Columns (1) and (2) show the first-stage regressions. Similar to many other empirical
studies, we find that housing supply elasticity is a strong predictor of changes in house
prices during the Great Recession. Precisely, a county’s own housing supply elasticity
is correlated with ∆ Log(HP)06−09 but not with ∆ Log(HP)06−09 (other), while other
counties’ housing supply elasticity is correlated with Log(HP)06−09 (other) but not with
∆ Log(HP)06−09  Importantly, the second-stage regression in column (3) confirms that
22

(instrumented) changes in house prices in other counties linked through firms’ internal
networks have a positive and significant eﬀect on non-tradable employment at the county
level. Indeed, the IV elasticities are virtually identical to the OLS elasticities in our
baseline specification in column (2) of Table V.
A possible concern with the housing supply elasticity instrument is that it includes
regulatory constraints, which may be driven by the same unobserved heterogeneity that
also drives employment dynamics. To mitigate this concern, we repeat the analysis in
columns (4) to (6) using only the part of the instrument that is based on an area’s
topology, “share of unavailable land.” All results remain similar.
Counties in Which House Prices Did Not Fall
Not all counties experienced a collapse in house prices during the Great Recession. We
exploit this fact in Table IX by focusing on counties in which house prices either increased
or changed only little, defined as changes of less than ±25 percent. Linking such counties
to other counties in which house prices fell sharply makes it unlikely that our results are
driven by common shocks to house prices.
Columns (1) and (2) focus on counties in which house prices increased during the Great
Recession. In column (1), the coeﬃcient associated with ∆ Log(HP)06−09 is positive but
not significant, presumably because increases in house prices were relatively small during
the Great Recession. In column (2), the coeﬃcient associated with ∆ Log(HP)06−09
(other) remains large and significant, and its point estimate is similar to that in prior
regressions. Thus, local demand shocks in other counties linked through firms’ internal
networks spill over to counties which experienced no local demand shocks of their own.
Columns (3) and (4) focus on counties in which house prices changed only little during
the Great Recession. As can be seen, all results are similar.

4.4

Trade Channel

We found no evidence that our results may be driven by direct demand spillovers from
nearby counties. However, local demand shocks may also indirectly aﬀect non-tradable

23

employment in other counties, namely, through the trade channel. Intuitively, falling
house prices in county  may lead to employment losses in county ’s tradable sector,
which may spill over to county ’s non-tradable sector if workers that were laid oﬀ cut
back on their local grocery shopping and restaurant visits.
We approach the trade channel hypothesis in two diﬀerent ways. We first test a
necessary condition for this channel to work: if our results are explained by the trade
channel, then local house prices should aﬀect tradable employment in other counties.
Figure III, which is constructed the same way as Figures I and II, provides a visual
impression. As can be seen, there is no clear association between changes in tradable
county-level employment and either changes in local house prices (top panel) or changes
in house prices in other counties (bottom panel). Column (1) of Table X confirms this
visual impression using regression analysis. As in our graphical analysis, we find that
neither local house prices nor house prices in other counties have a significant eﬀect on
tradable employment at the county level.
The second approach considers county-level employment in the non-tradable sector.
Under the trade channel hypothesis, larger (i.e., more populous) counties should have a
disproportionate eﬀect on tradable employment in other counties. Hence, if our countylevel linkages were primarily capturing the eﬀects of demand shocks in larger counties,
then this could raise concerns that our estimates might be picking up (indirect) demand
eﬀects from these counties via the trade channel. In column (2), we directly control for
population-weighted changes in house prices in other counties. Not only is this control
insignificant, but the coeﬃcient associated with ∆ Log(HP)06−09 (other) remains significant and almost identical to that in our baseline specification. Altoghether, these results
suggest that our results are unlikely to be explained by the trade channel.

5

Conclusion

Local labor market shocks are diﬃcult to insure against. Accordingly, economists have
focused on the role of public policy in mitigating the adverse impacts of local shocks,
including regional transfers, redistributive taxation, and “place-based” policies. Using
24

confidential micro data from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Business Database,
we document that firms redistribute the employment impacts of local demand shocks
across regions through their internal networks of establishments. At the establishment
level, we find that non-tradable employment responds strongly to local demand shocks in
other counties in which the firm has establishments. Indeed, the elasticity with respect to
house prices in other counties is about thirty percent of the elasticity with respect to local
house prices in the establishment’s own county. Further, and consistent with the notion
that firms smooth out the impacts of labor market shocks across regions, we find that
establishments belonging to firms with more expansive regional networks exhibit lower
elasticities with respect to house prices in the establishment’s own county.
Firms’ redistributive policies may be irrelevant in general equilibrium if workers laid
oﬀ due to demand shocks in other counties are re-employed by local firms that are less
exposed to these counties. To examine whether firms redistributive policies matter in the
aggregate, we consider total non-tradable employment at the county level. Similar to what
we found at the establishment level, we find that non-tradable county-level employment
responds strongly to local demand shocks in other counties linked through firms’ internal
networks of establishments. Indeed, the elasticity with respect to house prices in other
counties is about twenty percent of the elasticity with respect to a county’s own house
prices. This is slightly smaller than what we found at the establishment level, possibly
reflecting the impacts of general equilibrium adjustments.
What is crucial for our empirical results is that linkages across counties are based
on firms’ internal networks of establishments. If we assign equal weight to all other
counties–or to a randomly selected sample of counties–there is no significant spillover
eﬀect. Likewise, there is no significant spillover eﬀect if we randomly assign linkage
weights from the population of actual linkage weights or use placebo weights based on
tradable firms’ internal networks. Our results are also not driven by direct demand
spillovers from nearby counties, common county-level shocks to house prices, or local
demand shocks aﬀecting non-tradable employment in distant counties indirectly through
the trade channel. Overall, our results suggest that firms play an important role in the
extent to which local labor market risks are shared across regions.
25

6

References

Acemoglu, Daron, Ufuk Akcigit, and William Kerr, 2015, Networks and the Macroeconomy: An Empirical Exploration, forthcoming, NBER Macroeconomics Annual.
Acemoglu, Daron, David Autor, David Dorn, Gordon Hanson, and Brendan Price, 2016,
Import Competition and the Great US Employment Sag of the 2000s, Journal of
Labor Economics 34, S141-S198.
Asdrubali, Pierfederico, Bent Sørensen, and Oved Yosha, 1996, Channels of Interstate
Risk Sharing: United States 1963—1990, Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, 10811110.
Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson, 2013, The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Eﬀects of Import Competition in the United States, American Economic
Review 103, 2121-2168.
Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson, 2016, The China Shock: Learning from
Labor Market Adjustment to Large Changes in Trade, forthcoming, Annual Review
of Economics.
Autor, David, David Dorn, Gordon Hanson, and Jae Song, 2014, Trade Adjustment:
Worker Level Evidence, Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, 1799-1860.
Bailey, Mike, Ruiqing Cao, Theresa Kuchler, and Johannes Stroebel, 2016, Social Networks and Housing Markets, mimeo, New York University.
Baker, Scott, 2015, Debt and the Consumption Response to Household Income Shocks,
mimeo, Northwestern University.
Barrot, Jean-Noël, and Julien Sauvagnat, 2016, Input Specificity and the Propagation
of Idiosyncratic Shocks in Production Networks, forthcoming, Quarterly Journal of
Economics.
Bartik, Timothy, 1991, Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies? Kalamazoo: W.E. Upjohn Institute.
Beraja, Martin, Erik Hurst, and Juan Ospina, 2016, The Aggregate Implications of
Regional Business Cycles, mimeo, University of Chicago.
26

Blanchard, Olivier, and Lawrence Katz, 1992, Regional Evolutions, Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity, 1-75.
Busso, Matias, Jesse Gregory, and Patrick Kline, 2013, Assessing the Incidence and
Eﬃciency of a Prominent Place Based Policy, American Economic Review 103, 897947.
Davis, Steven, Jason Faberman, and John Haltiwanger, 2013, The Establishment-Level
Behavior of Vacancies and Hiring, Quarterly Journal of Economics 128, 581-622.
Del Negro, Marco, 2002, Asymmetric Shocks among U.S. States, Journal of International
Economics 56, 273-297.
Foster, Lucia, Cheryl Grim, and John Haltiwanger, 2014, Reallocation in the Great
Recession: Cleansing or Not? NBER Working Paper 20427.
Giroud, Xavier, and Holger Mueller, 2016, Firm Leverage, Consumer Demand, and
Employment Losses during the Great Recession, forthcoming, Quarterly Journal of
Economics.
Glaeser, Edward, and Joshua Gottlieb, 2008, The Economics of Place-Making Policies,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 155-239.
Hess, Gregory, and Kwanho Shin, 1998, Intranational Business Cycles in the United
States, Journal of International Economics 44, 289-313.
Hurst, Erik, Benjamin Keys, Amit Seru, and Joseph Vavra, 2016, Regional Redistribution through the U.S. Mortgage Market, forthcoming, American Economic Review.
Inderst, Roman, and Holger Mueller, 2003, Internal versus External Financing: An
Optimal Contracting Approach, Journal of Finance 58, 1033-1062.
Jarmin, Ron, and Javier Miranda, 2002, The Longitudinal Business Database, CES
Working Paper 02-17.
Kaplan, Steven, and Luigi Zingales, 1997, Do Financing Constraints Explain Why Investment Is Correlated with Cash Flow? Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 169-215.
Kaplan, Greg, Kurt Mitman, and Giovanni Violante, 2016, Non-durable Consumption
and Housing Net Worth in the Great Recession: Evidence from Easily Accessible
Data, mimeo, Princeton University.
27

Keys, Benjamin, Tomasz Piskorski, Amit Seru, and Vincent Yao, 2014, Mortgage Rates,
Household Balance Sheets, and the Real Economy, mimeo, University of Chicago.
Kline, Patrick, and Enrico Moretti, 2013, Place Based Policies with Unemployment,
American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 103, 238-243.
Kline, Patrick, and Enrico Moretti, 2014a, Local Economic Development, Agglomeration
Economies, and the Big Push: 100 Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley
Authority, Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, 275-331.
Kline, Patrick, and Enrico Moretti, 2014b, People, Places and Public Policy: Some Simple Welfare Economics of Local Economic Development Programs, Annual Review
of Economics 6, 629-662.
Lamont, Owen, 1997, Cash Flow and Investment: Evidence from Internal Capital Markets, Journal of Finance 52, 83-109.
Lewellen, Wilbur, 1971, A Pure Financial Rationale for the Conglomerate Merger, Journal of Finance 26, 521-537.
Lustig, Hanno, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, 2010, How Much Does Household Collateral
Constrain Regional Risk Sharing? Review of Economic Dynamics 13, 265-294.
McCue, Kristin, 2003, Matching Compustat Data to the SSEL, mimeo, Center for Economic Studies.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi, 2011, House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the
US Household Leverage Crisis, American Economic Review 101, 2132-2156.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi, 2014, What Explains the 2007-2009 Drop in Employment?
Econometrica 82, 2197-2223.
Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi, 2013, Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic Slump, Quarterly Journal of Economics 128, 1-40.
Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Francesco Trebbi, 2015, Foreclosures, House Prices, and the
Real Economy, Journal of Finance 70, 2587-2634.
Moretti, Enrico, 2014, Local Labor Markets, in: Handbook of Labor Economcis, edited
by David Card and Orley Ashenfelter. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
28

Notowidigdo, Matthew, 2013, The Incidence of Local Labor Demand Shocks, mimeo,
Northwestern University.
Peek, Joe, and Eric Rosengren, 1997, The International Transmission of Financial Shocks:
The Case of Japan, American Economic Review 87, 495-505.
Peek, Joe, and Eric Rosengren, 2000, Collateral Damage: Eﬀects of the Japanese Bank
Crisis on Real Activity in the United States, American Economic Review 90, 30-45.
Saiz, Albert, 2010, The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply, Quarterly Journal
of Economics 125, 1253-1296.
Schnabl, Philipp, 2012, The International Transmission of Bank Liquidity Shocks: Evidence from an Emerging Market, Journal of Finance 67, 897-932.
Stein, Jeremy, 1997, Internal Capital Markets and the Competition for Corporate Resources, Journal of Finance 52, 111-133.
Stein, Jeremy, 2003, Agency, Information and Corporate Investment, in: Handbook of
the Economics of Finance, edited by George Constantinides, Milton Harris, and
René Stulz. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Stroebel, Johannes, and Joseph Vavra, 2015, House Prices, Local Demand, and Retail
Prices, mimeo, New York University.
Whited, Toni, and Guojun Wu, 2006, Financial Constraints Risk, Review of Financial
Studies 19, 531-559.
Yagan, Danny, 2016, The Enduring Employment Impact of Your Great Recession Location, mimeo, UC Berkeley.

29

Figure I
Non-Tradable Establishment-Level Employment
This figure plots the relationship between changes in non-tradable employment at the firm-county (“establishment”) level,
Δ Log(Emp)07-09, and either changes in county-level house prices, Δ Log(HP)06-09, or changes in house prices in other counties
in which the firm has establishments, Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other). The sample is restricted to multi-county firms. To filter out any
confounding effects of Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other) when plotting the relationship between Δ Log(Emp)07-09 and Δ Log(HP)06-09,
we compute the residuals from a regression of Δ Log(Emp)07-09 on a constant and Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other). For each percentile
of Δ Log(HP)06-09, the plot in the top panel shows the mean values of the residuals and Δ Log(HP)06-09, respectively. We
proceed analogously in the bottom panel when plotting the relationship between Δ Log(Emp)07-09 and Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other).

0.06
slope = 0.117
0.04

Δ Log(Emp)07-09

0.02

0.00

-0.02

-0.04

-0.06
-0.50

-0.40

-0.30

-0.20

-0.10

0.00

0.10

0.20

Δ Log(HP)06-09

0.05
slope = 0.031

Δ Log(Emp)07-09

0.03

0.01

-0.01

-0.03

-0.05
-0.40

-0.30

-0.20
-0.10
Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other)

0.00

0.10

Figure II
Non-Tradable County-Level Employment
This figure is similar to Figure I, except that it plots the relationship between changes in non-tradable employment at the
county level, Δ Log(Emp)07-09, and either changes in county-level house prices, Δ Log(HP)06-09, or changes in house prices in
other counties linked through firms’ internal networks of establishments, Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other). Non-tradable county-level
employment is based on all firms in a county, including single-county firms.

0.06
slope = 0.129
0.04

Δ Log(Emp)07-09

0.02

0.00

-0.02

-0.04

-0.06
-0.50

-0.40

-0.30

-0.20

-0.10

0.00

0.10

0.20

-0.20
-0.15
-0.10
-0.05
Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other)

0.00

0.05

Δ Log(HP)06-09

0.03
slope = 0.030
0.02

Δ Log(Emp)07-09

0.01

0.00

-0.01

-0.02

-0.03
-0.30

-0.25

Figure III
Tradable County-Level Employment
This figure is similar to Figure II, except that it depicts tradable employment at the county level.

0.09
slope = 0.008
0.06

Δ Log(Emp)07-09

0.03

0.00

-0.03

-0.06

-0.09
-0.50

-0.40

-0.30

-0.20
-0.10
Δ Log(HP)06-09

0.00

0.10

0.20

-0.20
-0.15
-0.10
-0.05
Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other)

0.00

0.05

0.06
slope = 0.002
0.04

Δ Log(Emp)07-09

0.02

0.00

-0.02

-0.04

-0.06
-0.30

-0.25

Table I
Summary Statistics
Panel (A) provides summary statistics at either the firm-county (“establishment”) or county level. The firm-county statistics
(upper part of panel) pertain to multi-county firms operating in the non-tradable sector. Employees is the number of employees
in 2006. Δ Log(Emp)07-09 is the percentage change in employment from 2007 to 2009. Δ Log(HP)06-09 is the percentage change
in county-level house prices from 2006 to 2009. # Linkages is the number of other counties in which the firm has
establishments. All percentages are weighted by firm-county employment. The county-level statistics (bottom part of panel)
pertain to all firms operating in the non-tradable sector, including single-county firms. Establishments and Employees is the
number of establishments and employees, respectively, in 2006. Employment share is the ratio of non-tradable county-level
employment to total county-level employment in 2006. Δ Log(Emp)07-09 is the percentage change in non-tradable countylevel employment from 2007 to 2009. Δ Log(HP)06-09 is the percentage change in county-level house prices from 2006 to
2009. Linkages ( ≥ X employees) is the number of other counties in 2006 in which non-tradable firms operating in a given
county have at least X employees. All percentages are weighted by county-level employment. Panel (B) provides correlations
between county-level linkage weights based on firms’ internal networks of establishments (see Section 2.2) and either county
or county-pair characteristics. Proximity is the inverse of the geographic distance between counties’ centroids using the great
circle distance formula. Similarity refers to the absolute difference between counties with respect to a given county-level
characteristic. Age is the median age among county residents in 2000. Education is the percentage of adults in a county with
a bachelor’s degree or higher in 2000. Income is adjusted gross income per capita in 2006. Mortgage debt, mortgage
delinquencies, and household debt (mortgage, auto, and credit card debt) are all per capita in 2006. *, **, and *** denotes
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel (A): Basic summary statistics

N

Mean

Std. Dev.

Firm-county level (non-tradable multi-county firms)
Employees
Δ Log(Emp)07-09
Δ Log(HP)06-09

138,500
138,500
138,500

75.9
-0.029
-0.145

262.9
1.003
1.364

# Linkages

138,500

192.5

232.4

County level (all non-tradable firms)
Establishments
Employees
Employment share

1,000
1,000
1,000

1,074
18,490
0.186

2,174
38,227
0.531

Δ Log(Emp)07-09
Δ Log(HP)06-09

1,000
1,000

-0.036
-0.145

0.883
0.189

Linkages ( ≥ 10 Emp)
Linkages ( ≥ 100 Emp)
Linkages ( ≥ 1,000 Emp)

1,000
1,000
1,000

980
867
480

175
235
198

Table I
(continued)
Panel (B): Correlation with county-level linkage weights

Proximity
Population

Correlation

p- value

0.103***
0.073*

0.009
0.068

0.028
-0.030
-0.027
-0.006
-0.023
-0.024
0.018

0.210
0.201
0.220
0.860
0.458
0.467

Similarity
Income
Education
Age
Mortgage debt
Mortgage delinquencies
Household debt
Δ Log(HP)06-09

0.290

Table II
Redistribution of Local Labor Market Shocks through Firms’ Internal Networks: Establishment-Level Evidence
The dependent variable is the percentage change in non-tradable establishment-level employment from 2007 to 2009, Δ Log(Emp)07-09. In columns (1) to (3), establishments are
aggregated at the firm-county level. In columns (4) to (6), establishments are aggregated at the firm-county-industry level. Industries are based on four-digit NAICS codes.
Δ Log(HP)06-09 is the percentage change in county-level house prices from 2006 to 2009. Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other) is the linkage-weighted percentage change in house prices from 2006
to 2009 in other counties in which the firm has establishments. Establishment-level linkage weights are described in Section 2.2. County × industry controls are the county-specific
employment shares of all 23 two-digit NAICS industries in 2006. The sample is restricted to multi-county firms. All regressions are weighted by either firm-county employment
(columns (1) to (3)) or firm-county-industry employment (columns (4) to (6)). Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at both the firm and county level. *, **, and *** denotes
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Δ Log(Emp)07-09
Firm-county level

Δ Log(HP)06-09

(1)

(2)

0.104***
(0.014)

(4)

(5)

0.092***

0.105***

0.094***

(0.015)
0.029***

(0.016)
0.027***

(0.016)
0.027***

0.028***

(0.010)

(0.010)

(0.010)

(0.009)

Yes
No
No

Yes
No
No

–
Yes
No

Yes
No
No

Yes
No
No

–
–
Yes

0.01
138,500

0.01
138,500

0.03
138,500

0.01
161,700

0.01
161,700

0.11
161,700

Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other)

County × industry controls
County fixed effects
County × industry fixed effects
R-squared
Observations

Firm-county-industry level
(3)

(6)

Table III
Financial Constraints
This table presents variants of the regression in column (3) of Table II in which Δ Log(HP)06-09 and Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other) are
interacted with measures of firms’ financial constraints (FC) in 2006. In column (1), FC is firm leverage, which is the ratio of the
sum of debt in current liabilities and long-term debt to total assets. In column (2), FC is the financial constraints index of Kaplan
and Zingales (1997). In column (3), FC is the financial constraints index of Whited and Wu (2006). Both financial constraints
indices are net of their minimum values. The sample is restricted to multi-county firms that have a match in Compustat. All
regressions are weighted by firm-county employment. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at both the firm and county
level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Δ Log(Emp)07-09

Δ Log(HP)06-09 × FC
Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other)

Leverage06

KZ-index06

WW-index06

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.133**

0.003**

0.046**

(0.066)

(0.001)

(0.020)

0.011

0.009

0.011

(0.007)

(0.009)

(0.010)

0.036**

0.001**

0.011**

(0.018)

(0.000)

(0.006)

-0.037***

-0.002**

-0.008**

(0.008)

(0.001)

(0.004)

County fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared

0.04

0.04

0.04

40,100

40,100

40,100

Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other) × FC
FC

Observations

Table IV
Scope of Firms’ Regional Networks
This table presents variants of the regression in column (3) of Table II in which Δ Log(HP)06-09 is interacted with measures of the scope of firms’ regional networks (RN) in 2006. In
columns (1) and (4), RN is a dummy variable indicating whether the firm operates in multiple counties. In columns (2) and (5), RN is the logarithm of the number of counties in
which the firm operates. In columns (3) and (6), RN is one minus the Herfindahl-Hirschman index (HHI) measuring the extent of the firm’s geographic concentration based on its
non-tradable employment at the county level. Size is the logarithm of the number of employees of the firm. The sample in columns (2), (3), (5), and (6) is restricted to multi-county
firms. All regressions are weighted by firm-county employment. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at both the firm and county level. *, **, and *** denotes significance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Δ Log(Emp)07-09
Multi-county

# Counties

Geogr. HHI

Multi-county

# Counties

Geogr. HHI

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Δ Log(HP)06-09 × RN

-0.052***

-0.019***

-0.217***

-0.043**

-0.016***

-0.209**

RN

(0.017)
0.011***
(0.002)

(0.006)
0.006***
(0.001)

(0.070)
0.042***
(0.008)

(0.020)
0.010***
(0.002)
-0.002***

(0.005)
0.005***
(0.001)
-0.002**

(0.101)
0.017*
(0.010)
-0.003***

(0.000)
0.003***
(0.001)

(0.001)
0.008***
(0.001)

(0.001)
0.009***
(0.001)

Δ Log(HP)06-09 × Size
Size

County fixed effects
R-squared
Observations

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.01
669,700

0.03
138,500

0.03
138,500

0.01
669,700

0.03
138,500

0.03
138,500

Table V
Aggregate Non-Tradable Employment at the County Level
The dependent variable is the percentage change in non-tradable county-level employment from 2007 to 2009, Δ Log(Emp)07-09. Δ Log(HP)06-09 is the percentage change in
county-level house prices from 2006 to 2009. Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other) is the linkage-weighted percentage change in house prices from 2006 to 2009 in other counties linked
through firms’ internal networks of establishments. County-level linkage weights are described in Section 2.2. In column (3), equal weight is assigned to all other counties. In
column (4), equal weight is assigned to a randomly selected sample of 1,000 counties (with replacement). In column (5), linkage weights are randomly assigned from the
population of actual linkage weights (with replacement). In column (6), linkage weights are based on tradable firms’ internal networks of establishments. County × industry
controls are the county-specific employment shares of all 23 two-digit NAICS industries in 2006. All regressions are weighted by county-level employment. Standard errors
(in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Δ Log(Emp)07-09
Placebo tests

Δ Log(HP)06-09

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.122***

0.115***

0.123***

0.123***

0.122***

0.122***

(0.006)

(0.012)
0.024***

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.006)

Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other)

(0.007)
Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, equal weights)

0.007
(0.039)

Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, random counties)

0.003
(0.028)

Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, random linkages)

0.002
(0.024)

Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, tradable firms)

0.004
(0.010)

County × industry controls
R-squared
Observations

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.16
1,000

0.17
1,000

0.16
1,000

0.16
1,000

0.16
1,000

0.16
1,000

Table VI
Direct Demand Spillovers
This table presents variants of the regression in column (2) of Table V. Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, proximity) is similar to Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other), except that linkage weights are
based on the inverse of the geographic distance between counties’ centroids using the great circle distance formula. Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, excl. adj. counties) is similar to
Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other), except that linkage weights are set to zero for adjacent counties. Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, counties ≥ X miles) is similar to Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other), except
that linkage weights are set to zero for counties whose centroid is less than X miles away from the county’s own centroid. All regressions are weighted by county-level
employment. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Δ Log(Emp)07-09

Δ Log(HP)06-09
Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, proximity)
Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.111***

0.115***

0.115***

0.116***

0.116***

0.116***

(0.012)
0.012*

(0.012)

(0.012)

(0.012)

(0.012)

(0.012)

(0.007)
0.019***
(0.007)

Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, excl. adj. counties)

0.020***
(0.006)

Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, counties ≥ 50 miles)

0.019***
(0.006)

Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, counties ≥ 100 miles)

0.019***
(0.006)

Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, counties ≥ 150 miles)

0.018***
(0.006)

Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, counties ≥ 250 miles)

0.017***
(0.006)

County × industry controls
R-squared
Observations

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.17
1,000

0.17
1,000

0.17
1,000

0.17
1,000

0.17
1,000

0.17
1,000

Table VII
Common County-Level Shocks
This table presents variants of the regression in column (2) of Table V. Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, *) is similar to Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other), except that linkage weights are based on the
inverse of the absolute difference between counties with respect to either income, age, education, mortgage debt, mortgage delinquencies, household debt, or Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other).
All of these county-level characteristics are described in Table I. All regressions are weighted by county-level employment. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state
level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Δ Log(Emp)07-09
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Δ Log(HP)06-09

0.112***

0.114***

0.108***

0.114***

0.114***

0.115***

0.115***

Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other)

(0.012)
0.025***

(0.012)
0.025***

(0.012)
0.029***

(0.012)
0.027***

(0.012)
0.024***

(0.012)
0.024***

(0.012)
0.023***

(0.007)
0.003

(0.007)

(0.008)

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.007)

Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, income)

(0.015)
Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, education)

0.004
(0.010)

Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, age)

0.003
(0.013)

Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, mortgage debt)

0.003
(0.014)

Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, mortgage delinq.)

0.002
(0.013)

Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, household debt)

0.000
(0.013)

Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, house prices)

0.004
(0.012)

County × industry controls
R-squared
Observations

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.17
1,000

0.17
1,000

0.17
1,000

0.17
1,000

0.17
1,000

0.17
1,000

0.17
1,000

Table VIII
Instrumenting House Price Changes
This table presents variants of the regression in column (2) of Table V in which Δ Log(HP)06-09 and Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other) are instrumented using the county’s housing supply
elasticity and the linkage-weighted housing supply elasticity in other counties linked through firms’ internal networks, respectively. County-level linkage weights are described in
Section 2.2. In columns (4) to (6), the “share of unavailable land” is used in lieu of housing supply elasticity. Both instruments are described in Saiz (2010). All regressions are
weighted by county-level employment. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Housing supply elasticity
First stage

Housing supply elasticity
Housing supply elasticity (other)

Share of unavailable land
First stage

Second stage

Second stage

Δ Log(HP)06-09

Δ Log(HP)06-09
(other)

Δ Log(Emp)07-09

Δ Log(HP)06-09

Δ Log(HP)06-09
(other)

Δ Log(Emp)07-09

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.069***
(0.010)
0.016
(0.013)

0.001
(0.014)
0.068***
(0.011)
-0.303***
(0.084)
-0.038
(0.070)

-0.008
(0.078)
-0.294***
(0.082)

Share of unavailable land
Share of unavailable land (other)
Δ Log(HP)06-09

0.114***

0.110***

Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other)

(0.016)
0.024**

(0.015)
0.025**

(0.010)

(0.010)

County × industry controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared
Observations

0.52
700

0.62
700

0.18
700

0.50
700

0.62
700

0.18
700

Table IX
Counties in Which House Prices Did Not Fall
This table presents variants of the regressions in columns (1) and (2) of Table V in which the sample is restricted to counties in
which house prices either increased (columns (1) and (2)) or changed only little, defined as a change of less than ±2.5 percent
(columns (3) and (4)). All regressions are weighted by county-level employment. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at
the state level. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Δ Log(Emp)07-09
Δ Log(HP)06-09 > 0
(1)
Δ Log(HP)06-09

(2)

Δ Log(HP)06-09 ± 0.025
(3)

(4)

0.018

0.014

0.001

0.001

(0.050)

(0.051)
0.019**

(0.012)

(0.012)
0.020**

Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other)

(0.010)

(0.010)

County × industry controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

R-squared
Observations

0.18
200

0.19
200

0.22
200

0.23
200

Table X
Trade Channel
This table presents variants of the regression in column (2) of Table V. In column (1), the dependent variable is the percentage
change in tradable county-level employment from 2007 to 2009, Δ Log(Emp)07-09. In column (2), Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, population)
is similar to Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other), except that linkage weights are based on counties’ shares of the total U.S. population. All
regressions are weighted by county-level employment. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the state level. *, **, and
*** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Δ Log(Emp)07-09

Δ Log(HP)06-09
Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other)

Tradable

Non-tradable

(1)

(2)

0.011

0.114***

(0.010)
0.004

(0.012)
0.023***

(0.014)

(0.007)
0.012

Δ Log(HP)06-09 (other, population)

(0.010)
County × industry controls
R-squared
Observations

Yes

Yes

0.13
1,000

0.17
1,000

