                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              NATION BUILDING THROUGH FOREIGN INTERVENTION:
           EVIDENCE FROM DISCONTINUITIES IN MILITARY STRATEGIES

                                        Melissa Dell
                                       Pablo Querubin

                                     Working Paper 22395
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22395


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2016




Katherine Chen, Peter Hickman, Luis Felipe Jaramillo, Nhung Le, Phan Ngoc, and Minh Trinh
provided excellent research assistance. We thank Ethan Bueno de Mesquita, Benjamin Crost,
Nathan Hendren, Jesse Shapiro, and seminar participants at Berkeley, the Becker Friedman
Institute, the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, Cornell, ITAM, the NBER Political
Economy program meeting, Northwestern, NYU, Stanford, and UBC for helpful comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Melissa Dell and Pablo Querubin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Nation Building Through Foreign Intervention: Evidence from Discontinuities in Military
Strategies
Melissa Dell and Pablo Querubin
NBER Working Paper No. 22395
July 2016
JEL No. F35,F51,F52

                                          ABSTRACT

This study uses discontinuities in U.S. strategies employed during the Vietnam War to estimate
their causal impacts. It identifies the effects of bombing by exploiting rounding thresholds in an
algorithm used to target air strikes. Bombing increased the military and political activities of the
communist insurgency, weakened local governance, and reduced non-communist civic
engagement. The study also exploits a spatial discontinuity across neighboring military regions,
which pursued different counterinsurgency strategies. A strategy emphasizing overwhelming
firepower plausibly increased insurgent attacks and worsened attitudes towards the U.S. and
South Vietnamese government, relative to a hearts and minds oriented approach.


Melissa Dell
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer M-24
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
melissadell@fas.harvard.edu

Pablo Querubin
New York University
Department of Politics
19 W 4th Street, Room 208
New York, NY 10012
pablo.querubin@nyu.edu
1    Introduction
Interventions in weakly institutionalized societies have been central to U.S. foreign policy.
These have been amongst the most costly expenditures in the U.S. federal budget and may
have important national security consequences. The United States has employed a variety of
strategies aimed at defeating insurgents and building states capable of monopolizing violence,
ranging from the top-down deployment of overwhelming firepower to bottom-up initiatives to
win hearts and minds. This study identifies the causal e↵ects of key interventions employed
during the Vietnam War by exploiting two distinct discontinuities in U.S. policy: one varies
the intensity of a top-down approach - air strikes - and the other compares a top down
military force approach to a more bottom up hearts and minds approach.
    The U.S. intervened in Vietnam to prevent the spread of communism, and fostering a
state that could provide a bulwark against communism after U.S. withdrawal was central
to U.S. objectives. A state monopoly of violence is an equilibrium outcome that relies
upon both the capabilities of the state apparatus and citizen compliance. “If it is relatively
easy to disperse insurgent forces by purely military action...it is impossible to prevent the
return...unless the population cooperates” (Galula, 1964, p. 55). The military force and
hearts and minds strategies aimed to incentivize citizens to support a non-communist state.
    The military force approach is summed up by the Vietnam era adage: “get the people
by the balls and their hearts and minds will follow” (Kodosky, 2007, p. 175). Air strikes
were a key component, with the Air Force receiving over half of wartime appropriations and
twice as many tons of explosives dropped as during World War II (Thayer, 1975). Leaflets
warned citizens of “death from the sky” if they did not cooperate with the South Vietnamese
government (Appendix Figures A-1 and A-2). Samuel Huntington (1968) wrote that air
strikes could be used to establish social control and then modernization would organically
follow, and National Security Adviser Walt Rostow argued that countering Communism
required “a ruthless projection to the peasantry that the central government intends to be
the wave of the future” (Milne, 2008, p. 88). According to General William DePuy: “The
solution in Vietnam is more bombs, more shells, more napalm” (Sheehan, 1988, p. 619).
    This contrasts to the approach of building bottom-up support, advocated in Vietnam
by the U.S. Marine Corps: “a positive program of civil assistance must be conducted to
eliminate the original cause of the resistance movement” (USMC, 1962, p. 72). James
Scott (1985, 2009) argues that a top-down, coercion-oriented approach is ill-suited to gaining
cooperation, as citizens have many ways to undermine a state they do not genuinely support,
even without joining an armed rebellion. Moreover, when states try to impose a simplified
order from above, their failure to understand local realities and tendency to disrupt them
can lead the scheme to fail (Scott, 1998).


                                              1
    The U.S. utilized quantitative resource allocation metrics to an unprecedented extent in
Vietnam, and this study exploits a newly-discovered algorithm component of U.S. bombing
strategy that includes discontinuities useful for identifying causal e↵ects. Declassified Air
Force histories document that one of the factors used in allocating weekly pre-planned bomb-
ing missions was hamlet security (Project CHECO, 1969).1 A Bayesian algorithm combined
data from 169 questions on security, political, and economic characteristics into a single
hamlet security rating. The output ranged continuously from 1 to 5 but was rounded to the
nearest whole number before being printed from the mainframe computer.
    The study identifies the causal impacts of bombing by comparing places just below and
above the rounding thresholds, using being below the threshold as an instrument for bombing.
Outcome data on security, local governance, civic engagement, and economics are drawn
from armed forces administrative records, hamlet level variables compiled by a military-
civilian pacification agency, and South Vietnamese public opinion surveys. Hamlets near the
thresholds are similar prior to score assignment, but following assignment those that fall just
below the cuto↵s are significantly more likely to be bombed. There is no evidence that the
hamlet-level score was used systematically for other resource allocations, including of ground
and naval troops. Placebo checks document that there were no e↵ects during a 1969 pilot,
when the score was computed but not disseminated.
    Instrumental variables estimates document that the bombing of South Vietnamese popu-
lation centers backfired, leading more Vietnamese to participate in VC military and political
activities. An initial deterioration in security entered the next quarter’s security score, in-
creasing the probability of future bombing. Specifically, moving from no strikes during the
sample period - a relatively rare event - to the sample average increased the probability that
there was a local VC guerrilla squad by 27 percentage points, relative to a sample mean of
0.38. It also increased the probability that the VC Infrastructure - the VC’s political branch
- was active by 25 percentage points and increased the probability of a VC-initiated attack
on local security forces, government officials, or civilians by 9 percentage points. Public opin-
ion surveys and armed forces administrative data show similar patterns. There is limited
evidence for spillovers, across nearby areas or within VC administrative divisions, and to the
extent they exist they tend to go in the same direction as the main e↵ects.
    While U.S. intervention aimed to build a strong state that would provide a bulwark
against communism after U.S. withdrawal, bombing instead weakened local government and
non-communist civic society. Moving from no to sample mean bombing reduced the proba-
bility that the village committee positions were filled by 21 percentage points and reduced
the probability that the local government collected taxes by 25 percentage points. The vil-
   1
   Other factors included goals in the military region, security of friendly forces, location of combat ma-
neuver battalions, and enemy movements.


                                                    2
lage committee was responsible for providing public goods. Bombing also decreased access
to primary school by 16 percentage points and reduced participation in civic organizations
by 13 percentage points.
    The study also sheds light on how the top-down approach compares to a more bottom-up
strategy, by exploiting a spatial regression discontinuity between Military Corps Region I -
commanded by the U.S. Marine Corps (USMC) - and Military Corps Region II - commanded
by the U.S. Army. The Marines emphasized providing security by embedding soldiers in
communities and winning hearts and minds through development programs (USMC, 2009).
Their approach was motivated by the view that “in small wars the goal is to gain decisive
results with the least application of force...the end aim is the social, economic, and political
development of the people” (USMC, 1940). In contrast, the Army relied on overwhelming
firepower deployed through search and destroy raids (Long, 2016; Krepinevich, 1986).
    Evidence points to the di↵erences in counterinsurgency strategies as a particularly central
distinction between the Army and Marines, and comparisons of nearby hamlets on either
side of the corps boundary suggest potential pitfalls of the top down approach that are
quite consistent with the bombing results. Specifically, regression discontinuity estimates
document that public goods provision was higher on the USMC side of the boundary for
targeted public goods. Moreover, hamlets just to the USMC side of the boundary were
attacked less by the VC and were less likely to have a VC presence. Finally, public opinion
data document that citizens in the USMC region reported more positive attitudes towards
the U.S. and all levels of South Vietnamese government. Pre-period VC attacks, other pre-
characteristics, geography, urbanization, and soldier characteristics - including Armed Forces
Qualifying Test scores - are all relatively balanced across the corps region boundary.
    Understanding whether heavily top down counterinsurgency strategies are likely to
achieve their desired objectives remains policy relevant. The culture of the U.S. Armed
Forces has changed only slowly since Vietnam (Long, 2016). Moreover, while targeting has
improved significantly, it remains imperfect. Insurgents have responded by embedding more
tightly amongst civilians and it is widely accepted that heavy reliance on air power will lead
to collateral damage.2 Additionally, politicians continue to advocate a top-down approach.3
Our estimates highlight ways in which an intensive focus on top-down strategies could pose
challenges to achieving U.S. objectives, particularly when insurgents are embedded amongst
civilians as they are in the Middle East today. They do not reveal whether a bottom-up
   2
     For example, a dataset from the Bureau of Investigative Journalism suggests that since 2004, civilians
have represented 25% of the deaths in U.S. drone strikes of Pakistan.
   3
     2016 Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump argued: “I would bomb the [expletive] out of them
[ISIS in Iraq]. I would just bomb those suckers...I would blow up every single inch” (Trump in Fort Dodge,
2016). According to 2016 Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton: “It is time to begin a new phase and intensify
our e↵orts [air strikes] to smash the would-be caliphate”(Clinton in New York, 2015).



                                                    3
approach is more e↵ective at achieving U.S. objectives than refraining from intervention, a
question that is beyond the scope of this paper.
    This study contributes compelling identification to a question that could not ethically
be examined using a randomized trial and that is difficult to elucidate through correlations.
The most closely related study to the current one is an examination by Kocher et al. (2011)
of how bombing in Vietnam impacted an index of VC insurgent activity. The study uses
the VC activity index in July and August of 1969 to instrument for bombing in September
of 1969 and finds positive impacts on the VC activity index in subsequent months of 1969.
We employ an identification strategy in which treatment is orthogonal to initial insurgent
activity and other pre-period characteristics and examine a longer period and broader set
of outcomes. Miguel and Roland (2011) also examine bombing in Vietnam, focusing on
long-run economic impacts. They use distance to the 17th parallel to instrument for district
level bombing and do not find persistent economic e↵ects.
    This study also relates to a rich literature on intervention, counterinsurgency, and law
enforcement in other conflicts. Condra et al. (2010) show that counterinsurgency-generated
civilian casualties in Afghanistan, but not Iraq, are associated with increases in insurgent
violence over a period of six weeks to six months. Dell (2015) documents that a top-down mil-
itary force approach to combating the drug trade backfired in Mexico, generating significant
increases in violence, and Acemoglu et al. (2015) show that a reliance on top-down military
force in Colombia is correlated with a deterioration in security and a weakening of the local
state. Dube and Naidu (2015) find that U.S. military bases in Colombia increase paramili-
tary attacks, potentially undermining domestic institutions. In contrast, Lyall (2009) uses a
di↵erences-in-di↵erences strategy across matched pairs of Chechnyan villages to show that
shelled villages experienced a substantial reduction in post-treatment insurgent attacks. He
argues that exposure to shelling is as if random since artillery fire was often conducted by
inebriated soldiers following a policy of random firing intervals.
    Consistent with this study’s results exploiting the USMC natural experiment, Berman
et al. (2011a) document that improved public service provision reduced insurgent violence
in Iraq. Using a randomized experiment, Beath et al. (2012) show that participating in the
largest development program in Afghanistan improves perceptions of well-being, attitudes
towards the government, and levels of security, but only in relatively secure regions. Crost
et al. (2014) o↵er a cautionary note, documenting that insurgents may try to sabotage
development programs if they expect such programs will weaken their support, and Nunn
and Qian (2014) find that U.S. food aid increases conflict. A qualitative literature has argued
that aid is less e↵ective when it is carried out by the same countries that are engaging in
military attacks, which may lead citizens to view aid workers with hostility or suspicion (Gill,
2016). Finally, an empirical literature on the CIA documents their involvement in foreign

                                               4
coups and provides evidence that these interventions were commercially motivated (Berger
et al., 2013; Dube et al., 2011).
    The rest of the study is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses the broader historical
background. Section 3 examines the impacts of bombing population centers, first discussing
how air strikes were targeted (Section 3.1), then outlining the empirical approach (Section
3.2) and data sources (Section 3.3), and finally presenting the results (Section 3.4). Next,
Section 4 compares the top down to bottom up approach by examining the spatial disconti-
nuity between the Army and USMC corps regions. Finally, Section 5 concludes.


2     Historical Background
In 1954, the Geneva Accords temporarily divided Vietnam at the 17th Parallel, until nation-
wide elections could be held in 1956. When elections were not held, the Viet Minh established
a Communist state led by Ho Chi Minh in the North, and U.S.-backed Ngo Dinh Diem de-
clared leadership of a non-communist state in the South. A communist insurgency began
in South Vietnam, led by the Viet Cong (VC). The South Vietnamese central state faced
significant difficulties penetrating below the provincial level, and the Viet Cong often made
inroads in areas that had received few benefits from belonging to South Vietnam (Appy,
2015). During the 1960s, most tax collection and public goods provision responsibilities
were decentralized to the local level, where governance was supposed to be participatory.
    In 1965, the U.S. deployed around 200,000 troops to South Vietnam. Troop levels peaked
at over half a million in 1968, and the U.S. withdrew in January of 1973. The Department
of Defense estimates that the U.S. spent over a trillion USD on the Vietnam War, with
spending on Vietnam during the Lyndon Johnson administration exceeding spending on the
War on Poverty by a factor of 17 (Appy, 2015).


3     The Top Down Approach: Bombing
3.1    McNamara and the Whiz Kids
The United States utilized an unprecedented number of quantitative metrics during the
Vietnam War, spurred by the systems analysis perspective that Secretary of Defense Robert
McNamara brought to the Department of Defense (DoD). McNamara pioneered the use of
operations research in the private sector during his tenure in the 1950s as President of Ford
Motor Company. Upon being named Secretary of Defense by Kennedy in 1961, McNamara
surrounded himself with “Whiz Kid” analysts from the Rand Corporation, aiming to bring



                                             5
economics, operations research, game theory, and computing into DoD operations. This
produced policies and data that o↵er unique opportunities for estimating causal impacts.
    As Defense Secretary (1961-1968), McNamara launched a variety of data systems to
monitor the progress of the Vietnam War. Field data were key-punched into mainframe
computers in Saigon and Washington and used to determine resource allocation. The result-
ing electronic data would have likely been destroyed, but data tapes produced by the two
IBM 360 mainframe computers in Saigon and Washington were subpoenaed during an IBM
lawsuit. Much of this study’s outcome data are drawn from these tapes.
    The study uses discontinuities in quantitative ratings of hamlet security to identify the
causal e↵ects of bombing. In 1967, the U.S. and South Vietnam began the Hamlet Evalua-
tion System (HES) to rate hamlet security. Initially, U.S. district advisers assigned hamlets
A-E letter grades based on their subjective perceptions, but two 1968 studies showed that
subjective ratings did not always correlate well with actual conditions. In response, the U.S.
hired a defense consulting firm to develop an objective metric of hamlet security. In the Re-
vised HES, 169 monthly and quarterly questions about security, politics, and economics were
collected by US advisory personnel affiliated with Civil Operations and Revolutionary Devel-
opment Support (CORDS), a joint civilian-military agency. The majority of these questions
were classified into nineteen submodels, and Bayes Rule was used to aggregate responses
within each submodel into a continuous score ranging from 1 to 5. The submodel scores
were rounded to the nearest whole number - creating discontinuities - and combinatorial
logic aggregated the rounded scores into an overall security score.
    Specifically, the algorithm starts with a flat prior that each hamlet is equally likely to
belong to one of five security classes, ranging from A (very secure) to E (very insecure). The
algorithm then updates using Bayes Rule, the question responses, and conditional probability
matrices, which give the probabilities that each question would take on di↵erent response
values if the hamlet was very secure (A), somewhat secure (B), and so forth. The successive
application of Bayes Rule yields a posterior probability that a hamlet belongs to each of the
five latent security classes for that submodel. An A is assigned 5 points, a B 4 points, a C 3
points, a D 2 points, and an E 1 point. Then the expected value of the posterior distribution
is computed, using the points assigned to each latent class. Finally, this expected value is
rounded to the nearest whole number to produce a score for that submodel. For example,
a hamlet with a numerical score of 4.4999 is rounded down to a 4/B (somewhat secure),
whereas a hamlet with a numerical score of 4.5001 is rounded up to a 5/A (very secure).
    Combinatorial logic was used to aggregate the rounded submodel scores, two or three at
a time, into an overall security score, which was disseminated to military planners. Figure 1
illustrates the logic for combining scores two at a time. It is symmetric, taking an average of
the two submodel scores and rounding down. Figure A-3 shows the three-way logic, which

                                              6
combines three scores non-symmetrically. Finally, Figure 2 illustrates how the nineteen
submodel scores are combined, using the two and three-way logic, to produce a single hamlet
security score.4 Intermediate scores were also created during this process, covering military,
political, and economic topics. While national and provincial trends in these intermediate
scores were disseminated, the coding manuals for creating reports document that only the
overall score was reported at the hamlet level, and hence we focus on it.
    Consider the following simplified example of how the algorithm provides identification.
Suppose the security score combined two submodels, whose continuous scores are shown on
the x- and y-axes of Figure 1. The thick lines show the thresholds between di↵erent output
scores, and their location is determined by the rounding of the input scores and the decision
logic used to combine the rounded submodel scores. The thresholds create discontinuities,
and identification can be achieved by comparing nearby hamlets on either side. For example,
a hamlet with continuous submodel scores of 4.7 (rounded to 5/A) and 4.49 (rounded to 4/B)
- which would produce a 4/B output score - could be compared to a hamlet with input scores
4.7 (rounded to 5/A) and 4.5 (rounded to 5/A) - whose output score would be a 5/A.
    The security score combines 19 submodels, creating a 19 dimensional equivalent of Figure
1. The study computes the location of the A-B, B-C, C-D, and D-E thresholds and calculates
the distance - in continuous score space - from each observation to the nearest threshold.
To compute the continuous scores, which were never printed or saved from the mainframe’s
memory, we obtained the question responses from tapes now held at the U.S. National
Archives and the conditional probability matrices from uncatalogued documents at Fort
McNair.5 The tapes also contain the rounded scores, and we can reproduce all rounded
scores using the algorithm and question responses.
    Meeting memos held in an uncatalogued collection at Fort McNair emphasize the arbi-
trariness of the algorithm’s design. Military field officers were sent a survey stating “you
have been selected to participate in the design of a Bayesian processor”, which elicited the
conditional probabilities for one of the submodels. When the surveys were returned, the
probabilities had a high variance and often did not sum to one, leading the architect of the
design John Penquite to state “I have changed my mind about expertise on the Vietnam
situation. There are no experts.” Conditional probabilities more than two standard devia-
tions from the mean were dropped, and the remaining responses were averaged to create a
conditional probability matrix for each question. When the same question enters multiple
submodels, the conditional probabilities can be quite di↵erent. Moreover, the consulting firm
ran out of time before considering how to aggregate submodels, and hence the combinatorial
  4
     The way that submodel scores were combined changed somewhat between 1970 and 1971 to de-emphasize
economic submodels, but the conditional probabilities remained the same.
   5
     HES is in Record Group (RG) 472. There is also a version online from Record Group 330, but it is
missing most months.


                                                  7
logic was put together hastily.
    This study documents that the discontinuities have a strong influence on the targeting of
air strikes. More than twice as many tons of explosives were dropped during the conflict as
during World War II and four times more tons of explosives were dropped on South Vietnam
than on North Vietnam, about 500 pounds of ordinance for every man, woman, and child
in the country. 10% of air strikes supported ground operations and most of the remainder
targeted Viet Cong supply lines and insurgents (Thayer, 1975). Declassified studies by the
Defense Office for Systems Analysis reveal that over half of air attacks in South Vietnam did
not respond to real-time intelligence. Moreover, declassified documents on the fragging of
SVN air sorties highlight that most were pre-planned by the corps commander, according to
a pre-allocated quota, and overall hamlet security was a relevant consideration.6 Bombers
could not hit a precise target from high altitude, but they could hit a general area with
reasonably high probability. The common F-105 bomber had a circular error probability of
447 feet, meaning that half the bombs dropped fell within this radius of the target.
    Bombing was controversial. In a meeting with Johnson, Rostow, and others following
the Tet O↵ensive, McNamara argued: “This [expletive] bombing campaign, it’s been worth
nothing, it’s done nothing, they’ve dropped more bombs than in all of Europe in all of
World War II and it hasn’t done a [expletive] thing” (Milne, 2008, p. 5). We go further than
McNamara and show evidence that bombing undermined U.S. objectives.


3.2     Empirical Strategy
The study examines how bombing impacts outcomes, immediately and cumulatively during
the war. The endogenous variables are immediate bombing in quarter t + 1 and cumulative
bombing averaged across quarters t + 1 through U.S. withdrawal, both instrumented by
whether the hamlet was below the security score threshold when the score was computed
at the end of quarter t. Quarters are used because the score was calculated primarily from
quarterly data, with just a few inputs updated monthly. The first stage takes the following
form, and the second stage regressions are analogous:


                           4
                           X                  4
                                              X                               4
                                                                              X
   yh,t+n = 1 belowht +          d Dhtd   +         d Dhtd fd (distht )   +         d Dhtd fd (distht )belowht
                           d=1                d=1                             d=1                                (1)
             + ↵t + Xht + ✏ht

where yh,t+n is bombing in hamlet h, in quarter(s) t + n, and belowht is an indicator equal
   6
    The U.S. military authorized its forces to bomb villages if it had been fired on from them, if there was
evidence that villagers were aiding the VC, or if the area had previously been cleared of civilians.


                                                         8
to 1 if the hamlet is below the threshold in quarter t. fd (distht ) is an RD polynomial in
distance to the nearest score threshold, estimated separately on either side of each threshold
(A-B, B-C, C-D, D-E). Dhtd is a set of indicators equal to 1 if threshold d is the nearest
threshold, Xht includes indicators for all question responses that enter the quarter t security
score, and ↵t is a quarter-year fixed e↵ect.
    Baseline estimates use the Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2011) bandwidth and local linear
regression (the Calonico et al. (2014) bandwidth is nearly identical). Each hamlet appears in
the sample once, with period t denoting the first time that the hamlet is near the threshold,
where near is defined by the optimal bandwidth. This is more compelling than exploiting
all times near the threshold, because whether a hamlet is near in t + 1 could be endogenous
to whether it is below in t.7 Standard errors are clustered by village and would be nearly
identical if clustered by district.
    Identification requires: 1) all factors besides security score assignment change smoothly at
the rounding thresholds, 2) the security score is strongly correlated with bombing, and 3) the
security score only impacts outcomes through the allocation of air power. These assumptions
will be examined in Section 3.4. There is a strong first stage relationship between cumulative
bombing and the quarter t security score because bombing in t + 1 worsens security, reducing
the t + 1 score and making bombing more likely at t + 2, and so forth.
    The above specification will estimate a local average treatment e↵ect of the impact of
bombing on places that were targeted because they were below the threshold. Compliers
plausibly include places for which hard intelligence was limited, and hence planners relied
on the score to assess the likelihood that the village supported the VC. The estimates in-
form contexts where air strikes are conducted with relatively limited intelligence, a situation
likely to obtain when the air war is accelerated without a concurrent increase in intelligence
gathering capabilities.
    The study focuses on causally identifying reduced form impacts. Due to data limitations,
we cannot estimate structural parameters that would shed light on such questions as how
varying levels of civilian versus insurgent casualties translate into changes in VC activity.8
While the reduced form estimates cannot quantify optimal strategies, they provide com-
pelling causal evidence about big picture questions that remain highly controversial, in part
because exogenous variation is rare and randomized control trials of bombing are unfeasible.
   7
     Results are robust to using share of times near the threshold that the hamlet is below it as the instrument
for cumulative bombing. If we focus only on places near the threshold the first quarter that the score was
used, estimates are qualitatively similar but the first stage is weaker since the sample is much smaller.
   8
     There are no estimates of civilian casualties and measures of VC casualties are unreliable.




                                                       9
3.3     Data
This study utilizes archival data, drawn from the U.S. National Archives. Our preferred data
on bombing are from the Hamlet Evaluation System (HES), a joint data collection e↵ort
between U.S. district advisers and South Vietnamese officials. District advisers were part of
a personnel structure that advised the South Vietnamese government and military. Some
district advisers were civilians and others were military officers. Data were collected between
July of 1969 and 1973, with the same questions asked in nearly all of South Vietnam’s
hamlets. HES records whether air or artillery fire struck near a populated area during the
past month, and we use this to compute the share of months during the quarter with a strike.
Since we do not find impacts of the security score on ground troop activity - using HES as
well as detailed administrative data - we expect any impacts to be driven primarily by air
strikes. However, even if results are driven by both air and artillery fire, the study’s broader
arguments about the impacts of top-down military force would remain unchanged. We also
examine Air Force data providing the coordinates and amounts of ordinance dropped over
South Vietnam.9 Unfortunately, the system was migrated during our sample period, leading
to fragmentary information.10 It is also difficult to infer whether the ordinance struck a
populated area, as the data record the approximate coordinate where the ordinance was
dropped, not what it hit, and we only know the coordinate of the hamlet centroid.
    We combine three diverse sources of outcome data to elucidate robust insights about
impacts: HES, armed forces administrative data, and public opinion surveys. HES contains
answers to questions about monthly and quarterly security, as well as economic, governance,
and civic society outcomes. Some questions have multiple categorical values, and we code
them into binary indicators that preserve as much variation as possible (see the data appendix
for more details). For example, a coding of no VC attacks as 0 and sporadic/frequent VC
attacks as 1 preserves significantly more information than a coding of no/sporadic VC attacks
as 0 and frequent attacks as 1, since frequent attacks are rare.11 Section 3.4 also reports
estimates from latent class analysis that uses the categorical responses.
    While there have been critiques of HES, overall the evidence points to the source as being
reasonable, if potentially noisy. To our knowledge, there are not any critiques suggesting
di↵erential measurement error by whether the hamlet was bombed, which would be necessary
for measurement error to bias results. A well-known critique of HES comes from a memoir
by David Donovan (1985), who observed its collection during his tour of duty in Vietnam.
   9
     The systems are entitled “Combat Air Activities” (RG 218, 529) and “Sorties Flown in Southeast Asia”
(RG 218).
  10
     Some months appear in both systems but record di↵erent incidents. Some months are marked as
incomplete in both systems.
  11
     An alternative would be to estimate a multinomial logit, but this does not converge well since there is
often little variation in some of the categories.


                                                    10
He argued that U.S. district advisers - who were responsible for data collection - delegated
collection to subordinates or collected information hastily since they were overworked. He
also claims that advisers feigned progress by inflating responses over time. While it was
plausibly common to rely on subordinates, or to be hasty, it is not obvious that Donovan’s
experiences generalize. For example, HES scores tend to deteriorate, not improve, across our
sample period. A rigorous academic critique of Vietnam era data by Gregory Daddis (2011,
p. 40) argues that the main failing, particularly in the case of HES, stemmed “not from a lack
of e↵ort” by those collecting the data, but rather from an over-reliance on summary statistics
without a careful interpretation of what the data implied about policy e↵ectiveness.12
    Second, we examine administrative data from the U.S. and South Vietnamese armed
forces on operations, attacks, and casualties. Specifically, data on ground troops are from the
“Situation Report Army” (RG 218). Data on enemy initiated attacks from 1964-1969 come
from the “Vietnam Database” (RG 330), and data on naval incidents are from the “Naval
Surveillance Activities File (RG 218). Finally, data on South Vietnamese territorial defense
units are from the “Territorial Forces Evaluation System” (RG 330) and the “Territorial
Forces Activity Reporting System” (RG 330). The collection of these data was independent
of HES. VC casualties should be taken with a grain of salt, as they were based on thin
information and potentially exaggerated, but attacks, friendly (South Vietnamese and U.S.)
operations, and friendly casualties are well-measured.
    Finally, public opinion data on citizen attitudes towards local government, national gov-
ernment, and the war are available for a sample of hamlets through the Pacification Attitudes
and Analysis Survey (PAAS), a joint U.S.-South Vietnamese e↵ort that was collected by
Vietnamese enumerators. PAAS was launched in March of 1970 and was conducted monthly
until December of 1972, overlapping closely with the period in which the security score was
used to target bombing, though unfortunately not all months have been preserved.13 Each
month, surveys were conducted in 6 randomly selected hamlets per province. 15 respondents
were randomly selected per hamlet, with stratification on demographic characteristics. The
number of months in which a given question was included in the questionnaire - and whether
the question was asked in all or only a subset of hamlets - varies. Sample sizes for some
interesting questions - such as those about anti-Americanism - are sufficiently small that few
observations are left when we limit to hamlets near the security score discontinuities.
  12
     In a description of HES, CORDS director Robert Komer (1970) similarly concludes: “Vietnam has
been the most extensively commented on but least solidly analyzed conflict in living memory...[HES’s] full
exploitation may have to be left to the academic community.”
  13
     Tapes containing information for May, 1970 through February, 1971 and for August and September of
1971 were not preserved.




                                                   11
3.4     Results
We begin by examining graphically the first stage relationship between being below the
security score threshold and the share of months in the quarter with air or artillery strikes
near inhabited areas. Discontinuity fixed e↵ects are partialled out so barely A’s are compared
to barely B’s and so forth, but other controls are excluded in order to transparently display
the raw data. Figure 3, panel (a) uses a local linear polynomial to plot strikes in quarter
t + 1 against the distance to the nearest threshold in quarter t. Dashed lines show 95%
confidence intervals. A negative distance signifies that the hamlet is below the threshold.
Strikes increase discontinuously just below the threshold. When the controls from equation
(1) are included, estimates become more precise but do not change in magnitude.
    Panel (b) repeats this exercise for the cumulative specification, plotting the distance to
the threshold in quarter t against average strikes in quarters t + 1 through U.S. withdrawal.
Again, strikes change discontinuously at the threshold. The cumulative first stage is strong
because bombing reduces security, which in turn lowers the score and makes future bombing
more likely. Appendix Figure A-4, panels (a) and (b), document that these estimates are
highly robust to the choice of bandwidth and RD polynomial.14
    Panel (c) examines how the score relates to bombing in the quarters before and after it
was computed, by plotting quarter-by-quarter RD estimates from equation (1). There is no
pre-period impact of being below the threshold. The sample can be extended further back,
but sample size declines substantially. The e↵ect persists following the score’s dissemination.
    Panel (d) shows the McCrary plot, which tests for selective sorting around the threshold.
Given that the continuous scores were never printed or saved and required the world’s most
powerful super-computer to calculate, it would have been difficult to manipulate scores
around the threshold, and indeed there is no discontinuity in the density of observations.15
    During 1969 the system was in pilot, and the security score was computed but not
disseminated. Panels (e) and (f) document that there are no impacts of security scores in
1969 on bombing in the following quarter or cumulatively until U.S. withdrawal.
    Next, we examine whether hamlets barely above the threshold are a valid control group
for those barely below. Since the data used to compute the score were not received until
the close of the quarter, there should be no contemporaneous impact. Figure 4, panel (a)
documents that contemporaneous strikes change smoothly at the threshold. Strikes during
quarter t 1 (panel b) and on average during the pre-period (panel c) also change smoothly.
    Table 1 examines pre-period balance for the study’s outcomes. The pre-period charac-
  14
     The quadratic RD polynomial specification becomes extremely noisy when the polynomial is estimated
separately on each side of the four score discontinuities. Hence, for the quadratic specification, we estimate
a single RD polynomial, separately above and below the thresholds.
  15
     Moreover, the conditional probabilities were classified and were not known by those in the field who
collected the data (Komer, 1970).


                                                     12
teristics are used as the dependent variable in equation (1). Columns (1) and (2) consider
quarter t 1 and columns (3) and (4) the entire pre-period. The coefficients on below are
typically small and statistically insignificant, with the few statistically significant di↵erences
plausibly due to sampling error.
    To further check for balance, we predict bombing in t+1 using the variables that enter the
period t security score but not the score itself. Figure 4, panel (d) documents that predicted
bombing changes continuously, as we would expect if the characteristics that enter the score
change smoothly. Panel (e) documents a similar pattern for predicted cumulative bombing.
Data on VC attacks on troops are available for an extended pre-period. Panel (f) plots the
quarter by quarter relationship from equation (1) between being below the threshold and
VC attacks for 1964-1969, documenting that they are balanced throughout the pre-period.
    Table 2 reports the first stage estimates using the RD specification from equation (1).
Being below the score threshold in quarter t increases the share of months in quarter t + 1
with bombing or artillery fire that hit near inhabited areas by 5.4 percentage points, relative
to a sample average probability of 28 percent (column 1). The F-statistic, equal to 14.9,
indicates a strong first stage relationship. Columns (2) and (3) document that there is no
discontinuity using period t and t 1 bombing, respectively, and column (4) shows that there
are no significant impacts using scores from 1969, when the score was not disseminated.
    Column (5) reports the first-stage for the cumulative specification. Being below the
threshold in quarter t increases the share of months with bombing or artillery fire that hit
inhabited areas in quarters t + 1 through U.S. withdrawal by 4.4 percentage points, relative
to a sample average probability of 26 percent. The first stage F-statistic is 11.5. Column
(6) shows that cumulative pre-period bombing is balanced, and column (7) documents that
there is no impact of being above the threshold in 1969 on cumulative bombing afterwards.
    These patterns can be validated with the Air Force ordinance data, which while incom-
plete for our period, provide corroborating information. RD estimates document that being
below the threshold increases the tons of ordinance dropped within 5 kilometers of the ham-
let by 22 percentage points, though the e↵ect is noisily estimated and would not provide a
strong first stage. 21% of hamlet-months have ordinance dropped within 5 kilometers.16
    To be a valid instrument the score should not directly a↵ect other resource allocations.
Table 3 examines this assumption, focusing on immediate impacts. Military planners respond
to information about the enemy that is as recent as possible, so it is unlikely that the score
would have no immediate e↵ect on allocations but would a↵ect them in the longer run. This
scenario would more likely result if changes in security caused by bombing drew the attention
  16
    These data also contain information on the type of target, which in theory could provide additional
information not available from HES but in practice is typically missing: for 71% of strikes in our sample
the target is missing, 9% list it as “confirmed enemy”, 3.9% list it as “bunkers”, 3% list it as “any [enemy]
personnel”, and 2.8% list it as “structures.”


                                                     13
of other actors, which would not violate the exclusion restriction.
    Column (1) documents that there is no discontinuity at the quarter t threshold in whether
friendly (U.S. or South Vietnamese) ground troops operated near populated areas in t + 1.
These data are drawn from HES and are used to maximize comparability. Columns (2)
and (3) use armed forces administrative data to document that the score likewise does not
immediately impact U.S. battalion operations or U.S. initiated attacks.17 The coefficients
are small and precisely estimated. Even if there were e↵ects, however, the paper’s broader
arguments would remain valid since troops mostly engaged in a top-down military strategy.
Moreover, there is no discontinuity in U.S.-initiated naval attacks (column 4), in the presence
of South Vietnamese Regional or Popular Forces, which were regional self-defense forces
(columns 5 and 6), or in the presence or share of households participating in the People’s Self-
Defense Forces, which were local self defense units (columns 7 and 8).18 Finally, there is no
e↵ect on the presence of South Vietnamese development aid teams (the Rural Development
Cadre). An extensive qualitative search revealed that the only allocation beyond air power
to directly use the overall hamlet security score was the Accelerated Pacification Campaign,
which aimed to drive VC out of D and E hamlets following the Tet O↵ensive. It began in
1968 and had concluded before the start of our sample period.
    Next, the study examines the impacts of bombing. The main text reports IV estimates,
and Appendix Table A-1 documents that OLS estimates are similar.19 To address multiple
hypothesis testing concerns - and also to show that e↵ects are not driven by the coding of
categorical questions into binary outcomes - outcomes from HES are divided into six groups:
security, local government administration, education provision, health care provision, non-
insurgent civic society, and economic. For each group of variables the study computes an
index created using latent class analysis (LCA) that combines information from all available
questions in that group.20 Based on the observed question responses, latent class analysis
estimates the posterior probability that each hamlet belongs to one of two latent groups
associated with “high” and “low” values for each category: i.e. good and bad security.
    We focus in the main text on the direct impacts of bombing, but it could also a↵ect
other locations. For example, nearby places might be less likely to support the VC if seeing
a neighbor get bombed leads residents to update their beliefs about the costs of supporting
  17
     Battalion operations exclude small scale operations. Data on small operation movements are unavailable,
but U.S. initiated attacks include all attacks made by the U.S., regardless of the size of the attacking unit.
  18
     Data on U.S. initiated attacks are available through the first quarter of 1972. Data on the allocation of
naval personnel are only available at the district level.
  19
     This could be the case because on average biases in the OLS cancel each other out - i.e. an upward
omitted variables bias cancels a downward attenuation bias - or the OLS could be a biased estimate of an
average treatment e↵ect that is di↵erent from the local average treatment e↵ect estimated by the IV.
  20
     We include questions that are available for the entire sample period. Results are similar if we include
questions that were only asked during part of the sample period.



                                                     14
the insurgents. Additionally, VC recruiters might go to the bombed areas instead of targeting
nearby places. On the other hand, if nearby bombing creates grievances or disillusionment
- or impacts the economy - it could increase VC support. Appendix Tables A-2 through
A-9 examine spillovers using two measures of neighbors: contiguous areas and hamlets in
the same VC administrative district.21 Spillovers would likely occur in nearby places, since
media markets were nearly non-existent (radio and television were state-owned), and VC
recruitment networks were highly local. The spillovers analysis examines the average LCAs
and average measures of VC activity in the nearby areas. Both immediate and cumulative
bombing are examined, using below as an instrument. There is limited evidence of spillovers,
and to the extent they exist they tend to go in the same direction as the direct e↵ects. In
Tables A-2 through A-9, there are only two statistically significant coefficients that go in the
opposite direction. Both are significant at the 10% level and may be due to sampling error.
    To identify the direct impacts of bombing, we first consider security outcomes, starting
with data from HES and then examining military administrative data and public opinion
surveys. Table 4, Column 1 reports the immediate e↵ect of bombing on the security LCA,
using whether the hamlet was below the threshold as the instrument. Moving from no strikes
to the sample mean of 0.28 strikes per month decreases the posterior probability of being in
the good security class by 19 percentage points ( 0.67 ⇥ 0.28), relative to an overall sample
mean of 0.65, and the e↵ect is statistically significant at the 1% level. Appendix Figure A-5
shows the reduced form RD relationship for this - as well as the other - immediate LCAs.
    The other columns examine cumulative e↵ects until U.S. withdrawal. Estimates using
the immediate specification tend to be qualitatively similar but noisier.22 The point estimate
of -0.64 (s.e. 0.25) in column (2) suggests that moving from no cumulative strikes - which
is rare - to the sample average of 0.26 strikes per month decreases the posterior probability
of being in the high security class by 17 percentage points. Appendix Figure A-6 shows the
reduced form RD relationship for this - as well as the other - cumulative LCAs in the raw
data. Placebo checks reported in Appendix Table A-10 document that bombing in period
t does not impact the security posterior probability in t 1, nor does cumulative bombing
a↵ect the average pre-period posterior probability.
    Columns 3 through 11 of Table 4 examine outcomes that enter the LCA index.23 Moving
from no bombing to the sample mean increases the average probability of an armed VC
presence in a hamlet-month by 15 percentage points, relative to a sample mean probability
  21
     The appendix uses a radius of 10 kilometers. Results are similar when other radii are utilized.
  22
     Outcomes measured monthly are more likely to respond immediately than outcomes measured quarterly.
  23
     Appendix Table A-11 reports estimates for the other outcomes that enter the security LCA. The e↵ects
are qualitatively similar, but the outcomes reported in Table A-11 tend to have significantly less variation
than the outcomes in the main text. Hence more power is required to detect e↵ects, and impacts tend not
to be statistically significant.



                                                    15
of 0.19, and the estimate is statistically significant at the 5% level (column 3). Figure 5,
panel (a) plots the reduced form relationship between distance to the threshold and VC
armed presence in the raw data, revealing a clear discontinuity. Column 4 documents that
moving from no bombing to the sample mean increases the average probability that there
is an active VC village guerrilla squad during a given quarter by 27 percentage points. The
guerrilla squad consists entirely of locals. Bombing also increases the probability that a VC
main squad, which may operate throughout the region, is active (column 5) and increases the
probability that there is a VC base nearby (column 6). Finally, bombing increases attacks
on local security forces, government officials, and civilians by 9 percentage points, relative
to a sample mean of 16 percent of hamlet-months witnessing an attack (column 7).
    In addition to its military branch, the VC also maintained a political branch - called
the VC Infrastructure - tasked with propaganda, recruitment, and extortion (taxation).
Column 8 documents that moving from no bombing to sample mean bombing increases
the probability that there is an active VC Infrastructure by 25 percentage points, and this
e↵ect is statistically significant at the 5% level. Figure 5, panel (b) plots the reduced form
relationship between distance to the threshold and VC Infrastructure presence in the raw
data. Bombing also increases the share of households estimated to have engaged in VC
Infrastructure activities by around 4 percentage points (column 9). There is not a statistically
significant e↵ect on whether a VC propaganda drive was held, although the coefficient is large
and positive (column 10). Finally, bombing increases the probability that the VC extorted
residents by 23 percentage points, relative to a sample mean of 0.27 (column 11).
    Appendix Figure A-4 documents that the estimated impacts on the security LCA are
highly robust to the choice of bandwidth and RD polynomial.24 Moreover, Appendix Figure
A-7 (A-8) plots quarter x quarter reduced form (IV) estimates. There is no impact of
being below the threshold (bombing) before score assignment, whereas being below the
threshold (bombing) reduces the security LCA after score assignment. The impacts after
score assignment are all negative, as expected, though some are noisily estimated.
    35% of observations are near the A-B threshold, 46% near the B-C threshold, 16% near
the C-D threshold, and only 3% near the D-E threshold. Figure A-9 plots the raw data by
threshold, documenting jumps in bombing at the A-B, B-C, and D-E thresholds, and Figure
A-10 shows that the discontinuities in the security posterior probability closely match this
pattern. There is not enough power to run IV estimates by threshold, but Figure A-11 shows
coefficient plots for the reduced form for the outcomes in Table 4. Impacts are concentrated
around the A-B, B-C, and D-E thresholds, though some estimates are noisy.
    A potential concern with the above results is that CORDS advisers may have reported
  24
   The other outcomes in Table 4 are similarly robust but are not shown to avoid displaying a very large
number of coefficients.


                                                  16
less VC activity to show that bombing was working, or more VC activity to justify that
bombing was needed, though there was not an explicit incentive to do so, and the hamlet
level data were entirely for internal use.25 Administrative data on troop operations and
friendly casualties provide an alternative, well-measured source of information on security.
Table 5, Columns 1 through 6 consider immediate e↵ects on troops, and columns 7 through 12
examine cumulative impacts. Consistent with ground troops not directly using the score to
allocate resources, there are no contemporaneous e↵ects, but troops might well respond over
time to a deterioration in security. Column 7 documents, using data from HES, that moving
from no bombing to sample mean bombing over the course of the war increases the monthly
probability that friendly troops operated nearby by 17 percentage points. Administrative
data from the U.S. military present a consistent picture. U.S. battalion operations are more
likely over the course of the war near more bombed areas (column 8), as are U.S. initiated
attacks (column 9). Figure 5, panel (c) plots the reduced form relationship between distance
to the threshold and U.S. initiated attacks. There is no impact on US deaths (column 10),
which with a mean of 0.06 are relatively rare, whereas bombing increases South Vietnamese
and VC deaths (columns 11 and 12). VC deaths are measured with considerable error
and should be interpreted cautiously, whereas South Vietnamese deaths are well-measured.
Figure A-4, panel (d) shows that impacts on U.S. battalion operations are robust to the
choice of bandwidth and RD polynomial (as are other outcomes, available upon request).
Figures A-12 through A-15 show reduced form impacts by discontinuity, which match the
first stage impacts well.
    These estimates are complimented by Figure 6, which examines citizens’ perceptions of
security. The data are drawn from public opinion surveys collected by South Vietnamese
enumerators and provide an alternative source to corroborate the e↵ects documented above.
The surveys were conducted in six randomly selected hamlets in each province x month and
not all months have been preserved. Hence, these data are available for a much smaller
sample, and due to lower power the first stage is weaker, though the coefficients do not di↵er
significantly. To avoid a weak first stage, Figure 6 instead plots the reduced form. Perceived
VC terrorism in the hamlet is higher below the threshold (panel a); the probability of citizens
reporting VC recruitment is higher, though the e↵ect is noisy (panel b); citizens’ assessment
of the e↵ectiveness of local officials at ensuring security is worse (panel c); and citizens rate
the police as less e↵ective in preventing VC activity (panel d).
    Bombing also a↵ects governance outcomes beyond security. The local government was
often the face of the state, and strengthening local governments was an explicit U.S. objective
  25
    HES continued to be collected by the South Vietnamese for a year following U.S. withdrawal. The
study cannot reject that the impacts of cumulative bombing on the average LCA posteriors prior to U.S.
withdrawal are the same as those on the average LCA posteriors in the year following U.S. withdrawal. This
suggests that e↵ects are unlikely to be driven purely by reporting incentives of the U.S. district advisers.


                                                    17
in winning the political war. Column 1 of Table 6 examines the contemporaneous e↵ect of
bombing on a local government administration LCA, which incorporates the government’s
ability to tax, sta↵ its positions, and interface with citizens. The point estimate is small and
statistically insignificant, which is not surprising since this outcome may change slowly and
the component questions are measured quarterly. Column 2 documents that a cumulative
increase in bombing from zero to the sample mean decreases the posterior probability of
being in the high administration latent class by 8 percentage points. The appendix examines
placebo and robustness checks and documents impacts by quarter and discontinuity.26
    Columns 3 through 5 examine outcomes in the administration LCA.27 Moving from no
bombing to sample mean cumulative bombing decreases the probability that all village com-
mittee positions are filled by 21 percentage points, relative to a sample average of 0.84
(column 3). The village committee administered public goods provision, and Figure 5, panel
(d) plots the reduced form relationship for this outcome. Moreover, bombing reduces the
probability that the local government systematically collects taxes by 25 percentage points,
relative to a sample mean of 0.70 (column 4). Finally, the village chief is less likely to visit
all neighborhoods in the village at least once a month in more bombed areas (column 5).
    Both education and health care were provided primarily by local governments. Column
6 documents that there is not an immediate e↵ect of bombing on the posterior probability
of being in the high education provision latent class, which incorporates questions about the
accessibility of primary and secondary education and challenges faced by schools. In contrast,
moving from no bombing to sample mean bombing over the course of the war reduces the
probability of being in the high latent class by 12 percentage points, relative to a sample
mean of 0.66 (column 7). Columns 8 and 9 document that cumulative bombing reduces
access to primary and secondary school, respectively. See also Figure 5, panel (e). Next,
columns 10 and 11 consider the impact of immediate and cumulative bombing on the health
care provision LCA. If anything, the impact is positive, but it is not statistically significant.
This could potentially be explained by bombing increasing health care demand. Column
12 examines the probability that public works were under construction during the quarter.
While the estimate is negative and substantial in magnitude, it is not significant. The
appendix shows placebo and robustness checks and impacts by quarter and discontinuity.28
    Increasing non-communist civic engagement was another aim of nation building in South
  26
     Table A-10 documents that bombing does not impact the administration posterior probability in t 1,
nor does cumulative bombing a↵ect the average pre-period posterior probability. Figure A-4, panel (e) shows
that impacts are robust to the choice of bandwidth and RD polynomial, though the quadratic polynomial is
noisy for narrower bandwidths. Figures A-7 and A-8, panel (b), plot the reduced form and IV impacts by
quarter. Figures A-16 and A-19 show reduced form impacts by discontinuity.
  27
     Additional outcomes entering the LCA are presented in Table A-12. The other outcomes do not have
as much variation, and thus we are less powered to detect e↵ects.
  28
     See Table A-10, Figures A-4-A-8, and Figures A-17-A-19.


                                                    18
Vietnam, but the study shows that bombing had the opposite e↵ect. Column 1 of Table 7
documents that there is an immediate negative impact of bombing on civic society, which is
significant at the 10% level. Column 2 estimates that moving from no bombing to sample
mean cumulative bombing reduces the probability of being in the high civic society latent
class by 14 percentage points, relative to a sample mean of 0.69, and this e↵ect is significant
at the 5% level. Columns 3 to 9 report cumulative estimates for all outcomes used in the la-
tent class index. Moving from no to sample average bombing reduces the share of individuals
participating in civic organizations by 13 percentage points, relative to a sample mean of 0.29
(column 3). Figure 5, panel (f) plots this reduced form relationship. The impacts on partic-
ipation in the People’s Self Defense Force and economic training programs are negative but
not statistically significant (columns 4 and 5). Locally organized self-development projects
are less likely to be underway in more bombed hamlets (column 7). There is not a statis-
tically significant impact on the presence of youth organizations (column 8) or whether the
local council meets frequently with citizens (column 9). The appendix documents placebo
and robustness checks and examines impacts by quarter and discontinuity.29
    South Vietnam was primarily a rural subsistence economy, with little capital to be de-
stroyed, but bombing could nevertheless a↵ect economic outcomes. Impacts go in the ex-
pected direction but are imprecise, plausibly because the outcomes are noisily measured.
Column 1, Table 8 reports the immediate e↵ect of bombing on the probability of being in
the high economic latent class, and the estimate is statistically insignificant. Column 2 con-
siders the cumulative specification. The point estimate is negative and fairly large but not
quite statistically distinct from zero. Columns 3 to 8 report cumulative estimates for all
outcomes used in the LCA. Bombing decreases the availability of manufactures (column 4),
reduces the likelihood that there is a surplus of goods (column 5), and reduces the share of
households with access to a vehicle (column 7). The point estimate for the availability of
non-rice foodstu↵s (column 3) is negative but statistically insignificant, and the impacts on
whether plots are left fallow due to security concerns (column 6) and the share of households
requiring assistance to subsist (column 8) are positive but insignificant. Table 8 also exam-
ines quarterly population growth. Hamlet population was declining in this period, though
the secondary literature notes that Vietnamese often remained near their hamlets even when
they were destroyed (Appy, 2015, p. 167). The coefficient on bombing is negative and large,
but statistically insignificant (column 9). The appendix documents similar patterns for dif-
ferent bandwidths, RD polynomials, and estimates by quarter and discontinuity.30
    Bombing could impact insurgent activity through grievances/disillusionment and eco-
 29
      See Table A-10 and Figures A-4-A-8, A-20, and A-21.
 30
      See Table A-10 and Figures A-22 and A-23.




                                                   19
nomic opportunity costs, amongst other potential explanations.31 The economic e↵ects ap-
pear weaker and more delayed than the security e↵ects, suggesting that grievances may be
more central, but it is difficult to rule out opportunity costs with the available data. The
best information on VC motivations, while imperfect, comes from interviews that RAND
conducted with 2,400 VC defectors and POWs between 1964 and 1968. Summary statistics
are reported in a RAND study that compares VC volunteers to draftees (Denton, 1968).
Volunteers were significantly more likely than forced draftees to have grievances against the
government and also to face economic hardship, including unemployment, suggesting that
both political and economic factors motivated citizens to join the VC.32
    We have also examined long-run e↵ects on outcomes today, using a specification analo-
gous to that used to measure cumulative e↵ects during the war.33 We combine data from
the Vietnamese Household Living Standards Survey (2002-2012), The Vietnamese Enter-
prise Census (2011), and the Provincial Competitiveness Index (2010-2012), which surveys
firms on their perceptions of provincial government officials. Table A-13 reports small and
statistically insignificant impacts on log equivalent household consumption. The estimates
suggest that moving from no bombing to sample mean bombing over the course of the war
increases equivalent household consumption by a little more than three percentage points,
but the results are not statistically di↵erent from zero. Assessing the reasons why bomb-
ing does not exert persistent economic e↵ects is beyond this study’s scope, but columns 2
through 4 - which examine data from the 2011 Enterprise Census - provide some hints. Mov-
ing from no to sample mean bombing increases the share of employment in the state sector
by 14 percentage points, decreases employment in the private sector, and does not have a
statistically significant impact on foreign sector employment. During the first decades of
Communism, the state sector was the main economic game in town and plausibly played a
role in recovery from the war.34 Columns (5) through (8) do not find impacts on firms’ per-
ceptions of various types of favoritism towards state-owned enterprises, suggesting that any
historical favoritism may have been eroded more recently. Other perceptions of provincial
officials (available upon request) also do not show impacts. Perceptions of village officials are
not available, but given that local governments were replaced by the Communist Party, we
would not necessarily expect e↵ects on local government to persist. Column (9) documents
that there is not a di↵erence in private land titles in the 2000s in more bombed places.35
  31
     See i.e. Berman et al. (2011b); Miguel et al. (2004). Blattman and Miguel (2010) provides a review.
  32
     Common grievances included being falsely accused by the government and the killing or rape of a family
member by ARVN forces.
  33
     Results are similar whether being below the threshold is used to instrument bombing until U.S. with-
drawal or bombing for the entire period of data availability.
  34
     While some data on state enterprises during this period are available in provincial yearbooks and de-
classified Communist Party documents, they are at too high a level of aggregation to be useful for empirics.
  35
     We obtained declassified Communist Party documents on collectivization in the 70s and 80s, but the


                                                    20
Finally, column (10) estimates a positive coefficient of bombing on the number of days house-
hold survey respondents were ill during the past year, but the estimate is not statistically
significant.36


4     Top Down Versus Bottom Up
4.1     Counterinsurgency in South Vietnam
This section examines a second natural experiment, which directly compares the military
force strategy to a more bottom-up counterinsurgency (COIN) approach. A qualitative
literature highlights major di↵erences in how the U.S. Army and U.S. Marine Corps (USMC)
approach counterinsurgency (Long, 2016; Krepinevich, 1986). The Army has traditionally
emphasized overwhelming firepower and large-scale operations, a by-product of its formative
years during the U.S. Civil War. In contrast, following the Spanish-American War the USMC
developed as a de facto imperial police force with operations in the Caribbean. USMC units
worked closely with local police to maintain order, developing an organizational culture that
prioritized small units, limited firepower, and close collaboration with locals and civilians.37
    US Army leadership in Vietnam emphasized overwhelming firepower, deployed through
search and destroy raids that aimed to neutralize the VC. For example, an official Army
publication on search and destroy argued: “Units in Vietnam emphasized pacification by
stressing civic action e↵orts. In our opinion, this was a mistake...we always stressed the mil-
itary...The only way to overcome VC control is by brute force...one has to lower the boom
occasionally and battalion commanders have authority to use heavy firepower in populated
areas (Ewell and Hunt, 1974, p. 160). U.S. Army Chief of Sta↵ William Westmoreland
described his COIN strategy in one word: “firepower” (Krepinevich, 1986, p. 197). Devel-
opment aid could be undertaken by USAID later, once peace was solidified (Daddis, 2011).
This approach was reflected in the Army’s preferred metrics: the enemy body count, bat-
talion (large-scale) days of operation, ammunition expended, and the ratio of U.S. to enemy
deaths (Sheehan, 1988, p. 287-288; Krepinevich, 1986, p. 196-205).38
    In contrast, the Marines designated Civic Action - development aid - and Combined Ac-
tion - small units embedded in communities that worked closely with local security forces - as
pillars of their mission.39 The 1962 USMC Manual states: “a positive program of civil assis-
data are too aggregated to be useful for empirical analysis.
  36
     Other measures of health (available upon request) are also not statistically di↵erent.
  37
     The USMC also had an amphibious sub-culture that operated as an advanced landing team for the Navy,
but technological advancements following World War II made this function largely obsolete.
  38
     The favored metrics of the Air Force, sorties flown and bomb tonnage dropped, also focused on attrition.
  39
     The nascent U.S. Army Special Forces pursued an approach that resembled that of the USMC.



                                                     21
tance must be conducted to eliminate the original cause of the resistance movement” (USMC,
1962, p. 72). “Marine units built schools, roads, marketplaces, and hospitals...provided
regular medical care...and provided training and equipment to local and regional militias”
(USMC, 2009). Moreover, “one of the most important duties to be performed by the com-
mander...is to gain the cooperation and assistance of local police” (USMC, 1962, p.16).
Combined Action units eschewed heavy firepower, as it was likely to harm populations they
were protecting (Long, 2016). Working closely with local authorities to provide security
and basic public goods may have convinced some citizens “that they will be well rewarded
and well protected when they serve as local agents in the regime’s political network,” which
Roger Myerson (2011) has argued is fundamental to counterinsurgency. The USMC’s favored
metrics focused on measuring the above inputs to pacification (USMC, 1970, p. 15-17).40
    Military historian Austin Long qualitatively examines a 1967 natural experiment in which
the Army replaced the Third Marine Division, which was diverted to deal with urgent threats
along the DMZ. Long documents that the USMC emphasized small-unit operations in con-
junction with locals, whereas the Army emphasized overwhelming firepower. For example,
the Army expended significantly more rounds of ammunition than the USMC after assuming
control of the districts, even on days with no enemy contact. The latter occurred because
of harassment and interdiction (H & I), which did not have a specific target but rather fired
at a general area that could contain the enemy but also civilians. 88% of Army rounds were
used for H & I in the districts Long examines. Moreover, refugees were produced five times
faster after the Army arrived than when the USMC controlled the districts. Long presents
a variety of anecdotal evidence that US Army and USMC organizational cultures have per-
sisted since Vietnam, despite e↵orts by General David Petraeus to move the Army towards
a COIN strategy that more closely resembles that of the USMC in Vietnam.
    The USMC commanded Corps I, the northernmost of the four military regions in South
Vietnam, whereas the Army commanded neighboring Corps II. Lyndon Johnson deployed
the Marines - who serve as international first responders - to Vietnam in 1965 to protect a
key airbase in Da Nang, located in Corps I. Later that year the USMC expanded into the
rest of northern South Vietnam. The Marines were given command of Corps I upon arrival
and retained it until March of 1970, when the Army assumed command, and the USMC
withdrew from Vietnam in April of 1971. Army soldiers operated in Corps I, under USMC
command, and administrative data document that the Marines were concentrated almost
exclusively in Corps I.41 The Third Division was stationed along the DMZ and engaged
  40
     When the CIA developed the original, subjective Hamlet Evaluation System in 1967, they used the
USMC Matrix metric as a template.
  41
     99.7% of armed incidents involving the USMC occurred in Corps I, 99.8% of attacks on U.S. Marines
were in Corps I, and 99.8% of deaths of U.S. Marines were in Corps I. Appendix Figures A-24 to A-26 plot
USMC initiated attacks, enemy attacks on the USMC, and USMC casualties, respectively.


                                                  22
primarily in conventional warfare, whereas the First Division conducted counterinsurgency
in the remainder of Corps I.
    This study uses an RD to compare across the corps boundary (see Figure 7). If all other
factors change smoothly at the boundary, the RD will isolate the causal impact of the USMC
relative to the Army, though there could be other mechanisms beyond COIN strategies that
lead to di↵erent outcomes. While we cannot rule out other channels, evidence points to the
di↵erences discussed above as particularly central, painting a picture about the potential
pitfalls of the top down approach that is quite consistent with the results on bombing.
    Di↵erences in personnel recruitment and rotation are the most plausible alternative chan-
nels that di↵erentiate the Army and Marines, but the di↵erences appear relatively modest
compared to di↵erences in COIN. Notably, average Army and Marines scores on the Armed
Forces Qualifying Test (AFQT) - which was taken by all soldiers - were not di↵erent, nor
were the shares of soldiers drawn from the lowest AFQT score groups (Dawson, 1995). High
school completion rates for Army soldiers were slightly higher. The Army also had a higher
share of soldiers from the Selective Service, but rates varied from year to year, and the
USMC relied extensively on the draft from 1968 until withdrawal. Table A-14 compares a
wide range of demographic characteristics of Army and USMC casualties.42 USMC casual-
ties were modestly more likely to be from the Northeast, whereas US Army casualties were
modestly more likely to be from the South, but there are no di↵erences in racial composition.
    Both the USMC and Army pursued an individual rotation policy, in which enlisted men
were rotated in and out of combat units on a 12 (Army) or 13 (USMC) month schedule.
During a tour of duty, Army officers spent six months each in combat and sta↵ positions,
whereas USMC officers could be assigned for the entire year to combat, which may have
boosted morale or provided more relevant experience (Gabriel and Savage, 1979).43 It is
possible that di↵erences in officer rotation or other officer characteristics could contribute
to di↵erences across the boundary, though impacts are statistically identical across quarters
and thus unlikely to be driven entirely by officers in months 7 through 12 of their rotation
or by particular individuals stationed near the boundary.


4.2     Empirical Design
To compare the impacts of the USMC to those of the Army, the study uses a spatial regression
discontinuity across the Corps Region I-II boundary:

                   yhs = ↵0 + ↵1 U SM Chs + f (laths , lonhs ) + Ghs + ↵s + ✏hs                        (2)
  42
    This information cannot be released for individuals who are still living.
  43
    Due to rotation policies, however, officers would not spend the entire time with the same soldiers, and
often not in command of the same unit.


                                                    23
where U SM Chs is a dummy equal to 1 if hamlet h, along segment s, is in Corps I and
f (laths , lonhs ) is an RD polynomial in latitude and longitude. Ghs is a vector of geographic
controls, and ↵s is a boundary segment fixed e↵ect that splits the boundary into two seg-
ments. Standard errors are clustered by village. The baseline utilizes a local linear specifi-
cation and a bandwidth of 25 kilometers. Results are robust to alternative specifications.44
    The identifying assumptions for a spatial RD are the same as those for the RD in security
score space, and Table 9 examines whether pre-characteristics change smoothly at the corps
region boundary. Column 1 considers VC attacks, averaged from 1964 through when the
Marines established operations in southern Corps I in May, 1965. VC attacks are balanced
during the pre-period. The dependent variable in Column 2 is a dummy for whether the
hamlet is urban. The estimate is small and statistically insignificant, suggesting no di↵er-
ence in urbanization across the boundary. Columns 3 and 4 consider elevation and slope,
respectively, documenting that there are no statistically significant di↵erences.
    Next, geo-referenced 1929 maps are used to compute whether there are various landmarks
located near the hamlet: factories (column 5), markets (column 6), military posts (column
7), telegraphs (column 8), and train or tram stations (column 9). While the landmarks tend
to be rare, the limited data from the French colonial period are highly aggregated, and these
maps provide a rare source of hamlet level information. Overall, colonial landmarks are
balanced, though military posts are di↵erent at the 10% level. Columns 10 and 11 examine
the density of all roads and paved colonial-built roads near the hamlet, taken from the 1929
maps. Total roads are higher on the Marines side, but paved roads are not. Data on outcomes
like schooling or health care are not available, and these were not widely accessible.


4.3     Results
We compare outcomes across the Army-USMC boundary, using the spatial RD described by
equation (2) and data drawn from HES, military administrative records, and public opinion
surveys. Outcomes are averaged for the period prior to USMC withdrawal in April 1971.
    We first examine whether public goods targeted by the Marines were higher on their
side of the boundary, using data from HES. These data were collected by a SVN-US joint
agency that was not directly affiliated with the USMC or Army. Columns 1 and 2 of Table
10 document that the posterior probability of being in the high education latent class is 24
percentage points higher on the USMC side of the boundary and the probability of being in
the high health care provision latent class is 56 percentage points higher. Results for specific
outcomes, available upon request, document that primary school completion is 39 percentage
  44
     Table A-15 examines robustness to using a quadratic RD polynomial, and Table A-16 examines a wider
50 kilometer bandwidth. Results are broadly similar. While the education LCA is still positive and fairly
large in magnitude, it is no longer statistically significant.


                                                   24
points higher, medical services are 19 percentage points more likely to be available, and public
works are 28 percentage points more likely to be under construction on the USMC side.
    Columns 3 through 9 examine di↵erences across the boundary in security. The posterior
probability of being in the high security latent class is 10 percentage points higher on the
Marines’ side of the boundary, relative to a sample mean of 0.35, but the estimate is not
statistically significant (column 3). Security impacts are concentrated in VC military but
not political activity. The village is less likely to have an armed VC presence (column 4), and
VC initiated attacks on hamlets are lower (column 5). However, there is not a statistically
significant di↵erence in the presence of the VC Infrastructure (column 6). Related outcomes
such as VC bases, propaganda, and extortion (not reported) show a similar pattern.
    Columns 7 through 9 consider military administrative data. VC attacks on troops are
significantly lower on the USMC side of the boundary. This could reflect lower VC presence
but may also result from the fact that search and destroy - pejoratively known as “dangling
the bait” - often found the amorphous Viet Cong by sending troops into areas where they
would attack. The impacts on friendly (U.S. and South Vietnamese) and enemy troop deaths
are negative but not statistically significant (columns 8 and 9). Appendix Figure A-27 shows
RD figures for key outcomes. The x and y axes plot the running variables - latitude and
longitude - whereas shading is used to denote the outcomes. Predicted values are shown
in the background and the raw data values are displayed using points in the foreground.
Discontinuities in outcomes at the corps boundary are clearly visible.
    Columns 10 through 12 consider the administration, civic society, and economic posterior
probabilities, and do not find statistically significant impacts. We’ve also examined whether
bombing di↵ers across the boundary. As expected given that security enters the algorithm
targeting air strikes, bombing was 11 percentage points lower on the USMC side of the
boundary, but the di↵erence is not statistically significant (s.e. = .10).45 Nonetheless,
bombing could magnify initial security di↵erences, though e↵ects are similar when we limit
the sample to 1969, before the security score was used to target bombing.46
    It could also be that spillovers from Corps I impact nearby Corps II hamlets, leading
the boundary region to be atypical. Table A-17 shows that results are broadly similar when
we compare only hamlets 10-25 km from the boundary, suggesting that areas very near the
boundary are not unusual.
    A potential interpretation of the results thus far is that while less aggression reduced vio-
lence, instead of winning hearts and minds it may have simply led the Vietnamese to perceive
  45
     CAP targeted public goods also enter the security score algorithm, but are among the less influential
questions and alone cannot explain much of the potential di↵erence in air strikes.
  46
     It is also possible that the USMC strategy could have reduced or magnified the impacts of bombing. We
do not estimate the impacts of bombing separately for Corps I because the significantly smaller sample in
this region weakens the first stage, but the reduced form impacts are broadly similar for Corps I and II.


                                                   25
non-communists as weak. Public opinion surveys, while potentially subject to experimenter
demand e↵ects, can help shed light on whether hearts and minds were influenced. Table 11
examines attitudes towards Americans and the South Vietnamese government. Since there
are only 13 sampled hamlets within 25 km of the corps boundary, it uses OLS to compare
places within 100 km.
    Respondents in Corps I were 16 percentage points more likely to state that they liked
Americans and significantly less likely to respond that they hated Americans (columns 1 -
2).47 Moreover, respondents were 39 percentage points more likely to state that there was
no hostility towards the U.S. in their community, 11 percentage points more likely to state
that there is harmony between Americans and Vietnamese, and 38 percentage points more
likely to state that the American presence was beneficial (columns 3 - 5).
    Citizens in Corps I were also more likely to respond that they were fully confident in
the e↵ectiveness of the South Vietnamese government (column 6). They were more likely
to rate the South Vietnamese Army (ARVN) as e↵ective (column 7), to rate the Popular
and Regional Forces (PF and RF) - regional security forces - as e↵ective (columns 8 and 9),
and to rate the police as e↵ective in countering the VC and maintaining order (columns 10
and 11). Finally, they also rated local officials as more e↵ective in ensuring security (column
12). Table A-18 show that results are broadly similar when the sample is limited to hamlets
further than 25 km from the boundary. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that
hearts and minds were won - or lost less - by the bottom up approach, relative to a more
exclusive focus on overwhelming force.


5       Conclusion
Interventions in weakly institutionalized societies have been central to U.S. foreign policy
over the past half-century. This study identifies the causal impacts of bombing South Viet-
namese population centers by exploiting discontinuities in an algorithm used to target air
strikes. Bombing increased Viet Cong military and political activity, weakened local govern-
ment administration, and lowered non-communist civic engagement. Consistent with this,
evidence suggests that the Army’s reliance on overwhelming firepower led to worse outcomes
than the USMC’s more hearts and minds oriented approach.
    This study illustrates that the top down force strategy can backfire when targets are
embedded amongst civilian populations. Studying how weakly institutionalized states can
obtain a monopoly on violence remains a fundamental area for ongoing research.



 47
      The omitted category, and modal response, is “neither likes nor hates Americans.”


                                                     26
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Leopoldo Fergusson, James Robinson, Dario Romero, and Juan Vargas,
  “The Perils of Top-down State Building: Evidence from Colombia’s False Positives,” Working Paper
  2015.

Appy, Christian G., American Reckoning: The Vietnam War and Our National Identity, Penguin Pub-
 lishing Group, 2015.

Beath, Andrew, Fotini Christia, and Ruben Enikolopov, “Winning Hearts and Minds through De-
  velopment: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Afghanistan,” Working Paper 2011-14, MIT April 2012.

Berger, Daniel, William Easterly, Nathan Nunn, and Shanker Satyanath, “Commercial imperial-
  ism? Political influence and trade during the Cold War,” The American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (2),
  863–896.

Berman, Eli, Jacob N. Shapiro, and Joseph H. Felter, “Can Hearts and Minds Be Bought? The
  Economics of Counterinsurgency in Iraq,” Journal of Political Economy, 2011, 119 (4), 766–819.

  , Michael Callen, Joseph H. Felter, and Jacob N. Shapiro, “Do working men rebel? Insurgency
  and unemployment in Afghanistan, Iraq, and the Philippines,” Journal of Conflict Resolution, 2011, 55
  (4), 496–528.

Blattman, Christopher and Edward Miguel, “Civil War,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2010, 48
  (1), 3–57.

Calonico, Sebastian, Matias D Cattaneo, and Rocio Titiunik, “Robust Nonparametric Confidence
  Intervals for Regression-Discontinuity Designs,” Econometrica, 2014, 82 (6), 2295–2326.

Condra, Luke, Joseph H. Felter, Radha K. Iyengar, and Jacob N. Shapiro, “The E↵ect of Civilian
  Casualties in Afghanistan and Iraq,” Working Paper 16152, National Bureau of Economic Research 2010.

Crost, Benjamin, Joseph Felter, and Patrick Johnston, “Aid under fire: Development projects and
  civil conflict,” The American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (6), 1833–1856.

Daddis, Gregory A, No Sure Victory: Measuring US Army E↵ectiveness and Progress in the Vietnam
  War, Oxford University Press, 2011.

Dawson, David A., “The Impact of Project 100,000 on the Marine Corps,” Technical Report Occasional
  Paper Series, History and Museums Division, Headquarters, U.S. Marine Corps 1995.

Dell, Melissa, “Trafficking Networks and the Mexican drug war,” The American Economic Review, 2015,
  105 (6), 1738–1779.

Denton, Frank, “Volunteers for the Viet Cong,” Technical Report, RAND 1968.

Donovan, David, Once a warrior king: memories of an officer in Vietnam, McGraw-Hill Companies, 1985.

Dube, Arindrajit, Ethan Kaplan, and Suresh Naidu, “Coups, corporations, and classified informa-
 tion,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (3), 1375–1409.

Dube, Oeindrila and Suresh Naidu, “Bases, Bullets and Ballots: the E↵ect of US Military Aid on
 Political Conflict in Colombia,” Journal of Politics, 2015, 7 (1), 249–267.

Ewell, Lieutenant General Julian J and Ira Hunt, Sharpening The Combat Edge: The Use Of Analysis
  To Reinforce Military Judgment, Pickle Partners Publishing, 1974.

Gabriel, Richard and Paul Savage, Crisis in command: Mismanagement in the army, Macmillan, 1979.


                                                  27
Galula, David, Counterinsurgency warfare: theory and practice, Greenwood Publishing Group, 1964.

Gill, Peter, Today We Drop Bombs, Tomorrow We Build Bridges: How Foreign Aid Became a Casualty of
  War, Zed Books, 2016.

Huntington, Samuel P., Political Order in Changing Societies, Yale University Press, 1968.

Imbens, Guido and Karthik Kalyanaraman, “Optimal bandwidth choice for the regression discontinuity
  estimator,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2011, pp. 933–959.

Kocher, Matthew A., Thomas B. Pepinsky, and Stathis N. Kalyvas, “Aerial Bombing and Coun-
 terinsurgency in the Vietnam War,” American Journal of Political Science, 2011, 55 (2), 201–218.

Kodosky, Robert J., Psychological Operations American Style: The Joint United States Public A↵airs
 Office Reference, Information and Interdisciplinary Subjects Series, Lexington Books, 2007.

Komer, Robert, “Impact of Insurgency on Pacification in South Vietnam,” Technical Report, RAND 1970.

Krepinevich, Andrew F, The army and Vietnam, JHU Press, 1986.

Long, Austin, The Soul of Armies: Counterinsurgency Doctrine and Military Culture in the US and UK,
  Cornell University Press, 2016.

Lyall, Jason, “Does indiscriminate violence incite insurgent attacks? Evidence from Chechnya,” Journal
  of Conflict Resolution, 2009.

Miguel, Edward and Gerard Roland, “The long-run impact of bombing Vietnam,” Journal of Devel-
 opment Economics, 2011, 96 (1), 1 – 15.

  , Shanker Satyanath, and Ernest Sergenti, “Economic shocks and civil conflict: An instrumental
  variables approach,” Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112 (4), 725–753.

Milne, David, America’s Rasputin: Walt Rostow and the Vietnam War, Macmillan, 2008.

Myerson, Roger B., “Rethinking the Fundamentals of State Building,” Working Paper 2011.

Nunn, Nathan and Nancy Qian, “US food aid and civil conflict,” The American Economic Review,
 2014, 104 (6), 1630–1666.

Project CHECO, TACC Fragging Procedures, HQPACAF, 1969.

Scott, James C., Weapons of the Weak: Everyday Forms of Peasant Resistance, Yale University Press,
  1985.

  , Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have Failed, Yale University
  Press, 1998.

  , The Art of Not Being Governed: An Anarchist History of Upland Southeast Asia, Yale University Press,
  2009.

Sheehan, Neil, A bright shining lie: John Paul Vann and America in Vietnam, Vintage, 1988.

Thayer, Thomas C., A Systems Analysis View of the Vietnam War: 1965-1972. 12 Volumes, Defense
  Technical Information Center, 1975.

USMC, Marine Corps Manual 1940.

  , “Operations against Guerrilla Forces, FMFM-21,” 1962.

  , “Civil A↵airs in I Corps Republic of South Vietnam, April 1966 - April 1967,” 1970.

  , Vietnam War: U.S. Marine Corps Official History Volumes, United States Marine Corps’ History and
  Museums Division, 2009.


                                                   28
                                           Figure 1: Decision Logic (2-Way)


                                               A              C           C         B             B           A
                                                   4.5


                                               B              D           C         C             B           B
                                                   3.5


                                               C              D           D         C             C           B
                                                   2.5


                                               D              E           D         D             C           C
                                                   1.5


                                               E              E           E         D             D           C

                                                    0               1.5       2.5           3.5       4.5
                                                              E           D         C             B           A



Notes: This figure shows the aggregation logic for combining 2 submodel scores at a time.



                                                Figure 2: Model Aggregation

                                                                                                  Enemy                   Enemy Military Presence
                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                  Military                Enemy Military Activity

                                                                                                                          Friendly Military Activity
                                                                  Military      3
                                                                                                  Friendly            3   Friendly Military Presence
                                                                                                  Military
                                                                                                                          PSDF Activity

                                                                                                                          Impact of Military Activity
                                       Security          2

                                                                                                  Enemy                   Enemy Political Presence
                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                  Political               Enemy Political Activity
                    HES                                           Political     2
                           *                                                                      Friendly
                                                                                                                          Local Administration
                    Rating                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                          Law Enforcement
                                                                                                  Political               Political Mobilization

                                                                                        2                                 Development Assistance
                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                          Land Tenure (1)
                                                                                                  Political
                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                  Programs                PSDF Activity
                                                             Comm-Dev           2                                     3   Information/PSYOFS
                                                                                                                          Rural Development Cadre (2)

                                                                                                                          Education
                                                                                                  Social
                                                                                                                      3   Public Health
                                                                                        2
                                                                                                  Programs                Social Welfare

                    The HES rating will equal security unless:                                                         Economic Activity
                           1. HMBO1 = 1 or 2 when the HES Rating will be set to ‘V’
                           2. Community Development (Comm-Dev) is three letter grades higher or lower than security whereupon it will
                    be raised or lowered by one letter grade as applicable. If security is Not-evaluated (N) , the HES Rating will = ‘N’
                    (1) If Land Tenure = ‘N’, use Development Assistance only.
                    (2) If RD Cadre = ‘N’, use a two way decision table rather than the three way table.


Notes: This figure illustrates how the nineteen submodel scores are combined two or three at a time to
create a single hamlet security score. “N” indicates a missing value and “V” indicates Viet Cong
controlled. Scores of “N” or “V” are rare.
                                                                                                                                    Figure 3: First Stage
                                                              (a) Immediate First Stage                                                                                                                            (b) Cumulative First Stage
                  .1




                                                                                                                                                                                  .1
                                                                                                                                                                   bombing until U.S. withdrawal
                             .05




                                                                                                                                                                                          .05
       bombing in period t+1
                0




                                                                                                                                                                         0
   -.05




                                                                                                                                                                                  -.05
                  -.1




                                   -.2       -.16                      -.12       -.08    -.04      0     .04     .08           .12           .16      .2                                          -.2      -.16       -.12    -.08    -.04      0     .04     .08        .12   .16   .2
                                                                                    distance to threshold in period t                                                                                                            distance to threshold in period t



                                                                             (c) Impacts by Quarter                                                                                                                           (d) McCrary Test
                                                                                                                                                                                           400

           0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                           300




           0.10                                                                                                   ●

                                                                                     ●       ●
                                                                                                                                                                            Observations




                                                                                                                         ●                    Period
                                                                                                                                    ●         ● Pre−period
           0.05                                                               ●
                                                                                                                                                                                200




                                                                                                           ●                                  ● Post−period
                                         ●
                                                                                                    ●
                                              ●                        ●
           0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                           100




    −0.05
                                     −2       −1                       0      1       2      3      4      5      6       7         8
                                                                                          Quarter
                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                     -1 -.9 -.8 -.7 -.6 -.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             distance to threshold in period t



                                                                                             (e) 1969 (t + 1)                                                                                                          (f) 1969 (Cum)
                                                          .15




                                                                                                                                                                            .1
                                                          .1
                                               bombing in period t-1




                                                                                                                                                                                .05
                                                                                                                                                                 pre-peroid bombing
                                                  0         .05




                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                          -.05




                                                                                                                                                                            -.05
                                                          -.1




                                                                       -.2    -.16    -.12    -.08    -.04      0     .04     .08       .12     .16    .2                                      -.2       -.16   -.12    -.08    -.04      0     .04     .08   .12   .16   .2
                                                                                                distance to threshold in period t                                                                                         distance to threshold in period t




Notes: In panels (a), (b), (d), (e), and (f), each point plots an average value within a bin. Discontinuity
fixed e↵ects have been partialled out. The solid line plots a local linear regression and dashed lines show
95% confidence intervals. In panel (c), each point plots a coefficient from a separate regression.




                                                                                                                                                            30
                                                                                                      Figure 4: Placebos
                                           (a) Contemporaneous Bombing                                                                                                                                   (b) t           1 Bombing
                     .15




                                                                                                                                                             .1
                     .1




                                                                                                                                                                      .05
                                                                                                                                                bombing in period t-1
          bombing in period t
                       .05




                                                                                                                                                         0
               0     -.05




                                                                                                                                                             -.05
                     -.1




                                                                                                                                                             -.1
                                   -.2    -.16    -.12    -.08    -.04      0     .04     .08    .12    .16    .2                                                           -.2        -.16       -.12    -.08    -.04      0     .04     .08                  .12       .16          .2
                                                            distance to threshold in period t                                                                                                               distance to threshold in period t



                                           (c) All Prior Quarters Bombing                                                                                                               (d) Predicted Bombing (t + 1)
                     .1




                                                                                                                                                             .1
                             .05




                                                                                                                                                                  .05
          pre-peroid bombing




                                                                                                                                                predicted bombing
                   0




                                                                                                                                                        0
                     -.05




                                                                                                                                                             -.05
                     -.1




                                                                                                                                                             -.1




                                   -.2    -.16    -.12    -.08    -.04      0     .04     .08    .12    .16    .2                                                           -.2        -.16       -.12    -.08    -.04      0     .04     .08                  .12       .16          .2
                                                            distance to threshold in period t                                                                                                               distance to threshold in period t



                                          (e) Predicted Bombing (Cum)                                                                                                              (f) 1964-1969 VC-Initiated Attacks
             .04




                                                                                                                                                   0.04

                                                                                                                                                                                              ●                                   ●
                    .02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ●
                                                                                                                         VC Initiated Attacks




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●        ●     ●   ●              ●            ●
                                                                                                                                                   0.00                                                   ●                  ●                                 ●                       ●
  predicted bombing




                                                                                                                                                                                   ●                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●            ●     ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                                       ●          ●
              0




                                                                                                                                                −0.04
                                                                                                                                                                             ●
   -.02




                                                                                                                                                −0.08
             -.04




                                                                                                                                                −0.12
                                                                                                                                                                            1964           1965               1966               1967               1968               1969
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Quarter
             -.06




                              -.2        -.16    -.12    -.08    -.04      0     .04     .08    .12    .16    .2
                                                           distance to threshold in period t



Notes: In panels (a) through (e), each point plots an average value within a bin. Discontinuity fixed
e↵ects have been partialled out. The solid line plots a local linear regression and dashed lines show 95%
confidence intervals. In panel (f), each point plots a coefficient from a separate regression.




                                                                                                                    31
                                                                        Figure 5: Reduced Forms
                      (a) VC Presence (Cumulative)                                                   (b) Active VC Infrastructure (Cumulative)
   .05




                                                                                              .05
                                                                                              0
   0




                                                                                              -.05
   -.05




                                                                                              -.1
           -.2     -.16   -.12   -.08    -.04      0      .04     .08   .12   .16   .2               -.2   -.16   -.12   -.08    -.04      0      .04     .08   .12   .16   .2
                                   distance to threshold in period t                                                       distance to threshold in period t



                 (c) U.S. Initiated Attacks (Cumulative)                                             (d) Village Committee Filled (Cumulative)
   .01




                                                                                              .05
   .005




                                                                                              0
   0




                                                                                              -.05
   -.005
   -.01




                                                                                              -.1




           -.2     -.16   -.12   -.08    -.04      0      .04     .08   .12   .16   .2               -.2   -.16   -.12   -.08    -.04      0      .04     .08   .12   .16   .2
                                   distance to threshold in period t                                                       distance to threshold in period t



      (e) Access to a Primary School (Cumulative)                                                (f) Participation in Civic Orgs (Cumulative)
   .06




                                                                                              .04
   .04




                                                                                              .02
   .02




                                                                                              0
                                                                                              -.02
   0




                                                                                              -.04
   -.02




                                                                                              -.06
   -.04




           -.2     -.16   -.12   -.08    -.04      0      .04     .08   .12   .16   .2               -.2   -.16   -.12   -.08    -.04      0      .04     .08   .12   .16   .2
                                   distance to threshold in period t                                                       distance to threshold in period t



Notes: Each point plots an average value within a bin. Discontinuity fixed e↵ects have been partialled
out. The solid line plots a local linear regression and dashed lines show 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                                         32
                                                                    Figure 6: Public Opinion Data
                          (a) VC Terrorism (Cumulative)                                                                      (b) VC Recruitment (Cumulative)




                                                                                                            .2
          .1
          .05




                                                                                                                  .1
                                                                                                     VC Recruitment
    VC Terrorism
        0




                                                                                                    0
          -.05
          -.1




                                                                                                            -.1
                    -.2   -.16   -.12   -.08    -.04      0     .04     .08   .12   .16   .2                           -.2   -.16   -.12   -.08    -.04      0     .04     .08   .12   .16   .2
                                          distance to threshold in period t                                                                  distance to threshold in period t



                (c) Local Officials Ensure Security (Cum)                                               (d) Police E↵ective Against VC (Cumulative)



                                                                                                            .1
          .1
          .05




                                                                                                            .05
                                                                                                    Police Effective
    Security Good
              0




                                                                                                             0
    -.05




                                                                                                            -.05
          -.1




                                                                                                            -.1
          -.15




                    -.2   -.16   -.12   -.08    -.04      0     .04     .08   .12   .16   .2                           -.2   -.16   -.12   -.08    -.04      0     .04     .08   .12   .16   .2
                                          distance to threshold in period t                                                                  distance to threshold in period t



Notes: Each point plots an average value within a bin. Discontinuity fixed e↵ects have been partialled
out. The solid line plots a local linear regression and dashed lines show 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                                               33
                                     Figure 7: Corps Region Boundary

                                                                                                            Distance
                                                                                                               !      0 - 10 km
                                                                                                               !      10 - 20 km
                                                                                                               !      20 - 25 km

                                                                                                            Elevation
                                                                                                                      High : 3106
!
!
!
!!!!!
 !!!!
                                                                                                                      Low : -129
  !
  !!                                                     ! !!
                                                                    ! !!!
                                                                       !!
                                                                !
                             !
                             !
                             ! !                                    !
                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                  !!
                                                                                                   !
                                                                    !                             !!!
                                                                    !                              !!!
                                   !
                                   !!
                                    !!
                                    !
                                    !
                                    !                                                              !!!
                                                                                                     !
                             !        !
                                                                            !                          !
                                                                                                       !!! !
                                                                                                       !!
                                                                                                       !!!
                                                                                                         !!!! ! !
                                                                                                           !! !
                                                                                        !!                   ! !!
                                                                                       !!!!                  !
                                                                                                             ! ! !
                                                                                    !! !
                                                                                     !!!
                                                                                       !                       ! ! !!!
                                                                                !
                                                                                ! !  !!                              !!
                                                                                !      !
                                                                                !                                     !!
                                                                        !
                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                           !!!
                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                               !!
                                           !       ! !                                                        !!! !
                                               !                                                              ! !!!
                                                                                                               ! ! !!! !
                                                                                                               !! ! !!
                                                                                                               ! !! ! ! !
                                                                                                                      ! !
                                                                                                              ! ! ! !
                                                                                                              ! ! ! !
                                                                                                            !        !!
                                                                                                                    !    ! !!
                                                                                                                   !!     !
                                                                                                               ! ! !! !!  !!!!
                                                                                                                 ! ! ! ! !
                                                                                                                   ! !
                                                                                                                 !! !!
                                                                                                                !!
                                                                                                        ! ! !! !! !
                                                                                                       !!! !
                                                                                                       !   ! ! !              !
                                                                                                            !! !
                                                                                                          !       !




        Notes: This map plots hamlets near the Corps I-II boundary. See the legend for more details.
                          Table 1: Balance Checks

                                               t 1            Full Pre-Period
                                         RD Coe↵   SE        RD Coe↵      SE
                                           (1)     (2)         (3)        (4)
 Bombing                                  -0.001   (0.018)    0.020     (0.016)
 Security
 Enemy Forces Present                     -0.017   (0.018)    -0.008    (0.014)
 Village Guerrilla Squad                   0.026   (0.021)    0.015     (0.019)
 VC Main Force Squad                      -0.019   (0.022)    -0.021    (0.019)
 VC Base Nearby                            0.022   (0.018)    0.012     (0.017)
 VC Attack                                 0.007   (0.015)     0.005    (0.012)
 Active VC Infrastructure                 -0.013   (0.018)    -0.022    (0.017)
 % Households Participate VC              -0.003   (0.005)    -0.005    (0.006)
 VC Propaganda                            -0.019   (0.014)    -0.018    (0.014)
 VC Taxation                              -0.024   (0.020)    -0.019    (0.019)
 Troops
 Friendly Forces Nearby                   -0.02    (0.024)    -0.004    (0.019)
 US Operations                            0.006    (0.005)    0.005     (0.003)
 US Initiated Attacks                     0.007    (0.006)    0.009     (0.005)
 US Deaths                                0.036    (0.060)    0.036     (0.094)
 SVN Deaths                               0.326    (0.191)    0.141     (0.057)
 VC Deaths                                2.000    (1.950)    0.320     (2.027)
 Governance
 Administration LCA                        0.005   (0.008)    0.012     (0.009)
 Local Government Taxes                   -0.007   (0.021)    0.016     (0.021)
 Village Committee Filled                 -0.001   (0.020)    0.026     (0.019)
 Local Chief Visits Hamlet                  0.01   (0.012)    0.012     (0.012)
 Education LCA                             0.007   (0.015)    0.000     (0.015)
 Primary School Access                     0.004   (0.012)    0.013     (0.012)
 Secondary School Access                  -0.005   (0.019)    0.004     (0.018)
 Health LCA                                 0.01   (0.015)    0.013     (0.015)
 Public Works Under Construction           0.005   (0.027)    0.040     (0.022)
 Civic Society
 Civic Society LCA                         0.009   (0.018)    0.020     (0.018)
 HH Participation in Civic Orgs           -0.008   (0.011)     0.006    (0.010)
 HH Participation in PSDF                  0.005   (0.012)     0.002    (0.011)
 HH Participation in Econ Training        -0.017   (0.009)    0.003     (0.007)
 HH Participation in Devo Projects        -0.012   (0.013)    -0.004    (0.010)
 Self Devo Projects Underway              -0.021   (0.024)    -0.030    (0.019)
 Youth Organization Exists                 0.014   (0.022)     0.014    (0.021)
 Council Meets Regularly with Citizens      0.01   (0.018)     0.004    (0.017)
 Economic
 Economic LCA                             -0.031   (0.016)    -0.024    (0.016)
 Non-Rice Food Available                  -0.055   (0.019)    -0.038    (0.019)
 Manufactures Available                   -0.036   (0.016)    -0.018    (0.016)
 Surplus Goods Produced                   -0.023   (0.020)    -0.011    (0.020)
 Fields Fallow Due to Insecurity           0.029   (0.019)     0.017    (0.019)
 HH With Motorized Vehicle                -0.005   (0.005)    -0.004    (0.006)
 HH Require Assistance to Subsist          0.003   (0.007)     0.007    (0.007)
 Hamlet Population Growth                  0.003   (0.012)     0.006    (0.010)
 Urban                                    -0.015   (0.012)    -0.018    (0.012)
Notes: Columns (1) and (3) report the coefficients on below in RD regressions.
Columns (2) and (4) report robust standard errors clustered by village.
                                           Table 2: First Stage

                                  Dependent Variable is   Share Months Bomb/Artillery:
                            t+1          t     t 1          t+1     Post    Pre      Post
                            70-72     70-72    70-72         69    70-72   70-72       69
                              (1)       (2)     (3)          (4)     (5)    (6)        (7)
               Below        0.054     0.011   -0.001       -0.016  0.044   0.020    -0.002
                           (0.014) (0.011) (0.018)        (0.019) (0.013) (0.016) (0.017)
               Obs         12,188 12,259 11,382            4,510   12,206 11,427     4,527
               Clusters     2261      2277     2196         1435    2265   2201      1439
               Mean          0.28      0.31     0.33        0.39    0.26    0.36     0.30
              Notes: The dependent variable is the share of months that friendly air or ar-
              tillery fire struck in or near a populated area. Below is an indicator equal to
              one if the security score is below the threshold in quarter t. The regression also
              includes a linear RD polynomial - estimated separately on either side of the
              threshold for each discontinuity - as well as discontinuity fixed e↵ects, quarter-
              year fixed e↵ects, and controls for the characteristics that enter the period t
              security score. Robust standard errors clustered by village are in parentheses.


                                 Table 3: Other Resource Allocations

                                                 Dependent variable is:
                                                   Immediate (t + 1)
            Friendly     US        US        Naval    Regional Popular        PSDF       % HH      RD Cadre
             Forces      Ops     Attacks    Attacks    Forces    Forces      Present     PSDF       Present
               (1)       (2)       (3)         (4)       (5)       (6)         (7)        (8)         (9)
 Below       0.016      0.004     0.005      -0.000     0.026     0.012       0.013      0.004       0.012
            (0.018)    (0.005)   (0.005)    (0.006)   (0.021)    (0.013)     (0.011)    (0.010)     (0.019)
 Obs         12,188    12,181    12,181     11,535     10,432    10,432      11,796     11,839      11,610
 Clusters     2261      2261      2261        2221      2162      2162        2180       2196        2179
 Mean         0.53       0.02     0.02        0.01      0.35       0.10        0.86       0.46       0.53
Notes: Below is an indicator equal to one if the score is below the threshold in quarter t. The regression
includes a linear RD polynomial - estimated separately on either side of the threshold for each disconti-
nuity - as well as discontinuity fixed e↵ects, quarter-year fixed e↵ects, and controls for the characteristics
that enter the period t security score. Robust standard errors clustered by village are in parentheses.
                                                              Table 4: Security

                                                                      Dependent variable is:
                                Security        Armed      Vilg      VC      VC        VC         Reg VC      % HH       VC        VC
                             Posterior Prob       VC      Guer      Main    Base     Attack        Infra      Part      Prop      Extorts
                             t+1        Cum     Present   Squad     Squad Nearby Hamlet           Activity   VC Infr    Drive      Pop
                              (1)        (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)     (6)       (7)          (8)        (9)      (10)       (11)
        Bombing (t + 1)     -0.673
                           (0.246)
        Bombing (Cum)                  -0.642    0.571     1.030     0.640     1.139     0.328     0.978      0.159      0.278     0.893
                                      (0.246)   (0.222)   (0.435)   (0.387)   (0.429)   (0.183)   (0.384)    (0.095)    (0.179)   (0.417)
        Obs                12,188 12,206        12,189    11,923    11,924    11,925    12,149    11,921     11,914     12,139    11,904
        Clusters             2261       2265     2263      2204      2204      2205      2262      2198       2200       2260      2195
        F stat               14.43     12.12     11.89     10.03     10.18     10.04     11.45     10.41      11.76      11.44     10.43
        Mean                 0.65       0.68      0.19      0.38     0.39       0.22      0.16     0.25       0.03        0.09      0.27
      Notes: Bombing measures the share of months that friendly air or artillery fire was directed in or near a populated area. Bomb-
      ing is instrumented by whether the hamlet was below the security score threshold. The regression also includes a linear RD
      polynomial - estimated separately on either side of the threshold for each discontinuity - as well as discontinuity fixed e↵ects,
      quarter-year fixed e↵ects, and controls for the characteristics that enter the security score. Robust standard errors clustered by
      village are in parentheses.

                                                Table 5: Armed Forces Administrative Data

                                                                    Dependent variable is:
                                             Immediate                                                     Cumulative
                    Friendly      US        US       US       SVN       VC    Friendly       US           US       US     SVN       VC
                     Forces       Ops     Attacks         Troop Deaths         Forces        Ops        Attacks        Troop Deaths
                       (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)       (5)      (6)       (7)        (8)          (9)     (10)     (11)     (12)
 Bombing (t + 1)     0.294       0.068     0.088   -0.204    -1.263   -4.742
                    (0.326)     (0.094)   (0.096) (0.806) (2.976) (18.764)
 Bombing (Cum)                                                                  0.635      0.110         0.113      -0.048    24.547    171.569
                                                                               (0.312) (0.063)          (0.063)    (0.209)   (12.863)   (78.879)
 Obs                 12,188     12,181    12,181   12,181 12,181     12,181    12,206      12,199       12,199     12,199     12,199     12,199
 Clusters             2261       2261      2261     2261      2261     2261     2265        2265         2265        2265      2265       2265
 F stat               14.43      14.47     14.47    14.47     14.47    14.47    12.12       12.05        12.05      12.05      12.05      12.05
 Mean                 0.52       0.02       0.02    0.14      1.84     4.80      0.43       0.01          0.02       0.06      2.41       8.74
Notes: Bombing measures the share of months that friendly air or artillery fire was directed in or near a populated area. Bombing is in-
strumented by whether the hamlet was below the security score threshold. The regression also includes a linear RD polynomial - estimated
separately on either side of the threshold for each discontinuity - as well as discontinuity fixed e↵ects, quarter-year fixed e↵ects, and controls
for the characteristics that enter the security score. Robust standard errors clustered by village are in parentheses.
                                                              Table 6: Governance

                                                                        Dependent variable is:
                     Administration       Vilg         Vilg      Chief        Education      Primary       Sec          Health          Pub
                      Posterior Prob     Comm          Gov       Visits     Posterior Prob     School     School    Posterior Prob     Works
                      t+1        Cum     Filled       Taxes     Hamlet      t+1        Cum    Access      Access    t+1       Cum      Cons.
                       (1)        (2)     (3)          (4)         (5)       (6)        (7)      (8)        (9)     (10)       (11)     (12)
 Bombing (t + 1)     -0.091                                                -0.090                                   0.277
                    (0.110)                                               (0.183)                                  (0.175)
 Bombing (Cum)                  -0.305    -0.798     -0.944      -0.560               -0.447   -0.623    -0.752               0.417     -0.523
                               (0.144)   (0.380)    (0.443)     (0.241)              (0.283) (0.307)    (0.455)              (0.286)   (0.492)
 Obs                12,188 12,206        11,815     11,878      11,928 12,188 12,206           11,928   11,906     12,188 12,206       11,904
 Clusters             2261       2265      2188       2189        2202      2261       2265     2204      2192      2261      2265       2191
 F stat               14.43     12.12      10.33      10.62      11.44      14.43      12.12    11.61     9.76      14.43     12.12      10.34
 Mean                 0.97       0.96      0.84       0.70        0.93      0.59       0.66     0.88      0.37      0.72       0.76      0.51
Notes: Bombing measures the share of months that friendly air or artillery fire was directed in or near a populated area. Bombing is
instrumented by whether the hamlet was below the security score threshold. The regression also includes a linear RD polynomial - esti-
mated separately on either side of the threshold for each discontinuity - as well as discontinuity fixed e↵ects, quarter-year fixed e↵ects,
and controls for the characteristics that enter the security score. Robust standard errors clustered by village are in parentheses.

                                                   Table 7: Non-Insurgent Civic Society

                                                                   Dependent variable is:
                                    Civic Society       % HH with a Member Active in      Self Dev            Youth     Council
                                  Posterior Prob.       Civic PSDF      Econ     Dev        Proj               Org       Meets
                                   t+1        Cum       Org   Units    Train     Proj     Underway            Exists   Regularly
                                    (1)        (2)       (3)    (4)      (5)      (6)        (7)               (8)        (9)
             Bombing (t + 1)      -0.331
                                 (0.186)
             Bombing (Cum)                   -0.523     -0.504     -0.260    -0.225    -0.563    -0.471       0.166      -0.128
                                            (0.248)    (0.266)    (0.238)   (0.230)   (0.357)   (0.245)      (0.359)    (0.421)
             Obs                 12,188 12,206         11,927     11,914    11,967    11,298    11,863       11,855     11,761
             Clusters              2261       2265       2202       2201      2209      2168      2186        2189        2143
             F stat                14.43     12.12       11.28      11.61    10.35      8.53      11.03       11.25      11.16
             Mean                  0.61       0.69       0.29       0.52      0.20      0.37      0.89         0.76       0.58
            Notes: Bombing measures the share of months that friendly air or artillery fire was directed in or near a pop-
            ulated area. Bombing is instrumented by whether the hamlet was below the security score threshold. The
            regression also includes a linear RD polynomial - estimated separately on either side of the threshold for each
            discontinuity - as well as discontinuity fixed e↵ects, quarter-year fixed e↵ects, and controls for the characteris-
            tics that enter the security score. Robust standard errors clustered by village are in parentheses.
                                               Table 8: Economic Outcomes

                                                             Dependent variable is:
                               Economic        Non-Rice    Manuf. Surplus No Farm           % HH      % HH       Ham
                            Posterior Prob      Food       Goods Goods       Security       Own       Require    Pop
                            t+1        Cum      Avail      Avail    Prod       Bad          Vehic      Assist   Growth
                             (1)        (2)      (3)        (4)      (5)        (6)          (7)        (8)       (9)
        Bombing (t + 1)     0.029
                           (0.148)
        Bombing (Cum)                 -0.452     -0.336     -0.839     -0.775     0.636      -0.302    0.074      -0.063
                                     (0.287)    (0.379)    (0.460)    (0.487)    (0.418)    (0.154)   (0.158)    (0.212)
        Obs                12,188 12,206        11,882     11,882     11,894     10,976     11,935    11,848     11,966
        Clusters            2261       2265       2187       2187       2190      2072        2204     2197        2209
        F stat              14.43     12.12       9.66       9.66       9.90      10.18      11.84     11.74       10.38
        Mean                0.67       0.68       0.71       0.61       0.43       0.28       0.26     0.07        -0.02
       Notes: Bombing measures the share of months that friendly air or artillery fire was directed in or near a pop-
       ulated area. Bombing is instrumented by whether the hamlet was below the security score threshold. The
       regression also includes a linear RD polynomial - estimated separately on either side of the threshold for each
       discontinuity - as well as discontinuity fixed e↵ects, quarter-year fixed e↵ects, and controls for the characteris-
       tics that enter the security score. Robust standard errors clustered by village are in parentheses.


                                       Table 9: Army and Marines: Balance Checks

                                                          Dependent variable is:
              VC                                                        Military                  Tram or     Total     Colonial
            Attack    Urban        Elev.     Slope    Factory Market      Post       Telegraph     Train         Road   (Km)
              (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)      (5)      (6)       (7)           (8)        (9)        (10)        (11)
 Marines     0.020     0.031     -78.042     -1.552    0.003   -0.032    0.300         -0.017      0.038      2.253       -0.109
            (0.047)   (0.037)   (107.561)   (1.497)   (0.010) (0.040) (0.160)         (0.037)     (0.047)    (0.816)     (0.710)
 Obs          302       289         302       302       302     302       302           302         302        302         302
 Clusters      64        63          64        64        64      64        64            64          64         64          64
 Mean        0.35       0.04      302.24      3.32     0.01     0.03      0.05          0.02        0.05       1.63        0.64
Notes: Marines is an indicator equal to one if the observation is in Corps Region I. Regressions also include a linear RD
polynomial in latitude and longitude and a boundary segment fixed e↵ect. Robust standard errors clustered by village are in
parentheses.
                                      Table 10: Army and Marines: Public Goods and Security

                                                            Dependent variable is:
                Educ     Health Secur        Armed        VC     Active      VC      Friendly      VC     Admin    Civic Soc    Econ
                        Posterior              VC        Init      VC     Attacks           Troop                  Posterior
                       Probability           Present   Attack     Infr.   Troops           Deaths                 Probability
                  (1)      (2)      (3)         (4)       (5)      (6)       (7)        (8)        (9)     (10)      (11)       (12)
   Marines       0.243   0.562     0.095      -0.560    -0.482   -0.018    -0.191     -0.628     -1.935    0.147     0.130     -0.242
                (0.096) (0.198) (0.110)      (0.075)   (0.061) (0.036) (0.071)       (0.405) (2.807)      (0.138)   (0.153)   (0.270)
   Obs            302     302       302        300       300       286      302        302        302       302       302        302
   Clusters        64      64        64         63        64        63       64         64         64        64       64          64
   Mean           0.25    0.36      0.35       0.32      0.33     0.87      0.18       0.68       4.06      0.87     0.35       0.39
  Notes: Marines is an indicator equal to one if the observation is in Corps Region I. Regressions also include a linear RD poly-
  nomial in latitude and longitude, as well as geographic controls and a boundary segment fixed e↵ect. Robust standard errors
  clustered by village are in parentheses.


                         Table 11: Army and Marines: Attitudes Towards Americans and South Vietnam

                                                                 Dependent variable is:
                 Respondent        No               American          Fully                                       Police         Local
               Likes    Hates    Hostility   Vietnam Presence         Conf     ARVN       PF      RF             E↵ective      Officials
                  Americans       Am.        Harmony Beneficial in GVN                  E↵ective              VC       Order   E↵ective
                (1)       (2)      (3)          (4)         (5)        (6)       (7)      (8)     (9)        (10)       (11)      (12)
 Marines       0.158    -0.086    0.392        0.111       0.383      0.139     0.110    0.288   0.287       0.179     0.175     0.190
              (0.082) (0.023)    (0.110)      (0.058)     (0.079)    (0.041) (0.060) (0.066) (0.158)        (0.051) (0.039)     (0.055)
 Obs            117      117       115          116         117        250       181      179      85         408        344      288
 Clusters        66       66        65           66          66        112       102      109      54         178        156      145
 Mean           0.24     0.04     0.48          0.18        0.51       0.43     0.79      0.35   0.55         0.77      0.28     0.56
Notes: Marines is an indicator equal to one if the observation is in Corps Region I. Regressions also include geographic controls.
Robust standard errors clustered by village are in parentheses.
