                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              LIQUIDITY TRANSFORMATION IN ASSET MANAGEMENT:
             EVIDENCE FROM THE CASH HOLDINGS OF MUTUAL FUNDS

                                      Sergey Chernenko
                                        Adi Sunderam

                                     Working Paper 22391
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22391


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2016




We thank Jules van Binsbergen, Jaewon Choi, Lauren Cohen, Robin Greenwood, Johan Hombert,
Marcin Kacperczyk, Xuewen Liu, Alexi Savov, Jeremy Stein, René Stulz, Robert Turley, Jeff
Wang, Zhi Wang, Michael Weisbach, Yao Zeng, and seminar participants at the 3rd Annual
Conference on Financial Market Regulation, Adam Smith Conference, Duke/UNC Asset Pricing
Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, NBER New Developments in Long-Term Asset
Management Conference, Ohio State University, Risk Management Conference Mont Tremblant,
Texas A&M, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, and University of Massachusetts at
Amherst for helpful comments and suggestions. Yuan He and Mike Dong provided excellent
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Sergey Chernenko and Adi Sunderam. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Liquidity Transformation in Asset Management: Evidence from the Cash Holdings of Mutual
Funds
Sergey Chernenko and Adi Sunderam
NBER Working Paper No. 22391
July 2016
JEL No. G20,G23

                                           ABSTRACT

We study liquidity transformation in mutual funds using a novel data set on their cash holdings.
To provide investors with claims that are more liquid than the underlying assets, funds engage in
substantial liquidity management. Specifically, they hold substantial amounts of cash, which they
use to accommodate inflows and outflows rather than transacting in the underlying portfolio
assets. This is particularly true for funds with illiquid assets and at times of low market liquidity.
We provide evidence suggesting that mutual funds’ cash holdings are not large enough to fully
mitigate price impact externalities created by the liquidity transformation they engage in.


Sergey Chernenko
The Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
818 Fisher Hall
Columbus, OH 43210
sergey.chernenko@fisher.osu.edu

Adi Sunderam
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 359
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
asunderam@hbs.edu
I. Introduction

       Liquidity transformation – the creation of liquid claims that are backed by illiquid assets
– is a key function of many financial intermediaries. A long literature, starting with Diamond and
Dybvig (1983) and Gorton and Pennacchi (1990), argues, for example, that the purpose of banks
is to provide investors with highly liquid demand deposits while financing illiquid, information
intensive loans. Liquidity transformation is also an important function of the system of market-
based intermediaries known as the shadow banking system, as argued by Gorton and Metrick
(2010), Kacperczyk and Schnabl (2010), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgenson (2015), Moreira
and Savov (2016), and Nagel (2016).

       Through open-ending – allowing investors to withdraw capital at short notice –
traditional asset managers provide liquidity services that are similar to banks and shadow banks.
For example, though they may invest in illiquid assets such as corporate bonds, bank loans, and
emerging market stocks, open-end mutual funds have liquid liabilities. Specifically, mutual funds
allow investors to redeem any number of shares at the fund’s end-of-day net asset value (NAV),
effectively pooling liquidation costs across investors. In contrast, investors who directly hold the
underlying investments bear their own liquidation costs when selling those assets.

       Can liquidity transformation by asset managers cause financial stability problems? This
question has been the subject of a vigorous debate among academics, practitioners, and
regulators (e.g., Goldstein et al, 2015; International Monetary Fund, 2015; Financial Stability
Oversight Council, 2014; Feroli et al, 2014; Chen, Goldstein, and Jiang, 2010). A key concern on
one side of the debate is that liquidity transformation increases the scope for fire sales.
Redemptions from an open-ended fund can force sales of illiquid assets, depressing asset prices
and thereby stimulating further redemptions and fire sales. Motivated by such concerns, the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) has recently proposed new rules to promote more
effective liquidity risk management by mutual funds (SEC, 2015).

       On the opposite side of the debate are two main arguments. First, many contend that asset
managers are essentially a veil, simply transacting in the underlying equities and bonds on behalf
of investors without performing much liquidity transformation (Investment Company Institute,
2015). Second, others argue that asset managers are well aware of the risks of fire sales and take


                                                 1
steps to manage their liquidity needs (Independent Directors Council, 2016; Investment
Company Institute, 2016).

        A key empirical challenge in this debate is that it is difficult to measure liquidity
transformation for asset managers. For banks and shadow banks, maturity mismatch – the
difference in maturity between assets and liabilities – provides a reasonable measure of liquidity
transformation. While investors can withdraw unlimited quantities of deposits without any price
impact, bank loans cannot be traded before maturity without creating substantial price impact.
For asset managers, however, there is no comparable measure. Their assets are typically
tradeable securities, though with varying levels of liquidity. Furthermore, some price impact can
be passed on to investors because they own claims whose value is not fixed. Nevertheless, asset
managers perform some amount of liquidity transformation because their ability to pool trades
and space transactions over time flattens the price-quantity schedule faced by their investors.

        In this paper, we use the cash holdings of mutual funds that invest in equities and long-
term corporate bonds as a window into the liquidity transformation activities of asset managers.1
Our key insight is that the way mutual funds manage their own liquidity to provide the benefits
of open-ending to investors is a measure of how much liquidity transformation funds are
performing. A fund acting as a pure pass-through, simply buying and selling the underlying
assets on behalf of its investors, has little need for cash holdings to manage its liquidity. In
contrast, a fund performing substantial liquidity transformation will seek to use cash holdings to
mitigate the costs associated with providing investors with claims that are more liquid than the
underlying assets. This revealed preference argument thus suggests that funds’ cash management
practices can be used to measure their liquidity transformation.

        Two features of the mutual fund industry make it a good laboratory for studying liquidity
transformation by asset managers. First, mutual funds account for a large fraction of the overall
asset management industry. As of 2015Q1, mutual funds had aggregate assets of $12.9 trillion
and held 20.5% of corporate equities and 20.6% of corporate and foreign bonds.2 Second, while



1
  Because we focus on the mismatch in liquidity between fund assets and liabilities, we exclude money market
mutual funds, closed end funds, index funds, ETFs, and short-term bond mutual funds from our analysis.
2
  Federal Reserve Flow of Funds. These numbers do not include the assets of money market mutual funds.

                                                     2
other asset managers have some ability to restrict investor redemptions, most mutual funds are
completely open-ended, creating significant scope for liquidity transformation.

       We study mutual fund liquidity management using a novel data set on the cash holdings
of equity and long-term corporate bond funds collected from SEC form N-SAR filings.
Importantly, our data set covers holdings of both cash and cash substitutes such as money market
mutual fund shares. Cash substitutes have become an increasingly important source of liquidity
for asset managers in recent years. The IMF estimates that asset managers as a whole held about
$2 trillion of cash and cash substitutes in 2013 (Pozsar, 2013). This is approximately the same
amount as US corporations (Bates et al., 2009). Approximately 37% of asset manager holdings
is in the form of cash substitutes (Pozsar, 2013). Fig. 1 shows that a similar pattern holds for the
equity and long-term bond mutual funds in our data set. By 2014, they held $600 billion of cash
and cash substitutes, with nearly 50% taking the form of cash substitutes.

       We present four main results on mutual fund liquidity management, all showing that
mutual funds do not simply act as pass-throughs. Instead, consistent with the idea that mutual
funds perform a significant amount of liquidity transformation, funds use holdings of cash to
actively manage their liquidity provision and to reduce their impact on the prices of the
underlying assets. Our first main result is that, rather than transacting in equities and bonds,
mutual funds use cash to accommodate inflows and outflows. Funds build up cash positions
when they receive inflows and draw down cash when they suffer outflows. The magnitudes are
economically significant. For each dollar of inflows or outflows in a given month, 23 to 33 cents
of that flow is accommodated through changes in cash rather than through trading in the fund’s
portfolio securities. This impact of flows on cash balances lasts for multiple months.

       Second, asset liquidity affects the propensity of funds to use cash holdings to manage
fund flows. In the cross section, funds with illiquid assets are more aggressive in using cash to
meet inflows and outflows. A one-standard deviation increase in asset illiquidity is associated
with a 20-30% increase in the fraction of fund flows accommodated through changes in cash. We
find similar evidence in the time series: during periods of low aggregate market liquidity, funds
accommodate a larger fraction of fund flows with cash. These results would not obtain if funds
were simply a veil, trading on behalf of their investors. Instead, our results are consistent with



                                                 3
the idea that mutual funds perform a significant amount of liquidity transformation, with their
cash holdings playing a critical role.

       Third, we show that funds that perform more liquidity transformation hold significantly
more cash. Asset illiquidity, the volatility of fund flows, and their interaction are the key
determinants of how much liquidity transformation a given fund engages in, and we find that all
three variables are strongly related to cash holdings. For equity funds, for example, a one-
standard deviation increase in asset illiquidity (flow volatility) is associated with a 1.0 (0.4)
percentage points higher cash-to-assets ratio. Furthermore, the interaction of asset illiquidity and
flow volatility is positive and statistically significant, indicating that funds that invest in illiquid
assets and provide investors with ample liquidity have particularly high cash-to-assets ratios. The
magnitude of these effects is large. For funds with the most liquid assets in our sample, cash
holdings do not vary with flow volatility, indicating that these funds are close to the frictionless
null. However, the average fund is quite far from this frictionless benchmark. Overall, because
they use cash to manage liquidity, mutual funds hold large aggregate amounts of cash.

       Are these cash holdings large enough to fully mitigate any price impact externalities that
funds may exert on other market participants? We provide two pieces of suggestive evidence that
they are not. The first piece of evidence arises from the intuition that a monopolist internalizes its
price impact. We show that funds that hold a larger fraction of the outstanding amount of the
assets they invest in tend to hold more cash. This finding is consistent with such funds more fully
internalizing the price impact of their trading in the securities they hold. Our second piece of
evidence is at the fund family level. We show that funds that have significant holdings overlap
with other funds in the same family hold more cash. This finding is consistent with the idea that
these funds are more cautious about exerting price impact when it may adversely affect other
funds in the family.

       We also explore the extent to which funds use alternative liquidity management tools,
including redemption restrictions, credit lines, and interfund lending programs in lieu of cash.
Our evidence indicates that these alternative tools are imperfect substitutes for cash and that cash
is the key tool funds use for liquidity management. These results validate our insight that cash
holdings are a good measure of a fund’s liquidity transformation activities.



                                                   4
        In summary, our analysis highlights three key properties of liquidity transformation in
asset management. First, it is economically significant. Mutual funds are not a veil, simply
transacting in bonds and equities on behalf of their investors. Instead, funds have substantial cash
holdings and use them to accommodate inflows and outflows, even at horizons of a few months.

        Second, liquidity transformation in asset management is highly dependent on liquidity
provision by the traditional and shadow banking sectors. In order to provide liquidity to their
investors, mutual funds must hold substantial amounts of cash, bank deposits, and money market
mutual fund shares. These holdings do not decrease much with fund size, suggesting that
economies of scale in liquidity provision are weak.

        Third, despite their size, the cash holdings of mutual funds are not sufficiently large to
completely mitigate the price impact externalities created by funds’ liquidity transformation
activities. Our evidence suggests that funds do not fully internalize the effect that providing
investors with daily liquidity has on the prices of the underlying securities.

        Our paper is related to several strands of the literature. First, there is a small but growing
literature studying the potential for liquidity transformation among mutual funds to generate run-
like dynamics, including Chen, Goldstein, and Jiang (2010), Feroli et al (2014), Goldstein, Jiang,
and Ng (2015), Wang (2015), and Zeng (2015). Second, there is a large theoretical and empirical
literature studying fire sales in debt and equity markets, including Shleifer and Vishny (1992),
Shleifer and Vishny (1997), Coval and Stafford (2007), Ellul, Jotikasthira and Lundblad (2011),
Greenwood and Thesmar (2011), and Merrill et al (2012).3 Our results show how mutual funds
use cash holdings to manage the risk of fire sales created by their liquidity transformation
activities and suggest that they may not hold enough cash to fully mitigate fire sale externalities.

        Our paper is also related to the large literature on liquidity transformation in banks,
including recent empirical work measuring liquidity creation in banks such as Berger and
Bouwman (2009) and Cornett et al (2011). It is also related to the literature on instabilities in


3
  In addition, there is a broader literature on debt and equity market liquidity, including Roll (1984), Amihud and
Mendelsohn (1986), Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam (2001), Amihud (2002), Longstaff (2004), Acharya and
Pedersen (2005), Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011), Dick-Nielsen, Feldhütter, and Lando (2012), Feldhütter (2012), and
many others. Our results demonstrate that asset managers perform liquidity transformation in a manner similar to
banks, providing investors with liquid claims while holding less liquid securities, which they must ultimately trade
in the debt and equity markets.

                                                         5
shadow banking, including Gorton and Metrick (2012), Stein (2012), Kacperczyk and Schnabl
(2013), Krishnamurthy, Nagel, and Orlov (2014), Chernenko and Sunderam (2014), and
Schmidt, Timmerman, and Wermers (2016).

       Finally, we contribute to a small but growing literature on the determinants and effects of
mutual fund cash holdings, including Yan (2006), Simutin (2014), and Hanouna, Novak, Riley,
and Stahel (2015). While this literature focuses primarily on funds’ market timing ability and the
impact cash holdings have on returns, we use cash holdings as a measure of liquidity
transformation. We empirically validate this measure and use it to argue that mutual funds
perform a substantial amount of liquidity transformation. In addition, we use the measure to
examine the extent to which funds internalize the price impact they exert on security prices.

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II presents a simple
framework that demonstrates the link between liquidity transformation and optimal cash
holdings.   Section III describes the data. Section IV presents our main results on cash
management by mutual funds. Section V provides evidence on how much of their price impact
individual mutual funds internalize. Section VI discusses alternative liquidity management tools
and argues that they play a secondary role relative to cash holdings, and Section VII concludes.

II. Framework

       Throughout the paper, we use liquidity transformation to mean that the price-quantity
schedule faced by a fund investor in buying or selling fund shares is different from what it would
be if the investor directly traded in the underlying assets.

       There are three main ways mutual funds can perform liquidity transformation. First,
funds allow investors to buy and sell unlimited quantities at the end-of-day NAV. In contrast,
individual investors trading by themselves would create more price impact if they traded larger
quantities. Second, funds can use cash buffers to pool investor buy and sell orders that may be
asynchronous. Essentially, if some fraction of fund flows are temporary and will be offset in the
near future, the fund can use cash buffers to net these flows. This is analogous to the way
diversification across depositors allows banks to hold illiquid assets, as in Diamond and Dybvig
(1983). Individual investors trading for themselves in a market would achieve this only if they
traded simultaneously. Third, funds can use cash buffers to mitigate price impact when trading in
the underlying assets. If price impact is increasing in the quantity traded but temporary, then
                                                  6
funds can use cash buffers to spread out their trades across time in order to reduce their price
impact. Similarly, if market liquidity varies over time, funds can use cash buffers to allocate their
trades to periods with low price impact.

   A. Cash management

   To help fix ideas, we begin by outlining the logic of our empirical tests. In the Appendix, we
present a simple static model that formally derives many of these predictions. We consider a
fund charged with managing a pool of risky, illiquid assets to outperform a benchmark while
providing regular liquidity to its investors. Our predictions are based on the idea that an
optimizing fund will use cash buffers to help meet this mandate. The key tradeoff the fund faces
is that cash buffers help reduce price impact when trading the illiquid assets, but they have a
carrying cost because they increase tracking error relative to the benchmark.

   We conduct three sets of empirical tests. The first one involves fund cash management
practices.

   Prediction 1. A fund’s propensity to use cash to accommodate flows is a measure of its
liquidity transformation.

   The logic here is that if fund assets were perfectly liquid, the fund would have no need to use
cash. It could always trade in the underlying assets immediately and frictionlessly, so holding
cash buffers would only increase the fund’s tracking error. On the other hand, if the fund is
performing liquidity transformation, it can use its cash buffers to mitigate the price impact
associated with trading in the underlying. The same logic suggests that the strength of this cash
management motive varies with the illiquidity of the underlying assets.

   Prediction 2. In both the cross section and the time series, funds performing more liquidity
transformation should more aggressively use cash to accommodate flows.

   The more illiquid fund assets are, the longer the fund will take to accommodate flows. The
reason is that when assets are more illiquid, costs of delay become smaller relative to the price
impact of trading. Similarly, when assets are more illiquid, the value of waiting for offsetting
flows increases. Assets can be more illiquid either because of the fund’s choice of assets (e.g.,
small cap versus large cap stocks) or because of aggregate variation in market liquidity.



                                                 7
   B. Cash holdings for a single fund

       Our next set of empirical tests involves the level of cash holdings.

Prediction 3. The level of cash holdings is a measure of equilibrium liquidity transformation.

       This may seem somewhat counterintuitive, as all else equal, more cash reduces the
amount of liquidity transformation the fund is doing. In the limit, a fund holding only cash does
not perform any liquidity transformation. However, the prediction is about funds’ optimal
equilibrium behavior. The logic is that funds trade off the incremental carrying costs of having
more cash against the expected incremental trading costs associated with having less cash.

       It follows from the fund’s trade off that optimal cash reserves are increasing in the fund’s
expected trading costs. Intuitively, if the fund chooses to hold more cash, it is choosing to pay
higher carrying costs. This is optimal only if the fund faces higher expected trading costs.
Furthermore, a fund with higher expected trading costs will not hold enough cash to fully offset
those costs. The fund always bears the incremental carrying costs but enjoys reduced trading
costs only when there are large outflows. Thus, a fund’s optimal cash holdings are increasing in
the amount of liquidity transformation it performs.

Prediction 4. If cash holdings are driven by liquidity transformation, they should increase with
asset illiquidity, the volatility of fund flows, and the interaction of the two.

       Liquidity transformation is driven by the intersection of investor behavior and asset
illiquidity. Funds with more volatile flows are effectively providing greater liquidity services to
their investors. Similarly, if the fund’s assets are more illiquid, it is providing greater liquidity
services to its investors. These two effects interact: the more illiquid the assets, the stronger the
relationship between cash-to-assets ratios and flow volatility.

   C. Internalizing price impact

   Our third set of predictions involves the extent to which fund cash holdings are high enough
to prevent funds from exerting price impact externalities on one another. We consider the
alternative, where the level of cash holdings is picked by a planner minimizing total costs
(carrying costs of cash plus trading costs incurred by funds) borne by all funds.

Prediction 5. A planner coordinating the level of cash holdings among funds would choose a
higher level than the level chosen in the private market equilibrium.
                                                  8
       This is the analog of a leverage or fire sale externality as in Shleifer and Vishny (1992) or
Stein (2012). In the private market equilibrium, each individual fund treats other funds’ reserve
policies as fixed when choosing its own reserves. An individual fund does not internalize this
positive effect its cash holdings have on trading costs faced by the other funds. Specifically,
when an individual fund has more cash, it needs to trade less and thus creates less price impact.
This benefits other funds that need to trade in the same direction as the individual fund. In
contrast, the planner internalizes the fact that high reserves benefit all funds through lower
liquidation costs.

       Note that there is no welfare statement here. For there to be a social loss from low cash
holdings in general equilibrium, the liquidation costs to the funds must not simply be a transfer
to an outside liquidity provider. Our prediction is simply that coordination among funds would
lead to higher cash holdings.

       A corollary that follows from this logic is that a monopolist in a particular security
internalizes its price impact, particularly if that security is illiquid. The externality that makes
private market cash holdings lower than what a planner would choose arises because funds take
into account how cash holdings mitigate their own price impact but not how that price impact
affects other funds. Of course, if one fund owns the whole market, there is no externality. When
a monopolist creates price impact through trading, it is the only fund that suffers because it is the
only one that holds the security. Put differently, the monopolist and the planner solve the same
problem: minimizing the sum of cash carrying costs and trading costs in the security.
Generalizing this intuition, the higher is the fraction of the underlying assets owned by a given
fund, the more will the fund internalize its price impact.

Corollary: Funds that own a larger fraction of their portfolio assets more fully internalize
their price impact and therefore hold more cash reserves.

III. Data

   A. Cash holdings

       We combine novel data on the cash holdings of mutual funds with several other data sets.
Our primary data comes from SEC form N-SAR filings. These forms are filed semi-annually by
all mutual funds and provide data on asset composition, including holdings of cash and cash
substitutes. Specifically, we measure holdings of cash and cash substitutes as the sum of cash
                                               9
(item 74A), repurchase agreements (74B), short-term debt securities other than repurchase
agreements (74C), and other investments (74I). Short-term debt securities have remaining
maturities of less than a year and consist mostly of US Treasury Bills and commercial paper. The
demarcation between cash and other assets is less clear for bond funds than for equity funds
because bond funds may hold short-term debt for both liquidity management and pure
investment reasons. We focus on long-term bond funds for this reason, but our measures of cash
are still likely to be more noisy for bond funds than equity funds.

        The other investments category (74I) consists mostly of investments in money market
mutual funds (MMMFs), other mutual funds, loan participations, and physical commodities.
Using hand-collected data, we have examined the composition of the other investments category
for a random sample of 320 funds for which other investments accounted for at least 10% of total
net assets. The mean and median fractions of MMMFs in other investments were 75% and
100%. Holdings of other mutual funds accounted for most of the remaining value of other
investments. We use our security-level holdings data, described below, to subtract holdings of
long-term mutual funds from other investments. Otherwise, we treat the other investments
category as consisting entirely of MMMFs. This should only introduce measurement error into
our dependent variable and potentially inflate our standard errors.4

        Our dependent variable is thus the sum of cash and cash equivalents scaled by TNA (item
74T). We winsorize this cash ratio at the 1st and 99th percentiles.

        In addition to data on asset composition, form N-SAR contains data on fund flows and
investment practices. Gross and net fund flows for each month since the last semi-annual filing
are reported in item 28. Item 70 reports indicators for whether the fund uses various types of
derivatives, borrows, lends out it securities, or engages in short sales.5


4
  The CRSP Mutual Fund Database includes a variable called per_cash that is supposed to report the fraction of the
fund’s portfolio invested in cash and equivalents. This variable appears to be a rather noisy proxy for the cash-to-
assets ratio. Aggregate cash holdings of all long-term mutual funds in CRSP track aggregate holdings of liquid
assets of long-term mutual funds as reported by the Investment Company Institute (ICI) until 2007, but the
relationship breaks down after that. By 2014, there is a gap of more than $400 billion, or more than 50% of the
aggregate cash holdings reported by ICI. At a more granular level, we calculated cash holdings form the bottom up
using security-level data from the SEC form N-CSR for a random sample of 100 funds. The correlation between the
true value of cash-to-assets ratio computed using N-CSR data and our N-SAR based proxy is 0.75. The correlation
between the true value and CRSP is only 0.40.
5
  Almazan et al (2004) also use form N-SAR’s investment practices data.

                                                        10
    B. Link to CRSP mutual fund database

         For additional fund characteristics such as investment objective, fraction of institutional
share classes, and holdings liquidity, we link our N-SAR data to the CRSP Mutual Fund
Database. Using a name-matching algorithm, we can match the majority of funds in N-SAR to
CRSP.6 We match more than 70% of all fund-year observations in N-SAR to CRSP. In dollar
terms, we match more than 80% of all assets.

         After linking our data to CRSP, we apply the following screens to our sample of funds.
We focus on open-end funds and exclude exchange-traded funds (ETFs),7 small business
investment companies (SBIC), unit investment trusts (UIT), variable annuities, funds of funds,8
and money market mutual funds. In addition, we exclude observations with zero assets according
to N-SAR and those for which the financial statements do not cover a regular 6- or 12-month
reporting period. As we discuss below, we are able to measure asset liquidity for domestic equity
funds, identified using CRSP objective codes starting with ED, and for long-term corporate bond
funds.9 To further make sure that we can accurately measure fund flow volatility and asset
liquidity, we focus on funds with at least $100 million in assets. Finally, we exclude index funds
for two reasons. First, index funds are likely to have higher carrying costs (i.e., costs of tracking
error) than other funds. Thus, for index funds, cash holdings are likely to be lower and less
sensitive to asset liquidity and fund flow volatility, and therefore a noisier measure of liquidity


6
  Our procedure takes advantage of the structure of fund names in CRSP. The full fund name in CRSP is generally
of the form “trust name: fund name; share class.” For example, “Vanguard Index Funds: Vanguard 500 Index Fund;
Admiral Shares.” The first piece, “Vanguard Index Funds,” is the name of the legal trust that offers Vanguard 500
Index Fund as well as a number of other funds. Vanguard Index Funds is the legal entity that files on behalf of
Vanguard 500 Index Fund with the SEC. The second piece, “Vanguard 500 Index Fund,” is the name of the fund
itself. The final piece, “Admiral Shares,” indicates different share classes that are claims on the same portfolio but
that offer different bundles of fees, minimum investment requirements, sales loads, and other restrictions.
7
  ETFs operate a very different model of liquidity transformation. They rely on investors to provide liquidity in the
secondary market for the fund’s share and on authorized participants (APs) to maintain parity between the market
price of the fund’s shares and their NAV. In untabulated results, we find that ETFs hold significantly less cash and
that to the extent that they do hold more than a token amount of cash, it is almost entirely due to securities lending
and derivatives trading.
8
  SBICs, UITs, and open-end funds are identified based on N-SAR items 5, 6, and 27. ETFs are identified based on
the ETF dummy in CRSP or fund name including the words ETF, exchange-traded, iShares, or PowerShares.
Variable annuities are identified based on N-SAR item 58. We use security-level data from CRSP and Morningstar
to calculate the share of the portfolio invested in other mutual funds. Funds that, on average, invest more than 80%
of their portfolio in other funds are considered to be funds of funds.
9
  Corporate bond funds are defined as funds that have Lipper objective codes A, BBB, HY, IID, MSI, and MSI and
that invest more than 50% of their portfolio in intermediate and long-term corporate bonds (NSAR item 62P).

                                                         11
transformation. Second, index funds largely track the most liquid securities, so there is little
variation in asset liquidity for us to analyze among them.

     C. Asset liquidity

        We use holdings data from the CRSP Mutual Fund Database to measure the liquidity of
equity mutual fund holdings.10 These data start in 2003. Following Chen, Goldstein, and Jiang
(2010), we construct the square root version of the Amihud (2002) liquidity measure for each
stock. We then aggregate up to the fund-quarter level, taking the value-weighted average of
individual stock liquidity.

        For bond funds, we use monthly holdings data from Morningstar, which covers the
2002Q2-2012Q2 period. Following Dick-Nielsen, Feldhütter, and Lando (2012) we measure
liquidity of individual bonds as λ, the equal-weighted average of four other liquidity measures:
Amihud, Imputed Roundtrip Cost (IRC) of Feldhutter (2012), Amihud risk, and IRC risk.11 The
latter two are the standard deviations of the daily values of Amihud and IRC within a given
quarter. Once we have the λ measure for each bond, we aggregate up to the fund level, taking the
value-weighted average of individual bond liquidity.

     D. Summary statistics

        Our final data set is a semi-annual fund-level panel that combines the N-SAR data with
additional fund information from CRSP and data on asset liquidity from CRSP and Morningstar.
Throughout the paper, we conduct our analysis at the fund-half year level.

        The sample periods are determined by the availability of holdings data in CRSP and
Morningstar and of bond transaction data in TRACE. For equity funds, the sample period is
January 2003 – December 2014. For bond funds, it is September 2002 – June 2012.

        Table 1 reports basic summary statistics for funds in our data, splitting them into equity
versus bond funds. Our sample of equity funds consists of about 22,000 observations. Our
sample of bond funds is much smaller, only about one eight the size of the equity fund sample.12

10
   In unreported analyses, we obtain very similar results when we use Thomson Reuters Mutual Funds Holdings
data.
11
   We are grateful to Peter Feldhütter for sharing his code with us.
12
   The number of bond funds in our sample is significantly smaller than the number of equity funds because we
focus on bond funds that invest at least 50% of their portfolio in corporate bonds.

                                                     12
Equity and bond funds are broadly comparable in size with median TNA of $500 – 600 million
and mean TNA of $2.1 – 2.5 billion.

         Bond funds tend to hold more cash. The median bond fund has a cash-to-assets ratio of
5.3%, while the median equity fund has a cash-to-assets ratio of 4.4%. Bond funds have
significantly higher turnover.13 The volatility of fund flows is comparable for bond and equity
funds, averaging approximately 9-10% per year. Institutional ownership is also similar. Except
for securities lending, bond funds are somewhat more likely than equity funds to engage in
various sophisticated investment practices such as trading options and futures and shorting.

         Appendix Table A1 gives formal definitions for the construction of all variables used in
the analysis.

IV. Results

         We now present our main results. We start by showing that cash holdings play an
economically significant role in how mutual funds manage their liquidity to meet inflows and
outflows. We then study the determinants of cash holdings, showing that cash holdings are
strongly related to asset liquidity and volatility of fund flows. It is worth noting that for much of
the analysis, we are documenting endogenous relationships. Fund characteristics, investor
behavior, and cash holdings are all jointly determined, and our results trace out the endogenous
relationships between them.14

     A. Liquidity management through cash holdings

         We begin by examining Prediction 1 from Section II. We show that cash holdings play an
important role in the way mutual funds manage inflows and outflows. In Table 2, we estimate
regressions of the change in a fund’s cash holdings over the last six months on the net flows it
received during each of those six months:

                          ΔCashi,t−6→t = α obj (i ),t + β0 Flowsi,t + ... + β5 Flowsi,t−5 + εi,t .                (6)


13
   Higher turnover of bond funds is in part due to a) bond maturities being treated as sales and b) trading in the to-
be-announced market for agency MBS.
14
   In most cases, endogeneity should lead to coefficients that are smaller in magnitude. For instance, Chen,
Goldstein, and Jiang (2010) argue that higher cash holdings should endogenously lower the volatility of fund flows
because investors are less worried about fire sales. This should weaken the relationship between cash and fund flow
volatility relative to the case where fund flow volatility is exogenous.

                                                            13
Fund flows are winsorized at the 5th and 95th percentiles. In Appendix Table A2, we show that
we obtain similar results winsorizing at the 1st and 99th percentiles. All specifications include
Lipper objective code cross time (half-year) fixed effects, indicating that the results are not
driven by relationships between flows and cash holdings in particular fund objectives.

        We first examine the results for equity funds. In the first column of Table 2, the
dependent variable is the change in cash holdings over the last six months as a fraction of net
assets six months ago: ΔCashi,t−6→t / TNAi,t−6 . In the first column, the coefficient β0 = 0.23 is large

and highly statistically significant. Since flows are scaled by the same denominator – assets six
months ago – as the dependent variable, the coefficients can be interpreted as dollars. Thus, β0 =
0.23 indicates that a dollar of outflows during month t decreases cash holdings by 23 cents.
Similarly, a dollar of inflows increases cash holdings by 23 cents. The other 77 cents are met by
transacting in the fund’s holdings of equities.15 In untabulated results, when we run regressions
separating inflows and outflows, we find that funds respond relatively symmetrically to them.
This is consistent with the idea that funds care about the price pressure they exert on the
underlying assets when both buying and selling.

        The coefficient β0 shows that an economically significant portion of flows is
accommodated through cash holdings. Even though equities are quite liquid, and a month is a
relatively long period, 23% of flows at a monthly horizon are accommodated through changes in
cash holdings. Presumably, at higher frequencies (e.g., daily or weekly), cash plays an even more
important role. The remaining coefficients show that the effect of fund flows on cash holdings
declines over time. However, even fund flows in month t-4 still have a detectable effect on cash
holdings at time t.

        In the second column of Table 2, the dependent variable is the change in the fund’s cash-
to-assets ratio:

                                     ⎛ Cash ⎞   ⎛ Cash ⎞ ⎛ Cash ⎞
                                    Δ⎜      ⎟ =⎜       ⎟ −⎜      ⎟ .
                                     ⎝ TNA ⎠i,t ⎝ TNA ⎠i,t ⎝ TNA ⎠i,t−6



15
  These results are broadly consistent with Edelen (1999), who finds that a dollar of fund flows is associated with
about 70 cents in trading activity.

                                                        14
These regressions show that funds are not simply responding to flows by scaling their portfolios
up and down. The overall composition of the portfolio is changing, becoming more cash-heavy
when the fund receives inflows and less cash-heavy when the fund suffers outflows.

           The coefficient β0 = 0.087 is statistically and economically significant. Flows equal to
100% of assets increase the fund’s cash-to-assets ratio by 8.7% (percentage points). For
reference, the standard deviation of fund flows is 9%. The coefficients here are likely to be
biased down because of performance-flow relationships. If a fund has strong returns between
month t-6 and month t, it is likely to receive inflows, but its cash-assets ratio at time t will be
depressed because high returns inflate assets at time t.

           The last two columns of Table 2 report analogous results for bond funds. The coefficients
are again large and statistically significant, and the economic magnitudes are larger. Specifically,
in column (3), the coefficient β0 = 0.33 indicates that one dollar of outflows in month t decreases
cash holdings by 33 cents. Similarly, in column (4), the coefficient β0 = 0.124 indicates that
flows equal to 100% of assets increase the fund’s cash-to-assets ratio by 12.4% (percentage
points). The larger magnitudes we find for bond funds are consistent with bonds being less liquid
than equities. Because funds face a larger price impact trading in bonds, they accommodate a
larger share of fund flows through changes in cash.

       B. Effect of asset liquidity and market illiquidity

           We next turn to Prediction 2 from Section II, examining how illiquidity affects funds’
propensity to use cash to manage inflows and outflows in both the cross section and the time
series. Panel A of Table 3 estimates specifications that allow cash management practices to differ
across the cross section of funds based on the illiquidity of their assets. Specifically, we estimate:

                  ΔCashi,t−6→t = α obj (i ),t + β1Flowsi,t−2→t × Illiqi,t−6 + β2 Flowsi,t−5→t−3 × Illiqi,t−6
                                                                                                                    (7)
                                  +β3 Flowsi,t−2→t + β4 Flowsi,t−5→t−3 + β5 Illiqi,t−6 + εi,t .

For compactness, we aggregate flows into quarters, i.e., those from month t-5 to t-3 and month t-
2 to t.16 We interact each of these quarterly flows with lagged values of holdings illiquidity.



16
     Interacting monthly flows with asset illiquidity generates somewhat stronger results for more recent fund flows.

                                                             15
Thus, the specification asks: given the illiquidity of the holdings that a fund had two quarters
ago, how did it respond to fund flows during the last two quarters?

        For equity funds studied in the first two columns, illiquidity is measured as the square
root version of the Amihud (2002) measure. In the first column, the dependent variable is the
change in cash holdings over the last six months as a fraction of assets six months ago:
ΔCashi,t−6→t / TNAi,t−6 . We standardize the illiquidity variables so that their coefficients can be

interpreted as the effect of a one-standard deviation change in asset illiquidity. Again, all
specifications have Lipper objective cross time fixed effects. The first column of Table 3 Panel A
shows that for the average equity fund, one dollar of flows over months t-2 to t changes cash
holdings by β3 = 17 cents. For a fund with assets one standard deviation more illiquid than the
average fund, the same dollar of flows changes cash holdings by β1 + β3 = 21 cents, a 21% larger
effect. In the second column, the dependent variable is the change in the fund’s cash-to-assets
ratio. Once again, fund flows over the last three months have a larger effect on funds with more
illiquid assets.

        The last two columns of Table 3 Panel A report analogous results for bond funds. The
magnitudes are similar. Column (3) shows that for the average bond fund, one dollar of flows
over months t-2 to t changes cash holdings by β3 = 15 cents. For a fund with assets one standard
deviation more illiquid than the average fund, the same dollar of flows changes cash holdings by
β1 + β3 = 19 cents, a 28% larger effect. However, in column (4), neither the coefficient on flows
nor its interaction with market liquidity is statistically significant. We have less power to detect
the effect of aggregate market liquidity in our bond sample because our sample size is
significantly smaller.

        In Panel B, we next turn to time variation in how funds manage their liquidity. When
markets for the underlying securities are less liquid, funds should have a higher propensity to
accommodate flows through changes in cash. Table 3 Panel B estimates specifications of the
form:

ΔCashi,t−6→t = α + β1Flowsi,t−2→t × LowAggLiqi,t−2→t + β 2 Flowsi,t−5→t−3 × LowAggLiqi,t−5→t−3
                                                                                                             (8)
              +β3 Flowsi,t−2→t + β 4 Flowsi,t−5→t−3 + β5 LowAggLiqi,t−2→t + β6 LowAggLiqi,t−5→t−3 + εi,t .




                                                     16
        We measure aggregate market liquidity during separate quarters and then define the
bottom tercile as periods of low aggregate market liquidity. For equity funds, our measure of
aggregate market liquidity is the Pastor and Stambaugh (2003) measure.17 In the first column, the
dependent variable is the change in cash holdings over the last six months as a fraction of assets
six months ago: ΔCashi,t−6→t / TNAi,t−6 .

        The first column of Table 3 Panel B shows that for the average half-year, one dollar of
fund flows during months t-2 to t changes cash balances by β3 = 16 cents. When aggregate
market liquidity is low, the same dollar of flows changes cash balances by β1 + β3 = 21 cents,
30% more. In the second column, the dependent variable is the change in the fund’s cash-to-
assets ratio. Here again, we see evidence that cash-to-assets ratios are more sensitive to fund
flows when aggregate market liquidity is low.

        The last two columns of Table 3 Panel B turn to bond funds. There is less agreement in
the literature over the appropriate way to measure the liquidity of the aggregate bond market. We
use the average of Dick-Nielsen, Feldhütter, and Lando (2012) lambda across all US-traded
corporate bonds.18

        Column (3) of Panel B shows estimates with larger magnitudes than we find for equity
funds. One dollar of fund flows during months t-2 to t changes cash balances by β3 = 10 cents.
When aggregate market liquidity is low, the same dollar of flows changes cash balances by β1 +
β3 = 22 cents, or over 100% more. However, in column (4), neither the coefficient on flows nor
its interaction with market liquidity is statistically significant. We have less power to detect the
effect of aggregate market liquidity in our bond sample because our sample size is significantly
smaller and, crucially for the tests in Table 3 Panel B, the time series dimension is shorter at
eleven and a half years.




17
   We use the Pastor-Stambaugh measure rather than averaging the Amihud measure across stocks because changes
in market capitalization mechanically induce changes in the Amihud measure. This means that time variation in the
average Amihud measure does not necessarily reflect time variation in aggregate stock market liquidity.
18
    We thank Peter Feldhütter for making the monthly time series available through his website
http://feldhutter.com/USCorporateBondMarketLiquidity_updated.txt

                                                       17
    C. Determinants of cash holdings

        Having shown that cash holdings play an important role in how mutual funds manage
inflows and outflows, we next turn to the stock of cash holdings. We estimate regressions that
seek to link fund cash holdings to liquidity transformation, as in Predictions 3 and 4 in Section II.
Specifically, Table 4 reports the results of regressions of the form:

           Cashi,t
                     = α + β1ʹLiquidityTransformation i,t + β2ʹScale i,t + β3ʹInvestorBehaviori,t
           TNAi,t                                                                                   (9)
                     +β4ʹTradingPractices i,t + εi,t .

We group the regressors into four categories. The first category consists of regressors related to
liquidity transformation. As discussed in Section II, we include in this category the illiquidity of
fund assets, the volatility of fund flows, and their interaction. The second category consists of
regressors that capture economies of scale: the (log) size of the fund and the (log) size of the
fund family. Our proxy for investor behavior is the fraction of the fund’s assets that are in
institutional share classes. Measures of trading practices include the fund’s asset turnover and
indicators for whether the fund uses various derivatives, borrows, lends out its securities, or
engages in short sales.

        The first two columns of Table 4 report the results for equity funds. All specifications
include objective-time fixed effects with standard errors clustered at the fund family level. All
continuous variables are standardized so that the coefficients can be interpreted as the effect of a
one-standard deviation change in the independent variable.

        The results indicate that funds that engage in more liquidity transformation hold more
cash. Focusing on the second column, where we control for all explanatory variables
simultaneously, a one-standard deviation increase in asset illiquidity increases the cash-to-assets
ratio by 1.0 percentage points. Similarly, the volatility of fund flows comes in positive and
significant. A one-standard deviation increase in flow volatility is associated with a 0.4
percentage points higher cash-to-assets ratio. Finally, the interaction between asset illiquidity and
flow volatility is also positive and significant.

        One way to see the importance of liquidity transformation in determining fund’s cash
holdings is to compare the predicted cash-to-assets ratio of two otherwise identical funds that

                                                         18
have liquidity transformation measures one standard deviation below the mean and one standard
deviation above the mean, respectively. Based on the estimates in column 2, that difference is 2.9
percentage points. This is about two-thirds of the median and almost 40% of the mean value of
the cash-to-assets ratio, consistent with the idea that liquidity transformation is an important
determinant of cash holdings.

        Another way to see the importance of liquidity transformation is to compare the
sensitivity of cash holdings to flow volatility across funds. Our results indicate that for funds
with the most liquid assets (σ(Flows) = -2 standard deviations below the mean), the total impact
of flow volatility on cash holdings is βσ ( Flows ) − 2 ⋅ βσ ( Flows )×Illiq = 0.35 − 2 ⋅ 0.17 = 0.01. That is,

flow volatility has virtually no impact on cash holdings for funds with very liquid assets. For
these funds, the frictionless null holds. They can trade without price impact and thus are not
engaged in liquidity transformation and have no need for cash holdings that scale with flow
volatility. However, the average fund is quite far from the frictionless null. Its cash holdings
increase strongly with flow volatility.

        Trading practices are also a significant determinant of cash holdings. Funds that engage
in securities lending hold much more cash (6.6 percentage points) because they receive cash
collateral when lending out securities. Similarly, funds that trade options and futures and that are
engaged in short sales tend to hold more cash because they may need to pledge collateral.

        Finally, our results provide mixed evidence of economies of scale in liquidity
management. There is no evidence of economies of scale at the individual fund level. Why might
this be the case? One reason is that highly correlated investor flows diminish the scope for scale
economies. In particular, effective liquidity provision by mutual funds depends in part on gross
inflows and outflows from different investors netting out. This is analogous to banks, where
withdrawals from some depositors are met in part using incoming deposits from other depositors.
This diversification across liquidity shocks to depositors allows banks to hold illiquid assets
while providing depositors with demandable claims (Diamond and Dybvig, 1983). This
diversification benefit increases with the number of investors in the fund but increases more
slowly when investor flows are more correlated.

        In the context of mutual funds, past returns are a natural public signal that results in
correlated flows and thus diminished economies of scale. It is well known that net investor flows
                                                      19
respond to past returns (e.g., Chevalier and Ellison, 1997; Sirri and Tufano, 1998). In particular,
following poor fund returns, each individual investor is more likely to redeem shares from the
fund. This reduces the fund’s ability to diversify across investor flows and means that the fund is
more likely to suffer net outflows. In untabulated results, we find strong evidence of this
mechanism at work. The ratio of net flows faced to gross flows faced by a fund is strongly
correlated with past returns.

       We do find evidence of economies of scale at the fund family level rather than the fund
level. A one-standard deviation increase in fund family total assets decreases the cash-to-assets
ratio by 1.3 percentage points. As we discuss further below, these economies of scale do not
appear to be driven by the fact that larger families tend to have alterative liquidity management
tools like lines of credit, interfund lending programs (Agarwal and Zhao, 2015), or funds of
funds (Bhattacharya, Lee, and Pool, 2013). Instead it appears that larger fund families have better
back office infrastructure that allow them to economize on cash holdings, or that they have more
scope to net offsetting trades across individual funds (Goncalves-Pinto and Schmidt, 2013).

       In the last two columns of Table 4, we find broadly similar effects for bond mutual funds.
Once again, the amount of liquidity transformation the fund engages in plays a key role. The
coefficients on the volatility of fund flows and flow volatility interacted with asset illiquidity are
both positive and significant. The magnitudes on these coefficients are larger than for equity
funds. However, for bond funds, the coefficient on asset illiquidity does not come in significant.
Because there is less agreement in the literature about the appropriate way to measure bond
liquidity, Appendix Table A3 shows that we obtain similar results with other measures, including
the Roll (1984) measure, the Amihud (2002) measure, and the imputed roundtrip cost.

       The cash holdings we study in Table 4 are large in the aggregate and have grown rapidly
over recent years. Fig. 1 shows the time series of holdings of both cash and cash substitutes.
Holdings of cash and cash substitutes rise from $100 billion in 1996 to $600 billion in 2014. This
is large as a fraction of total asset manager cash holdings, estimated by Pozsar (2013) to be
approximately $2 trillion. It is also large in comparison to corporate cash holdings, which also
stand at approximately $2 trillion.

       The large cash holdings of mutual funds make clear that in the aggregate, liquidity
transformation by asset managers relies heavily on liquidity provision by the banking and

                                                 20
shadow banking systems. In order to provide their investors with liquid claims, asset managers
must themselves hold large quantities of cash and cash substitutes. Moreover, these cash
holdings come largely from the financial sector, not the government. In our data, over 80% of
cash holdings are bank deposits and money market mutual fund shares, not Treasury securities.
This presumably reflects an unwillingness of fund managers to pay the high liquidity premia
associated with Treasuries when the banking and shadow banking systems can provide cheaper
cash substitutes (e.g., Greenwood, Hanson, and Stein, 2015; Nagel, 2016; Sunderam, 2015).

       D. Robustness and alternative explanations

           Table 5 reports a battery of robustness exercises for our results on the determinants of
cash holdings. Each row of the table reports the coefficients on our liquidity transformation
variables in Eq. 9 estimated for both equity funds and bond funds. All specifications include the
full suite of controls from Table 5 as well as objective-time fixed effects. Row (1) replicates our
baseline results from columns (2) and (4) of Table 4.

           The next five rows split the sample in various ways. Rows (2) and (3) split funds by size
and show that the results are not driven by a large number of small funds that account for a small
fraction of aggregate mutual fund assets. Rows (4) and (5) present the results before and after the
financial crisis, and row (6) shows the results excluding money market mutual funds from our
definition of cash. Across these rows, for equity funds, asset illiquidity always comes in positive
and significant, flow volatility is positive and significant in all but one specification, and their
interaction is positive and significant in three out of the six columns. For bond funds, the results
are less consistent here, which is not surprising given the small size of the sample. Nonetheless,
the volatility of fund flows is positive and significant in all but one specification, and the
interaction of flow volatility and asset illiquidity is positive and significant in two out of the six
columns.

           The next several rows add controls that help to rule out alternative explanations. The first
alternative is that, rather than measuring liquidity transformation, cash holdings reflect
managers’ expectations of risk and return. Specifically, fund managers may choose to hold more
cash whenever they expect future returns to be low or risk to be high.19 If these expectations

19
     Huang (2013) provides evidence consistent with this story.

                                                          21
correlate with our measures of liquidity transformation, they could explain the results in Table 4.
Our inclusion of fund objective cross time fixed effects in Table 4 should absorb most such time
variation in risk and expected returns. In rows (7), (8), and (9) of Table 5, we add future fund
returns as controls in Eq. (9). Specifically, we analyze fund i’s cash holdings at time t,
controlling for returns between t and t+k. The coefficients on our liquidity transformation
variables, flow volatility, asset illiquidity, and their interaction, are not impacted, suggesting that
they are not being driven by market timing considerations.20

         Another alternative interpretation of the results in Table 4 is that cash holdings are driven
by fund investment strategies, not by their liquidity transformation. Specifically, it could be the
case that funds hold cash as dry powder to allow them to quickly take advantage of investment
opportunities when they arise (Simutin, 2014). If the propensity to hold dry powder is related to
the illiquidity of the assets the fund invests in, then the coefficient on asset illiquidity could be
capturing the effects of dry powder as opposed to liquidity transformation. In rows (10) and (11)
of Table 5, we augment our regression specification in Eq. (9) with proxies for funds that are
more likely to want to hold dry powder. Our proxies are based on the idea that funds following
such strategies are likely to make relatively large bets. Thus, we use the Herfindahl index of the
fund’s holdings and the portfolio share of the largest position. Adding these controls for dry
powder has almost no effect on the estimated coefficients on the liquidity transformation
variables: flow volatility, asset illiquidity, and their interaction.21 This suggests that our results
are in fact capturing the association between cash holdings and liquidity transformation.

         A third alternative explanation is that cash holdings are driven by managerial
characteristics like risk aversion or skill. If some fund managers are more risk averse than others,
and these managers tend to hold more illiquid assets, this could explain the results in Table 4.
Similarly, more skilled managers may choose to hold more cash in order to quickly take
advantage of new investment opportunities when they arise. In row (12) of Table 5, we control
for a variety of managerial characteristics that have been used in the literature as proxies for


20
   For equity funds, the coefficients on future returns provide some evidence of market timing. Funds hold more
cash when future returns are going to be low.
21
   The coefficients on these dry powder proxy variables come in positive and statistically significant as well. A one-
standard deviation increase in holdings HHI is associated with 0.97% higher cash-to-assets ratio for equity funds and
1.44% higher cash-to-assets ratio for bond funds. The share of the largest position has a similar effect.

                                                         22
ability or risk aversion, including total industry experience, tenure with the current fund,
possession of a certified financial analyst (CFA) credential, and ACT score.22 We report the
results for the sample of observations for which we have all explanatory variables. The sample
size is reduced by about a third for equity funds and a quarter for bond funds. For both equity
funds and bond funds, controlling for these managerial characteristics has virtually no impact on
the liquidity transformation variables. Overall, our results are very stable across these
specifications aimed at ruling out alternative explanations by adding controls.

     E. Matched pairs

        One may still worry that our controls are imperfect and that the results in Tables 4 and 5
are driven by explanations other than liquidity transformation. The ideal experiment to isolate the
effect of liquidity transformation would hold fixed fund managers’ information and investment
opportunity set while varying how much liquidity investors demanded from the fund.

        This suggests comparing the portfolio decisions one manager makes for two funds with
the same investment objective but different flow volatilities. Variable annuities funds provide a
laboratory to approximate this ideal experiment. Variable annuities funds are mutual funds sold
as part of an insurance product. These funds are regulated and structured just like regular mutual
funds under the Investment Company Act of 1940. Indeed, for many variable annuity funds,
there is also a regular mutual fund with the same manager and mandate. For example, American
Century VP Income & Growth Fund is a variable annuity fund in our data, and American
Century Income & Growth Fund is the corresponding regular mutual fund. The two funds have
the same investment goal and investment strategy and are managed by the same team of three
portfolio managers. The only difference between the two is that the variable annuity fund “only
offers shares through insurance company separate accounts.”23

        Because they are sold as a part of an insurance product, variable annuity funds face less
flow volatility than regular mutual funds. In CRSP Mutual Fund Database, the annualized


22
   Chevalier and Ellison (1999) and Greenwood and Nagel (2009), among others, use SAT scores as a proxy for
ability. We use the average ACT rather than SAT score of students admitted to manager’s undergraduate institution
because in our data the ACT score is available for a larger number of institutions. Using SAT scores generates
similar results.
23
   Fund prospectus on Form N-1A:
https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/814680/000081468016000172/acvp2016485bpos.htm

                                                       23
volatility of monthly fund flows of variable annuity funds is 4.6% lower than that of comparable
regular funds.24 This effect represents 29% of the mean (16.0%) and 61% of the median (7.5%)
volatility.

         To study the effects of these differences in flow volatility on cash holdings, we construct
a sample of fund pairs with the same investment objective, where one fund is a variable annuity
fund, and its paired fund is a regular mutual fund managed by the same portfolio manager. We
are able to find 187 pairs, with each pair having on average 8 semi-annual observations.25

         Table 6 examines cash holdings in this matched sample. The table regresses the cash-to-
assets ratio of a dummy variable for variable annuity funds, while clustering the standard errors
by adviser to account for any correlation across funds managed by the same adviser. In the first
column, the coefficient on the variable annuity dummy indicates that variable annuity funds have
0.66 percentage points lower cash-to-assets ratio than matched regular funds. The magnitude of
the effect is sizable compared to the average cash-to-assets of regular funds of 5.27%. Columns
(2) and (3) analyze the equity and bond funds separately. Though the bond fund sample is too
small for statistical significance, the point estimates are similar for bond and equity funds.
Finally, columns (4) and (5) split the equity funds in our sample by their asset illiquidity.26 The
difference in cash holdings between variable annuity and regular funds is negative and
significant for both groups. As one would expect, however, the magnitude is larger in funds with
illiquid assets. Overall, the results of Table 6 strongly support the idea that differences in
liquidity transformation drive differences in cash holdings across funds.

        In Appendix Table A4, we take another approach to addressing alternative explanations,
instrumenting for asset liquidity and flow volatility with the fund’s Lipper objective code and its
age, respectively. The idea is that funds’ asset holdings are constrained by their objective: high-

24
   For each fund, we first calculate the volatility of fund flows during each year in the 2009—2015 period when
variable annuity funds are included in CRSP. We exclude funds with less than $10M in lagged net assets and
winsorize flow volatility at the 1st and 99th percentiles. The effect of variable annuity is then estimated from a
regression of flow volatility on the variable annuity dummy, while controlling for objective-time fixed effects and
fund size.
25
   A key constraint on finding matched pairs is that many variable annuity and regular funds have different reporting
cycles. Almost all variable annuity funds have their fiscal year end in December, while many regular mutual funds
have fiscal year ends in October and November. Such differences in reporting cycles prevent us from being able to
observe the fund’s cash holdings at the same point in time and force us to discard potential matches.
26
   We split fund pairs based on the asset liquidity of the regular fund. We do not have enough bond fund pairs to
split them by their liquidity.

                                                         24
yield funds must hold high-yield bonds. Thus, variation in liquidity driven by objective is not an
endogenous choice. Similarly, the volatility of fund flows declines with age, because investors
have less to learn about a fund with a long history (Chevalier and Ellison, 1997; Berk and Green,
2004).27 The appendix table shows that our main results go through using this IV strategy.

V. Internalizing Price Impact

     A. Fund-level results

        We next examine Prediction 5 from Section II, asking whether mutual fund cash holdings
are large enough to fully mitigate the price impact externalities created by the liquidity
transformation that funds engage in. In this section, we provide suggestive evidence that they are
not. We run two types of tests. The first is based on the idea that monopolists internalize their
price impact. As discussed in Section II, this suggests that funds that own a larger fraction of the
securities they invest in should internalize more of their price impact and as a result should have
higher cash-to-assets ratios.

        To examine this prediction, we estimate regressions similar to those in Eq. (9) but
augment them with measures of the fund’s share of the securities it owns. Specifically, for each
security that the fund holds, we first calculate the fund’s share of either aggregate mutual fund
holdings of that security or of the security’s outstanding amount. We then calculate the value-
weighted average across all securities in the fund’s portfolio. Finally, we standardize the
resulting variables so that their coefficients represent the effect of a one-standard deviation
change.

        Columns (1) and (2) of Table 7 report the results for equity funds. In column 1, the
coefficient on the fund’s share of the securities it owns as a fraction of aggregate mutual fund
holdings is positive and statistically significant. It is also economically meaningful – a one
standard deviation higher share of aggregate holdings increases the cash-to-assets ratio by 0.8
percentage points. In column (2), we look at the fund’s share of the securities it owns as a


27
   Objective code is a somewhat limited instrument because it is time invariant, but it helps rule out alternative
explanations based on market timing and managerial risk aversion. Because it could still be the case that certain
objectives are more amenable to dry powder strategies, we make sure to directly control for dry powder
considerations using holdings HHI. This makes it more likely that the exclusion restriction – a fund’s objective
affects cash holdings only through the illiquidity of the fund’s assets - is satisfied.

                                                       25
fraction of the securities’ outstanding amounts. We obtain similar results, though the economic
magnitude is smaller.

        Our second test of price impact internalization is based on the idea that fund families may
at least partially internalize price impact across different funds in the family. Thus, if a fund
holds assets that are also held by other funds in the same family, then the fund may be more
likely to internalize the price impact of its trading on those funds than on funds outside the fund
family. This suggests that funds should hold more cash when there is greater overlap in their
holdings with other funds within the fund family. Furthermore, we might expect this effect to be
stronger for larger funds. By their sheer size, larger funds might have to dump more assets on the
market, resulting in larger price impact than smaller funds (for the same percentage of asset fund
flows and asset sales).

        To examine this prediction, we estimate panel regressions similar to those in Eq. (9) but
augment with them a measure of holdings overlap. For each security that the fund holds, we
calculate the share of this security in the aggregate holdings of all other funds within the family.
We then calculate the value-weighted average of this measure across all securities in the fund’s
portfolio. If none of the fund’s securities are held by other funds in the same family, the holdings
overlap measure will be zero. The more of the fund’s securities are held by other funds in the
same family, the greater will be the holdings overlap measure.28

        Column (3) of Table 7 reports the results for equity funds. The coefficient on overlap
itself is positive but not statistically significant. However, the coefficient on the interaction of
overlap and fund size is positive and statistically significant. This indicates that large funds that
have significant overlap in holdings with other funds in the same family hold more cash. This is
consistent with the idea that such funds try to mitigate the price impact externalities they would
otherwise impose on other funds in the family.

        Columns (4), (5) and (6) of Table 7 report the results for bond funds. In columns (4) and
(5), the coefficients on the fund’s share of the securities it owns are positive but not significant.
In column (6), the coefficient on overlap is large, positive, and statistically significant. For bond
funds, a one-standard deviation increase in holdings overlap with other family funds is associated
28
  In untabulated regressions, we find that holdings overlap is driven by manager overlap. If two funds in the same
family share a manager, they are more likely to have similar holdings.

                                                       26
with a 0.9 percentage points higher cash-to-assets ratio. The coefficient on the interaction of
holdings overlap, and fund size is not statistically significant, however.

   B. Position-level results

       One concern that arises with the results in Table 7 is that they may simply reflect
differences in the characteristics of assets holdings across funds rather than differences in
internalization of price impact. For instance, funds that hold a large share of the securities they
own might invest primarily in small, illiquid securities. In this case, our finding that such funds
hold more cash might simply reflect the fact that our measures of liquidity are imperfect.

       We can address this concern using position-level data in Table 8. Specifically, we form a
security-fund-time panel and run regressions analogous to those in Table 7. The dependent
variable for security s held by fund f at time t is the cash-to-assets ratio of fund f at time t. The
independent variable of interest will be either the fund f’s share of the securities it owns at time t
or fund f’s holdings overlap with other funds in the same family at time t. Thus, we are
effectively running fund-time level regressions within our security-fund-time level dataset.

       The key difference between Tables 7 and 8 is that we can include security fixed effects in
Table 8. Thus, the results in Table 8 look at variation within security, absorbing variation across
securities in the average characteristics of the funds holding that security. Put differently, the
results compare two funds that hold the same security, one of which holds a higher share of the
securities it owns that the other. To make the results in Table 8 analogous to those in Table 7, we
weight the regressions by the portfolio share of each security. Standard errors are clustered by
fund-time.

       Table 8 shows that we obtain very similar results to Table 7 for equity funds. The share a
fund holds of the equities it owns is positively and significantly related to cash holdings, as is the
overlap of the fund holdings with other funds in the family (for larger funds).

       For bond funds, the results in Table 8 are a bit stronger than those in Table 7. The share a
fund holds of the bonds it owns is positively and significantly related to cash holdings. The
overlap of the fund holdings with other funds in the family is also positively and significantly
related to cash holdings.



                                                 27
       Overall, the evidence in this section is consistent with the idea that funds do not fully
internalize the price impact of their trading on one another. They suggest that in a counterfactual
world in which a single fund owned one hundred percent of the securities it invested in, cash
holdings would be substantially higher in order to mitigate price impact associated with liquidity
transformation. Similarly, in a counterfactual world where all funds were in the same fund
family, cash holdings would be substantially higher.

VI. Alternative Liquidity Management Tools

       In our analysis throughout the paper, we have assumed that cash is the only tool funds
have for liquidity management. In this section, we discuss four alternative liquidity management
tools that funds have at their disposal. Two of these alternative tools, lines of credit and in-kind
redemption options, may be useful for liquidity management in times of stress. The other two,
within-family lending programs and redemption fees, may be useful in normal times as well as
times of stress. The key takeaway of our analysis is that although funds do have access to
alternative liquidity management tools, they appear to use them very little in practice. In
equilibrium, cash is still strongly related with liquidity transformation despite the existence of
alternative liquidity management tools.

   A. Lines of credit and in-kind redemption options

       We start by analyzing the two liquidity management tools that may be useful in times of
stress: lines of credit and in-kind redemption options. Lines of credit can be used to meet
redemption requests without having to sell illiquid assets. They are generally arranged at the
fund family level and made available to all funds within the family. Individual funds pay their
pro-rata share of any commitment fees and pay interest based on the fund’s actual borrowings.

       We first examine whether fund families typically have credit lines at all. We read annual
reports on form N-CSR and prospectuses on form 485BPOS to collect information on credit lines
for the top 150 mutual fund families as of the end of 2014. These fund families account for more
than 97% of aggregate mutual fund assets in the CRSP Mutual Fund Database. About 60% of
families in the sample report having a line of credit. Because larger families are more likely to
have a line of credit, at least 80% of total mutual fund assets is held by families with lines of
credit. Lines of credit are generally small relative to the assets of the fund family. The median
credit facility is less than 0.44% of the fund family assets.
                                                  28
         Our primary data source, SEC form N-SAR, also gives us a window into drawdowns on
lines of credit. Funds report whether, at any point during the six-month reporting period, they
had bank loans exceeding 1% of TNA. Fig. 2 reports the fraction of funds that had bank loans
exceeding 1% of TNA as a function of fund flows. The figure shows that usage is generally quite
low. About 5% (7%) of equity (bond) funds have bank loans exceed 1% of TNA during a typical
reporting period. Large outflows are associated with a higher probability of drawing on a line of
credit. But even funds experiencing very large outflows are unlikely to draw down their line of
credit. The five percent of observations with the largest outflows suffer average outflows of more
than 20% of assets. Yet, even for these funds, the probability of having bank loans exceed 1% of
TNA is only 15%.

         Thus, although most funds do have access to a line of credit, utilization rates are low.
This suggests that funds view lines of credit as an imperfect substitute for cash holdings. This is
consistent with Acharya, Almeida, and Campello (2013), who argue that nonfinancial firms with
greater aggregate liquidity risk should use cash rather than lines of credit. The idea is that
because banks pool risks across nonfinancial firms, credit lines are less likely to be a reliable
source of liquidity if there is an aggregate liquidity shock, when many firms are likely to draw
their lines simultaneously. Thus, for firms more exposed to aggregate liquidity shocks, cash is a
safer option. In our case, mutual funds are quite exposed to aggregate liquidity shocks because
fund flows are strongly correlated with aggregate market returns. This implies that mutual funds
should prefer cash to credit lines as a source of liquidity.

         Redeeming in kind – giving investors a pro-rata share of the fund’s portfolio instead of
cash – is another way for mutual funds to offer less liquidity to investors in times of stress. In
normal times, in-kind redemptions are typically both legally and mechanically challenging for
mutual funds.29 However, in times of stress, funds may utilize the option.

         We collect data from SEC filings to get a rough estimate of the quantitative importance
of in-kind redemptions. Since retail funds are extremely unlikely to redeem in-kind, we focus on

29
  Most funds irrevocably commit themselves under Rule 18f-1 to redeem all retail investors in cash. Funds can still
redeem in-kind requests from institutional investors, but even the latter might find it costly, if not impossible, to hold
certain types of assets. Repurchase agreements and Eurodollar deposits, for example, are over-the-counter contracts
that cannot be transferred to multiple investors. There can be restrictions on the funds’ ability to transfer syndicated
loan participations, as these can require approval from the borrower.

                                                           29
institutional funds with at least $1 billion in assets. For each fund, we choose the quarter the fund
experienced its largest dollar outflow and discard the other quarters. We then examine the 50
fund-quarter observations with the largest outflows. Out of these 50 observations, only 3 had in-
kind redemptions. In value terms, our observations suffered combined net outflows of $123.3
billion. Out of this, $7.7 billion, or about 6%, was redeemed in-kind. These results confirm that
in-kind redemptions are rare and play a limited role as an alternative liquidity management tool.

     B. Interfund lending programs and redemption fees

        We next analyze the two liquidity management tools that may be useful in both normal
times and times of stress: interfund lending programs, in which funds borrow from other funds in
the same family, and redemption fees. Interfund lending is typically forbidden.30 However, fund
families can ask the SEC for exemptive relief if such borrowing is “appropriate in the public
interest and consistent with the protection of investors.” Agarwal and Zhao (2015) provide more
background on interfund lending programs and study the determinants and consequences of such
programs. In particular, they find that as of 2013, only thirty fund families had set up interfund
lending programs.

        In Table 9, we ask whether having an interfund lending program weakens the relationship
between cash holdings and liquidity transformation. We run regressions like Eq. (9), splitting the
sample into funds with interfund lending programs and funds without them. Columns 1 and 2
report the results for equity funds. The results are broadly similar across the sample split.
Although the coefficient on flow volatility for funds with interfund lending programs is not
statistically significant, the coefficients on asset illiquidity and its interaction with flow volatility
are. Moreover, their magnitudes are actually larger than for funds without an interfund lending
program. Columns 5 and 6 report the results of an analogous sample split for bond funds. The
sample of bond funds that have an interfund lending program is very small. As a result, none of
the liquidity transformation coefficients are statistically significant. Their magnitudes, however,
are comparable to the sample of funds without access to an interfund lending program. Overall,
the results are consistent with the idea that liquidity transformation plays an equally important
role in determining cash holdings, whether a fund has an interfund lending program or not. This

30
  Section 17(a) of the Investment Company Act of 1940 prohibits transactions between affiliates, while section
21(b) prohibits funds from lending to any entity under common control.

                                                     30
suggests that interfund lending programs do not strongly substitute for cash holdings as liquidity
management tools.

       Finally, we examine redemption fees. Funds that impose redemption fees and deferred
sales load charges effectively offer less liquidity to their investors. Only 26% of our equity fund
observations and 30% of our bond fund observations have such fees. Are they an effective
substitute for liquidity management through cash holdings? In Table 9, we also report the results
of estimating Eq. (9) when we split the sample into funds with redemption fees versus funds
without such fees. We once again get broadly similar results for both groups of funds, suggesting
that even funds that impose redemption fees must rely on cash holdings as their primary liquidity
management tool.

       Overall, the analysis in this section suggests that funds appear to use their alternative
liquidity management tools very little in practice. Cash is the main tool mutual funds use to
manage their liquidity. These results validate our insight that cash holdings are a good measure
of a fund’s liquidity transformation activities.

VII. Conclusion

       We study the cash management strategies of equity and bond mutual funds to shed light
on liquidity transformation by asset managers. Our analysis highlights three key features of this
liquidity transformation. First, cash management practices suggest it is significant. Mutual funds
accommodate a substantial fraction of fund flows through changes in cash holdings as opposed
to trading in portfolio securities. For equity funds, a $1 of fund outflows in month t decreases
cash holdings by 23 cents. For bond funds, the same $1 of outflows decreases cash holdings by
33 cents.

       Second, the fact that mutual funds accommodate fund flows through changes in cash
holdings indicates that liquidity transformation in asset management is highly dependent on
liquidity provision by the traditional banking and shadow banking sectors. In order to provide
liquidity to end investors, mutual funds must hold substantial amounts of cash, bank deposits,
and money market mutual fund shares.

       Third, despite their size, cash holdings of mutual funds are not large enough to
completely mitigate price impact externalities created by the liquidity transformation that mutual

                                                   31
funds engage in. Our evidence suggests that funds do not fully internalize the effects that
providing investors with daily liquidity have on the prices of the underlying securities.




                                                32
References

Acharya, Viral, and Lasse Pedersen, 2005, Asset Pricing with Liquidity Risk, Journal of
      Financial Economics 77, 375-410.
Acharya, Viral, Heitor Almeida, and Murillo Campello, 2013, Aggregate Risk and the Choice
      between Cash and Lines of Credit, Journal of Finance 68, 2059–2116.
Agarwal, Vikas, and Haibei Zhao, 2015, Interfund lending in mutual fund families: Role of
      internal capital markets.
Almazan, Andres, Keith C. Brown, Murray Carlson, and David A. Chapman, 2004, Why
      Constrain Your Mutual Fund Manager? Journal of Financial Economics 73, 289-321.
Amihud, Yakov, 2002, Illiquidity and Stock Returns: Cross-Section and Time Series Effects,
     Journal of Financial Markets 5, 31-56.
Amihud, Yakov, and Haim Mendelson, 1986, Liquidity and Stock Returns, Financial Analysts
     Journal 42, 43-48.
Bao, Jack, Jun Pan, and Jiang Wang, 2011, The Illiquidity of Corporate Bonds, Journal of
       Finance 66, 911–946.
Bates, Thomas W., Kathleen M, Kahle, and Rene Stulz, 2009, Why Do U.S. Firms Hold so
       Much More Cash than They Used to? Journal of Finance 64, 1985-2021.
Berger, Allen and Christa Bouwman, 2009, Bank liquidity creation, Review of Financial Studies
       22(9), 3779-3837.
Berk, Jonathan B. and Richard C. Green, 2004, Mutual fund flows and performance in rational
       markets, Journal of Political Economy 112, 1269-95.
Bhattacharya, Utpal, Jung H Lee, and Veronika K Pool, 2013, Conflicting family values in
       mutual fund families, The Journal of Finance 68, 173–200.
Chen, Qi, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang, 2010, Payoff Complementarities and Financial
      Fragility: Evidence from Mutual Fund Outflows, Journal of Financial Economics 97,
      239-262.
Chernenko, Sergey and Adi Sunderam, 2014, Frictions in Shadow Banking: Evidence from the
      Lending Behavior of Money Market Funds, Review of Financial Studies, 27 (6): 1717
      1750.
Chevalier, Judith and Glenn Ellison, 1997, Risk Taking by Mutual Funds as a Response to
       Incentives, Journal of Political Economy 105, 1167-1200.
Chevalier, Judith and Glenn Ellison, 1999, Are Some Mutual Fund Managers Better Than
       Others? Cross-Sectional Patterns in Behavior and Performance, Journal of Finance 54(3),
       875-899.


                                             33
Chordia, Tarun, Richard Roll, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2001, Market Liquidity and
      Trading Activity, Journal of Finance 56, 501-530.
Cornett, Marcia, Jamie McNutt, Philip Strahan, and Hassan Tehranian, 2011, Liquidity risk
       management and credit supply in the financial crisis, Journal of Financial Economics
       101(2), 297-312.
Coval, Joshua, and Erik Stafford, 2007, Asset Fire Sales (and Purchases) in Equity Markets,
       Journal of Financial Economics 86, 479-512.
Diamond, Douglas, and Philip Dybvig, 1983, Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity,
      Journal of Political Economy 91, 401-419.
Dick-Nielsen, Jens, Peter Feldhütter, and David Lando, 2012, Corporate Bond Liquidity Before
      and After the Onset of the Subprime Crisis, Journal of Financial Economics 103, 471-
      492.
Edelen, Roger M, 1999, Investor flows and the assessed performance of open-end mutual funds,
       Journal of Financial Economics 53, 439–466.
Ellul, Andrew, Chotibhak Jotikasthira, and Christian Lundblad, 2011, Regulatory Pressure and
        Fire Sales in the Corporate Bond Market, Journal of Financial Economics 101, 596-620.
Feldhütter, Peter, 2012, The same bond at different prices: Identifying search frictions and
       selling pressures, Review of Financial Studies 25, 1155–1206.
Feroli, Michael, Anil Kashyap, Kermit L. Schoenholtz, and Hyun Song Shin, 2014, Market
        Tantrums and Monetary Policy, U.S. Monetary Policy Forum Report No.8, Initiative on
        Global Markets, University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
Financial Stability Oversight Committee, 2014 Annual Report.
Goldstein, Itay, Hao Jiang, and David Ng, 2015, Investor Flows and Fragility in Corporate Bond
       Funds, Unpublished working paper.
Goncalves-Pinto and Breno Schmidt, 2013, Co-Insurance in Mutual Fund Families, Unpublished
      working paper.
Gorton, Gary and Andrew Metrick, 2010, Regulating the Shadow Banking System, Brookings
       Papers on Economic Activity.
Gorton, Gary and Andrew Metrick, 2012, Securitized banking and the run on repo, Journal of
       Financial Economics, Volume 104, Issue 3, Pages 425–451.
Gorton, Gary, and George Penacchi, 1990, Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity Creation,
       Journal of Finance 45, 49-72.
Greenwood, Robin, and Stefan Nagel, 2009, Inexperienced Investors and Bubbles, Journal of
      Financial Economics 93, 239-258.


                                             34
Greenwood, Robin, and David Thesmar, 2011, Stock Price Fragility, Journal of Financial
      Economics 102, 471-490.
Greenwood, Robin, Samuel G. Hanson, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2015, A Comparative-Advantage
      Approach to Government Debt Maturity, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Hanouna, Paul, Jon Novak, Tim Riley, and Christof Stahel, 2015, Liquidity and Flows of U.S.
      Mutual Funds, Division of Economic and Risk Analysis White Paper, U.S. Securities and
      Exchange Commission.
Huang, Jiekun, 2013, Dynamic Liquidity Preferences of Mutual Funds, working paper.
Independent Directors Council, 2016, IDC Comments on the SEC’s Liquidity Risk Management
       Proposal.
International Monetary Fund, 2015, Global Financial Stability Report: Navigating Monetary
        Policy Challenges and Managing Risks.
Investment Company Institute, 2016, ICI Comments on the SEC’s Liquidity Risk Management
       Proposal.
Kacpercyzk, Marcin and Philipp Schnabl, 2010, When safe proved risky, Journal of Economic
      Perspectives, 24(1), 29-50.
Kacpercyzk, Marcin and Philipp Schnabl, 2013, How safe are money market funds?, Quarterly
      Journal of Economics 128(3), 1073-1122.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2015, The Impact of Treasury Supply
       on Financial Sector Lending and Stability, Journal of Financial Economics.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, Stefan Nagel, and Dmitry Orlov, 2014, Sizing Up Repo, Journal of
       Finance, 69: 2381–2417.
Longstaff, Francis A, 2004, The Flight-to-Liquidity Premium in U.S. Treasury Bond Prices,
       Journal of Business 77, 511-526.
Merrill, Craig B., Taylor D. Nadauld, Shane M. Sherlund, and Rene Stulz, 2012, Did Capital
        Requirements and Fair Value Accounting Spark Fire Sales in Distressed Mortgage
        Backed Securities? NBER Working Paper No. 18270.
Moreira, Alan and Alexi Savov, 2016, The Macroeconomics of Shadow Banking, Journal of
       Finance, forthcoming.
Nagel, Stefan, 2016, The Liquidity Premium of Near-Money Assets, Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, forthcoming.
Pastor, Lubos, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2003, Liquidity Risk and Expected Stock Returns,
        Journal of Political Economy 111, 642-685.
Pozsar, Zoltan, 2013, Institutional cash pools and the Triffin dilemma of the US banking system,
       Financial Markets, Institutions & Instruments 22, 283-318.

                                              35
Roll, Richard, 1984, A Simple Implicit Measure of the Effective Bid-Ask Spread in an Efficient
       Market, The Journal of Finance 39, , 1127-1139.
Schmidt, Lawrence, Allan Timmerman, and Russ Wermers, 2016, Runs on Money Market
      Mutual Funds, American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Securities and Exchange Commission, 2015. Open-End Fund Liquidity Risk Management
        Programs, Release No. 33-9922.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1992, Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A Market
        Equilibrium Approach, Journal of Finance 47, 1343-1366.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, The Limits of Arbitrage, The Journal of Finance
        52, 35-55.
Simutin, Mikhail, 2014, Cash Holdings and Mutual Fund Performance, Review of Finance 18,
       1425-1464.
Sirri, Erik, and Peter Tufano, 1998, Costly Search and Mutual Fund Flows, Journal of Finance
        53, 1589-1622.
Stein, Jeremy, 2012, Monetary Policy as Financial-Stability Regulation, Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 127, 57-95.
Sunderam, Adi, 2015, Money Creation and the Shadow Banking System, Review of Financial
      Studies 28, 939-977.
Wang, Jeffrey, 2015, Asset Managers and Financial Instability: Evidence of Run Behavior and
      Run Incentives in Corporate Bond Funds, Harvard College Senior thesis.
Yan, Xuemin (Sterling), 2006, The Determinants and Implications of Mutual Fund Cash
      Holdings, Financial Management 35, 67-91.
Zeng, Yao, 2015, A Dynamic Theory of Mutual Fund Runs and Liquidity Management,
      Unpublished working paper.




                                             36
                                               Figure 1
                       Aggregate cash holdings of equity and bond mutual funds

Aggregate cash holdings of actively managed open-end equity and bond mutual funds re-
porting on the semi-annual form N-SAR, matched to the CRSP Mutual Fund Database. The
sample excludes index, money market, and municipal funds, variable annuities, ETFs, and funds of
funds. Cash is cash, repurchase agreements, and short-term debt securities. Cash and substitutes
is the sum of cash, repurchase agreements, short-term debt securities, and money market fund
shares. See Appendix Table A1 for more details on measurement of cash substitutes.


               600


               500


               400
  $ billions




               300


               200


               100

                 1996h1      2000h1      2004h1      2008h1      2012h1      2016h1
                       1998h1      2002h1      2006h1      2010h1      2014h1

                                     Cash           Cash and Substitutes




                                                   37
                                                                                          Figure 2
                                                                                Utilization of lines of credit

This figure shows the relationship between fund flows and utilization of lines of credit.
Funds report whether at any point during the semi-annual reporting period they had bank loans
exceed 1% of TNA. We sort observations into twenty bins based on their cumulative semi-annual
fund flows scaled by lagged assets. For each bin we then calculate the average value of fund flows
as well as the fraction of observations with bank loans exceeding 1% of TNA. Each dot represents
a single bin that accounts for five percent of the sample.

                                                        (a) Equity funds                                                                                 (b) Bond funds
                                         .2                                                                                               .2
 Fraction with bank loans > 1% of TNA




                                                                                                  Fraction with bank loans > 1% of TNA
                                        .15                                                                                              .15




                                         .1                                                                                               .1




                                        .05                                                                                              .05




                                         0                                                                                                0
                                              -20   0      20          40       60    80    100                                                -20   0     20         40        60   80   100
                                                                Flows/TNA (%)                                                                                   Flows/TNA (%)




                                                                                             38
                                                                  Table 1
                                                              Summary statistics

     This table reports summary statistics for the sample of mutual funds studied in the paper. Actively managed equity and bond
     open-end funds reporting on the semi-annual form N-SAR are matched to the CRSP Mutual Fund Database. The sample excludes
     money market funds, index funds, ETFs, variable annuities, and funds with less than $100 million in TNA (measured in 2012 dollars).
     The sample of equity funds is limited to domestic equity funds. The sample of bond funds is limited to funds with Lipper objectives A,
     BBB, HY, IID, MSI, SII that invest at least 50% of their portfolio in corporate bonds. The sample period for equity funds is 2003–2014.
     The sample period for bond funds is January 2004–June 2012. Illiq is Amihud (2002) for equity funds and Dick-Nielsen, Feldhütter, and
     Lando (2012) for bond funds. Share of Agg Holdings is the weighted-average of the fund’s holdings of each portfolio security relative to
     aggregate holdings by all mutual funds in CRSP. Share of Outstanding is the weighted-average of the fund’s holdings of each portfolio
     security relative to the security’s outstanding amount. Holdings Overlap measures overlap in holdings with other funds within the same
     family. Size is ln(T N A). Family size is ln(f amilyT N A). F lowsj!k is net flows from month j to k, scaled by net assets six months
     ago. Fund flows are winsorized at the 5th and 95th percentiles. T urnover is the minimum of purchases and sales, divided by the
     monthly average size of the portfolio. (F lows) is the standard deviation of monthly net flows during the semi-annual reporting period.
     Sec lending/Shorting/Options/Other are indicators for funds that engage in securities lending/shorting/trading of options and other
     derivatives/and other investment practices specified in question 70 of form N-SAR.

                                                    Equity funds                                             Bond funds
                                                                     Percentile                                              Percentile
39




                                 N        Mean       SD       25        50       75       N       Mean       SD       25        50       75
      TNA                      22,427   2064.81   5785.14   228.59    580.14 1554.87    2,648   1435.07   2537.71   233.76    521.29 1346.28
      Size                     22,427      6.52      1.33     5.43      6.36     7.35   2,648      6.41      1.23     5.45      6.26     7.21
      Family size              22,427     10.57      2.14     9.12     10.74    12.01   2,648     10.55      1.72     9.54     10.76    11.56
      Cash/Assets              22,427      7.48      8.47     1.94      4.36     9.52   2,648      7.89      7.53     2.55      5.28    10.76
        Cash/Assets            22,427      0.67      6.60     1.66      0.13     2.31   2,578      0.77      7.68     2.54      0.12     2.94
        (Cash/Assets)          22,427      0.14      5.20     1.87      0.04     1.64   2,578      0.19      6.07     2.70      0.12     2.24
      F lowst 5!t 3            22,427      2.73     13.84     3.55      0.65     4.53   2,648      4.64     14.75     2.38      1.32     7.25
      F lowst 2!t              22,427      2.36     12.16     3.47      0.44     4.76   2,648      4.61     14.51     2.18      1.44     7.06
      Illiq                    22,427      0.02      0.02     0.01      0.01     0.03   2,648      0.21      0.18     0.34      0.25     0.12
      Institutional share      22,427     29.19     37.19     0.00      7.48    56.96   2,648     31.28     37.71     0.00     10.01    60.61
      T urnover                22,427     56.10     50.08    22.00     41.00    74.00   2,648     73.48     79.15    27.00     48.00    85.00
       (F lows)                22,427      8.87     11.22     2.27      4.93    10.72   2,648     10.14     11.76     3.01      6.05    12.47
      Sec lending              22,427      0.50      0.50     0.00      0.00     1.00   2,648      0.41      0.49     0.00      0.00     1.00
      Shorting                 22,427      0.02      0.16     0.00      0.00     0.00   2,648      0.04      0.19     0.00      0.00     0.00
      Options                  22,427      0.03      0.06     0.00      0.00     0.00   2,648      0.05      0.10     0.00      0.00     0.12
      Other practices          22,427      0.36      0.18     0.25      0.38     0.50   2,648      0.43      0.15     0.38      0.50     0.50
      Holdings HHI             22,427      0.02      0.01     0.01      0.02     0.03   2,648      0.01      0.01     0.01      0.01     0.01
      Top share                22,427      5.00      4.74     2.85      4.17     5.84   2,648      3.54      3.23     1.63      2.33     4.11
      Share of Agg Holdings    22,427      2.36      3.84     0.25      0.81     2.69   2,648     11.35     10.88     3.87      7.50    14.66
      Share of Outstanding     22,427      0.45      0.72     0.05      0.16     0.50   2,648      1.45      1.92     0.34      0.72     1.57
      Holdings Overlap         22,427      0.37      0.48     0.07      0.25     0.48   2,648      0.15      0.33     0.01      0.05     0.15
                                        Table 2
                          Flow management through cash holdings

This table reports the results of regressions of changes in cash holdings on fund flows:
                                                            5
                                                            X
                           Cashi,t    6!t   = ↵obj(i),t +         s F lowsi,t s   + "i,t .
                                                            s=0

In columns (1) and (3), the dependent variable is the change in cash over a six-month period,
scaled by assets six months ago. In columns (2) and (4), the dependent variable is the change in
the cash-to-assets ratio over a six-month period. The independent variables are monthly net fund
flows, scaled by net assets six months ago. All specifications include objective-time fixed e↵ects.
The sample perioid is 2003–2014 for equity funds and January 2004–June 2012 for bond funds.
Standard errors are adjusted for clustering by time. ⇤, ⇤⇤, and ⇤ ⇤ ⇤ indicate statistical significance
at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

                                   Equity funds                                              Bond funds
                            Cash                      Cash                         Cash                     Cash
                           T NA                       T NA                        T NA                      T NA
                            (1)                       (2)                       (3)                          (4)
  F lowsi,t                0.230⇤⇤⇤                  0.087⇤⇤⇤                  0.329⇤⇤⇤                    0.124⇤⇤
                          (0.029)                   (0.019)                   (0.075)                     (0.052)
  F lowsi,t   1            0.208⇤⇤⇤                  0.047                     0.085                       0.018
                          (0.035)                   (0.030)                   (0.050)                     (0.041)
  F lowsi,t   2            0.171⇤⇤⇤                  0.037                     0.213⇤⇤                     0.070
                          (0.036)                   (0.029)                   (0.083)                     (0.061)
  F lowsi,t   3            0.136⇤⇤⇤                  0.003                     0.055                       0.066
                          (0.025)                   (0.019)                   (0.074)                     (0.076)
  F lowsi,t   4            0.074⇤⇤⇤                  0.025                     0.010                       0.080
                          (0.026)                   (0.015)                   (0.071)                     (0.078)
  F lowsi,t   5            0.039                     0.119⇤⇤⇤                  0.146⇤                      0.016
                          (0.029)                   (0.022)                   (0.070)                     (0.049)
  N                       19,212                    19,212                     2,515                       2,515
  Adjusted R2              0.136                     0.024                     0.099                       0.012




                                                     40
                                                        Table 3
                                     Interactions with asset and market illiquidity

This table reports the result of regressions of changes in cash holdings on fund flows inter-
acted with (a) the fund’s asset illiquidity and (b) aggregate market illiquidity:

             Cashi,t      6!t   = ↵obj(i),t +      1 F lowsi,t 2!t   +   2 F lowsi,t 2!t   ⇥ Illiqi,t      6

                                +    3 F lowsi,t 5!t 3    +   4 F lowsi,t 5!t 3     ⇥ Illiqi,t   6   +    5 Illiqi,t 6   + "i,t .

In columns (1) and (3), the dependent variable is the change in cash over a six-month period,
scaled by assets six months ago. In columns (2) and (4), the dependent variable is the change
in the cash-to-assets ratio over a six-month period. Asset illiquidity is measured as of the
beginning of the six-month period and is standardized so that the coefficients on illiquidity and its
interactions represent the e↵ect of a one-standard deviation change in illiquidity. All specifications
include objective-time fixed e↵ects. The sample perioid is 2003–2014 for equity funds and January
2004–June 2012 for bond funds. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering by time. ⇤, ⇤⇤, and
⇤ ⇤ ⇤ indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

                                                                     Equity funds                              Bond funds
                                                               Cash                 Cash               Cash                   Cash
                                                              T NA                  T NA              T NA                    T NA
                                                               (1)              (2)                      (3)                 (4)
                                                       Panel A: Asset illiquidity
  F lowsi,t       2!t                                         0.171⇤⇤⇤         0.043⇤⇤⇤               0.146⇤⇤⇤             0.030
                                                             (0.010)          (0.006)                (0.030)              (0.019)
  F lowsi,t       2!t   ⇥ Illiqi,t   6                        0.036⇤⇤⇤         0.016⇤                 0.041⇤               0.015
                                                             (0.012)          (0.009)                (0.020)              (0.016)
  F lowsi,t       5!t 3                                       0.082⇤⇤⇤         0.027⇤⇤⇤               0.143⇤⇤⇤             0.010
                                                             (0.013)          (0.007)                (0.035)              (0.038)
  F lowsi,t       5!t 3   ⇥ Illiqi,t     6                    0.016            0.005                  0.041                0.016
                                                             (0.010)          (0.008)                (0.037)              (0.025)
  Illiqi,t    6                                               0.096            0.063                  0.398                0.157
                                                             (0.126)          (0.079)                (0.357)              (0.306)
  N                                                          19,212           19,212                  2,515                2,515
  Adjusted R2                                                 0.143            0.022                  0.109                0.010
                                                     Panel B: Market illiquidity
  F lowsi,t       2!t                                         0.161⇤⇤⇤         0.037⇤⇤⇤               0.104⇤⇤              0.011
                                                             (0.013)          (0.007)                (0.039)              (0.022)
  F lowsi,t       2!t   ⇥ Low Agg Liqt       2!t              0.049⇤⇤          0.024⇤                 0.123⇤⇤              0.056
                                                             (0.022)          (0.013)                (0.058)              (0.039)
  F lowsi,t       5!t 3                                       0.082⇤⇤⇤         0.029⇤⇤⇤               0.209⇤⇤⇤             0.056⇤⇤
                                                             (0.015)          (0.006)                (0.039)              (0.025)
  F lowsi,t       5!t 3   ⇥ Low Agg Liqt       5!t   3        0.003            0.001                  0.183⇤⇤              0.180⇤⇤
                                                             (0.027)          (0.017)                (0.066)              (0.072)
  N                                                          19,212           19,212                  2,515                2,515
  Adjusted R2                                                 0.139            0.022                  0.113                0.021




                                                                 41
                                             Table 4
                                      Level of cash holdings

This table reports the results of regressions of the cash-to-assets ratio on fund characteris-
tics:
             ✓      ◆
               Cash
                         = ↵obj(i),t + 10 LiquidityTransformationi,t + 20 Scalei,t
               T N A i,t
                               0                            0
                           +   3 InvestorBehaviori,t    +   4 TradingPracticesi,t   + "i,t .

All specifications include objective-time fixed e↵ects. For equity funds, Illiq is the square-root
version of Amihud (2002). For bond funds, Illiq is the Dick-Nielsen, Feldhütter, and Lando (2012)
measure. All continuous variables are standardized so that their coefficients represent the e↵ect of
a one-standard deviation change in each variable. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering by
fund family. ⇤, ⇤⇤, and ⇤ ⇤ ⇤ indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

                                        Equity funds                              Bond funds
                                  (1)                  (2)                (3)                   (4)
                                      ⇤⇤⇤
   (F lows)i,t                   0.355                0.353⇤⇤⇤           0.622 ⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                              0.584⇤⇤⇤
                                (0.090)              (0.089)            (0.213)              (0.209)
  Illiqi,t                       0.988⇤⇤⇤             0.967⇤⇤⇤           0.430                0.441
                                (0.257)              (0.258)            (0.312)              (0.310)
  Illiq ⇥ (F lows)i,t                                 0.171⇤⇤                                 0.298⇤⇤
                                                     (0.086)                                 (0.144)
  Sizei,t                        0.068                0.063              0.206                0.207
                                (0.193)              (0.192)            (0.348)              (0.348)
  Family sizei,t                 1.302⇤⇤⇤             1.298⇤⇤⇤           0.831⇤⇤              0.827⇤⇤
                                (0.313)              (0.314)            (0.344)              (0.344)
  Institutional sharei,t         0.383                0.391              1.032⇤⇤⇤             1.044⇤⇤⇤
                                (0.247)              (0.247)            (0.292)              (0.292)
  T urnoveri,t                   0.025                0.027              0.354                0.358
                                (0.146)              (0.146)            (0.432)              (0.432)
  Sec lendingi,t                 6.640⇤⇤⇤             6.641⇤⇤⇤           5.281⇤⇤⇤             5.285⇤⇤⇤
                                (0.620)              (0.619)            (0.756)              (0.756)
  Short sellingi,t               3.209⇤⇤⇤             3.194⇤⇤⇤           1.434                1.478
                                (1.152)              (1.153)            (1.055)              (1.063)
  Optionsi,t                     5.405⇤               5.388⇤             7.258⇤⇤              7.250⇤⇤
                                (2.796)              (2.799)            (3.228)              (3.238)
  Other practicesi,t             3.256⇤⇤              3.241⇤⇤            2.342                2.332
                                (1.517)              (1.518)            (1.665)              (1.664)
  N                             22,427               22,427              2,648                2,648
  Adjusted R2                    0.228                0.228              0.196                0.198




                                                   42
                                                                           Table 5
                                                                          Robustness

     This table shows the robustness of the cash-to-assets ratio regressions to alternative sample splits and controls. Crisis period is
     2008H1–2009H1. Models 7–9 control for average monthly returns over the following three, six, and twelve months. Model 10 controls for
     Holdings HHI: Herfindahl index of the fund’s holdings. Model 11 controls for the Top share: portfolio share of the fund’s largest position.
     Model 12 controls for manager characteristics: years of experince, tenure, team managed dummy, CFA credential, and average ACT
     scores of the students admitted to the university from which the manager received his or her undergraduate degree. All specifications
     include objective-time fixed e↵ects. For equity funds, Illiq is the square-root version of Amihud (2002). For bond funds, Illiq is the
     Dick-Nielsen, Feldhütter, and Lando (2012) measure. All continuous variables are standardized so that their coefficients represent the
     e↵ect of a one-standard deviation change in each variable. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering by fund family. ⇤, ⇤⇤, and ⇤ ⇤ ⇤
     indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

                                                           Equity funds                                             Bond funds
                                     N          Illiq          (F lows)        ⇥Illiq     R2       N       Illiq       (F lows)     ⇥Illiq     R2
     (1) Baseline                  22,427     0.967  ⇤⇤⇤
                                                              0.353 ⇤⇤⇤
                                                                              0.171⇤⇤
                                                                                         0.228   2,648    0.441       0.584 ⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                                                                   0.298⇤⇤
                                                                                                                                              0.198
                                             (0.258)         (0.089)         (0.086)                     (0.310)     (0.209)      (0.144)
     Sample restrictions:
     (2) Small funds               11,208     0.664⇤⇤⇤        0.480⇤⇤⇤        0.118      0.258   1,321    0.084       0.948⇤⇤⇤     0.056      0.244
                                             (0.242)         (0.112)         (0.099)                     (0.365)     (0.239)      (0.176)




43
     (3) Large funds               11,219     1.727⇤⇤⇤        0.190⇤          0.481⇤⇤⇤   0.212   1,327    0.740       0.070        0.745⇤⇤    0.202
                                             (0.510)         (0.110)         (0.183)                     (0.498)     (0.370)      (0.344)
     (4) Before crisis              8,036     1.200⇤⇤⇤        0.410⇤⇤         0.018      0.248   1,264    0.773       0.555⇤       0.547⇤⇤⇤   0.233
                                             (0.390)         (0.166)         (0.123)                     (0.604)     (0.298)      (0.195)
     (5) After crisis              11,382     1.085⇤⇤⇤        0.235⇤⇤         0.062      0.172    963     0.567       0.989⇤⇤⇤     0.305      0.196
                                             (0.352)         (0.112)         (0.118)                     (0.490)     (0.315)      (0.468)
     (6) Exclude MMMF holdings     22,427     0.504⇤⇤⇤        0.135           0.136⇤⇤    0.129   2,648    0.542⇤⇤     0.309⇤       0.135      0.109
                                             (0.181)         (0.087)         (0.064)                     (0.268)     (0.182)      (0.138)
     Additional controls for:
     (7) ri,t+1!t+3                22,269     0.974⇤⇤⇤        0.346⇤⇤⇤        0.172⇤⇤    0.228   2,625    0.440       0.584⇤⇤⇤     0.289⇤⇤    0.197
                                             (0.261)         (0.090)         (0.087)                     (0.316)     (0.212)      (0.146)
     (8) ri,t+1!t+6                22,051     0.994⇤⇤⇤        0.345⇤⇤⇤        0.174⇤⇤    0.229   2,602    0.450       0.596⇤⇤⇤     0.302⇤⇤    0.198
                                             (0.262)         (0.091)         (0.087)                     (0.321)     (0.216)      (0.148)
     (9) ri,t+1!t+12               21,649     1.004⇤⇤⇤        0.337⇤⇤⇤        0.176⇤⇤    0.229   2,553    0.407       0.527⇤⇤      0.340⇤⇤    0.193
                                             (0.266)         (0.092)         (0.088)                     (0.345)     (0.209)      (0.147)
     (10) Holdings HHI             22,427     1.022⇤⇤⇤        0.288⇤⇤⇤        0.166⇤     0.236   2,648    0.376       0.562⇤⇤⇤     0.295⇤⇤    0.224
                                             (0.253)         (0.088)         (0.085)                     (0.318)     (0.204)      (0.145)
     (11) Top share                22,427     0.976⇤⇤⇤        0.328⇤⇤⇤        0.168⇤⇤    0.230   2,648    0.420       0.548⇤⇤⇤     0.306⇤⇤    0.221
                                             (0.257)         (0.086)         (0.086)                     (0.312)     (0.207)      (0.145)
     (12) Manager chars            14,653     0.964⇤⇤⇤        0.368⇤⇤⇤        0.204⇤⇤    0.245   1,989    0.488       0.473⇤⇤      0.355⇤⇤    0.195
                                             (0.283)         (0.111)         (0.094)                     (0.344)     (0.225)      (0.157)
                                      Table 6
         Cash holdings of matched variable annuity and regular mutual funds

This table reports the regressions of the cash-to-assets ratio on the variable annuity dummy in the
matched sample of variable annuity and regular mutual funds:
                           ✓       ◆
                             Cash
                                        = ↵ + Variable annuityi,t + "i,t .
                             T N A i,t

The matched sample consists of 187 fund pairs in which both funds have the same objective, are
advised by the same firm, and have the same semi-annual reporting period. Funds with TNA
smaller than $10 million are excluded. The sample period is 2003–2014. Columns (4) and (5) split
funds based on their asset illiquidity. Specifically, we split funds into two equal-sized groups based
on the asset illiquidity of the regular mutual fund. The sample is limited to equity funds, with
asset illiquidity measured as the square root of Amihud (2002). Cash holdings are adjusted for cash
collateral received for securities on loan. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering by adviser. ⇤,
⇤⇤, and ⇤ ⇤ ⇤ indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

                                               By fund type                   By asset liquidity
                                         Equity            Bond           Liquid            Illiquid
                           (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)                (5)
  Variable annuity        0.657⇤⇤         0.725⇤⇤          0.235           0.688⇤⇤           0.913⇤⇤
                         (0.264)         (0.293)          (0.529)         (0.316)           (0.412)
  Constant                5.272⇤⇤⇤        4.601⇤⇤⇤         9.401⇤⇤         4.125⇤⇤⇤          5.056⇤⇤⇤
                         (0.753)         (0.417)          (3.670)         (0.467)           (0.621)
  N                       3,002           2,582             420            1,160             1,162
  R2                      0.002           0.006            0.000           0.008             0.008




                                                 44
                                              Table 7
                         Internalizing price impact: Fund level analysis

This table reports the results of regressions of the cash-to-assets ratio on fund characteris-
tics:                ✓       ◆
                       Cash
                                 = ↵obj(i),t + Internalizei,t + 0 Xi,t + "i,t .
                       T N A i,t
All specifications include objective-time fixed e↵ects and the full suite of controls included in Table 4.
For equity funds, Illiq is the square-root version of Amihud (2002). For bond funds, Illiq is the
Dick-Nielsen, Feldhütter, and Lando (2012) measure. All continuous variables are standardized
so that their coefficients represent the e↵ect of a one-standard deviation change in each variable.
Standard errors are adjusted for clustering by fund family. ⇤, ⇤⇤, and ⇤ ⇤ ⇤ indicate statistical
significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

                                         Equity funds                               Bond funds
                                (1)          (2)              (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)
  Share of agg holdingsi,t    0.795⇤⇤⇤                                   0.116
                             (0.230)                                    (0.463)
  Share of outstandingi,t                   0.467⇤⇤                                   0.212
                                           (0.219)                                   (0.433)
  Overlapi,t                                                 0.129                                0.878⇤⇤⇤
                                                            (0.298)                              (0.319)
  Overlap ⇥ Sizei,t                                          0.311⇤⇤                              0.024
                                                            (0.152)                              (0.147)
   (F lows)i,t                0.331⇤⇤⇤      0.344⇤⇤⇤         0.349⇤⇤⇤    0.585⇤⇤⇤     0.588⇤⇤⇤    0.532⇤⇤
                             (0.089)       (0.088)          (0.089)     (0.209)      (0.208)     (0.207)
  Illiqi,t                    0.531⇤⇤       0.775⇤⇤⇤         0.993⇤⇤⇤    0.461        0.469       0.560⇤
                             (0.252)       (0.252)          (0.259)     (0.319)      (0.313)     (0.330)
  Illiq ⇥ (F lows)i,t         0.180⇤⇤       0.192⇤⇤          0.161⇤      0.299⇤⇤      0.301⇤⇤     0.289⇤⇤
                             (0.086)       (0.085)          (0.086)     (0.145)      (0.145)     (0.140)
  N                           22,427        22,427           22,427      2,648        2,648        2,648
  Adjusted R2                 0.232         0.229            0.230       0.198        0.198       0.209




                                                       45
                                                 Table 8
                           Internalizing price impact: Position level analysis

This table reports the results of the regressions of the cash-to-assets ratio on fund charac-
teristics:       ✓      ◆
                   Cash
                               = ↵s,t + ↵obj(i),t + Internalizei,t + 0 Xi,t + "i,s,t ,
                   T N A i,s,t
where i indexes funds, s indexes securities, and t indexes time. All specifications include security-
time and objective-time fixed e↵ects, as well as the full suite of controls included in Table 4. For
equity funds, Illiq is the square-root version of Amihud (2002). For bond funds, Illiq is the Dick-
Nielsen, Feldhütter, and Lando (2012) measure. All continuous variables are standardized so that
their coefficients represent the e↵ect of a one-standard deviation change in each variable. Standard
errors are adjusted for clustering by fund-time. ⇤, ⇤⇤, and ⇤ ⇤ ⇤ indicate statistical significance at
10%, 5%, and 1%.

                                             Equity funds                                Bond funds
                                   (1)           (2)               (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)
  Share of agg holdingsi,t       0.488⇤⇤⇤                                     0.499⇤⇤
                                (0.079)                                      (0.206)
  Share of outstandingi,t                       0.199⇤⇤⇤                                   0.300⇤
                                               (0.070)                                    (0.179)
  Overlapi,t                                                      0.053                                0.764⇤⇤⇤
                                                                 (0.061)                              (0.245)
  Overlap ⇥ Sizei,t                                               0.242⇤⇤⇤                             0.122
                                                                 (0.052)                              (0.106)
  Illiqi,t                        0.545⇤⇤⇤      0.709⇤⇤⇤          0.809⇤⇤⇤    0.357        0.300       0.318
                                 (0.115)       (0.120)           (0.112)     (0.252)      (0.252)     (0.252)
   (F lows)i,t                    0.357⇤⇤⇤      0.361⇤⇤⇤          0.359⇤⇤⇤    0.544⇤⇤⇤     0.547⇤⇤⇤    0.504⇤⇤⇤
                                 (0.061)       (0.061)           (0.061)     (0.148)      (0.148)     (0.147)
  Illiq ⇥ (F lows)i,t             0.080         0.077             0.055       0.349⇤⇤⇤     0.352⇤⇤⇤    0.354⇤⇤⇤
                                 (0.066)       (0.066)           (0.066)     (0.120)      (0.121)     (0.123)
  Sizei,t                         0.251⇤⇤⇤      0.140⇤            0.077       0.081        0.015       0.172
                                 (0.071)       (0.076)           (0.058)     (0.190)      (0.218)     (0.144)
  Family sizei,t                  1.269⇤⇤⇤      1.295⇤⇤⇤          1.292⇤⇤⇤    0.851⇤⇤⇤     0.890⇤⇤⇤    0.975⇤⇤⇤
                                 (0.067)       (0.066)           (0.067)     (0.154)      (0.156)     (0.152)
  Institutional sharei,t          0.396⇤⇤⇤      0.379⇤⇤⇤          0.367⇤⇤⇤    0.963⇤⇤⇤     0.941⇤⇤⇤    0.863⇤⇤⇤
                                 (0.056)       (0.056)           (0.056)     (0.139)      (0.136)     (0.134)
  T urnoveri,t                    0.009         0.003             0.013       0.295⇤       0.264       0.280⇤
                                 (0.061)       (0.061)           (0.060)     (0.168)      (0.168)     (0.162)
  Sec lendingi,t                  6.647⇤⇤⇤      6.626⇤⇤⇤          6.636⇤⇤⇤    5.039⇤⇤⇤     5.037⇤⇤⇤    5.028⇤⇤⇤
                                 (0.123)       (0.124)           (0.123)     (0.304)      (0.304)     (0.302)
  Short sellingi,t                2.514⇤⇤⇤      2.603⇤⇤⇤          2.596⇤⇤⇤    1.538⇤⇤      1.492⇤      1.633⇤⇤
                                 (0.443)       (0.447)           (0.445)     (0.776)      (0.774)     (0.783)
  Optionsi,t                      6.030⇤⇤⇤      6.055⇤⇤⇤          6.030⇤⇤⇤    6.168⇤⇤⇤     6.234⇤⇤⇤    5.670⇤⇤⇤
                                 (0.953)       (0.955)           (0.952)     (1.554)      (1.571)     (1.562)
  Other practicesi,t              2.629⇤⇤⇤      2.574⇤⇤⇤          2.547⇤⇤⇤    2.800⇤⇤⇤     2.719⇤⇤⇤    2.162⇤⇤
                                 (0.333)       (0.333)           (0.333)     (0.972)      (0.966)     (0.962)
  N                             2,115,821     2,115,821         2,115,821    449,609      449,609      449,609
  Adjusted R2                     0.352         0.351             0.352       0.403        0.402       0.408




                                                           46
                                                                      Table 9
                                                      Alternative liquidity management tools

     This table reports the results of regressions of the cash-to-assets ratio on fund characteristics:

          Cash                                                                                                   0
                    = ↵obj(i),t + 10 LiquidityTransformationi,t + 20 Scalei,t + 30 InvestorBehaviori,t +         4 TradingPracticesi,t     + "i,t .
          T N A i,t
        ✓       ◆



     Models 2 and 3 split funds into the ones with interfund lending programs versus the ones without such programs. Models 4 and 5 split
     funds into the ones with redemption fees or deferred sales loads versus the ones without such fees. For equity funds, Illiq is the square-root
     version of Amihud (2002). For bond funds, Illiq is the Dick-Nielsen, Feldhütter, and Lando (2012) measure. All continuous variables
     are standardized so that their coefficients represent the e↵ect of a one-standard deviation change in each variable. Standard errors are
     adjusted for clustering by fund family. ⇤, ⇤⇤, and ⇤ ⇤ ⇤ indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.




47
                                                      Equity funds                                              Bond funds
                               N           Illiq          (F lows)     ⇥Illiq     R2        N         Illiq        (F lows)       ⇥Illiq        R2
      (1) Baseline           22,427      0.967  ⇤⇤⇤
                                                         0.353 ⇤⇤⇤
                                                                      0.171⇤⇤
                                                                                 0.228    2,648     0.441         0.584 ⇤⇤⇤
                                                                                                                                0.298 ⇤⇤
                                                                                                                                               0.198
                                        (0.258)         (0.089)      (0.086)                       (0.310)       (0.209)       (0.144)
      Interfund lending:
      (2) No                 17,637      1.039⇤⇤⇤        0.444⇤⇤⇤     0.170⇤     0.231    2,212     0.538         0.628⇤⇤⇤      0.152          0.196
                                        (0.258)         (0.105)      (0.100)                       (0.333)       (0.221)       (0.157)
      (3) Yes                  4,085     1.560⇤⇤         0.228        0.416⇤⇤    0.347     306      0.705         0.306         0.342          0.347
                                        (0.716)         (0.249)      (0.170)                       (1.392)       (0.645)       (0.498)
      Redemption fees:
      (4) No                 16,406      1.028⇤⇤⇤        0.271⇤⇤⇤     0.036      0.259    1,864     0.896⇤⇤       0.603⇤⇤⇤      0.288⇤         0.212
                                        (0.318)         (0.096)      (0.069)                       (0.391)       (0.232)       (0.170)
      (5) Yes                  5,755     0.768⇤⇤         0.585⇤⇤⇤     0.450⇤⇤    0.186     762      0.768         0.492         0.543⇤⇤        0.266
                                        (0.377)         (0.167)      (0.194)                       (0.474)       (0.376)       (0.256)
Appendix

                                     Table A1
                                Variable definitions

Cash
T NA
                    Cash is cash (74A) + repurchase agreements (74B) + short-term debt
                    securities other than repurchase agreements (74C) + other investments
                    (74I). Other investments consist mostly of money market mutual funds
                    but sometimes include holdings of long-term mutual funds. We subtract
                    the latter based on security-level holdings data from CRSP Mutual
                    Fund Database (for equity funds) and Morningstar (for bond funds).
                    Cash is scaled by total net assets (74T). Winsorized at the 1st and 99th
                    percentiles.
 Cashi,t    6!t
 T N Ai,t   6
                    Change in cash between two semi-annual reporting periods divided by
                    TNA as of the previous semi-annual reporting period. Winsorized at
                    the 1st and 99th percentiles.
    Cash
    T N A i,t 6!t
                    Change in the cash-to-assets ratio between two semi-annual reporting
                    periods. Winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles.
F lows              Net fund flows during each of the preceding six months (28) are scaled
                    by TNA at the end of the previous semi-annual reporting period. Win-
                    sorized at the 5th and 95th percentiles. Appendix Table A2 reports the
                    results of robustness checks using fund flows winsorized at the 1st and
                    99th percentiles.
Illiq               Equity funds: We first calculate the square-root version of Amihud
                    (2002) liquidity measure for each stock in a funds portfolio. We use
                    daily data for the preceding six months. We then calculate the value-
                    weighted average across all stocks held by a given mutual fund. Equity
                    fund portfolio holdings are from the CRSP Mutual Fund Database.
                    Winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles.
                    Bond funds: We first calculate Dick-Nielsen, Feldhütter, and Lando
                    (2012) measure for each bond in a fund’s portfolio. We then cal-
                    culate the value-weighted average across all corporate bonds held by
                    a given mutual fund. Portfolio holdings are from Morningstar. Bond
                    transaction data are from Enhanced TRACE.




                                       48
                                  Table A1—Continued

Low Agg Liq           For equity funds, we use the Pastor and Stambaugh (2003) measure
                      of market liquidity. For bond funds, we use the aggregate version of
                      Dick-Nielsen, Feldhütter, and Lando (2012). Periods of low aggregate
                      liquidity are defined as those in the bottom tercile of the distribution
                      of aggregate market liquidity within our sample.
Family size           Log of aggregate TNA across all CRSP mutual funds within the same
                      family.
 (F lows)             Standard deviation of monthly fund flows (28) over the preceeding six
                      months. Fund flows are scaled by TNA as of the beginning of the
                      semi-annual reporting period.
Institutional share   Fraction of institutional share classes, identified following Chen, Gold-
                      stein, and Jiang (2010). A share class is considered to be institutional
                      if a) CRSPs institutional dummy is equal to Y and retail dummy is
                      equal to N, or b) fund name includes the word institutional or its ab-
                      breviation, or c) class name includes one of the following suffixes: I,
                      X, Y, or Z. Share classes with the word retirement in their name or
                      suffixes J, K, and R are considered to be retail.
T urnover             Portfolio turnover for the current semi-annual reporting period (71D).
                      Portfolio turnover is the minimum of purchases and sales (including
                      all maturities), divided by the monthly average value of the portfolio.
                      Portfolio turnover is winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles.
Sec lending           Binary variable equal to one for funds that engage in loaning portfolio
                      securities (70N).
Short selling         Binary variable equal to one for funds that engage in short selling (70R).
Options               Average of 8 binary variables, each equal to one if a fund engages
                      in writing or investing in 1) options on equities (70B), 2) options on
                      debt securities (70C), 3) options on stock indices (70D), 4) interest
                      rate futures (70E), 5) stock index futures (70F), 6) options on futures
                      (70G), 7) options on stock index futures (70H), and 8) other commodity
                      futures (70I).




                                          49
                                     Table A1—Continued

Other practices         Average of 7 binary variables for engaging in the following investment
                        practices: 1) investment in restricted securities (70J), 2) investment in
                        shares of other investment companies (70K), 3) investments in securi-
                        ties of foreign issuers (70L), 4) currency exchange transactions (70M),
                        5) borrowing of money (70O), 6) purchases/sales by certain exempted
                        affiliated persons (70P), 7) margin purchases (70Q).
Redemption fees         Binary variable equal to one for funds that impose a deferred or contin-
                        gent deferred sales load (34) or a redemption fee other than a deferred
                        or contingent sales load (37).
Share of agg holdings   Weighted-average of the funds holdings of each security relative to ag-
                                                                 P Vf,s           V
                        gregate holdings by all mutual funds:       s
                                                                      P        ⇥ P f,s   , where f
                                                                        s Vf,s    f Vf,s
                        indexes funds and s indexes securities. For equities (bonds), aggregate
                        fund holdings are calculated using CSRP (Morningstar).
Share of outstanding    Weighted-average of the funds holdings of each portfolio security rel-
                                                                      P Vf,s             Vf,s
                        ative to the security’s outstanding amount:     s
                                                                          P        ⇥ Outstanding   ,
                                                                            s Vf,s               s

                        where f indexes funds and s indexes securities. For stocks, the out-
                        standing is the market capitalization, calculated using the price and
                        number of shares reported in CRSP. For bonds, outstanding is the face
                        value at issuance.
Overlap                 For each security s held by fund f , we calculate aggregate holdings of
                        security s by all other funds that belong to the same family and divide
                        this by the aggregate TNA of family funds, excluding fund f . We then
                        take the value-weighted average acrossPall securities held by fund f .
                                                   P V                                 Vf,s
                        Specifically, Overlapf = s P f,s  V f,s
                                                                ⇥ P j2f amily(f ),j6=fT N Aj , where f and
                                                        s          j2f amily(f ),j6=f
                        j index funds and s indexes securities.
T enure                 Number of years managing the fund. For team managed funds, T enure
                        is the average across individual managers. Manager identities and char-
                        acteristics are from Morningstar and cover the period through Septem-
                        ber 2013.
Experience              Number of years managing any mutual funds.
ACT                     Average ACT score of the students admitted to the university from
                        which the fund manager received his or her undergraduate degree. ACT
                        scores are for the 2001–2002 incoming class. Source: National Center
                        for Education Statistics, IPEDS Data Center.


                                              50
                                        Table A2
              Flow management through cash holdings: Alternative winsorization

This table shows the robustness of the flow management results to winsorizing fund flows
at the 1st and 99th percentiles In columns (1) and (3), the dependent variable is the change in cash
over a six-month period, scaled by assets six months ago. In columns (2) and (4), the dependent
variable is the change in the cash-to-assets ratio over a six-month period. The independent
variables are monthly net fund flows, scaled by net assets six months ago. Standard errors are
adjusted for clustering by time. ⇤, ⇤⇤, and ⇤ ⇤ ⇤ indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and
1%.

                                   Equity funds                                 Bond funds
                            Cash                    Cash              Cash                     Cash
                           T NA                     T NA             T NA                      T NA
                            (1)                     (2)               (3)                       (4)
  F lowsi,t                0.178⇤⇤⇤                0.060⇤⇤⇤          0.243⇤⇤⇤                 0.091⇤⇤⇤
                          (0.017)                 (0.011)           (0.046)                  (0.028)
  F lowsi,t   1            0.135⇤⇤⇤                0.017             0.016                    0.048
                          (0.023)                 (0.015)           (0.042)                  (0.031)
  F lowsi,t   2            0.113⇤⇤⇤                0.018             0.186⇤⇤                  0.079
                          (0.024)                 (0.017)           (0.071)                  (0.053)
  F lowsi,t   3            0.097⇤⇤⇤                0.010             0.038                    0.065
                          (0.020)                 (0.010)           (0.069)                  (0.062)
  F lowsi,t   4            0.061⇤⇤⇤                0.012             0.040                    0.038
                          (0.021)                 (0.010)           (0.053)                  (0.056)
  F lowsi,t   5            0.003                   0.065⇤⇤⇤          0.145⇤⇤                  0.002
                          (0.024)                 (0.015)           (0.064)                  (0.033)
  N                       19,212                  19,212             2,515                    2,515
  Adjusted R2              0.160                   0.024             0.129                    0.015




                                                   51
                                           Table A3
               Cash-to-assets ratio and alternative measures of bond illiquidity

This table reports the results of the regressions of the cash-to-assets ratio on alternative
measures of bond illiquidity:
             ✓        ◆
               Cash
                          = ↵obj(i),t + 10 LiquidityTransformationi,t + 20 Scalei,t
               T N A i,t
                               0                           0
                           +   3 InvestorBehaviori,t   +   4 TradingPracticesi,t   + "i,t .

   is the Dick-Nielsen, Feldhütter, and Lando (2012) measure of bond illiquidity. Amihud (2002) is
calculated following Dick-Nielsen, Feldhütter, and Lando (2012). IRC is the Imputed Roundtrip
Cost (Feldhütter 2012).       is the Roll (1984) measure of illiquidity, calculated following Bao,
Pan, and Wang (2011). All specifications include objective-time fixed e↵ects. The sample period
is January 2004–June 2012. All continuous variables are standardized so that their coefficients
represent the e↵ect of a one-standard deviation change in each variable. Standard errors are
adjusted for clustering by fund family. ⇤, ⇤⇤, and ⇤ ⇤ ⇤ indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%,
and 1%.
                                                                     p
                                                                       Amihud                   IRC
                                  (1)                (2)                 (3)                     (4)
   (F lows)i,t                   0.584⇤⇤⇤           0.770⇤⇤⇤            0.595⇤⇤⇤               0.564⇤⇤⇤
                                (0.209)            (0.236)             (0.212)                (0.206)
  Illiqi,t                       0.441              0.825⇤⇤             0.545                  0.325
                                (0.310)            (0.320)             (0.364)                (0.355)
  Illiq ⇥ (F lows)i,t            0.298⇤⇤            0.202               0.204                  0.338⇤⇤
                                (0.144)            (0.295)             (0.131)                (0.149)
  Sizei,t                        0.207              0.547⇤              0.186                  0.206
                                (0.348)            (0.329)             (0.345)                (0.348)
  Family sizei,t                 0.827⇤⇤            0.896⇤⇤             0.840⇤⇤                0.823⇤⇤
                                (0.344)            (0.372)             (0.342)                (0.345)
  Institutional sharei,t         1.044⇤⇤⇤           0.865⇤⇤             1.041⇤⇤⇤               1.037⇤⇤⇤
                                (0.292)            (0.334)             (0.292)                (0.294)
  T urnoveri,t                   0.358              0.566               0.310                  0.371
                                (0.432)            (0.359)             (0.429)                (0.433)
  Sec lendingi,t                 5.285⇤⇤⇤           5.113⇤⇤⇤            5.275⇤⇤⇤               5.267⇤⇤⇤
                                (0.756)            (0.875)             (0.760)                (0.762)
  Short sellingi,t               1.478              2.409⇤⇤             1.496                  1.476
                                (1.063)            (1.201)             (1.062)                (1.067)
  Optionsi,t                     7.250⇤⇤            6.231               7.200⇤⇤                7.323⇤⇤
                                (3.238)            (3.990)             (3.208)                (3.207)
  Other practicesi,t             2.332              2.853               2.249                  2.294
                                (1.664)            (1.752)             (1.655)                (1.664)
  N                              2,648              1,713               2,648                  2,648
  Adjusted R2                    0.198              0.228               0.197                  0.198




                                                 52
                                            Table A4
                       Instrumenting for asset illiquidity and flow volatility

This table reports the results of 2SLS regressions of the cash-to-assets ratio on asset illiq-
uidity and flow volatility, instrumented with Lipper objective dummies interacted with fund age.
OLS specifications include objective-date fixed e↵ects. 2SLS specifications include date fixed
e↵ects. All continuous variables are standardized so that their coefficients represent the e↵ect of
a one-standard deviation change in each variable. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering by
Lipper objective. ⇤, ⇤⇤, and ⇤ ⇤ ⇤ indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

                                         Equity funds                         Bond funds
                                  OLS                  2SLS           OLS                 2SLS
                                   (1)                  (2)            (3)                  (4)
  Illiqi,t                        0.967⇤⇤⇤             1.700⇤⇤⇤       0.441               0.368
                                 (0.258)              (0.348)        (0.310)             (2.102)
   (F lows)i,t                    0.353⇤⇤⇤             1.231⇤⇤        0.584⇤⇤⇤            2.614⇤⇤⇤
                                 (0.089)              (0.619)        (0.209)             (0.469)
  Illiq ⇥ (F lows)i,t             0.171⇤⇤              1.175⇤⇤⇤       0.298⇤⇤             3.267
                                 (0.086)              (0.437)        (0.144)             (3.834)
  Sizei,t                         0.063                0.241          0.207               0.622⇤⇤⇤
                                 (0.192)              (0.200)        (0.348)             (0.158)
  Family sizei,t                  1.298⇤⇤⇤             1.148⇤⇤⇤       0.827⇤⇤             0.725⇤⇤⇤
                                 (0.314)              (0.123)        (0.344)             (0.216)
  Institutional sharei,t          0.391                0.405          1.044⇤⇤⇤            0.764⇤⇤⇤
                                 (0.247)              (0.324)        (0.292)             (0.161)
  T urnoveri,t                    0.027                0.002          0.358               0.070
                                 (0.146)              (0.105)        (0.432)             (0.282)
  Sec lendingi,t                  6.641⇤⇤⇤             6.726⇤⇤⇤       5.285⇤⇤⇤            5.347⇤⇤⇤
                                 (0.619)              (0.966)        (0.756)             (0.118)
  Short sellingi,t                3.194⇤⇤⇤             2.532⇤⇤        1.478               1.985⇤⇤
                                 (1.153)              (1.061)        (1.063)             (0.965)
  Optionsi,t                      5.388⇤               4.484⇤⇤⇤       7.250⇤⇤             6.748⇤⇤⇤
                                 (2.799)              (1.020)        (3.238)             (1.575)
  Other practicesi,t              3.241⇤⇤              3.452⇤⇤⇤       2.332               3.017⇤⇤⇤
                                 (1.518)              (0.836)        (1.664)             (1.088)
  N                              22,427               22,427          2,648               2,648
  Adjusted R2                     0.228                0.186          0.198                .




                                                    53
Appendix: Model
    A. Setup

         Throughout the paper, we use liquidity transformation to mean that the price-quantity
schedule faced by a fund investor in buying or selling fund shares is different than it would be if
the investor directly traded in the underlying assets. To help fix ideas, we begin by presenting a
simple static model linking liquidity transformation to cash holdings.1 Consider a single mutual
fund that has M investors, each of whom has invested a dollar. Each investor is associated with
outflows xm next period. For simplicity, we assume that these outflows are normally distributed,
with mean zero and variance σ2. Further, assume that the correlation of outflows across investors
is ρ. This correlation captures, in reduced form, both that liquidity shocks may be correlated
across investors and that flows may be correlated because they respond to past performance (i.e.,
there is a performance-flow relationship).

         The fund may accommodate redemptions in two ways. First, it may choose to hold cash
reserves R. These reserves are liquid claims that can be sold costlessly to meet outflows. In
practice, these claims are supplied by the traditional banking system or shadow banking system,
but, for simplicity, we model them here as existing in elastic supply. Each dollar of cash reserves
is associated with carrying cost i. One may think of i as the cost of tracking error for the fund. If
it does not have sufficient cash reserves, the fund meets outflows by liquidating some of its
illiquid security holdings. When it does so, the fund incurs average cost c per dollar of sales.

         Given these assumptions, the total outflows suffered by the fund are

                                                      (
                                 x = ∑ m xm ~ N 0, σ 2 M (1 + ( M − 1) ρ ) .    )
The fund chooses its cash reserves R to minimize the sum of carry costs and expected liquidation
costs:

                                           iR + ∫ c ( x − R ) dF ( x ) ,
                                                  ∞
                                                                                                               (1)
                                                  R


where F is the cumulative distribution function of x.

1
  To get similar intuitions in a dynamic model, one needs to assume either convex costs of liquidating the illiquid
asset or time varying liquidation costs. Zeng (2015) shows that these intuitions remain in a full-fledged dynamic
model using the latter approach.


                                                          54
   B. Discussion of setup

       This setup, though stylized, captures key features of how mutual funds perform liquidity
transformation. The model is akin to the problem a fund faces at the end of a trading day. At the
end of a trading day, the fund’s NAV is set, so the fundamental value of the illiquid securities is
fixed. We are normalizing the NAV so that the value of each investor’s shares is $1 and then
allowing them to redeem some fraction of those shares. The fund then meets those fixed value
redemptions in the optimal manner.

       The fund in the model is performing liquidity transformation in two ways. First, it allows
the investors to sell an unlimited fraction of their shares at a $1 NAV despite the fact that the
fund itself faces costs if it sells the illiquid asset. Second, the fund aggregates buying and selling
across investors, costlessly netting trades between them and only selling the illiquid asset if it
faces large net outflows. Individual investors trading for themselves in a market would only
achieve this if they traded simultaneously. Outside of the model, the presence of a cash buffer
allows funds to perform this kind of netting across longer periods of time.

       The model could be generalized in two ways. First, we could more carefully model net
inflows. As structured, the model is set up to consider how the fund manages outflows, but the
fund faces a similar problem when it has inflows. On one hand, the fund increases its tracking
error if it holds the inflows as cash. But on the other hand, holding cash reduces the price impact
the fund generates in buying the illiquid asset. Thus, the logic of the model suggests that cash is
useful for managing both inflows and outflows.

       A second generalization would be to endogenize the volatility of investor flows.
Presumably, the fact that investors do not directly face the costs of liquidation that they generate
for the fund means that they are more willing to trade fund shares than they would be if they bore
their own liquidation costs. This means that gross flows in the model are higher than gross trade
would be in a setting where investors traded the illiquid asset themselves.

   C. Optimal cash reserves for a single fund

       We now solve for the fund’s optimal holdings of cash reserves R. Proposition 1
characterizes the optimal reserve holdings R*.




                                                 55
                                     𝒄
Proposition 1. Assuming 𝒊 ≤              , optimal cash holdings R* satisfy the first order condition
                                     𝟐


F ( R* ) = 1 − i / c. Because x is normally distributed, we have R* = k σ 2 M (1 + ( M − 1) ρ ) ,

where k = Φ−1 (1 − i / c ) , and Φ is the standard normal cumulative distribution function.

Proof: All proofs are given at the end of the Appendix.

          Intuitively, the fund trades off the carrying costs of cash reserves against the expected
liquidation costs. The fund always pays the carrying cost i, while if it carries zero cash, it pays
                                                                                     !
liquidation costs only half of the time – when it has outflows. Thus, we need 𝑖 ≤ for the fund to
                                                                                     !

hold any cash.

          The fund engages in liquidity transformation in two ways. First, it diversifies across
investor liquidity shocks: inflows from one investor can be used to meet outflows from another
without incurring any liquidation costs. This is analogous to the way diversification across
depositors allows banks to hold illiquid assets, as in Diamond and Dybvig (1983). Second, when
    !
<       , the fund uses cash holdings to further reduce its expected liquidation costs. These costs
    !

depend on total outflows, which are determined by the number of investors, the volatility of their
individual outflows, and the correlation between the individual outflows.

          It follows from the fund’s trade off that optimal cash reserves are increasing in the fund’s
expected liquidation costs. Intuitively, if the fund chooses to hold more cash, it is choosing to
pay higher carrying costs. This is optimal only if the fund faces higher expected liquidation
costs. Thus, if we take expected liquidation costs as a measure of the amount of liquidity
transformation the fund is performing on behalf of its investors, the fund’s optimal cash holdings
are a measure of the amount of liquidity transformation it performs.

                                 (         )
Proposition 2: Let L* = ∫ * c x − R* dF ( x ) be the fund’s expected liquidation costs when it
                             ∞

                             R

                                                                    𝒄
holds the optimal amount of cash reserves. When 𝒊 ≤                     , optimal cash holdings are
                                                                    𝟐

proportional to the expected liquidation costs: L* = R* ( cφ ( k ) / k − i ) .

          Let r * = R* / M be the fund’s optimal cash-to-assets ratio. Proposition 3 derives some
simple comparative statics.




                                                     56
                               𝒄
Proposition 3. Assuming ≤          , optimal cash holdings R* and optimal cash-to-assets ratio r*
                               𝟐

satisfy the following comparative statics:

        ∂r * / ∂c > 0 : The optimal cash-to-assets ratio increases with asset illiquidity.

        ∂r * / ∂σ > 0 : The optimal cash-to-assets ratio increases with the volatility of fund flows.

        ∂ 2 r * / ∂σ∂c > 0 : The relationship between cash-to-assets ratios and fund flow volatility

               is stronger for funds with more illiquid assets.

        ∂R* / ∂M > 0 and ∂r * / ∂M < 0 : Optimal cash holdings rise with fund size. As long as
               ρ < 1, optimal cash-to-assets ratio falls with fund size.

        ∂ 2 r * / ∂M ∂ρ > 0 : The optimal cash-to-assets ratio falls more slowly with fund size when

               investor flows are more correlated.

       The first three comparative statics relate cash holdings to liquidity transformation.
Liquidity transformation is driven by the intersection of investor behavior and asset illiquidity. If
the fund faces more volatile flows, it is providing greater liquidity services to its investors.
Similarly, if the fund’s assets are more illiquid, it is providing greater liquidity services to its
investors. Consistent with our insight that cash holdings are a measure of liquidity
transformation, the fund optimally chooses a higher cash-to-assets ratio when it faces more
volatile flows and holds more illiquid assets. These two effects interact: the more illiquid the
assets, the stronger the relationship between cash-to-assets ratios and flow volatility.

       The fourth and fifth comparative statics involve economies of scale in liquidity
management. As the size of the fund rises, the volatility of dollar outflows rises. Thus, the fund
must hold more cash reserves. However, because there is diversification across investors, the
cash-to-assets ratio falls with fund size: the amount of additional cash reserves the fund holds for
each incremental dollar of assets falls as fund size increases. The comparative statics also show
that this diversification benefit dissipates as the correlation between individual investor flows
rises. As flows become more correlated, economies of scale in liquidity management diminish.

   D. Internalizing price impact

       We next consider the problem of many funds and ask whether, in the aggregate, they hold
enough cash to avoid exerting price impact externalities on one another. Suppose there are G


                                                  57
funds, each of size M. For simplicity, assume that flows to all funds are perfectly correlated. This
simplifies the algebra but does not change the intuition. Further, suppose that the per-dollar of
sales liquidation cost c faced by an individual fund is a function of the total asset sales by all

funds: c = c   (∑ x j   j   − Rj .  )
         Fund j now seeks to minimize costs

                                                   (                            )
                                   iR + ∫ c x − R + ∑k ≠ j ( xk − Rk ) ( x − R ) dF ( x ).
                                               ∞
                                                                                                                     (2)
                                               R


Eq. (2) is the same as Eq. (1), except now we have the costs of liquidation c depending on the
reserve choices and flows faced by all G funds. Differentiating with respect to R and imposing a
symmetric equilibrium ( Rk = R j ), we have:


                                               ( (       )) (           ) ( (        ))
                                             !c G x − R* + x − R* c ' G x − R* $ dF(x) = 0.
                                        ∞
                             i−    ∫    R*   "#                                &%                                    (3)

         Next, consider the problem of a social planner seeking to minimize costs across all
mutual funds.2 The planner seeks to minimize

                                             G ⎡iR + ∫ c (G ( x − R )) ( x − R ) dF ( x )⎤ .
                                                      ∞
                                                                                                                     (4)
                                               ⎢⎣     R                                  ⎥⎦

Crucially, from the planner’s perspective, it moves all funds’ cash reserves at the same time. In
contrast, in the private market equilibrium, each individual fund treats other funds’ reserve
policies as fixed when choosing its own reserves. Essentially, in the private market equilibrium,
an individual fund does not internalize the positive effect its cash holdings have on the
liquidation costs faced by other funds. This can be seen in the planner’s first order condition:

                                             ( (        )) (             ) ( (
                                        !c G x − R** + G x − R** c ' G x − R** dF(x)$ = 0.
                                                                                          ))
                                  ∞
                        i−    ∫   R**   #"                                          &%                               (5)

         Eq. (5) is the same as the private market first order condition in Eq. (3), with one
exception. In the last term, the effect of the choice of reserves on marginal costs of liquidation is
multiplied by G. Essentially, the planner internalizes the fact that high reserves benefit all funds



2
  Note that for there to be a social loss in general equilibrium, the liquidation costs to the funds must not simply be a
transfer to an outside liquidity provider. This would be the case if, as in Stein (2012), those outside liquidity
providers had to forgo other positive-NPV projects in order to buy the assets being sold by mutual funds.


                                                                   58
through lower liquidation costs. Proposition 4 says that this leads the social planner to a higher
level of reserves than the private market outcome.

Proposition 4: A planner coordinating among funds would choose a level of cash holdings R**
higher than the level of cash holdings chosen in the private market equilibrium R*.

       A corollary that follows from this logic is that a monopolist in a particular security
internalizes its price impact, particularly if that security is illiquid. The externality that makes
private market cash holdings R* lower than the socially optimal level of cash holdings R** arises
because funds take into account how cash holdings mitigate their own price impact but not how
that price impact affects other funds. Of course, if one fund owns the whole market, there is no
externality. Generalizing this intuition, the higher is the fraction of the underlying assets owned
by a given fund, the more will the fund internalize its price impact.

Corollary: Funds that own a larger fraction of their portfolio assets more fully internalize
their price impact and therefore hold more cash reserves.




                                                59
Proof of Proposition 1

Differentiating the fund’s objective function with respect to R yields the first-order condition

                               −i + c ∫ dF ( x ) = − i + c (1 − F ( R ) ) = 0.
                                           ∞

                                           R



                        ( )
Rearranging yields F R* = 1 − i / c. Because x is normally distributed with standard deviation

  σ 2 M (1 + ( M − 1) ρ ) , we have:

                                                 x
                                                                ~ N ( 0,1) ,
                                       σ M (1 + ( M − 1) ρ )
                                           2




which is standard normal.

Proof of Proposition 2

Expected liquidation costs are given by

                               L* = ∫ * c ( x − R* ) dF ( x )
                                       ∞

                                       R


                                                            (
                                  = c ∫ * xdF ( x ) − R* 1 − F ( R* )   )
                                           ∞

                                           R

                                  = c (φ ( k ) )σ M (1 + ( M − 1) ρ ) − R*i
                                  = R* ( cφ ( k ) / k − i ) .

Proof of Proposition 3

We have:

                                    r * = k σ 2 (1 + ( M − 1) ρ ) / M ,

where k = Φ−1 (1 − i / c ) . Differentiation yields




                                                       60
                         ∂r * ∂k
                                =        σ 2 (1 + ( M − 1) ρ ) / M > 0
                         ∂c ∂c
                         ∂r *
                                = k (1 + ( M − 1) ρ ) / M > 0
                         ∂σ
                         ∂ 2 r * ∂k
                         ∂σ∂c ∂c
                                   =        (1 + ( M − 1) ρ ) / M > 0
                         ∂r *        k
                                         ( M σ 2 + M ( M − 1) σ 2 ρ ) σ 2 ( ρ − 1) < 0
                                                                         −1/2
                                 =
                         ∂M 2 M
                         ∂2 r*         k
                                           (            (        )       )
                                                                           −1/2
                               2
                                  =          M σ  2
                                                    + M   M   − 1  σ 2
                                                                       ρ        σ 2 > 0.
                         ∂M          2M

Proof of Proposition 4

The private market equilibrium is characterized by the first-order condition

                                        (             )            (           )
                         i − ∫ * ⎡c G ( x − R* ) + ( x − R* ) c ' G ( x − R* ) ⎤ = 0.
                                ∞

                              R ⎣                                              ⎦

The social planner’s solution is characterized by the first-order condition

                                    (             )                    (           )
                     i − ∫ ** ⎡c G ( x − R** ) + G ( x − R** ) c ' G ( x − R** ) ⎤ = 0.
                            ∞

                          R ⎣                                                    ⎦

Evaluating the social planner’s first-order condition at the private market equilibrium R* and
substituting in the private market first-order condition, we have:

                                    (         )                    (           )
                     i − ∫ * ⎡c G ( x − R* ) + G ( x − R* ) c ' G ( x − R* ) ⎤dF ( x )
                            ∞

                          R ⎣                                                ⎦
                                                          (            )
                     = − ∫ * ⎡( G − 1) ( x − R* ) c ' G ( x − R* ) ⎤dF ( x ) < 0.
                            ∞

                          R ⎣                                      ⎦

Thus, the planner’s first-order condition does not hold at the private market equilibrium R*. Note
that the planner’s first-order condition is increasing in R, so we must have R** > R*.




                                                              61
