                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           THE GIFT OF MOVING:
           INTERGENERATIONAL CONSEQUENCES OF A MOBILITY SHOCK

                                         Emi Nakamura
                                        Jósef Sigurdsson
                                         Jón Steinsson

                                      Working Paper 22392
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22392


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                            July 2016, Revised January 2019




We thank Masao Fukui for extraordinarily excellent research assistance. We would also like to
than Elliot Choi for excellent research assistance. We thank Josh Angrist, David Autor, Samuel
Bazzi, Gharad Bryan, Thomas Covert, Esther Duflo, Larry Katz, Emir Kamenica, David Lagakos,
Melanie Morten, Suresh Naidu, Arash Nekoei, Peter Nilsson, Ben Olken, Parag Pathak, Torsten
Persson, Frank Schilbach, Jesse Shapiro, Magnús Torfason, Michael Waugh, and Danny Yagan,
as well as seminar participants at various institutions for valuable comments and discussions. We
thank Hrafnhildur Arnkelsdóttir, Margrét Indridadóttir, and Hildur Erna Sigurdardóttir at
Statistics Iceland and Thórdur Kristjánsson and Kári Stefánsson at deCode Genetics for their
invaluable support in developing the data infrastructure for this project, Ragnar Heidar
Thrastarson for helping us create a post-eruption map of the Westman Islands, and Jóhann
Jónsson for sharing his recollections of the Westman Islands volcanic eruption and its aftermath.
We thank the National Science Foundation (grant SES-1056107), the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation,
and the Jan Wallander and Tom Hedelius Foundation for financial support. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Emi Nakamura, Jósef Sigurdsson, and Jón Steinsson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Gift of Moving: Intergenerational Consequences of a Mobility Shock
Emi Nakamura, Jósef Sigurdsson, and Jón Steinsson
NBER Working Paper No. 22392
July 2016, Revised January 2019
JEL No. E24,J61,O15,R23

                                          ABSTRACT

We exploit a volcanic “experiment" to study the costs and benefits of geographic mobility. We
show that moving costs (broadly defined) are very large and labor therefore does not flow to
locations where it earns the highest returns. In our experiment, a third of the houses in a town
were covered by lava. People living in these houses were much more likely to move away
permanently. For those younger than 25 years old who were induced to move, the “lava shock”
dramatically raised lifetime earnings and education. Yet, the benefits of moving were very
unequally distributed within the family: Those older than 25 (the parents) were made slightly
worse off by the shock. The large gains from moving for the young are surprising in light of the
fact that the town affected by our volcanic experiment was (and is) a relatively high income town.
We interpret our findings as evidence of the importance of comparative advantage: the gains to
moving may be very large for those badly matched to the location they happened to be born in,
even if differences in average income are small.

Emi Nakamura                                             Jón Steinsson
Department of Economics                                  Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley                       University of California, Berkeley
685 Evans Hall                                           671 Evans Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720                                       Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER                                                 and NBER
enakamura@berkeley.edu                                   jsteinsson@berkeley.edu

Jósef Sigurdsson
Institute for International Economic Studies
Stockholm University
SE-10691 Stockholm
Sweden
josef.sigurdsson@iies.su.se
1   Introduction

Wages differ enormously across space. One interpretation of such differentials is the presence of
large moving costs, arising from informational, cultural, legal, and economic barriers that impede
labor from flowing to its highest return activity (Munshi and Rosenzweig, 2016; Bryan and Morten,
2018). However, just because the inhabitants of some locations have higher incomes than others
does not mean there is a large causal effect of moving to these locations. The variation in average
income across locations may be due to selection effects, whereby high productivity workers sort
into certain locations, as opposed to the location having a direct causal effect on earnings (e.g.,
Lagakos and Waugh, 2013; Young, 2013).
    Distinguishing between selection and direct causal effects of locations is challenging. Large,
exogenous relocation shocks are few and far between. Consequently, most work on this topic has
used structural methods. However, a small number of recent papers have made use of experimen-
tal and quasi-experimental variation to identify the consequences of moving. Bryan, Chowdhury,
and Mobarak (2014) find that randomly giving workers an inducement to move, in the form of a
$8.50 bus ticket, yields large effects on subsequent economic outcomes. Chetty, Hendren, and Katz
(2016) show that giving families vouchers to move from high-poverty areas to lower-poverty areas
improves long-term outcomes for young children. Sarvimäki, Uusitalo, and Jäntti (2016) study the
long-term impact of forced migration in Finland after World War II. They estimate large positive
long-run effects of displacement on earnings of men working in agriculture prior to displacement.
    These results suggest that some people are “stuck” in locations that do not fully exploit their
economic potential. However, many questions remain unresolved. Do the benefits of moving
apply only to situations where people are leaving behind a desperately poor location for better
economic opportunities? How do the benefits of moving vary with age? Would the benefits of
moving accrue to all workers, or does comparative advantage play an important role as suggested
by Bazzi et al. (2016) and Lagakos, Mobarak, and Waugh (2017)?
    We shed new light on the role of location in shaping economic outcomes by studying the con-
sequences of a true “natural” experiment. On January 23, 1973, a long-dormant volcano erupted
unexpectedly on the Westman Islands, off the coast of Iceland. A volcanic fissure opened only 300
yards from the edge of the island’s town forcing the entire population of the island to be evacuated
in a matter of hours. The eruption continued for several months and about a third of the houses
on the island were destroyed by lava. The owners of these lava-stricken homes were “cashed out”
of their property by a government disaster relief fund. After the eruption ended, a majority of the
                                                 1
residents of the island returned and the population of the island quickly rebounded to almost its
pre-eruption level. However, those whose homes were destroyed were substantially less likely to
return.
   We interpret this “lava shock” as a large, quasi-random shock to mobility. We can estimate the
causal effect of moving by comparing outcomes for those whose houses were destroyed by lava
(our “treatment group”) versus those whose houses were intact after the eruption (our “control
group”). To do this, we gather information on exactly which houses were destroyed and which
not. We then merge this information with data on the inhabitants of each house, their tax records
over a 34 year period, data on their educational attainment, and genealogical data allowing us
to analyze their descendants. We are therefore able to study the economic consequences of the
mobility shock over the full lifetimes of the individuals affected and their children. This turns out
to be important for our results.
   We document a remarkable reversal of fortune for those less than 25 years old at the time of the
eruption. Being “unlucky” enough to have one’s house destroyed is associated with a large increase
in long-run labor earnings and education. Using the destruction of houses as an instrument for
moving away from the Westman Islands, we estimate a causal effect of moving of $27,000 per year,
or close to a doubling of the control group’s average earnings. The income effect is particularly
large at the upper tail of the income distribution: the effect on the 95th percentile of the earning
distribution is $47,000 per year. There is also a large causal effect on education: those younger
than 25 that were induced to move because their house was destroyed by lava got almost 4 years
of additional schooling (and their children’s education responded even more).
   Our findings imply that moving costs (broadly defined) must be large. If not, out-migration in
the control group would have been larger. We cannot tell whether the eruption made the treatment
group better off or the control group worse off. Both groups are likely affected by such a large
disruption. Our experiment identifies the difference in earning and education outcomes for these
two groups. We calculate that for an 18 year old who is induced to move, the difference in the
net present value of life-time earnings is roughly $440,000. This difference can be viewed as an
estimate of the cost of moving (broadly defined). This large barrier to moving actually lines up
quite well with existing structural estimates. Kennan and Walker (2011) estimate a structural
model of migration decisions for young men within the United States, and find that the typical
worker could roughly double his or her income by moving.
   The benefits of moving are, however, very unequally distributed within the family. While los-


                                                 2
ing the family home in the eruption had large positive effects on the adulthood earnings of people
younger than 25 years old at the time of the eruption (mostly children), the earnings effects for
older cohorts are somewhat negative (but statistically insignificant). In other words, the economic
costs of moving fall disproportionately on the parents in a family, while the economic gains accrue
to the children. This implies that moving can be an immensely valuable but also somewhat costly
gift that parents can give to their children. Conversely, the large intergenerational differences in
returns to moving may help explain the large barrier to moving we estimate for younger cohorts.
As we show below, the large barrier may partly reflect limits to parents’ understanding of the po-
tential gains to their children of moving, limited parental altruism, or aversion to the uncertainty
associated with moving.
   The large positive causal effects we estimate for those younger than 25 at the time of the erup-
tion are particularly surprising in light of the fact that the Westman Islands was (and is) one of
the highest income towns in Iceland. Those induced to move for the most part moved to places
with lower average income (e.g., the capital area). Previous studies have tended to find gains for
households moving from very disadvantaged places to places with substantially higher average
income. We are, however, studying a situation where households appear to be “moving away from
opportunity” from the perspective of average income. How can it be that the effects are so positive
in this case?
   The most compelling interpretation for these facts, in our view, is that they reflect the impor-
tance of comparative advantage. Roy’s classic 1951 paper studies the matching between workers
and tasks for the case of fishermen and rabbit hunters (Roy, 1951). Naturally, those with greater
relative prowess in fishing will sort into that industry, and the same will occur for rabbit hunting.
While those who moved away from the Westman Islands did not become rabbit hunters (more
likely, they became bankers), they did leave an economy that was highly concentrated in fishing.
Many smaller communities are, like the Westman Islands, specialized in a particular industry that
is unlikely to be suitable for everyone. In such a setting, potential gains from moving may be large
since workers are “stuck” in locations in which the occupational mix is not well suited for their
talents. While the Westman Islands—with its high-paying fishing jobs—may be an ideal place for
some workers, it is unlikely to be the best match for a future computer whiz or a great legal mind.
   We present a Roy model with heterogeneous comparative advantage and moving costs (build-
ing on recent work by Lagakos and Waugh (2013), Young (2013), Bryan and Morten (2018), and
Adao (2015)) to study these effects. A key insight from our model is that the “compliers” in our


                                                 3
natural experiment—i.e., those induced to move by the volcanic eruption—gain a particularly
large amount from moving. Intuitively, it is those that are not well suited to live on the island that
are induced to move.1 The model makes clear that other groups may gain much less or even lose
from moving since they are better suited to live on the island (and therefore not induced to move
by the eruption).
       This insight provides a natural interpretation for how the benefits of moving we estimate can
be so large, despite the fact that the individuals are moving away from a high income location.
Those induced to move are selected on their comparative advantage, which implies that they have
particularly large gains from moving. The Westman Islands have high average income, however,
because they are a particularly good place for many other workers to earn income. One piece
of evidence for this comparative advantage interpretation comes from our analysis of the pre-
treatment characteristics of the compliers.2 What stands out from this analysis is that the compliers
in our experiment are more likely to come from highly educated families, whose children are likely
to have the most to gain from moving to a location where the returns to education are larger.
       Our model features an overlapping generations structure and an education choice. This allows
the model to capture the large difference in causal effects we estimate between younger and older
individuals in our sample: The young can reoptimize their education and career choice when they
move, while this is more difficult for older individuals.
       Our focus on comparative advantage contrasts with the simple wage model of Abowd, Kra-
marz, and Margolis (1999) (hereafter, AKM), which allows only for absolute advantage. AKM
decomposes wages as a sum of worker and firm (or location) effects, where the latter are empiri-
cally identified off of movers. Viewed through the lens of the AKM model, our data would imply
that the Westman Islands is a “bad” place to live—it has a negative location effect—since there is
a large positive causal effect of moving away. But to fit the high average incomes in the Westman
Islands, the people living there would have had to have large positive worker effects to more than
cancel out the negative location effect. While logically consistent, we do not view this as the most
compelling explanation for the facts, given the low levels of standard human capital measures in
the Westman Islands. We discuss this, as well as other competing possible explanations for our
results in section 9.
       Might compensating differentials explain the large effects of moving we estimate? While any
   1
    This result echoes and extends earlier results by Borjas et al. (1992).
   2
    While it is not possible to identify exactly who the compliers are, it is possible to compare their characteristics
versus the average person in the population, using the methods described in (Angrist, 2004).


                                                          4
pattern of results can be explained by a sufficiently flexible model of (unobserved) compensating
differentials, this does not seem like a likely explanation in our case. Conventional wisdom in
Iceland is that the price level in rural towns like the Westman Islands is and has always been higher
than in Reykjavik (except possibly when it comes to housing) and product variety much more
limited. Any compensating differential of living in the Westman Islands are, therefore, unlikely
to arise from prices, but might arise from differences in preferences (Atkin, 2013). However, this
interpretation seems difficult to square with the time pattern of earnings effects which appear to
grow across generations. If compensating differentials associated with preferences for living in
the Westman Islands were behind our effects, one would expect them to be smaller for children
than parents, and even smaller for descendants born outside of the Westman Islands. But the
earnings gains from moving are the reverse: highest for the young and their descendants, and
much smaller for the parents. We also estimate causal effects of moving on a number of non-
monetary outcomes and find that movers are less likely to die before the age of 50, less likely to
receive pension payments before the retirement age of 65 due to illness or disability, and more
likely to marry. None of these support the compensating differentials interpretation.
   Our findings corroborate recent work arguing that location plays a key role in determining in-
come. Several recent papers on this topic are worth highlighting in addition to the papers already
mentioned. Yagan (2018) shows that, even controlling for a detailed set of characteristics, work-
ers living in an area hit worse by the Great Recession had lower employment many years later.
Chyn (2018) finds that children from households forced to relocate due to demolition of public
housing in Chicago have higher earnings and employment rates as adults compared to children
from nearby public housing that was not demolished. Deryugina, Kawano, and Levitt (2018) and
Sacerdote (2012) show that those displaced by Hurricane Katrina had higher long-run income and
educational outcomes.
   The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides a short description of the volcanic eruption
and its aftermath. Section 3 describes our data. In Section 4 outlines our empirical strategy. Section
5 presents results on the effects of the shock on mobility. Section 6 presents pre-treatment balance
test. Section 7 presents our results on the effects on earnings, while section 8 presents our results on
the effects on education. Section 9 discusses our interpretation that the results imply that moving
costs are large and comparative advantage important. Section 10 concludes.




                                                   5
2       A Volcanic Experiment

Just before 2:00am on January 23 1973 a volcanic eruption began on the tiny island of Heimaey
off the southern coast of Iceland. Heimaey is the main island in a cluster of islands called the
Westman Islands. Despite their small size, the Westman Islands are of great economic importance
to Iceland because they are the only location where a fishing harbor can be built over a several
hundred mile stretch on the southern coast of Iceland. As a consequence, a prosperous town of
5,200 inhabitants was situated there.
        The eruption began on a 1500m long fissure only about 200-300 meters from the easternmost
part of the town (Thorarinsson, 1973). All inhabitants were immediately evacuated from the is-
land. Luckily, the island’s entire fishing fleet was in harbor that night due to bad weather the
preceding day, which was crucial in the evacuation. Within 4 hours, the evacuation was complete.
Only one person died due to the eruption that night. Over the following days and weeks, rescue
units did their best to recover valuables—everything from livestock, to household appliances, to
photo albums.
        The eruption lasted for roughly 5 months. During this time it produced enormous amounts of
lava and ash, which destroyed the eastern third of the town. Figure 1 shows a map of the town
after the eruption, with the area covered by lava from the eruption shaded in red. Of the roughly
1400 houses and apartments in the town at the start of the eruption, roughly 30% were destroyed.
These houses are colored pink (darker) in the figure, while the residential units that survived are
colored green (lighter). Most of the destroyed houses were engulfed by lava, but some were hit by
“lava bombs” (pyroclasts) which were projected from the volcano or collapsed under the weight of
ash.
        People began moving back to the Westman Islands in the summer and fall of 1973. Figure 2
shows that by the end of 1975, the population of the Westman Islands had returned to roughly
85% of its pre-eruption level. The lava field created by the eruption actually improved the town’s
harbor.3 This meant that the economic fundamentals of the Westman Islands were, if anything,
improved by the eruption. Figure 3 shows that the fishing industry barely skipped a beat, and by
1974, fishing companies in the Westman Islands were back to normal production levels.
        While many people quickly moved back to the Westman Islands after the eruption ended,
those whose houses had been destroyed by the eruption were substantially less likely to return.
    3
     For a time during the eruption, the lava flow threatened to block the harbor. This would have been devastating
for the economic prospects of the islands. A Herculean effort to divert the flow of the lava by spraying water on it and
cooling it was successful at averting this calamity.

                                                           6
                   Buildings and designations
                     Houses Destroyed
                     Houses Not Destroyed
                                                                                                       Ü
                     Commercial Real Estate     Ic e la n d


                       New Lava Field
                                                _
                                                ^
                       Coastline before 1973        Westman Islands




                                                                                                  re
                                                                                            Fis su
                                                                                               tion
                                                                                           Erup
                                                                                      Main
               0        500      1,000 ft

               0     100   200   300 m


                              Figure 1: Map of Westman Islands town Post 1973 Eruption
             Note: The map was created by Ragnar Heidar Thrastarson based on data from the Ice-
             landic Disaster Relief Fund (Viðlagasjóður Íslands) and the National Land Survey of Iceland
             (Landmælingar Íslands).


Table 1 reports statistics on this. The people who had lived in the houses that were destroyed were
15 percentage points—or roughly 50% less likely—to return before the end of 1975. We refer to
those that did not return before the end of 1975 as “movers.” The proportion of movers was 42%
among those with destroyed houses, while it was only 27% among those whose houses were not
destroyed.
    The Icelandic government set up a Disaster Relief Fund (Viðlagasjóður Íslands) to compensate
those that lost their houses in the eruption. The Disaster Relief Fund “cashed-out” those whose
houses and land was destroyed at the current replacement value of their house and land.4 The cash
value of houses and land was determined according to annual fire insurance and tax valuations,
    4
      It was not possible to build again on the land covered by lava—at least for several decades. This land was therefore
effectively “destroyed”.


                                                                      7
               5,500
                                                                                                              140,000


               5,000
                                                                                                              120,000
Population




                                                                                                                                              Population
               4,500
                                                                                                              100,000


               4,000                                                                                          80,000


               3,500                                                                                          60,000
                                       1950          1960              1970            1980            1990


                                                  Westman Islands (Left)             Capital Region (Right)
                                                  Other Regions (Right)

                                                          Figure 2: Population by Year
             Note: The figure plots the evolution of the population of the Westman Islands (left axis),
             the Iceland’s capital region (right axis), and other regions of Iceland (right axis). These data
             were obtained from Statistics Iceland.



                                     240                                                                      1,600


                                     200
    Total fish catch (1,000 tones)




                                                                                                                       Total fish catch (1,000 tones)
                                                                                                              1,200
                                     160


                                     120                                                                      800


                                      80
                                                                                                              400
                                      40


                                       0                                                                      0
                                           1966    1968         1970          1972         1974        1976


                                                          South Iceland                Iceland Total

                                                          Figure 3: Fish Catch by Year
             Note: Total fish catch in thousands of tones per year by area. Westman Islands accounts
             for 60-85% of all fish landed in harbors in South Iceland. These data were obtained from
             Fiskifélag Íslands and various issues of Útvegur.


                                                                          8
                                        Table 1: Probability of Moving
                                                              P(Move)       Sample
                                Overall                         0.311        4,807
                                House Destroyed                 0.420        1,341
                                House Not Destroyed             0.269        3,466
             Note: The table reports the probability of moving away from the Westman Islands (i.e., not
             returning before the end of 1975) for three groups: those whose house was destroyed in the
             eruption, those whose house was not destroyed in the eruption, and the total population.
             We also report the sample size of each group.


respectively.5 Households were then compensated for the value of the destroyed houses and land,
net of any associated mortgages. The compensation was paid out in four equal payments over
the period October 1973 to July 1974. The replacement values were increased to reflect October
1973 prices. (Inflation in Iceland was 33% in 1973 and 51% in 1974.) The Disaster Relief Fund
took ownership of the destroyed real estate (and any associated mortgages) as soon as the first
payment was made. The Icelandic Disaster Relief also paid the cost of infrastructure repair and
rescue operations.
    It is worth emphasizing that the Icelandic government took steps to try to ensure the accu-
racy of these compensation payments. The government employed a private company to assess
the damages to all houses on the island, and augment the baseline fire insurance assessments to
account for any additional features that were not included in the original assessments. While it
is inevitable that these valuations contain some error, we believe that they are likely modest in
relation to overall household wealth.
    How might errors in these valuations affect our analysis? Our main results are a large positive
effect on lifetime earnings for those younger than 25 at the time of the eruption—to a large extent
arising from earnings differences occurring more than a decade after the eruption—and a small
negative effect on the older generation. The most natural way in which errors in payouts may
affect these results is through wealth effects. But it is hard to see how such a modest wealth shock
could explain the large effects on earning we identify many years later, and the pattern of effects
we observe on children versus their parents.
   5
     The fire insurance valuation of houses are meant to estimate the cost of rebuilding the house. These are based on
characteristics of the house (size, age, etc.) and are indexed to the construction cost index in Iceland.




                                                          9
3        Data

To analyze the long-term consequences of our “volcanic experiment” we leverage the exception-
ally detailed data on income, education, and genealogical linkages that are available for the Ice-
landic population. Our first task is to identify who lived in the Westman Islands at the time of
the eruption. To do this, we obtained from the Icelandic National Registry scanned images of
inhabitant registers of the Westman Islands on December 1 1972, less than two months before
the eruption.6 We converted these images to machine-readable form. These data contain the full
name, unique personal identifier, address, date of birth, place of birth, gender, marital status, and
citizenship status of all residents of the Westman Islands.
        Next we need to identify who moved away from the Westman Islands following the eruption.
For this, we obtained analogous data to those described above on the population of the Westman
Islands on December 1 1975. We choose 1975 as opposed to 1974 because of possible inaccuracies
in the 1974 data arising from people who had not yet updated their permanent addresses after
the eruption. We have also redone our entire analysis using the location of residence in 1981 as
opposed to 1975. The results are very similar.
        We identify which houses were destroyed by the eruption using scanned images of records
from the Icelandic Disaster Relief Fund obtained at the Icelandic National Archives, which we
converted to machine readable form. We have also collected data on all residential real estate
in the Westman Islands from the 1970 Property Registry of Iceland. These data provide us with
information on the year of construction and tax valuation of the houses, which we use to carry out
balance tests between the destroyed and non-destroyed houses.
        We are interested in analyzing the effects of the eruption on the descendants of the original
inhabitants of the Westman Islands at the time of the eruption. To this end, we obtained data on
all the descendants of the original inhabitants from deCODE Genetics. Specifically, we obtained
a list of these descendants along with the name and unique personal identifier of each person’s
mother and father. This allows us to assign these descendants to either the treatment or control
group.
        We have linked these data to administrative data on earnings and educational attainment. Our
earnings data are from the Icelandic Longitudinal Income Database (ICELID). This database was
constructed by Statistics Iceland from tax records over 34 years, spanning 1981-2014, and includes
both earnings and demographic characteristics. We were able to match 95% of the inhabitants to
    6
        At this time, the Icelandic National Registry was updated once a year on December 1.

                                                            10
the earnings data.7
        Our data on educational attainment are from Statistics Iceland’s Education Registry, which
contains information on educational attainment for the Icelandic population in 2011. The highest
level of completed education is reported on a five-step scale using the International Standard
Classification of Education (ISCED). We map this variable into a measure of years of schooling.
Appendix A describes this mapping.



4       Empirical Strategy

Our goal is to estimate the causal effect of moving away from the Westman Islands on key long-
term economic outcomes such as income and education. The relation of interest is captured by the
following equation
                                    Yit   α    βM ovedi      X1i γ   δt   εit ,                                (1)

where Yit denotes earnings or education for individual i in year t. The variable M ovedi is an
indicator for having moved from the Westman Islands as of 1975. The causal affect of moving is
denoted by β. Xi is a vector of demographic characteristics, including a set of age fixed effects,
with coefficient γ, and δt is a set of year fixed effects. Finally, εit is an error term that captures other
determinants of income and education.
        If people were to move at random, estimating equation (1) by ordinary least-squares (OLS)
would deliver the average causal effect of moving. Yet, the decision to move is clearly far from
random. The central empirical challenge faced by the literature on the effects of migration is how
to deal with these selection effects. For example, if low skilled workers with unstable jobs are more
likely to move than the rest of the population, then movers may have a lower long-term income
than stayers even if there is no causal effect of moving.
        To overcome this challenge, we employ an instrumental variables (IV) strategy that exploits the
quasi-random destruction of houses by the volcanic eruption. More specifically, we instrument for
the variable M ovedi using an indicator variable for whether the person lived in a house that was
destroyed in the volcanic eruption. The “first-stage” regression in our IV strategy is then given by

                                 M ovedi    αf     φDestroyedi       X1i γf       ηit                          (2)

where Destroyedi is an indicator for individual i having lived in a house that was destroyed by
    7
    Unmatched individuals either died before 1981 or live abroad and therefore do not file taxes in Iceland. The age
distribution of those we cannot match suggests that most of the people we cannot match likely died before 1981.

                                                        11
the eruption. The coefficient φ on the instrumental variable captures the effect of living in a house
that was destroyed on the probability of moving.
       This empirical strategy identifies the causal effect on the “compliers” in our experiment—i.e.,
those that are induced to move by having their house destroyed (Imbens and Angrist, 1994). As
we discuss in section 9, we believe that the causal effect on compliers is likely larger than the causal
effect for the population as a whole since the compliers in our experiment are a subgroup of the
population that is less well matched to living in the Westman Islands than the average person
living there.8
       A recent literature emphasizes the potential heterogeneity of treatment effects across different
cohorts of individuals (e.g., Chetty and Hendren, 2018). We will in most cases present results
separately for those less than 25 years old at the time of the eruption, and those who were 25 years
old and older. Our chosen age break-point of 25 is meant to distinguish between people that had
settled on a career at the time of the eruption and those that had not yet settled on a career. We also
explore a specification that allows for linear exposure effects during childhood. In appendix D,
we present results for an alternative—non-age based—way of grouping people. There we group
people into “household heads” versus “dependents.” The idea is to distinguish between those
that make the decision to move (household heads, e.g., the parents in a family with children) and
those that don’t (dependents). This yields similar results to our baseline grouping.
       The definitions we give above for the variables M ovedi and Destroyedi pertain to the “original
inhabitants”—i.e., those that lived in the Westman Islands at the time of the eruption. We also
consider the effect of the lava shock on their descendants. In particular, we consider children
(but not grandchildren) of the original inhabitants that were born after the eruption (1973) but
before 1997. Restricting the sample to those born before 1997 guarantees that everyone in the
descendant sample is at least 18 years old by the end of our sample. This ensures that we are able
observe them in our administrative data. The reason for restricting the sample to children (but not
grandchildren) born after the eruption is to avoid including descendants who had already moved
away before the eruption.
   8
    As with all IV identification strategies, our empirical strategy requires a monotonicity assumption to be valid. In
our context, this assumption rules out the existence of individuals that would have moved away after the eruption if
their house had not been destroyed but were induced to stay (move back) by the fact that their house was destroyed.
Recall that in our setting all Westman Islanders were forced to relocate away from the Islands for at least six months
and we define the “Moved” variable in terms of where people live two years after the eruption (18 months after the
eruption ended). While it is possible that the monotonicity assumption is violated in our setting, we think it is unlikely.
A reaction of defiance is likely to be strongest among those with the strongest attachment to the Westman Islands. But
these are “never-takers” in our experiment.



                                                            12
                                        Table 2: Descendant Groups
                                        Parent’s Status (tfather, motheru)        Size
                        Treatment            tD, Du, tD, Au, tA, Du                965
                        Control              tN, Nu, tN, Au, tA, Nu               2,775
                        Excluded                 tD, Nu, tN, Du                    282
                        Total                                                     4,022
            Notes: D denotes a parent that was living in a house destroyed by the eruption, N denote a
            parent that was living in the Westman Islands but in a house that was not destroyed, and A
            denotes a parent that did not live in the Westman Islands at time of the eruption.


    For the descendants, the definitions of M ovedi and Destroyedi are somewhat more subtle,
since it was not the individuals themselves that moved due to the eruption or lived in houses that
were destroyed, rather it was their parents that were directly affected by the eruption. For the de-
scendants, M ovedi is, therefore, an indicator for whether the descendant lived outside the Westman
Islands when first observed in the administrative records. For Destroyedi , there is the additional
issue that each descendant has two parents, who may each have come from a destroyed (D) or
non-destroyed (N) house in the Westman Islands, or may have come from another location in Ice-
land (A). Table 2 illustrates our assignment of different descendants into the treatment and control
groups. The treatment group is those descendants whose parents’ status is one of the following
{D,D}, {D,A}, or {A,D}, where the first entry is the father and the second entry is the mother. The
control group is those whose parents’ status is one of {N,N}, {N,A}, or {A,N}. We choose to exclude
those that have one parent from a destroyed house and one parent from a non-destroyed house,
i.e., the {D,N}, {N,D} groups. We could alternatively have added these groups to both the treat-
ment and control groups. This would not have affected our point estimates (since their presence in
both groups would mean that they would cancel out) but would have complicated the calculation
of standard errors.



5   Propensity to Move

The first thing that we need to establish is that the “lava shock” does, indeed, have a strong and
statistically significant effect on the propensity of people living in the Westman Islands at the time
of the eruption to move away. Table 3 reports estimates of the first-stage regression where M ovedi
is regressed on Destroyedi as well as controls—equation (2). We report results for all inhabitants
as well as separate results for those younger than 25 years old at the time of the eruption and those
25 years old and older. In all cases, the first-stage coefficients are statistically significant at the 1%
                                                       13
                                            Table 3: First Stage Regressions
                               All               Younger than 25          25 and older             Descendants
                        (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)       (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)
 Destroyed           0.151***    0.160***       0.114***   0.125***    0.194***    0.200***    0.058***     0.059***
                      (0.030)     (0.029)        (0.035)    (0.034)     (0.031)     (0.030)     (0.017)      (0.017)
 Control Mean          0.269         0.269       0.284      0.284       0.250        0.250       0.621        0.621
 Controls               No            Yes         No         Yes         No           Yes         No           Yes
 F -statistic          17.9          21.1        10.9       13.6        25.8         27.7         10.4        12.3
 N                     4,807         4,807       2,609      2,609       2,198        2,198       3,740        3,740
Notes: This table reports coefficients from OLS regressions of M oved on Destroyed. For the original inhabitants M oved
is an indicator for having moved away as of 1975 and Destroyed is an indicator for living in a house that was destroyed
by the eruption. For descendants, M oved is an indicator for living outside the Westman Islands when first observed
in the administrative records, while the definition of Destroyed is more involved and is described in section 4. The set
of controls includes gender, age, a dummy for having changed houses after 1960, and a dummy for being born in the
Westman Islands. Robust standard errors clustered by address are reported in parentheses.*** p 0.01, ** p 0.05, * p 0.1


level. Living in a house that was destroyed raises the probability of moving by 15% points for the
overall population. There is some heterogeneity across the age groups. The effect is about 12% for
those younger than 25, while it is roughly 20% for those 25 and older. The first-stage F-statistic
ranges from 28 to 70.
     Table 3 also reports first stage estimates for the descendants. The estimates show that individu-
als that have parents that lived in houses destroyed by the eruption are about 6 percentage points
less likely to live in the Westman Islands when they first appear in our administrative records.
This difference is statistically significant at the 1% level with a first-stage F-statistic of 12.3.



6     Balance Tests

The Westman Islands is a small and relatively homogeneous community. Our discussions with
locals who lived in the Westman Islands at the time indicate that the neighborhoods destroyed by
the volcanic eruption were essentially similar those that were not destroyed. While we cannot fully
test this assumption, a basic requirement is that observable pre-eruption features of the people and
the houses in the destroyed and non-destroyed areas should be similar.
     Table 4 presents balance tests for various pre-eruption characteristics that are available in our
data. While we have limited data on pre-treatment economic characteristics, importantly, we do
have data on housing values prior to the eruption (from tax valuations). There are no systematic
differences in values of houses between the destroyed and non-destroyed neighborhoods. As


                                                           14
housing wealth is likely to be correlated both with total wealth and income, this test confirms
the perceptions of the locals we have talked with that the destroyed neighborhoods were neither
richer nor poorer than neighborhoods that were not destroyed.
   We also have information on the year of construction of houses in the Westman Islands. These
data show that the destroyed houses were slightly older, but only by roughly two years on aver-
age. The average age of houses in the Westman Islands was roughly 30 years. So, the two year
difference is quite minimal. But it does suggest that the destroyed area was a slightly older part of
town on average.
   We have information on several pre-treatment demographic characteristics. Among those 25
years old and older at the time of the eruption, about half of the population was female, the
average age was 46 years, 76% were married, 47% were born in the Westman Islands, they had
on average 12 years of education, and had slightly less than 2 children on average. When we
test for differences in these characteristics (as well as the rate of divorce and widowhood and the
probability of moving houses after 1960), we find that in all cases the differences are small and
statistically insignificant. The last row of Table 4 also shows that there is no difference between
the treatment and control samples in terms of the number of individuals we were unable to match
to their long-term outcomes on earnings.
   We also perform these same balance tests for those younger than 25 years old. In this case,
there is a statistically significant difference between the treatment and control sample for one of
the 10 characteristics—the probability of being born in the Westman Islands. The treatment group
is somewhat more likely to have been born in the Westman Islands (83% versus 78% for the control
group). To assess whether these results indicate a true difference in the nature of the destroyed
neighborhoods or random variation (one out of 20 tests being significant), we carried out two
additional tests. We performed a test of the omnibus null hypothesis that all the balance test coef-
ficients are zero and are not able to reject that hypothesis. We also used a Bonferroni adjustment to
assess whether any of the coefficients are non-zero taking account of multiple hypothesis testing.
We are not able to reject zero for any coefficients with this adjustment.
   We should also note that, to the extent that the destroyed neighborhoods were different from
the non-destroyed neighborhoods in ways that were correlated with long-term outcomes, one
would expect these selection effects to run primarily through the adults who lived in the affected
neighborhoods and only secondarily through their children. Yet our results illustrate a large,
positive effect of the lava shock on outcomes for those less than 25 years of age, and a small,


                                                 15
                         Table 4: Sample Characteristics and Covariate Balance Test
                                                          Younger than 25                     25 and older
                                                     Control       Treatment vs.       Control      Treatment vs.
                                                      Mean            Control           Mean           Control
                                                       (1)                (2)            (3)              (4)
       Value of house (2014 $)                       65,576              -306          61,321            -111
                                                                       (2,146)                         (2,419)
       House construction year                        1943.2            -1.76*          1941.2         -2.45**
                                                                        (0.96)                          (0.97)
       Female (%)                                      0.48             0.023            0.48           0.002
                                                                       (0.022)                         (0.022)
       Age                                             11.8              0.22            46.1            0.81
                                                                        (0.29)                          (0.72)
       Married (%)                                     0.08            -0.006            0.76           0.010
                                                                       (0.011)                         (0.019)
       Number of children                              0.14            -0.030            1.86           -0.018
                                                                       (0.018)                         (0.077)
       Widowed (%)                                     0.000            0.000            0.08           -0.010
                                                                       (0.000)                         (0.011)
       Divorced (%)                                    0.001           -0.001            0.03           -0.010
                                                                       (0.001)                         (0.007)
       Years of schooling                                –                 –             11.95          0.167
                                                                           –                           (0.165)
       Move house after 1960 (%)                       0.61            -0.022            0.46           0.013
                                                                       (0.021)                         (0.022)
       Born in the Westman Islands (%)                 0.78           0.051***           0.47           0.036
                                                                       (0.017)                         (0.022)
       Not matched to outcomes (%)                     0.02            -0.007            0.12           0.016
                                                                       (0.005)                         (0.015)
Notes: Columns 1 and 3 report sample means by age at the time of the eruption. Columns 2 and 4 report results from a
covariate balance test. We regress the variable in question on Destroyed and report the coefficient and robust standard
errors in parentheses. Move house after 1960 is a dummy for having moved houses after 1960. Missing is a dummy for
being missing from the outcome data in 1981. Years of schooling is based on educational attainment as of 2011. We only
report a balance test on this variable for those 25 and older. The validity of this balance test relies on the assumption that
this group has already completed their education by the time of the eruption. We verify this assumption by showing
no significant effect on education for this group in Table 7. We do not, however, report a test of balance in years of
schooling for the younger cohorts, who have not completed their education by the time of the eruption. *** p 0.01, **
p 0.05, * p 0.1




                                                              16
negative effect on those 25 years of age or older. This pattern argues against an interpretation of
our findings based on selection effects.



7        Earnings Effects

The main outcome variables we focus on are labor earnings and education. In this section, we
consider the effects on labor earnings. We consider the effects on eduction in section 8. Our
measure of earnings includes wage income and proprietors’ labor income, but excludes pension
income, transfers, and capital income.9 We have annual earning data for the sample period 1981
to 2014. We restrict attention to earnings in years when individuals are prime age, which we
define as being between the ages of 25 and 64 years old. For ease of exposition, we first convert all
monetary variables to 2014 prices using the Icelandic CPI and then convert them into US dollars
(USD) using an exchange rate of 125 Icelandic króna (ISK) per USD.
         Let’s consider first the cohorts that were younger than 25 years old at the time of the eruption.
For these cohorts, we start with a simple comparison of the average labor earnings by year of those
whose houses were destroyed by the eruption and those whose houses were not destroyed by the
eruption. This comparison is plotted in Figure 4. The figure illustrates a remarkable reversal of
fortune for these younger cohorts. The “bad luck” of having their houses destroyed in the 1973
eruption was associated with persistently higher average earnings over the next 35 years. It is
worth noting that this difference in earnings does not seem to be driven by the financial boom that
Iceland experienced between 2002 and 2008. The gap opens up long before this and persists after
the financial crisis.
         Regression estimates of these reduced form results pooled across years are reported in the first
two specifications in Table 5. The annual earnings effect of living in a house that was destroyed
at the time of the eruption is estimated to be roughly $3,400 in a specification with controls. This
estimate is statistically significant at the 1% level. When constructing standard errors, we cluster
observations by address to allow for arbitrary correlation across time and across individuals that
live at the same address at the time of the eruption.10 The point estimates are similar with and
without controls. The controls we include are age and year fixed effects as well as dummies for
     9
    We have considered broader measures of income as well and the results are similar.
    10
    We have investigated whether there is broader spatial correlation in our data. Due to data limitations, we can only
do this for the data we have on house prices prior to the eruption. We find statistically significant but very small spatial
correlation of house prices in the Westman Islands. The magnitude of the spatial correlation we estimate is sufficiently
small that we have not pursued further adjustments to our standard errors for spatial correlation. See appendix E for
details.

                                                            17
                            50,000
     Average earnings ($)



                            40,000




                            30,000




                            20,000
                                     1980          1990               2000            2010               2020
                                                                      Year

                                                          Destroyed             Not Destroyed
                              Figure 4: Earnings by Year – Cohorts Younger than 25 at time of Eruption


gender and two controls intended to capture an individual’s attachment to the Westman Islands
(an indicator for whether the individual was born in the Westman islands and an indicator for
whether the individual, or his/her parents, had been living in the same house since 1960).
   A simple Wald estimate of the causal effect of moving on earnings can be constructed by
dividing the difference in average earnings between the destroyed and non-destroyed samples
by the respective difference in the probability of moving. Recall that the difference in mov-
ing probabilities—the first stage—is 11.4 percentage points and the difference in earning—the
reduced-form—is roughly $3,000 (without controls). The Wald estimate of the annual earnings
gain of moving is, therefore, roughly $26,600. This estimate is the third specification reported in
Table 5. It is, of course, not unlikely that having one’s house destroyed by lava might also affect
earnings through other channels than only whether one moves. However, it seems likely that
these other channels would negatively affect earnings, making our (already large) estimates of the
earnings effect an underestimate.
   We also report a two-stage least squares (2SLS) estimate of equation (1) with controls for the
demographic factors discussed above. This yields a slightly larger estimate of the causal effect
of moving of roughly $27,500, which is equal to 83 percent of the average earnings of the control

                                                                18
              Table 5: Effect on Earnings – Cohorts Younger than 25 at Time of Eruption
                                         Reduced Form             Wald         2SLS                 OLS
                                          (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
          M oved                                                 26,628*     27,532**      -2,570**     -1,906*
                                                                 (15,638)    (13,146)       (1,149)     (1,046)
          Destroyed                    3,037**     3,408***
                                       (1,485)     (1,279)
          Control group mean            33,347      33,347       33,347       33,347          —           —
          Controls                       No          Yes          No           Yes           No          Yes
          Age fixed effects              No          Yes          No           Yes           No          Yes
          Year fixed effects             No          Yes          No           Yes           No          Yes
          Observations                  68,539      68,539       68,539       68,539        68,539      68,539
    Notes: The dependent variable in all cases is labor earnings. Coefficient estimates are reported in US dollars
    as of 2014 (125 ISK = 1 USD). The set of controls includes gender, a dummy for having changed houses after
    1960, and a dummy for being born in the Westman Islands. Robust standard errors clustered by address are
    reported in parentheses. *** p 0.01, ** p 0.05, * p 0.1


group in these regressions. The IV estimates are significant at the 1% level and are somewhat
more precise than the Wald estimate since they include controls for the life-cycle profile of earn-
ings.11 As Figure 4 suggests, these causal effects are not driven by the financial boom that Iceland
experienced between 2002 and 2008. We present subsample analysis in appendix B.
    Our quasi-experimental design is crucial in estimating the causal effect of moving. Columns 5
and 6 of Table 5 report OLS estimates of equation (1). The resulting estimates of β are slightly nega-
tive. The large downward bias of the OLS estimate relative to the IV estimate suggests that movers
are overall substantially adversely selected relative to stayers and relative to the “compliers” in
our quasi-experiment (i.e., those that are induced to move by having their house destroyed). This
finding seems natural in light of the fact that the Westman Islands is a relatively affluent place in
Iceland. People moving away from the Westman Islands are likely to do so because of adverse
events such as job loss that signal weak unobserved characteristics.12
    The average treatment effect we estimate in Table 5 is very large. Does this large average
treatment effect reflect disproportionate increases at the top of the earnings distribution? Or are
they evenly distributed through the earnings distribution? To answer these questions, we estimate
   11
      The dependent variable in our baseline specification is the level of earnings. An alternative would be to use the log-
arithm of earnings. Table A.1 in the appendix reports estimates from this alternative specification. It yields a somewhat
larger estimate of the causal effect: moving causes about an 138 percent increase in life-time labor earnings (0.87 log
points). As we show in Figure A.1, this difference versus the results in levels is driven partly by very large proportional
increases for the lower tail of the earnings distribution.
   12
      Yagan (2018) finds that moving is strongly negatively correlated with employment (conditional on age and other
demographics).

                                                            19
quantile treatment effects using the methods developed in Abadie, Angrist, and Imbens (2002). We
estimate the treatment effect for the 5th to the 95th percentile in 5 percentile increments and then
the effect for the 96th-99th percentile in 1 percentile increments.
       Figure 5 plots the resulting quantile treatment effects. We find that the treatment effect for
the median and for all quantiles between the 15th percentile and the 85th percentile are roughly
$20,000, which is roughly 60 percent of the average earnings of the control group. This is a some-
what smaller effect than the average effect reported in Table 5, but still large. Towards the top of
the income distribution, the estimated treatment effects rise substantially. Evidently, some peo-
ple do very well after having been induced to move.13 Figure A.1 in the appendix plots quantile
treatment effects when the logarithm of earnings is the dependent variable. When viewed in pro-
portional terms, it is the lower tail of the distribution of earning that moves the most. However,
movements at the top of the distribution are also substantial at roughly 100 percent (0.7 log points).
       Figure 6 plots the raw data on average earnings by age separately for those whose houses were
and were not destroyed in the eruption. This figure shows how the earnings effects of the lava
shock differs over the life-cycle. This simple comparison indicates negative earnings effects early
in adulthood—from ages 18 to roughly 25. This likely reflects the fact that those whose houses
were destroyed attend school for longer (see section 8). After people’s mid-20s the earnings effect
is positive. It rises over the life-cycle peaking relatively close to retirement.
       One useful way to summarize our results is to do a simple calculation of the net present value
of moving. To do this we need to estimate the life-cycle profile of the causal effect of moving—i.e.
estimate the earnings effect by age. Appendix C describes the details of the the specification and
Panel B of Figure A.2 presents the earnings effects by age. The resulting estimates start off small
and grow at least until age 50. At age 50, they are estimated to be roughly $50,000.14 If we adopt
the viewpoint of an 18 year old complier at the time of the eruption, and assume the future is
discounted at a rate of 4% per year, the net present value of moving is $444,473.15
       The large positive causal effects of moving we estimate for those younger than 25 years old
at the time of the eruption contrast sharply with our estimates of the causal effects of moving for
  13
      We should note that our estimator yields estimates of the causal effect on different quantiles of the distribution
of earning, not the causal effect on the person that is at any particular quantile absent treatment. If treatment leads
individuals to switch places in the income distribution, these two will be different.
   14
      The precision of our estimates diminishes substantially for ages above 50 (since many of those younger than 25 at
the time of the eruption are in their 50’s at the end of our sample period).
   15
      Here we assume that the causal effect remains constant over the age range 50-63 at its estimated value for age 50
and is zero after age 63. If we instead use the estimated coefficients for the 52-63 age range (which are imprecisely
estimated), we get a net present value of moving of $518,934. On the other hand, if we assume that the value of moving
after age 51 is zero, we we get a net present value of moving of $311,453.

                                                          20
                             100,000


                              80,000
      Treatment Effect ($)




                              60,000


                              40,000


                              20,000


                                  0
                                       0   20           40               60              80               100
                                                             Quantile

                                            Point Estimate                    Point Estimate Mean

Figure 5: Quantile Treatment Effects on Earnings – Cohorts Younger than 25 at time of Eruption
   Note: The figure plots quantile treatment effects using the estimator proposed by Abadie, Angrist, and Imbens
   (2002) for the 5th to the 99th percentile. The effects are estimated in 5 percentile increments up to the 95th
   percentile, and in 1 percentile increments for 96th to 99th percentile. The green horizontal dashed-line plots
   the mean effect (2SLS) for comparison.


those 25 years old and older. Table 6 presents results for this older set of cohorts. For these cohorts,
we estimate the causal effect of moving to be a small negative number that is not statistically
significantly different from zero. Taken together, these results imply that the benefits of moving
are very unequally distributed within families with the children reaping large benefits but the
parents bearing the costs.
   We have also estimated the effect of the lava shock on the earning of the descendants of those
living in the Westman Islands at the time of the eruption. These estimates are reported in Table A.2
in the appendix. The point estimates are large but imprecise, which is not surprising given how
young on average this group is during our sample period. More accurate analysis of the earnings
effect of the descendant group will be possible after a decade or two.
   Our result that the young that disproportionately benefit from moving is consistent with re-
cent work by Chetty, Hendren, and Katz (2016) and Chetty and Hendren (2018) in other settings.
Chetty and Hendren (2018) find evidence for a linear exposure effect—i.e., that the benefits of liv-

                                                        21
                              50,000



                              40,000
       Average Earnings ($)




                              30,000



                              20,000



                              10,000
                                       20   30                 40                 50                 60
                                                                Age

                                                 Destroyed                    Not Destroyed
   Figure 6: Earnings Effect Over the Life Cycle – Cohorts Younger than 25 at time of Eruption


ing in a “good” location grow linearly with the number of years of childhood exposure to that
neighborhood. To shed further light of this in our setting, Figure 7 presents causal effect estimates
for four groups of cohorts: those 0 to 9 years old, those 10 to 24 years old, those 25 to 50 years
old, and those older than 50 at the time of the eruption. While the estimates for these subgroups
are quite noisy, there seems to be a “break” in the causal effect of moving at age 25, but the causal
effect for the 0 to 9 year old cohorts is not estimated to be larger than for the 10 to 24 year old
cohorts.16 Our results, therefore, suggest that the crucial distinction is whether individuals had
finished their education and settled on a career at the time of the eruption. Those young enough
to make changes to the educational choice and shift careers were better able to take advantage of
the “opportunity” the lava shock presented them.17
  16
     We have also run linear specifications similar to those reported by Chetty and Hendren (2018). These do not support
the existence of a linear exposure effect in our setting.
  17
     Our results also differ from those of Chetty, Hendren, and Katz (2016), who find positive effects only for children
who are younger than 13 at the time they move.




                                                          22
        Table 6: Effects of Moving on Earnings – Cohorts 25 and Older at Time of Eruption
                                       Reduced Form            Wald     2SLS                 OLS
                                         (1)        (2)         (3)       (4)         (5)           (6)
           M oved                                           -5,265      -3,931    -3,323***     -3,017***
                                                            (5,149)     (5,374)    (1,029)        (953)
           Destroyed                   -1,024      -725
                                        (999)     (992)
           Control group mean          28,089    28,089        28,089   28,089        —              —
           Controls                     No        Yes           No       Yes         No             Yes
           Age fixed effects            No        Yes           No       Yes         No             Yes
           Year fixed effects           No        Yes           No       Yes         No             Yes
           Observations                30,861    30,861        30,861   30,861      30,861         30,861
    Notes: The dependent variable in all cases is labor earnings. Coefficient estimates are reported in US dollars
    as of 2014 (125 ISK = 1 USD). The set of controls includes gender, a dummy for having changed houses after
    1960, and a dummy for being born in the Westman Islands. Robust standard errors clustered by address are
    reported in parentheses. *** p 0.01, ** p 0.05, * p 0.1


8    Education Effects

We next estimate the causal effect of moving on educational attainment for those induced to move
by our lava shock. Table 7 reports results separately for cohorts younger than 25 at the time of the
eruption, cohorts 25 years old and older, and descendants of the original inhabitants (see section 4
for a discussion of how exactly we define the descendant group). We present both OLS estimates
and IV estimates where we instrument for M ovedi using Destroyedi . The regressions for the
“younger than 25” and “25 and older” groups include as controls gender, cohort, an indicator
for whether the individual was born in the Westman islands, and an indicator for whether the
individual, or his/her parents, had been living in the same house since 1960. The regressions for
the descendants include gender and age as controls.
    Our estimates indicate that the lava shock caused those younger than 25 and induced to move
by the eruption to increase their educational attainment by 3.5 years. To interpret this large es-
timate, it is useful to understand the structure of the Icelandic educational system. Iceland has
10 years of compulsory schooling from ages 6 to 16. The next stage in the Icelandic educational
system is a four-year junior college degree (usually done from ages 16 to 20). Junior college has
traditional academic tracks required for university enrollment, as well as vocational tracks such
as carpentry and hairdressing.
    Table 8 presents estimates of the causal effect of the lava shock on the probability of finishing


                                                          23
                             80,000



                             60,000
      Treatment Effect ($)




                             40,000



                             20,000



                                  0



                             -20,000
                                        0-9             10-24           25-50           50+
                                                           Age at Treatment

                                       Figure 7: IV Earnings Effect – Four Age Groups


a junior college degree and a university degree. Moving raises the probability of getting a junior
college degree by 63 percentage points. The corresponding estimate for the probability of getting
a university degree is positive, with a point estimate of about 23 percentage points, but the effect
is not statistically significant. The 3.5 additional years of schooling induced by moving therefore
mostly reflect a large increase in the rate of attending junior college.
   The lava shock has an even larger causal effect on the educational attainment of the descen-
dants of those living in the Westman Islands at the time of the eruption than on the inhabitants
themselves. Our estimate of the causal effect on the descendants is 5.7 years of extra schooling.
This estimate, though large, may be somewhat downward biased. The youngest cohort in the
descendant group was only 15 years old in 2011 (the year for which we have data on educational
attainment). Many individuals in the youngest cohorts of the descendant group had therefore not
yet finished their educational attainment.
   In contrast, the causal effect of our lava shock on the education of those 25 years old and older
at the time of the eruption, while positive, is small and statistically insignificant. It may seem
natural to view this as a placebo test. However, the forgiving nature of the Icelandic education

                                                            24
                            Table 7: Effect of Moving on Years of Schooling
                                        Younger than 25          25 and Older            Descendants
                                          IV         OLS             IV    OLS            IV      OLS
                                          (1)        (2)             (3)   (4)            (5)     (6)
            M oved                      3.54**       0.13        0.81       0.13     5.69**      -0.24**
                                        (1.77)      (0.16)      (0.77)     (0.15)    (2.49)       (0.11)
            Control group mean          13.40       13.40        11.94     11.94         12.71    12.71
            Controls                     Yes         Yes          Yes       Yes           Yes      Yes
            N                           2,262       2,262        1,101     1,101         3,207    3,207
           Notes: The dependent variable is years of schooling for the group listed at the top of each
           column. In the first four columns, we report robust standard errors clustered by address in
           parentheses. In the last two columns, we report robust standard errors clustered by indi-
           vidual are reported in parentheses. *** p 0.01, ** p 0.05, * p 0.1


                            Table 8: Effects on Post-Compulsory Education
                             Cohorts Younger than 25 at Time of Eruption
                                                      Junior College        University
                                                               (1)                 (2)
                          M oved                             0.638**           0.226
                                                             (0.283)          (0.212)
                          Control group mean                 0.609             0.224
                          Controls                            Yes               Yes
                          N                                  2,262             2,262
                    Notes: The dependent variable is listed at the top for each column (Junior
                    College degree or University degree). In all cases, we report IV regres-
                    sion results with M ovedi instrumented with Destroyedi . Robust stan-
                    dard errors clustered by address are reported in parentheses. *** p 0.01,
                    ** p 0.05, * p 0.1


system makes this a somewhat imperfect placebo test. In Iceland it is not uncommon for people
to return to school in adulthood, finish previously started but unfinished degrees, and take addi-
tional courses and certificates, such as specialized vocational education. The fact that our point
estimate is positive for this group (yet statistically insignificant) may be reflecting this channel.



9   Interpretation

We have shown that our lava shock caused a large increase in life-time income and educational
attainment for those younger than 25 years old at the time of the eruption who were induced
to move. These results cannot be explained simply by a (possibly unanticipated) decline in the

                                                       25
                                           40,000



               Average Earnings (2014 $)   35,000



                                           30,000



                                           25,000



                                           20,000


                                                    1981   1987        1993         1999    2005        2011

                                                                  Westman Islands           Capital region
                                                                  Other regions

                                                Figure 8: Evolution of Average Earnings Across Locations
       Note: The figure plots average earnings across all taxpayers by their municipality of residence in the given year.
       “Capital region” includes Reykjavik (the capital) and surrounding municipalities. “Other regions” includes
       all municipalities not included in the groups “Capital region” or Westman Islands.


returns to fishing or by the Westman Islands being a fundamentally bad place to earn income
during our sample period. To the contrary, fishing has been highly profitable in Iceland and the
Westman Islands has been a very high income place over our sample period. Figure 8 shows that
average earnings in the Westman Islands have been substantially higher than in Iceland’s capital
area (Reykjavik and suburbs) except for a few years during the financial boom last decade. In
contrast to much prior work, our setting is, thus, one in which people gain a great deal from
moving away from a high income location to locations with lower average income.
       This raises the question of how it can possibly be so beneficial to move away from the Westman
Islands. The most compelling explanation, in our view, is that the causal effect of moving away is
highly heterogeneous across people due to the importance of comparative advantage. Like many
small places, the Westman Islands is specialized in a narrow set of industries. In the case of the
Westman Islands, these industries happen to be fishing and fish processing. These two industries
alone account for roughly 70% of income in the Westman Islands, relative to less than 15% in
Iceland as a whole.18 The highly specialized nature of the labor market in the Westman Islands
  18
    See Table A.5 for further details. These statistics combine “Fishing and Agriculture” and “Fish and Food Process-
ing”. However, since there is virtually no agriculture in the Westman Islands, the true extent of specialization is even

                                                                           26
likely means that this is a good place for some to work—i.e., those whose comparative advantage
lies in skills valued in the fishing industry—but a much worse place for others—i.e., those whose
comparative advantage lies in jobs requiring a large amount of eduction such as law, computer
science, engineering, or medicine.
      If moving costs are large, people who are not a good match for living in the Westman Islands
may nevertheless remain on the island. For this group, the causal effect on earnings of moving
away is potentially very high. At the same time, the causal effect for those well matched to the
islands is likely much lower, and may even be negative. In other words, the compliers in our
experiment are likely to be selected as those with a particularly high causal effect of moving.
Moreover, there are important intergenerational tradeoffs that come into play in the decision to
move. The benefits of moving may be quite different for the children (who have yet to complete
their education and choose a career) versus their parents, whose choice of education and career is
more likely to be fixed, even if they move to a location where the returns have changed.


9.1     A Model of Comparative Advantage

To illustrate these ideas, it is useful to write down a Roy model with heterogeneous comparative
advantage, moving costs, and overlapping generations. The model we develop is based on the
models in Lagakos and Waugh (2013), Young (2013), Bryan and Morten (2018), and Adao (2015).
Our model generalizes Adao’s model to include moving costs, an educational choice, and over-
lapping generations, while simplifying it along several other dimensions.
      Consider an economy with two regions: the Westman Islands and the mainland of Iceland. For
simplicity, we assume that each region has a single sector. The economy of the Westman Islands
is engaged in fishing, while the mainland of Iceland is engaged in non-fishing. We use the generic
index k to denote the sectors and denote fishing by F and non-fishing by N .
      The Westman Islands is populated by a measure I of families. Each period, family i is made
up of two generations: parents and children. For simplicity, we model the parents in each family
as a single agent and the children, also, as a single agent. Agents live for two periods. In their
first period of life, they are children and in their second period of life they are parents. We denote
parents by p and children by c.
      Parents inelastically supply one unit of labor to market work. They are endowed with a bi-
variate skill vector pzFp piq, zN
                                p
                                  piqq, where zkppiq is the number of efficiency units of labor that parents
greater than what the statistics suggest.


                                                    27
from family i produce if employed in sector k. It is convenient to define parent i’s comparative
advantage in the non-fishing sector to be

                                        sp piq  logpzN
                                                      p
                                                        piq{zFp piqq
and her absolute advantage to be
                                            ap piq  log zFp piq.

The joint distribution of pzFp piq, zN
                                     p
                                       piqq can then be described in terms of a distribution for compar-
ative advantage sp piq    F psq and a conditional distribution for absolute advantage tappiq|sppiq 
su  H pa|sq.
   Children inherit the skills of their parents with some error. We model the inheritability of skills
as an intergenerational AR(1) process for comparative and absolute advantage:

                                        sc piq  ρs sp piq   s piq,

                                        ac piq  ρa ap piq    a piq,

where s piq and a piq are mean zero i.i.d. shocks and the parameters ρs and ρa take values between
zero and one. Childrens’ skills are not known until they become adults.
   Parents face two choices: whether to move and whether to educate their children. Their choices
are made to maximize a utility function given by

                                      logpC p piqq   βE logpC c piqq,

where C p piq is the parents’ (family) consumption and C c piq is their childrens’ (family) consump-
tion in adulthood. The parameter β captures the degree of altruism of parents towards their chil-
dren. We assume that there is no inter-generational borrowing or saving.
   We focus our analysis on the decisions of the parents at the time of the volcanic eruption. For
simplicity, we abstract from the possibility that their children will want to move when they become
adults. We have considered the more general case. Allowing the children to move when they are
adults complicates the analysis considerably without yielding further insight. One interpretation
of our no-future-moving assumption is that the eruption is a very special event that lowers moving
costs (both for those that lose their house and those that don’t) and that in other periods moving
costs are sufficiently high that few people move.
   Moving to the mainland is costly. We denote this cost by mpiq. The form that this cost takes is
that a fraction 1  exppmpiqq of the parents’ labor income is lost when they move. The moving
                                                     28
costs may differ across households. For example, it may be lower for households whose house is
destroyed if this event reduces their attachment to the Westman Islands.
    We assume that the returns to education on the mainland are sufficiently high that parents
choose to educate their children if they move to the mainland. We denote the cost of education
by f . As with moving costs, the form that the education cost takes is that parents lose a fraction
1  exppf q of their income if they educate their children. Being educated increases childrens’
non-fishing income by a factor exppφpiqq. The benefits of education may also differ across house-
holds, i.e., some households may have a comparative advantage when it comes to making use of
education. Education is not useful in the fishing industry. In our model, parents that stay in the
Westman Islands, therefore, do not educate their children.
    Labor is the only factor of production and firms produce using linear production functions

                                     YF       AF LF       and YN          AN L N ,
where                                    »                                »
                                LF                 zF piqdi,    LN                 zN piqdi,
                                             P
                                             i SF                             P
                                                                              i SN
and S k denotes the set of workers employed in sector k.
    The labor markets in both sectors are perfectly competitive. Furthermore, the Westman Islands
is a small place that takes the prices of both fish, denoted PF , and non-fish, denoted PN , as given.
These assumptions imply that the wages per efficiency unit of labor in fishing and non-fishing are
given by
                                     WF       PF AF       and WN          PN AN ,
respectively. The labor income of worker i in sector k before adjustment for education is therefore
Yk piq      Wk zk piq, i.e., the wage in that sector times the number of efficiency units of labor the
worker can supply.
    Using the definitions of comparative advantage and absolute advantage, we can write the
logarithm of labor income of parents and children in family i as

                                      p
                                     yN piq  wN            ap piq    sp piq,

                                     yFp piq  wF          ap piq,
                                      c
                                     yN piq  wN            ac piq    sc piq      φ pi q,

                                     yFc piq  wF          ac piq,

                                                                               p
where lower case letters refer to the logarithm of upper class letters (i.e., yN piq  log YNp piq).
                                                                29
   Taking account of moving costs and the costs of education, we can write the logarithm of the
consumption of parents and children in family i as
                                 $
                                 '
                                 &wN     ap piq    sp piq  mpiq  f           if they move,
                      c pi q 
                       p
                                 '
                                 %wF    ap piq                                 if they stay,
                                 $
                                 '
                                 &wN     ac piq    sc piq     φpiq  f      if parents move,
                      c pi q 
                       c
                                 '
                                 %wF    ac piq                              if parents stay.

Notice that if the parents move, they choose to educate their children—this is the f in the first line
above—and the children also choose to educate their children in the subsequent period—this is
the f in the third line above.
   It is convenient to rank families according to the comparative advantage of the parents. For
each quantile q P r0, 1s, let αpqq  F 1pqq denote the level of comparative advantage at quantile
q. By construction, αpq q is increasing in q. Agents at higher quantiles q have a stronger compara-
tive advantage in the non-fishing sector, or equivalently a stronger comparative disadvantage in
fishing.
   Expected average log earnings for parents and children of quantile q in the non-fishing and
fishing sectors are

                                  ȲNp pq q  wN     Apq q       α pq q ,                            (3a)

                                  ȲFp pq q  wF     Apq q,                                          (3b)

                                 EȲNc pq q  wN     ρa Apq q       ρs αpq q     φp q q ,            (3c)

                                 EȲFc pq q  wF     ρa Apq q.                                       (3d)

Here Apq q denotes the mean of the absolute advantage conditional distribution H pa|αpq qq at quan-
tile q and φpq q is the mean benefit of education for workers of quantile q.


9.1.1   Simplified Version Explained Visually

As a stepping stone towards understanding the full model, let’s first briefly consider a simplified
version of the model where there is a single generation, no education, and all workers face homo-
geneous moving costs. In this case, average earnings of quantile q in the non-fishing and fishing
sectors are
                       ȲN pq q  wN     Apq q     α pq q     and      ȲF pq q  wF        Apq q,

                                                        30
                                                 ȲF(q)

                  Average log earnings                              ȲN(q)




                                                                              ȲN(q) − m

                                          Moving cost (m)

                                                            “misallocation”

                              0             Fishing        q̃            q* Non-fishing 1
                                          Comparative advantage in non-fishing (q)
                                         Figure 9: Sorting by Comparative Advantage


respectively. Figure 9 illustrates the economics of the model visually. If a worker chooses to work
in the fishing sector, she will on average earn ȲF pq q (the light blue line). This will also be her
consumption. If she chooses to work in the non-fishing sector, she will earn ȲN pq q (the dashed
dark red line). In this case, however, she will need to move away from the Westman Islands,
which is costly. Taking account of these moving costs, her level of consumption will on average
be ȲN pq q  m (the solid dark red line).
   We have drawn Figure 9 with ȲF pq q downward sloping and ȲN pq q upward sloping. This
means that workers that have a comparative advantage in fishing (i.e., low q workers) are more
productive at fishing than those that have a comparative advantage at non-fishing and vice versa.
While this may seem like a natural case, the theory we have laid out can accommodate cases in
which both ȲF pq q and ȲN pq q are upward sloping (those with a comparative advantage at non-
fishing are also better at fishing) and cases in which both ȲF pq q and ȲN pq q are downward sloping
(those with a comparative advantage at fishing are also better at non-fishing). All that we assume
is that ȲN pq q has a larger slope than ȲF pq q (i.e., workers differ in their comparative advantage).
   In equilibrium, workers will self-select into the sector in which they earn the most net of mov-
ing costs. Figure 9 shows that this will give rise to a unique cutoff quantile q  below which all
workers choose to be fishermen and above which all workers choose to move away from the
Westman Islands and take up employment in the non-fishing sector.

                                                            31
      Figure 9 also shows clearly how the moving cost leads to misallocation of labor. If moving
were not costly, workers at quantile q would choose between ȲF pq q and ȲN pq q rather than ȲF pq q
and ȲN pq q  m. In this case, a larger fraction of workers would move away from the Westman
Islands (and presumably a larger fraction of mainland workers would also move to the Westman
Islands). The cutoff quantile in this no-moving-cost case would be q̃. The moving cost implies
that workers between q̃ and q  are misallocated and are earning less than they would without the
moving cost.


9.2     The Volcanic Experiment

Let’s now consider the situation at the time of the eruption in the full model with parents and
children. Our empirical results in sections 5 and 6 indicate that at the time of the eruption a
fraction of families in the Westman Islands exogenously faced a lower moving cost than other
families because their houses were destroyed in the eruption. We therefore consider a situation
where a fraction of families (those whose house was destroyed) face a moving cost of m1 , while
other families face a moving cost of m ¡ m1 .
      The decision to move is made by the parents. They decide whether to move by comparing their
expected utility from moving with their expected utility from staying. This comparison implies
that a family moves if

                        ȲNp pq q   βEȲNc pq q  mpiq  p1         β qf   ¡ ȲFppqq    βEȲFc pq q,

where mpiq is either m or m1 . Using equations (3a)-(3d) we can rewrite this condition as

                   p1      βρs qαpq q     βφpq q ¡ mpiq        p1     β qf     p1      β qpwF    wN q.     (4)

The left-hand side of this condition is the benefit of moving, while the right-hand side is the cost of
moving. If we assume that φpq q is constant or increasing in q—i.e., that families with a comparative
advantage in non-fishing also gain (weakly) more from being educated—the left-hand side of the
inequality (4) is increasing in q, while the right-hand side is a constant for each value of mpiq. This
implies that for families whose house was destroyed there is a unique q 1 such that among these
families, those with q    P rq1, 1s move away from the Islands. The cutoff q1 solves the equation
                   p1     βρs qαpq 1 q   βφpq 1 q  m1       p1      β qf     p1     β qpwF    wN q.
Analogously, for families whose house was not destroyed there is a different unique cutoff q             ¡ q1




such that among these families, those with q         P rq, 1s move away from the Islands.
                                                          32
                                             ȲF(q)
                                                                                                          Ȳ cN(q)
              Average log earnings




                                                                                               effect                ψ(m′)
                                                                           effect           on children
                                                                         on parents
                                                                                                           ψ(m)
                                                                                                                     Ȳ pN(q)

                                                never-takers                          compliers           always-takers

                          0                                    q *′     q*                                                      1
                                            Comparative advantage in non-fishing (q)
                                                     Figure 10: The Volcanic Experiment


    This situation is depicted in Figure 10. As before, the downward-sloping light-blue line depicts
average earnings of fishermen as a function of comparative advantage in non-fishing ȲF pq q (same
for both generations). The two solid dark-red lines depict average earning on the mainland for
parents and children. The gap between the two lines represents the gains from education in non-
fishing. We have drawn the figure for the case where those with a comparative advantage in
non-fishing also gain (slightly) more from being educated (the ȲNc pq q line is (slightly) steeper than
the ȲNp pq q line). The equation for the cutoff points q 1 and q  can be rewritten as

                                                             ȲNp pq q   Ψpmpiq, q q  ȲFp pq q,                                   (5)

where
                                     Ψpmpiq, q q                rβφpqq  mpiq  p1           β qf    β p1  ρsqαpqqs.
                                                         1
                                                                                                                                    (6)
                                                     1       β
The two dashed red lines in Figure 10 plot the left-hand side of equation (5) for the two values
of moving costs m1 and m. The points where these lines cross the ȲF pq q line are the two cutoff
quantiles q 1 and q  .
    It is now straightforward to map our various empirical facts into the model. For this purpose,
it is useful to begin by dividing the workers into three groups based on the terminology of Angrist

                                                                               33
(2004). Workers to the left of q 1 in Figure 10 are “never-takers.” These workers have such a strong
comparative advantage in fishing that they don’t move even if their house is destroyed. Workers
between q 1 and q  are “compliers.” These are the workers that are induced to move by having
their house be destroyed, i.e., they move only if their house is destroyed. Finally, workers to the
right of q  are “always-takers.” These workers have such a strong comparative disadvantage in
fishing that they move even if their house is not destroyed.
   Our IV estimates reflect the causal effect of moving on the compliers (Imbens and Angrist,
1994). Let’s start by considering the children. In Figure 10, the causal effect of moving for children
at a given level of comparative advantage q is the vertical distance between ȲNc pq q and ȲF pq q. The
figure shows clearly that in our setting the complier children are highly selected to have a large
causal effect of moving. This fact helps explain the large magnitude of the causal earnings effects
we estimate. Intuitively, the complier children are relatively poorly suited to live in the Westman
Islands. This is why their parents can be induced to move away and also why they themselves
gain so much from moving.
   We can also read the causal effect on the parents—the vertical distance between ȲNp pq q and
ȲF pq q—off of Figure 10. It is much smaller than the causal effect on the children. The reason for
this is that the parents are not educated and therefore benefit less from moving to the mainland.
We have drawn Figure 10 such that the causal effect on the complier parents is negative as in our
empirical estimates. Whether this effect is positive or negative depends on the sign of Ψpmpiq, q q.
Equation (6) reveals that this depends on the parents’ level of altruism toward their children β and
the size of the education effect φpq q. With a large degree of altruism and a large education effect,
parents will be induced to move even if the effect on their own earning is negative because the
large effect on their children’s earnings outweighs their own losses.
   It is evident from Figure 10 that the causal effect of moving in our model is highly heteroge-
neous depending on comparative advantage. In particular, the causal effect on the never-takers is
smaller than the causal effect on compliers and can easily be negative even for children. In Figure
10, the causal effect on most never-taker children is negative (all of those to the left of the point
where the ȲF pq q line crosses the ȲNc pq q line). These families have a strong comparative advantage
in the fishing sector. They would be made worse off if they had to move to the non-fishing sector
even if there were no direct moving cost. Our model therefore has the property that even though
some can be made much better off by moving, this is not true of all. A policy of moving every-
one away from the Westman Islands may be a terrible policy even despite our large positive IV


                                                  34
estimates because there are these other groups that are well matched to the Westman Islands and
would be made worse off by having to move.
       Figure 10 provides a natural explanation for the “puzzle” we posed at the start of this section:
how can it be that the causal effects of moving are so positive even though people are moving
away from a high income location? We have drawn the figure such that the average income across
never-takers is high (higher than the average income of compliers and always-takers). This reflects
the fact that fishing is very profitable in Iceland, and those with a comparative advantage in this
sector therefore earn high income on average (higher than the average of those with a comparative
advantage in other sectors). This is in no way inconsistent with the notion that the causal effect of
moving away from fishing can be very high for those not well suited to work in this sector. Hence,
even though the causal effect on the complier children is large and positive, average income can
easily be higher for those who remain in the Westman Islands (a weighted average of ȲF pq q for
the never-takers and non-treated compliers) than those who move away (a weighted average of
ȲNc pq q and ȲNp pq q for the always-takers and treated compliers).
       This logic also provide a simple explanation for why the OLS estimate of income on moving is
so much lower than the IV estimate for the young in our setting. The OLS estimator compares the
income of all of those that move with all of those that stay. The stayers are the never-takers and
the non-treated compliers, while the movers are the always-takers and the treated compliers. The
OLS estimate therefore takes a difference between the average of ȲNc pq q from q 1 to 1 and ȲF pq q
from 0 to q  .19 This can easily be negative for both the parents and the children even though the
causal effect on the complier children is always large and positive.
       An important implication of our model is that barriers to mobility can result in large
amounts of misallocation even across locations that have similar levels of average income. Many
locations—especially smaller ones—are specialized in terms of their occupational mix. Large mov-
ing costs will then imply that people born in these locations who happen to have a strong com-
parative advantage in occupations not well represented in that location could have substantially
higher lifetime earnings were these barriers to mobility eliminated.
       A concern regarding the interpretation given above is that the large causal effect of moving for
the compliers may have been an ex post fluke due to aggregate shocks after the eruption rather
than something that could have been rationally anticipated at the time of the eruption (Rosen-
  19
    It is important to remember that there are two types of households at each value of q in Figure 10: those whose
house was destroyed and those whose house was not destroyed. In the complier region, those whose house was
destroyed move, while those whose house was destroyed do not.


                                                        35
zweig and Udry, 2018). This concern is difficult to rule out completely. However, Figure 4 shows
that the relative labor market outcomes for treated and untreated individuals in our sample are
quite stable over our 34 year sample period. If we assume that the statistical process that generated
this stable process of relative returns during our sample period also applied to the period prior to
our sample period running back to the eruption, a large difference between ex-ante and ex-post
returns is unlikely. Only a large and extremely persistent shock could result in such a difference,
but the stability over our sample period implies that such shocks are uncommon.


9.3     Barriers to Moving

Equation (6) is helpful for understanding what factors impede moving in our setting—i.e., what
we have referred to as “moving costs broadly defined.” One such factor is imperfect altruism by
parents towards their children. The level of altruism of parents towards their children is captured
by β in our model. If β is small, parents will place low value on their childrens’ gains from
education (φpq q) and consequently be less inclined to move.
      Another factor is imperfect information about the returns to moving. The decision to move will
depend on perceived returns rather than actual returns. In our model this means the perceived
gains from eduction (perceived φpq q) and perceived earnings in the non-fishing sector (perceived
ȲNp pq q). If the parents are pessimistic about either of these factors, this will hinder mobility in
the same way as traditional moving costs. This type of friction has been emphasized in, e.g., the
context of returns to education (Manski, 1993). In settings where education and income are low,
perceived returns to education are much smaller than actual returns (Jensen, 2010).
      But pessimism is not the only way in which imperfect information can impede mobility. Risk
has this effect as well. In appendix F, we extend our model to allow for Epstein-Zin preferences
and uncertain returns to education. In this case, the equivalent expression to equation (6) is
                                                                                                         
           Ψpmpiq, q q                β φ̄pq q           mpiq  p1   β qf    β p1  ρsqαpqq  γ2 σs2
                               1                    γ 2
                                                     σ                                                         ,   (7)
                           1       β                2 φ
where σφ2 and σs2 denote the variance of the education effect and the variance of the intergenera-
tional shock to comparative advantage, respectively, and γ denotes the coefficient of relative risk
aversion. Moving away from log-utility and adding uncertain returns to eduction results in two
additional terms in equation (7) relative to equation (6): the σφ2 term and the σs2 term. Both terms
enter the right-hand side of equation (7) with a negative sign. In this case, therefore, risk about the
effect of education and risk regarding future comparative advantage act to hinder mobility in the
same way as traditional moving costs.
                                                            36
      The returns to moving may be particularly difficult to estimate when the industry structure
differs between the location of origin and destination, as in the case of the Westman Islands. Fur-
thermore, the fact that the decision to move is made by the parents no doubt exacerbates the
informational frictions. Not only does a future computer genius or great legal mind need to un-
derstand that he or she will have higher earnings on the mainland, but this information needs to
be communicated to his or her parents. All of this suggests to us that information frictions may
play an important role in explaining the large barriers to moving that we estimate.
      While the large causal effect of moving that we estimate (present value of roughly $444,000)
indicates that barriers to moving are large, this does not provide an estimate of the difference in
moving costs between those whose houses were destroyed and those whose houses were not
destroyed. This difference—i.e., the reduction in moving costs resulting from one’s house being
destroyed—is potentially much smaller. Figure 10 illustrates this point clearly. The reduction in
moving costs resulting from one’s house being destroyed is equal to the vertical distance between
the two dashed red lines in Figure 10. The size of this difference determines the size of the complier
group. It is, however, not related to the size of the causal effect on the children, which is equal to
the distance between the light-blue line and the top solid red line.


9.4     Evidence of Comparative Advantage

The model analyzed above illustrates that heterogeneous comparative advantage across workers
provides a natural explanation for the large causal effect of moving we estimate. In this section,
we support this view by presenting evidence indicating that the Westman Islands is a place that
specializes in occupations for which the value of education is low, and is therefore a poor match
for people with a comparative advantage in “brainy” occupations.
      While the fishing industry pays high wages, it requires little formal education. One sign of
this is that educational attainment in the Westman Islands is low. Table 9 reports educational
attainment in the Westman Islands, Iceland’s capital area, and other areas in Iceland. Educational
attainment is substantially lower in the Westman Islands than in Reykjavik. Only 20% of the
working age population has a university degree, compared to 40% in the capital region.
      Another sign that comparative advantage for “brainy” occupations is an important factor
in our results derives from our analysis of the characteristics of the compliers in our natural
experiment—i.e., those induced to move by the volcanic eruption. Although individual compliers
cannot be identified in the data, their average characteristics can be estimated when the instru-

                                                 37
                                   Table 9: Educational Attainment by Location
                                                Westman Islands         Capital Region        Other Regions
              Compulsory education                   40%                     25%                  41%
              Junior college education               39%                     36%                  36%
              University education                   20%                     39%                  22%
       Notes: Data from the 2011 Educational Census. People aged 25-64 in 2011. Source: Statistics Iceland.


        Table 10: Complier characteristics ratios – Cohorts Younger than 25 at Time of Eruption

       Variable pX q                                 PrrXi    1s     PrrXi    1|Compliers           r |
                                                                                                   Pr Xi 1 Complier  s
                                                                                                        r s
                                                                                                       Pr Xi 1

       Female                                             0.49                  0.34                  0.69 (0.20)
       Age (¡ median)                                     0.51                  0.40                  0.79 (0.18)
       Change house after 1960                            0.60                  0.75                  1.25 (0.25)
       Born in Westman Islands                            0.80                  0.82                  1.03 (0.13)
       House value (¡ median)                             0.64                  0.68                  1.06 (0.16)
       House year (¡ median)                              0.61                  0.72                  1.17 (0.32)
       Parents education (¡ compulsory)                   0.50                  0.75                  1.51 (0.36)
       Parents married                                    0.88                  1.05                  1.19 (0.10)
       Notes: The first column reports the fraction of the overall population for which the characteristic applies. The
       second column reports this same statistic only for compliers. The third column reports the relative frequency
       for compliers relative to the overall population. Parents education is a dummy variable that equals 1 if one or
       both parents have more than compulsory education. Standard errors for the characteristics ratios clustered by
       address are reported in parentheses.


mental variable is binary (Angrist, 2004). The basic intuition is that we can uncover the statistical
characteristics of the always-takers and never-takers in our data by looking at those whose houses
were destroyed and did not move (never-takers) and those whose houses were not destroyed and
moved anyway (always-takers). The statistical characteristics of the compliers can then be inferred
by comparing these groups to the whole sample and using Bayes rule.20
       Table 10 reports the frequency of a set of characteristics among the cohorts that were younger
than 25 years old at the time of the eruption. We report the frequency within this entire group
(column 1), among the compliers in this group (column 2), and the ratio of these frequencies
(column 3). What stands out is that the compliers are roughly 50% more likely to have parents
that had post-compulsory education than the typical Westman Islander.
       An extensive literature has documented that parents with higher education levels also have
children with higher education levels (see, e.g., Black and Devereux, 2010), and that this partly
reflects correlated traits between parents and children (Black, Devereux, and Salvanes, 2005). The
  20
    For further discussion on estimation of treatment effects under imperfect compliance, see Imbens and Angrist
(1994) and Angrist and Pischke (2009).

                                                             38
fact that the compliers in our experiment come from homes with highly educated parents, thus,
suggests that they may be particularly likely to have a comparative advantage in occupations that
require relatively large amounts of education.


9.5     A Model of Absolute Advantage

It is useful to contrast our preferred comparative advantage interpretation of our empirical results
with an interpretation based only on absolute advantage. In a seminal paper, (Abowd, Kramarz,
and Margolis, 1999) (hereafter, AKM) model worker income yi,j as the sum of a worker effect, a
firm (or in our case, location) effect, and an error term:

                                          yi,j    ai        bj   i,j .                               (8)

Here ai is the worker effect and bj is the location effect. In empirical applications, the location effect
in this model is identified by looking at movers. For our application, let’s denote the location effect
for the Westman Islands by bW and the location effect for the rest of Iceland by bI .
      Since we estimate a large causal effect of moving away from the Westman Island for the cohorts
younger than 25 years old at the time of the eruption, the AKM model implies that the Westman
Islands has a worse location effect than the rest of Iceland, i.e., bW      bI   0, for these cohorts. In
other words, the Westman Islands is a “bad” location from the perspective of earning income for
this group.
      But as we emphasize above, average income in the Westman Islands is substantially higher
than average income in the rest of Iceland. Given that the Westman Islands is a “bad” place, the
only way to explain the high average income in the Westman Islands within the context of AKM’s
model of absolute advantage is that the workers in the Westman Islands have much higher average
person effects (ai ’s) than their counterparts in the rest of Iceland, In other words, the young people
living in the Westman Islands at the time of the eruption must have been hugely positively selected
in terms of their ability to earn income relative to young people elsewhere in Iceland.
      While this alternative explanation is logically consistent, we do not view it as particularly
plausible. One reason for this is that standard measures of human capital accumulation do not
support this view. Educational attainment is low in the Westman Islands (Table 9). Students from
the Westman Islands also perform poorly on standardized tests relative to their peers elsewhere
in Iceland: The average test score for the Westman Islands ranks towards the bottom of the dis-
tribution of average test scores across schools in Iceland in all subjects (see Figure A.5 for details).

                                                        39
Of course, Westman Islanders may be particularly well-endowed in the human capital needed to
carry out the specific tasks that are done on the Westman Islands. But that suggests the model of
comparative advantage we present in sections 9.1-9.2.
      To gain a further understanding of what an absolute advantage interpretation of our facts en-
tails, Figure 11 provides a graphical depiction of the AKM model analogous to Figure 9. In this
case, workers are ranked on the horizontal axis by absolute advantage as opposed to comparative
advantage (i.e., q denotes absolute advantage). Workers further to the right in the figure have
higher absolute advantage and are therefore better at both tasks. This is reflected in the fact that
both the ȲF pq q curve and the ȲN pq q curve are upward sloping. Since there is no comparative ad-
vantage, these two curves are parallel. We have drawn the figure such that the causal effect of
moving is positive (ȲN pq q   ¡ ȲF pqq). We have also drawn a third curve in the figure representing
the average earning in non-fishing of those living in other regions at the time of the eruption (the
green dotted curve). This curve is below the ȲN pq q curve reflecting the positive worker effects of
the Westman Islanders relative to people elsewhere in Iceland needed to explain lower average
income in the rest of Iceland than in the Westman Islands. Finally, in this model, it is not hetero-
geneity in the causal effect of moving that determines who moves (since this is constant). A simple
idea is that there is heterogeneity in moving costs. The final curve in the Figure 11 plots earnings
of Westman Islanders in non-fishing net of a heterogeneous moving cost (ȲN pq q  mpq q). We have
drawn this curve such that the moving cost is smaller for people with low absolute advantage. In
this case, it will be low absolute advantage people that move. This assumption is needed for the
AKM interpretation to be able to explain the low OLS estimate of income on moving we obtain.
However, recent empirical evidence suggests that, in fact, low-skilled people are less mobile than
high-skilled people (Notowidigdo, 2013).


9.6     Compensating Differentials

Are the greater earnings obtained by those who move away from the Westman Islands compensa-
tion for non-pecuniary costs? This is an issue that besets most work on the causal effect of location,
but which we believe is relatively unimportant in our setting. Conventional wisdom in Iceland is
that the price level in rural towns like the Westman Islands has traditionally been higher than in
Reykjavik (except perhaps for housing). We do not have access to a systematic comparison of price
levels in the Westman Islands and other areas in Iceland. But we have been able to survey certain
product categories to partially verify this conventional wisdom at least for the present time.

                                                   40
                                                                            Y̅ N(q)

                                                                            Y̅ F(q)
                                                                   m(q)
                          causal effect of move

                                                                            Y̅ N(q)-m(q)




                                           Average earning in non-fishing
                                           of people born in other region


               0                      q*                                    1
                           Absolute advantage of workers (q)
                           Figure 11: A Model of Absolute Advantage


   The Westman Islands has two main supermarkets, and we have verified that currently the
price of food in these stores is identical to other outlets of the same chains in Iceland. Product
availability is clearly much more limited in the Westman Islands, suggesting that the variety-
adjusted price index is higher. The price of gasoline is also the same in the Westman Islands as
in rest of Iceland, but the price of electricity and hot water for heating are higher in the Westman
Islands than in Reykjavik. Housing has been less expensive per square foot in the Westman Is-
lands than in the Reykjavik in recent years. However, it is difficult to adjust for quality and this
difference is presumably associated with greater amenities in Reykjavik.
   Since the price level is likely higher in the Westman Islands than in Reykjavik, any non-
pecuniary benefits of living in the Westman Islands must arise from other sources. One such
source may be differences in preferences (Atkin, 2013). The people living in the Westman Islands
may simply have a preference for the particular amenities that exist there. However, this inter-
pretation seems difficult to square with the time pattern of earnings effects which appear to grow
across generations. The average earnings effect for the cohorts that were 25 years old and older
at the time of the eruption is -$4,000, while it is $27,500 for those younger than 25 years old, and
$31,000 for the unborn children of those younger than 25 years old (estimated with large standard
errors). Similarly, the education effect also seems to grow across the generations, with the effect
being largest for the generation that was unborn at the time of the eruption.

                                                  41
       If compensating differentials associated with culture were behind our effects, one would ex-
pect them to be smaller for children than parents, and even smaller for descendants born outside
of the Westman Islands. Therefore, for compensating differentials to explain our findings, the
intergenerational pattern of effect sizes should be the reverse of what we find. Another way to
put this is that if the non-pecuniary benefits of living in the Westman Islands were similar for the
parents as for the children, then the causal effect estimates for the children would require large
moving costs to explain.
       We are also able to study the effect of our shock to mobility on a variety of non-monetary
outcomes. Table 11 reports results fo a variety of outcomes, aside from earnings, for those less
than 25 years of age at the time of the eruption. The causal effect of moving on these outcomes are
imprecisely estimated. But the point estimates suggest that those induced to move by the eruption
are both less likely to die before the age of 50 and less likely to receive pension payments. Since the
young cohorts do not reach the retirement age of 67 during the sample period, pension payments
relate to illness, disability, or a deceased spouse or parent.21 The point estimates also suggest that
those induced to move are more likely to get married and have more children. Effects for the
older cohorts are qualitatively similar, though they are smaller and apart from being less likely to
die before the age of 50, none of the coefficients are statistically significant (see Table A.3). None
of these estimates are consistent with non-pecuniary costs of moving, according to conventional
views on the consequences of these factors for happiness.


9.7      Returns to Education?

Finally, let us consider how our estimates relate to the literature on the returns to education. Em-
pirical work on the returns to education suggests that an additional year of schooling raises in-
come by roughly 10% (Card, 2001). This corresponds approximately to what one obtains by com-
paring average incomes across educational groups in Iceland. During the period 2004-2014, the
annual earnings premium for workers with junior college degrees in Iceland versus those with
only compulsory education was 36%. This suggests a 9% return per additional year of schooling
in Iceland (36% / 4 years).
       We can compare this with what we would estimate for the returns to education if we were
  21
    One might wonder whether the treatment effect on income is, to some extent, driven by the lower propensity of the
treatment group to retire early. To investigate this, we reran our empirical analysis setting the earnings observations
to missing for all years when individuals are receiving a pension. Table A.4 in the appendix presents results from this
case. This approach yields a treatment effect of $24,300, and is highly statistically significant (compared to $27,500 for
our baseline specification). Hence, early pensions do not appear to be driving our main results.

                                                           42
               Table 11: Other Outcomes – Cohorts Younger than 25 at Time of Eruption
                                                          IV          OLS       Control Mean
                                                          (1)         (2)            (3)
                          Pension Recipient             -0.087       0.000            0.084
                                                        (0.058)     (0.006)
                          Early Death                   -0.057      -0.010*           0.033
                                                        (0.040)     (0.006)
                          Married                        0.171      -0.038**          0.628
                                                        (0.141)      (0.016)
                          Number of Children             0.089      -0.100*           2.30
                                                        (0.435)     (0.055)
     Notes: Each coefficient estimate corresponds to a regression of the dependent variable indicated in the top
     panel on M oved. We control for gender, cohort, a dummy for having changed houses after 1960, a dummy
     for being born in the Westman Islands, year dummies, and age dummies. Pension Recipient is a dummy for
     receiving pension income in a given year. Early Death is a dummy for dying before age 50. The regression
     with Early Death as the dependent variable is estimated only for those born before 1965, since this group has
     reached age 50 by the end of our sample period. Married is an indicator of being registered as married in the
     National Registry. Number of Children is number of children born after the eruption, i.e., in 1973 or later. Robust
     standard errors clustered by address are reported in parentheses. *** p 0.01, ** p 0.05, * p 0.1


to assume (counterfactually, we think) that the only channel by which moving affects earnings is
through educational attainment. Our average estimated earnings effect is 83%, and our average
estimated effect on educational attainment is a 3.6 year increase in schooling. Taken together, these
estimates would imply a 23% return (0.83/3.6) to each additional year of schooling—much larger
than the 10% return suggested by the returns to education literature.
     The model we present in sections 9.1-9.2 can help us understand this difference. In this model,
the large ratio of causal effects of moving on earning and education arise from several factors.
First, it partly reflects comparative advantage: those induced to move have a comparative advan-
tage at non-fishing. Second, it arises from an interaction between moving and increased educa-
tional attainment. Additional years of schooling are much more valuable when the individuals
can relocate to where the education is most valuable. The returns to additional years of education
are smaller in the more standard case where the individual still faces a large moving cost and is
therefore only able to use his or her additional education in his or her original location.



10      Conclusion

We exploit a mobility shock generated by a destructive volcanic eruption—a true natural
experiment—to estimate the causal effect of location on economic and educational outcomes. For

                                                             43
those who were younger than 25 years old at the time of the eruption, we find that having one’s
house destroyed by the eruption yields a large positive causal effect on both earnings and educa-
tion. The “lava shock” led to an increase in annual earnings of roughly 83% for those younger
than 25 years old at the time of the eruption who were induced to move. The earnings effect
increased gradually over people’s working life and peaked during prime age. Moreover, these
young movers got 3.6 more years of schooling than they otherwise would have, and, as a result
of the mobility shock, their children (the descendants of the originally affected population) got 4.7
more years of schooling.
    Our study shows that the benefits of moving may be very unequally distributed within the
family. While the eruption had large positive effects on the earnings of the young, the earnings
effects for those 25 and older at the time of the eruption were small and negative. The unequal
distribution of the costs and benefits of moving across parents and children may help shed light
on why labor does not always flow to where it earns the highest returns: the costs accrue to the
parents (who make the decision), while the gains accrue to children, potentially many decades
later.
    A unique feature of our environment, moreover, is that the workers in our study are moving
away from opportunity, at least from the perspective of average income. This suggests that our re-
sults should not be interpreted as the return from escaping a “bad” location. Instead, we interpret
our results as evidence of the importance of comparative advantage. The location we study is,
like many small towns, specialized in a particular industry that is unlikely to be the ideal match
for everyone. Those who responded to the “lava shock” were more likely to come from highly
educated families, who were plausibly poorly matched with the range of job opportunities in this
location. Our findings underscore the potential for geographical misallocation of labor even when
differences in average incomes across locations are small.




                                                 44
A     Constructing Years of Schooling

Our education variable is reported on a five-point scale using the International Standard Classifi-
cation of Education (ISCED). The first level is compulsory schooling, which is 10 years in Iceland
and is completed by most students when they are 16 years old. The second level is a degree from
a junior college. In junior college, students can choose between traditional tracks that prepare stu-
dents for university studies and vocational tracks such as carpentry, hair-dressing, plumbing, etc.
Junior college degrees take four years to complete and are completed by most students when they
are 20 years old. We therefore convert the second level to 14 years of schooling. The third level
is post-secondary, non-tertiary degrees. These include various technical degree programs that in
most cases take 6 months to 2 years to complete. We convert this level to 15 years of schooling.
The fourth level is university education, both bachelor’s and master’s degrees. Most bachelor’s
degrees take three years to complete in Iceland and most masters degree take one to two years to
complete. We convert this level to 18 years of schooling, i.e., four additional years over and above
junior college. Finally, the fifth level is doctoral degrees. We assume that these take four years to
complete after a completion of a bachelor’s degree and a one year master’s degree. We therefore
convert these degrees to 22 years of schooling.



B    Earnings Effect over Subsamples

One might worry that the large causal effect of moving we estimate is concentrated in the period
of the financial boom Iceland experienced over the period 2002 to 2008. This is not the case. To
illustrate this we estimate the following regression

                                     ¸
                                     2014
                         Yit   α            βt M ovedi  periodt   X1i γ   δt   εit ,            (9)
                                    
                                    t 1981

where the variable periodt represents an indicator variable for each non-consecutive 5-year period
in sample period of 1981-2014 (i.e., 1981-1985, 1986-1990, ... 2011-2014). The endogenous regres-
sors M ovedi  periodt are instrumented using interactions of the 5-year period dummies with the
instrument Destroyedi . The βt estimates from this regression are plotted in Figure A.3. The figure
shows that the effect of moving is positive throughout the sample period and does not appear to
have a systematic relationship with the business cycle. In particular, it is high both before and
after the financial crisis.


                                                      45
C    Earnings Effects over the Life-Cycle

We can estimate the life-cycle profile of the effect of living in a house that was destroyed on earn-
ings by estimating the following regression

                                      ¸
                                      62
                         Yit   α             βτ Destroyedi  ageτ     X1i γ        δt     εit          (10)
                                      
                                      τ 18

where the variable ageτ represents an indicator variable for each 2-year age group from age 18 to
63 (i.e., 18-19, 20-21, ..., 62-63). We include a full set of 2-year age fixed effect, time fixed effects and
the same demographic controls as in our main specifications. Panel A of Figure A.2 plots the βτ
coefficients from this specification. These results are slightly different from what one might expect
from Figure 4. The difference arises because of the inclusion of the controls.
    We can also estimate the life-cycle profile of the causal effect of moving by age by using an
instrumental variables procedure where we estimate

                                          ¸
                                          62
                           Yit   α            βτ M ovedi  ageτ     X1i γ     δt        εit            (11)
                                          
                                       τ 18

and instrument for the endogenous regressors M ovedi  ageτ with Destroyedi  ageτ . Panel B of
Figure A.2 plots the βτ coefficients from this specification.



D     Results for Household Heads versus Dependents

Our baseline empirical results split the sample into those younger than 25 and 25 and older. Our
theoretical model and interpretation of our results, however, discusses the difference between the
choice faced by children and their parents at the time of the eruption. In this section, we present a
set of empirical results that matches more closely the distinction between parents and children.
    Rather than splitting the sample by age, we split it into a group we call “household heads”
and another that we call “dependents.” We classify people into the household heads group if they
are: 1) married, “cohabiting” (a legal construct for unmarried couples in Iceland), divorced, or
widowed; or 2) the oldest male or female in the household and are older than 25 years old; or 3)
between 18 and 25 years old, the oldest male or female, and living with someone older than 25 but
less than 15 years older than they are. All others are classified as dependents.
    Table D.1 provides basic information about how this grouping compares to the age-based
grouping we use in the main body of the paper. The difference is that 217 individuals under

                                                       46
                                  Table D.1: Comparison of Groups
                                           Younger than 25       25 and Older
                   Dependents                  2,392                   0           2,392
                   Household Heads              217                  2,198         2,415
                                               2,609                 2,198         4,807
           Note: The table reports number of individuals by group according to two sample splits:
           Younger than 25 versus 25 and Older, used in main text, and Dependents versus Household
           Heads used in this appendix.


the age of 25 are in the household head group. This shows that our simple age based grouping
captures the distinction between independent adults and dependents quite well.
   Tables D.2-D.5 present our main results for the household head versus dependent grouping.
The results are very similar to the results for the age-based grouping in the main body of the paper.
We find large positive IV estimates of the effect on both income and education for the dependents.
We find zero effects for the household heads on earnings and statistically insignificant positive
effects on education. The OLS estimates are also very similar.
   The results show directly that it is the dependents (mostly children) that benefit from being
induced to move by having their house destroyed, while the parents (household heads) do not
gain. The only difference between our grouping and parents versus dependents is that we include
childless adults in the household heads category. The reason for this is that we do not think having
children will affect the earnings effect of moving for adults. It may affect the decision to move (the
first stage). But it should not affect the second stage. We therefore include these childless adults
in our head of household regressions.




                                                     47
                                         Table D.2: First Stage Regressions
                                All                     Dependents                  Household Heads               Descendants
                          (1)          (2)             (3)              (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)         (8)
   Destroyed           0.151***    0.160***          0.107***      0.120***         0.195***      0.201***      0.058***    0.059***
                        (0.030)     (0.029)           (0.035)       (0.034)          (0.029)       (0.029)       (0.017)     (0.017)
   Control Mean         0.269         0.269           0.284         0.284            0.250         0.250         0.621       0.621
   Controls              No            Yes             No            Yes              No            Yes           No          Yes
   F -statistic         17.9          21.1             8.9          11.4             27.5          29.4          10.4         12.3
   N                    4,807         4,807           2,392         2,392            2,415         2,415         3,740       3,740
Notes: This table reports coefficients from OLS regressions of M oved on Destroyed. For the original inhabitants M oved is
an indicator for having moved away as of 1975 and Destroyed is an indicator for living in a house that was destroyed by
the eruption. For descendants, M oved is an indicator for living outside the Westman Islands when first observed in the
administrative records, while the definition of Destroyed is more involved and is described in section 4. The set of controls
includes gender, age, a dummy for having changed houses after 1960, and a dummy for being born in the Westman Islands.
Robust standard errors clustered by address are reported in parentheses.*** p 0.01, ** p 0.05, * p 0.1




                                   Table D.3: Effect on Earnings – Dependents
                                             Reduced Form                 Wald          2SLS                    OLS
                                               (1)           (2)              (3)           (4)           (5)         (6)
              M oved                                                     25,366        28,349**      -2,134*      -1,813*
                                                                        (16,905)       (14,425)      (1,224)      (1,099)
              Destroyed                      2,705*      3,314**
                                             (1,540)     (1,306)
              Control group mean             34,073      34,073          34,073         34,073         —            —
              Controls                        No          Yes             No             Yes          No           Yes
              Age fixed effects               No          Yes             No             Yes          No           Yes
              Year fixed effects              No          Yes             No             Yes          No           Yes
              Observations                   61,532      61,532          61,532         61,532       61,532       61,532
       Notes: The dependent variable in all cases is labor earnings. Coefficient estimates are reported in US dollars
       as of 2014 (125 ISK = 1 USD). The set of controls includes gender, a dummy for having changed houses after
       1960, and a dummy for being born in the Westman Islands. Robust standard errors clustered by address are
       reported in parentheses. *** p 0.01, ** p 0.05, * p 0.1




                                                                   48
                        Table D.4: Effect on Earnings – Household Heads
                                   Reduced Form              Wald      2SLS                 OLS
                                     (1)         (2)           (3)       (4)         (5)           (6)
      M oved                                                    76       835     -3,885***     -3,214***
                                                             (5,730)   (5,769)     (941)         (906)
      Destroyed                      14         153
                                  (1,066)     (1,057)
      Control group mean           27,930     27,930         27,930    27,930       —               —
      Controls                      No         Yes            No        Yes        No              Yes
      Age fixed effects             No         Yes            No        Yes        No              Yes
      Year fixed effects            No         Yes            No        Yes        No              Yes
      Observations                 37,868     37,868         37,868    37,868     37,868          37,868
Notes: The dependent variable in all cases is labor earnings. Coefficient estimates are reported in US dollars
as of 2014 (125 ISK = 1 USD). The set of controls includes gender, a dummy for having changed houses after
1960, and a dummy for being born in the Westman Islands. Robust standard errors clustered by address are
reported in parentheses. *** p 0.01, ** p 0.05, * p 0.1




                        Table D.5: Effect of Moving on Years of Schooling
                                      Dependents             Household Heads          Descendants
                                       IV       OLS           IV        OLS           IV        OLS
                                       (1)      (2)           (3)       (4)           (5)       (6)
         M oved                      3.56*       0.14         1.16       0.11       5.69**     -0.24**
                                     (1.86)     (0.17)       (0.77)     (0.15)      (2.49)      (0.11)
         Control group mean           13.52     13.52        11.99      11.94        12.71      12.71
         Controls                      Yes       Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes
         N                            2,071     2,071        1,292      1,292        3,207      3,207
        Notes: The dependent variable is years of schooling for the group listed at the top of each col-
        umn. Robust standard errors clustered by address are reported in parentheses. *** p 0.01,
        ** p 0.05, * p 0.1




                                                        49
E    Spatial Correlation

The standard errors in our main analysis are clustered at the address level. This allows for corre-
lation across individuals that lived at the same address at the time of the eruption (in most cases
members of the same family). A reasonable concern with our results is that there might be more
widespread spatial correlation. For confidentiality reasons, we do not have information about
the exact address of the individuals in our sample. Since the Westman Islands is a small place,
it is coded as a single geographic unit in our tax data (which identifies location by postal code).
Unfortunately, this precludes us from studying spatial correlation in our main outcome variables.
    However, since we constructed the house price data we use ourselves by digitizing adminis-
trative records, we have the exact address of each house in our sample. We can, therefore, study
spatial correlations in house prices prior to the eruption. To do this, we have manually geocoded
the location of every house in our dataset. This process was somewhat involved because many of
the residential streets in question were subsequently covered with lava and no longer exist. We
used a combination of web-based map viewers from the National Land Survey of Iceland and
street maps of the Westman Islands pre-eruption to locate houses and to construct a geocoded
location for each house.
    Using these data we have calculated two measures of spatial correlation of house prices. First,
we have calculated Geary’s C:
                                                    °°
                                             N 1         wij pxi  xj q2
                                     C       2W
                                                     i
                                                       °j          2 pxi  x̄q
                                                                          ,
                                                                 i

where xi denotes the price of house i, the weight wij is the inverse distance between house i and
j, and W is the sum of all weights wij . If the price of neighboring houses tends to be positively
correlated, this will lead to values of Geary’s C that are significantly lower than 1 (negative spatial
correlation will lead to values significantly higher than one). A value of one indicates no spatial
correlation. For our sample, the value of Geary’s C is estimated to be 0.974, which is very closer to
1. We cannot reject the null hypothesis of no spatial correlation (the P-value is 0.128).
    The second measure of spatial correlation that we have calculated is Moran’s I:
                                             °°
                                                        wij pxi  x̄qpxj          x̄q
                                 I      N
                                         W
                                               i    j
                                                        °
                                                                pxi  x̄q   2
                                                                                         .
                                                            i

Moran’s I is analogous to an autocorrelation coefficient, but measures correlations over space (in
two dimensions) rather than over time. If adjacent houses tend systematically to have more similar
house prices than houses that are further away from each other, this will tend to raise the value of
                                                          50
Moran’s I. Values of Moran’s I close to 1 suggest strong positive spatial correlation, while values
close to -1 suggest strong negative spatial correlation. Moran’s I is more sensitive to “global”
spatial correlation than Geary’s C, since the building blocks involve differences versus the overall
mean, as opposed to immediately surrounding houses.
   Our estimate of Moran’s I is 0.02. This value indicates statistically significantly spatial corre-
lation. However, the economic magnitude of this spatial correlation is extremely small. The test
statistic implies that a 1% increase in a given house price is associated with a 0.02% increase in the
house prices of its neighbors.
   To aid interpretation of Moran’s I, Figure E.1 plots a “Moran’s I scatter plot.” This figure plots
the price of each house (on the x-axis) against its “spatial lag.” The spatial lag is a “synthetic
neighbor,” defined as the weighted average of the value of all other houses in the town, weighted
by the inverse of their geographic proximity. Hence, closer houses are given higher weights than
those that are further away. A positive relationship in Figure E.1 indicates positive spatial corre-
lation. It is clear from the figure that any positive spatial correlation in our house price data is
very modest. Moreover, the figure above distinguishes between houses in the destroyed (orange)
and non-destroyed (blue) regions. There is no systematic difference in the house prices along this
margin, consistent with our balance tests.
   Spatial correlation may imply that there are fewer “effective observations” than actual obser-
vations in our dataset, which could be biasing downward our standard errors. We can quantify
this concern using Moran’s I as an indicator of how spatially correlated the observations are likely
to be (with the caveat that these spatial correlations apply to house prices, not income or edu-
cation). To do this, we draw on the literature studying the relationship between Moran’s I and
the “effective number of observations.” Griffith and Zhang (1999) report Monte Carlo calculations
that relate Moran’s I to the spatial autocorrelation coefficient in a first order spatial autocorrelation
model, and then relate the spatial autocorrelation coefficient to an approximate effective sample
size. A value of Moran’s I of 0.02 implies a spatial autocorrelation of roughly the same numerical
value, which implies only a tiny adjustment to the effective sample size (see Figure 3 in their pa-
per). For this reason, we have not pursued further adjustments to our standard errors for spatial
correlation. To the extent that spatial correlation of income and education is of a similar order of
magnitude to house prices, we expect the required spatial adjustment of our standard errors to be
very small.



                                                   51
          Spatially Lagged House Value (in 2014 $)
                                                     100,000


                                                      90,000


                                                      80,000


                                                      70,000


                                                      60,000


                                                      50,000
                                                               0         50,000       100,000 150,000 200,000               250,000   300,000
                                                                                         House Values (in 2014 $)

                                                                                        Not Destroyed          Destroyed
                                                               Spatial Autocorrelation Tests
                                                               Geary's C: 0.974 (P-value: 0.128)
                                                               Moran's I: 0.020 (P-value: 0.000)


                                                                            Figure E.1: Moran’s I scatter plot



F    Uncertain Gains from Education (and Comparative Advantage)

Consider an extension of the model presented in section 9.1 where the gains from education are
uncertain and households have Epstein and Zin (1989) preferences. Specifically, assume that the
gains from education in the non-fishing sector are stochastic and distributed

                                                                                 φpiq  Npφ̄piq  σφ2 {2, σφ2 q

and the utility function of the parents is

                                                                       logpC p piqq     β logprEpC c piqq1γ s1{p1γ q q.

where γ measures risk aversion and the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (substitution be-
tween own consumption and the consumption of the children in this case) is one. We introduce the
shorthand notation Ukp pq q to represent logpC p piqq for households of quantile q that are working in
sector k and, analogously, Ukc pq q to represent logprEpC c piqq1γ s1{p1γ q q for households of quantile
q that are working in sector k.


                                                                                                   52
   In this case, we have that

                     p
                    UN p q q  wN          Ap q q    α p q q,                                                                (12a)

                     UFp pq q  wF         Apq q,                                                                            (12b)
                     c
                    UN p q q  wN          ρa Apq q 
                                                          γ 2
                                                           σ
                                                          2 a
                                                                     ρs αpq q 
                                                                                  γ 2
                                                                                   σ
                                                                                  2 s
                                                                                            φ̄pq q 
                                                                                                       γ 2
                                                                                                        σ ,
                                                                                                       2 φ
                                                                                                                             (12c)

                     UFc pq q  wF         ρa Apq q 
                                                          γ 2
                                                           σ .                                                               (12d)
                                                          2 a

The right-hand sides of these expressions differ from those in equations (3a)-(3d) due to the vari-
ance terms γ2 σa2 , γ2 σs2 , and γ2 σφ2 . Here σa2 and σs2 are the variances of the intergenerational shocks
to absolute and comparative advantage, respectively, i.e., the variances of a piq and s piq. In our
earlier model, the three variance terms did not appear because of two simplifying assumptions:
log-utility and non-stochastic education. Analogous algebra to that in section 9.2 yields an equa-
tion for the cutoff points for moving q 1 and q  that can be written

                                            p
                                           UN pq q      Ψpmpiq, q q  UF pq q,                                                (13)

where
                                                                                                                   
         Ψpmpiq, q q                β φ̄pq q              mpiq  p1            β qf    β p1  ρsqαpqq  γ2 σs2
                             1                      γ 2
                                                     σ                                                                   .    (14)
                         1       β                  2 φ

Relative to the expression for Ψpmpiq, q q in our baseline model, there are two additional terms
 γ2 σs2 and  γ2 σφ2 . In this model, risk is a source of “moving costs” in the sense that it makes people
more reluctant to move for a given expected return to moving.




                                                                53
Table A.1: Effects on the Logarithm Earnings – Cohorts Younger than 25 at Time of Eruption
                                 Reduced Form                    IV                         OLS
                                  (1)        (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)
             M oved                                   0.812*        0.866***         -0.060   -0.031
                                                      (0.484)        (0.421)        (0.046)   (0.043)
             Destroyed          0.094*     0.110**
                                (0.048)    (0.044)
             Controls             No         Yes        No             Yes           No          Yes
             Observations        2,570      2,570      2,570          2,570         2,570       2,570
 Notes: The dependent variable in all cases is the natural logarithm of life-time labor earnings. The set of
 controls includes gender, a dummy for having changed houses after 1960, and a dummy for being born in
 the Westman Islands. Robust standard errors clustered by address are reported in parentheses. *** p 0.01, **
 p 0.05, * p 0.1




                     Table A.2: Effects of Moving on Earnings – Descendants
                                  Reduced Form                      IV                          OLS
                                    (1)        (2)        (3)               (4)          (5)           (6)
      M oved                                            29,070            27,672      -7,038***     -5,708***
                                                       (25,205)          (23,119)      (1,262)       (1,156)
      Destroyed                   1,833      1,798
                                 (1,355)    (1,210)

      Control group mean          31,681    31,681         31,681        31,681          —                —
      Controls                     No        Yes            No            Yes           No               Yes
      Age fixed effects            No        Yes            No            Yes           No               Yes
      Year fixed effects           No        Yes            No            Yes           No               Yes
      Observations                20,192    20,192         20,192        20,192        20,192           20,192
Notes: We control for gender. Robust standard errors clustered by individual are reported in parentheses. ***
p 0.01, ** p 0.05, * p 0.1




                                                      54
               Table A.3: Other Outcomes – Cohorts 25 and Older at Time of Eruption
                                                        IV           OLS        Control Mean
                                                        (1)          (2)             (3)
                        Pension Recipient              0.003       -0.020**           0.40
                                                      (0.049)       (0.010)
                        Early Death                   -0.024*        0.000            0.008
                                                      (0.013)       (0.002)
                        Married                        0.109         0.009            0.700
                                                      (0.103)       (0.021)
                        Number of Children             0.131       -0.167**           1.08
                                                      (0.301)       (0.059)
                        Earnings ¡ 0                   0.011       -0.022**           0.622
                                                      (0.050)       (0.011)
   Notes: Each coefficient estimate corresponds to a regression of the dependent variable indicated in the top
   panel on M oved. Controls include gender, cohort, a dummy for having changed houses after 1960, a dummy
   for being born in the Westman Islands, year dummies, and age dummies. Pension Recipient is a dummy for
   receiving pension income in a given year. Early Death is a dummy for dying before age 50. The regression
   with Early Death as the dependent variable is estimated only for those born before 1965, since this group has
   reached age 50 by the end of our sample period. Married is an indicator of being registered as married in the
   National Registry. Number of Children is number of children born after the eruption, i.e., in 1973 or later. Robust
   standard errors clustered by address are reported in parentheses. *** p 0.01, ** p 0.05, * p 0.1




Table A.4: Effect of Pension on Earnings Estimates – Cohorts Younger than 25 at Time of Eruption
                                        Reduced Form              Wald         2SLS                 OLS
                                         (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)
         M oved                                                   22,535      24,298**   -2,528**     -1,879*
                                                                 (14,645)     (12,256)    (1,131)     (1,015)
         Destroyed                     2,561*     2,997**
                                       (1,445)    (1,227)
         Control group mean            34,297      34,297        34,297       34,297           —         —
         Controls                       No          Yes           No           Yes            No        Yes
         Age fixed effects              No          Yes           No           Yes            No        Yes
         Year fixed effects             No          Yes           No           Yes            No        Yes
         Observations                  62,172      62,172        62,172       62,172         62,172    62,172
   Notes: The dependent variable in all cases is labor earnings, which is set to missing in all years when individ-
   uals receive pension payments. Coefficient estimates are reported in US dollars as of 2014 (125 ISK = 1 USD).
   The set of controls includes gender, a dummy for having changed houses after 1960, and a dummy for being
   born in the Westman Islands. Robust standard errors clustered by address are reported in parentheses. ***
   p 0.01, ** p 0.05, * p 0.1



                                                            55
                                 Table A.5: Payroll Taxes by Industry
                                          Westman Islands         Capital Region        Other Regions
     Fishing and Agriculture                  23.2%                   1.2%                 13.7%
     Fish and Food Processing                 46.5%                   3.4%                 15.6%
     Construction                              2.5%                   4.2%                  8.5%
     Manufacturing                             3.7%                   6.2%                 10.8%
     Trade and Transport                       5.4%                   18.3%                10.7%
     Hospitality and Recreation                1.7%                    3.6%                 5.0%
     Information Services                      0.3%                    6.6%                 0.7%
     Professional Services                     1.0%                    8.9%                 0.4%
     Finance                                   2.0%                   10.7%                 2.3%
     Government                               12.8%                   34.4%                26.5%
     Other                                     0.9%                   2.4%                  4.4%
Notes: Average share of payroll taxes by industry, 2008-2014. Source: Directorate of Internal Revenue, Iceland.




                                                      56
                                  2.5



                                   2
               Treatment Effect




                                  1.5



                                   1



                                   .5



                                   0
                                        0   20             40                60              80         100
                                                                  Quantile

                                                 Point Estimate                   Point Estimate Mean


Figure A.1: IV Quantile Effects for Log(Earnings) – Cohorts 25 and Older at time of Eruption
 Note: The figure plots quantile treatment effects using the estimator proposed by Abadie, Angrist, and Imbens
 (2002) for the 5th to the 99th percentile. The effects are estimated in 5 percentile increments up to the 95th
 percentile, and in 1 percentile increments for 96th to 99th percentile. The green horizontal dashed-line plots
 the mean effect (2SLS) for comparison.




                                                                  57
                                              15,000



                 Reduced From Estimates ($)   10,000



                                               5,000



                                                  0



                                              -5,000


                                                           20        30             40            50             60
                                                                                   Age

                                                                 Point Estimate           95% Confidence Interval


                                                                  (a) Reduced Form by Age




                                              150,000
                 Treatment Effect ($)




                                              100,000




                                               50,000




                                                       0


                                                            20        30            40            50             60
                                                                                   Age

                                                                 Point Estimate             95% Confidence Interval


                                                                 (b) Treatment Effect by Age

Figure A.2: Earnings Effect Over the Life Cycle – Cohorts Younger than 25 at time of Eruption
 Note: Panel (a) plots the reduced form earnings effect by age. Panel (b) plots the causal effect of moving by
 age. Robust standard errors are clustered at the house level. To aid visibility in panel (b), we only plot the 95%
 confidence intervals out to age 56. The confidence intervals for the older age groups are even wider.




                                                                              58
                                           80,000



                                           60,000
                   Treatment Effect ($)


                                           40,000



                                           20,000



                                                0



                                          -20,000
                                                     81-85   86-90   91-95      96-00       01-05      06-10    11-14
                                                                                Period


   Figure A.3: IV Earnings Effect by Year – Cohorts Younger than 25 at time of Eruption.
Note: The figure displays the evolution of the treatment effect over time. The dashed lines plot the 95-percent
confidence interval. Robust standard errors are clustered at the house level.




                                                0


                                           -20,000
              Treatment Effect ($)




                                           -40,000


                                           -60,000


                                           -80,000


                                          -100,000
                                                     0        20           40              60            80           100
                                                                                Quantile

                                                               Point Estimate                   Point Estimate Mean

    Figure A.4: IV Earnings Quantile Effects – Cohorts 25 and Older at time of Eruption
Note: The figure plots quantile treatment effects using the estimator proposed by Abadie, Angrist, and Imbens
(2002) for the 5th to the 99th percentile. The effects are estimated in 5 percentile increments up to the 95th
percentile, and in 1 percentile increments for 96th to 99th percentile. The green horizontal dashed-line plots
the mean effect (2SLS) for comparison.


                                                                          59
       .2




                                                                                                .2
                       8th pctl                                                                                                                   27th pctl
       .15




                                                                                                .15
Kernel density




                                                                                      Kernel density
     .1




                                                                                           .1
       .05




                                                                                                .05
       0




                                                                                                0
                           25                  30            35             40                               15                  20                25              30   35
                                                    Grade                                                                                         Grade



                                (a) Mathematics – Capital Region                                                         (b) Mathematics – Other Regions
       .2




                                                                                                .2
                      5th pctl                                                                                                        19th pctl
       .15




                                                                                                .15
Kernel density




                                                                                      Kernel density
     .1




                                                                                           .1
       .05




                                                                                                .05
       0




                                                                                                0




                      25                             30                35                                     20                        25                    30        35
                                                    Grade                                                                                         Grade



                                  (c) English – Capital Region                                                                (d) English – Other Regions
                                                                                                .15
       .2




                                    7th pctl                                                                      22nd pctl
       .15




                                                                                                        .1
Kernel density




                                                                                         Kernel density
     .1




                                                                                      .05
       .05
       0




                                                                                                0




                 20                  25              30           35        40                                     25                    30                   35        40
                                                    Grade                                                                                         Grade



                                  (e) Icelandic – Capital Region                                                              (f) Icelandic – Other Regions

                                                       Figure A.5: Results from Standardized Tests
       Notes: Distribution of average grade by school for 2010-2014 on 10th grade standardized tests in Mathematics,
       English and Icelandic. National average score is 30. The red vertical line represents the average test scores in
       the Westman Islands in the respective distribution. Source: Directorate of Education, Iceland.

                                                                                 60
References
A BADIE , A., J. D. A NGRIST, AND G. W. I MBENS (2002): “Instrumental Variables Estimates of the
  Effect of Subsidized Training on the Quantiles of Trainee Earnings,” Econometrica, 70, 91–117.
A BOWD , J. M., F. K RAMARZ , AND D. N. M ARGOLIS (1999): “High wage workers and high wage
  firms,” Econometrica, 67, 251–333.
A DAO , R. (2015): “Worker Heterogeneity, Wage Inequality, and International Trade: Theory and
  Evidence from Brazil,” Working Paper, MIT.
A NGRIST, J. D. (2004): “Treatment Effect Heterogeneity in Theory and Practice,” Economic Journal,
  114, C52–C83.
A NGRIST, J. D. AND J.-S. P ISCHKE (2009): Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricists Companion,
  Princeton: Princeton University Press.
ATKIN , D. (2013): “Trade, Tastes, and Nutrition in India,” American Economic Review, 103, 1629–
 1663.
B AZZI , S., A. G ADUH , A. D. R OTHENBERG , AND M. W ONG (2016): “Skill Transferability, Mi-
  gration, and Development: Evidence from Population Resettlement in Indonesia,” American
  Economic Review, 106, 2658–2698.
B LACK , S. E. AND P. J. D EVEREUX (2010): “Recent Developments in Intergenerational Mobility,”
   in Handbook of Labor Economics, ed. by O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, Amsterdam: Elsevier, vol. 4B,
   1487–1541.
B LACK , S. E., P. J. D EVEREUX , AND K. G. S ALVANES (2005): “Why the Apple Doesn’t Fall Far:
   Understanding Intergenerational Transmission of Human Capital,” American Economic Review,
   95, 437–449.
B ORJAS , G. J., S. G. B RONARS , AND S. J. T REJO (1992): “Self-Selection and Internal Migration in
  the United States,” Journal of Urban Economics, 32, 159–185.
B RYAN , G., S. C HOWDHURY, AND A. M. M OBARAK (2014): “Unverinvestment in a Profitable
   Technology: The Case of Seasonal Migration in Bangladesh,” Econometrica, 82, 1671–1748.
B RYAN , G. AND M. M ORTEN (2018): “The Aggregate Productivity Effects of Internal Migration:
   Evidence from Indonesia,” Working Paper, London School of Economics.
C ARD , D. (2001): “Estimating the Return to Schooling: Progress on Some Persistent Econometric
  Problems,” Econometrica, 69, 1127–1160.
C HETTY, R. AND N. H ENDREN (2018): “The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mo-
  bility I: Childhood Exposure Effects,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133, 1107–1162.
C HETTY, R., N. H ENDREN , AND L. F. K ATZ (2016): “The Effects of Exposure to Better Neigh-
  borhoods on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment,” American
  Economic Review, 106, 855–902.
C HYN , E. (2018): “Moved to Opportunity: The Long-Run Effect of Public Housing Demolition on
  Labor Market Outcomes of Children,” American Economic Review, 108, 3028–3056.
D ERYUGINA , T., L. K AWANO , AND S. L EVITT (2018): “The Economic Impact of Hurricane Kat-
  rina on its Victims: Evidence from Individual Tax Returns,” American Economic Journal: Applied

                                                61
  Economics, 10, 202–233.
E PSTEIN , L. G. AND S. E. Z IN (1989): “Substitution, Risk Aversion and the Temporal Behavior of
   Consumption and Asset Returns,” Econometrica, 57, 937–969.
G RIFFITH , D. A. AND Z. Z HANG (1999): “Computational Simplifications Needed for Efficient
  Implementation of Spatial Statistical Techniques in a GIS,” Geographic Information Sciences, 5,
  97–105.
I MBENS , G. W. AND J. D. A NGRIST (1994): “Identification and Estimation of Local Average Treat-
   ment Effect,” Econometrica, 2, 467–475.
J ENSEN , R. (2010): “The (Perceived) Returns to Education and the Demand for Schooling,” Quar-
   terly Journal of Economics, 125, 515–548.
K ENNAN , J. AND J. R. WALKER (2011): “The Effect of Expected Income on Individual Migration
  Descisions,” Econometrica, 79, 211–251.
L AGAKOS , D., M. M OBARAK , AND M. E. WAUGH (2017): “The Welfare Effects of Encouraging
  Rural-Urban Migration,” Working Paper, UCSD.
L AGAKOS , D. AND M. E. WAUGH (2013): “Selection, Agriculture, and Cross-Country Productivity
  Differences,” The American Economic Review, 103, 948–980.
M ANSKI , C. F. (1993): “Adolescent Econometricians: How Do Youth Infer the Returns to Educa-
  tion?” in Studies of Supply and Demand in Higher Education, ed. by C. T. Clotfelter and M. Roth-
  schild, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
M UNSHI , K. AND M. R OSENZWEIG (2016): “Networks and Misallocation: Insurance, Migration,
  and the Rural-Urban Wage Gap,” American Economic Review, 106, 46–98.
N OTOWIDIGDO , M. J. (2013): “The Incidence of Local Labor Demand Shocks,” Working Paper,
  Northwestern University.
R OSENZWEIG , M. AND C. U DRY (2018): “External Validity in a Stochastic World: Evidence from
  Low Income Countries,” Working Paper, Yale University.
R OY, A. D. (1951): “Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings,” Oxford Economic Papers, 3,
  135–146.
S ACERDOTE , B. (2012): “When the Saints Go Marching Out: Long-Term Outcomes for Student
   Evacuees from Hurricanes Katrina and Rita,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4,
   109–135.
S ARVIMÄKI , M., R. U USITALO , AND M. J ÄNTTI (2016): “Habit Formation and the Misallocation of
   Labor: Evidence from Forced Migrations,” Mimeo, Aalto University and University of Helsinki.
T HORARINSSON , S., S. S TEINTHÓRSSON , T. E INARSSON , H. K RISTMANNSDÓTTIR , AND N. O S -
  KARSSON (1973): “The Eruption on Heimaey, Iceland,” Nature, 241, 372–375.

YAGAN , D. (2018): “Employment Hysteresis from the Great Recession,” Working Paper, UC
  Berkeley.
Y OUNG , A. (2013): “Inequality, the Urban-Rural Gap and Migration,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 128, 1727–1785.


                                               62
