                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            WHAT CAN WE LEARN FROM CHARTER SCHOOL LOTTERIES?

                                          Julia Chabrier
                                         Sarah Cohodes
                                        Philip Oreopoulos

                                       Working Paper 22390
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22390


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2016




For sharing the data from and answering question about their studies, we thank Ira Nichols-
Barrer, Brian Gill, Phil Gleason, Josh Furgeson, and Christina Clark Tuttle of Mathematica
Policy Research; Danielle Eisenberg of the KIPP Foundation; Josh Angrist, Parag Pathak, and
Chris Walters; and Will Dobbie and Roland Fryer. We also thank Carrie Conaway of the
Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education and the National Center for
Education Statistics for additional data access, and Josh Angrist, Will Dobbie, and Mike Gilane,
as well as seminar participants at Teachers College Columbia University and IFN-Stockholm for
helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22390.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Julia Chabrier, Sarah Cohodes, and Philip Oreopoulos. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Can We Learn from Charter School Lotteries?
Julia Chabrier, Sarah Cohodes, and Philip Oreopoulos
NBER Working Paper No. 22390
July 2016
JEL No. I20,I24,I28,J18

                                            ABSTRACT

We take a closer look at what we can learn about charter schools by pooling data from lottery-
based impact estimates of the effect of charter school attendance at 113 schools. On average, each
year enrolled at one of these schools increases math scores by 0.08 standard deviations and
English/language arts scores by 0.04 standard deviations. There is wide variation in impact
estimates. To glean what drives this variation, we link these effects to school practices, inputs,
and characteristics of fallback schools. In line with the earlier literature, we find that schools that
adopt an intensive “No Excuses” attitude towards students are correlated with large gains in
academic performance, with traditional inputs like class size playing no role in explaining charter
school effects. However, we highlight that “No Excuses” schools are also located among the most
disadvantaged neighborhoods in the country. After accounting for performance levels at fallback
schools, the relationship between the remaining variation in school performance and the entire
“No Excuses” package of practices weakens. “No Excuses” schools are effective at raising
performance in neighborhoods with very poor performing schools, but the available data have
less to say on whether the “No Excuses” approach could help in nonurban settings or whether
other practices would similarly raise achievement in areas with low-performing schools. We find
that intensive tutoring is the only “No Excuses” characteristic that remains significant (even for
nonurban schools) once the performance levels of fallback schools are taken into account.


Julia Chabrier                                         Philip Oreopoulos
J-PAL                                                  Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology                  University of Toronto
30 Wadsworth Street, E53-320                           150 St. George Street
Cambridge, MA 02142                                    Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
jchabrier@povertyactionlab.org                         CANADA
chabrier@mit.edu                                       and NBER
                                                       philip.oreopoulos@utoronto.ca
Sarah Cohodes
525 West 120th Street, Box 11
Teachers College Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
cohodes@tc.columbia.edu
I. Introduction



         Publicly funded charter schools, which set their own curriculum, financial management,

and staffing, have been spreading rapidly throughout the United States. Originally designed as

testing grounds for trying out new and innovative approaches for improving academic

achievement, charter schools have since captured a growing share of enrollment and become

competitors to traditional public schools for students, funding, and facilities. Beginning with the

first charter in 1993, enrollment has increased from a few dozen students to about 3 million

across 7,000 schools. 1 That’s more than 5 percent of all public elementary and secondary

students in the country. Some large urban districts, like Indianapolis, Philadelphia, Detroit, and

Washington, D.C. have shares of students at charters greater than 30 percent, and in the 2014-

2015 school year, the New Orleans Recovery School District became the first U.S. school district

to be comprised entirely of charter schools (National Alliance for Public Charter Schools 2015a;

Abdulkadiroğlu et al. 2014, 1).

         All charter schools are free to students. Anyone residing in a given geography (depending

on state law, the district, region, or state where the charter school is located) is eligible to attend.

Increasingly, however, more students apply than there are spots available. When faced with too

many applicants, charters must admit students by lottery. 2 Some lotteries are held in large

auditoriums in front of anxious parents and children, leading to heartbreaking scenes of


1
  National Center for Education Statistics. 2015. “The Condition of Education 2015: Charter School Enrollment.”
U.S. Department of Education. http://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/indicator_cgb.asp (accessed January 11, 2016).
2
  The authors of a national evaluation of charter school impacts (Gleason et al., 2010) estimated that about 26% of
charter middle schools were likely to be oversubscribed (Clark Tuttle, Gleason, and Clark, 2012) in the 2006-07
school year.

                                                          2
disappointment like those in the documentary, “Waiting for Superman,” in which administrators

pick only a minority of names from a box. To avoid public letdown, some schools discourage

parents from showing up to watch the live admissions process (although many still do).

         While most charter schools do not face oversubscribed demand, some in disadvantaged

urban neighborhoods have admission rates of less than 20 percent. 3 To remove the incentive for

parents to apply separately to multiple schools and to maximize the number of students who get

into at least one school, a few districts now centralize the lottery process. 4 Results from the

District of Columbia's most recent common lottery provide an indicator of oversubscribed

demand: of the 17,000 students that entered the unified lottery, 71 percent of students received

an offer from at least one school on their lists, but only 60 percent received an offer from one of

their top three choices. 5 Space is limited in high-demand areas due to legislation that caps the

total number of schools or because the authorization process, limited funding, or other

regulations make the process of opening new charter schools difficult. Charter school authorizers

(typically state or local education agencies, higher education institutions, or independent boards

created for the purpose of charter authorization) choose which charters to grant and which to

renew.



3
  For some examples of oversubscribed demand at popular charter schools see: Wiltenburg, Mary. 2015. WYPR.
“Uncertain Future for Thousands in Charter School Lottery” February 13. http://news.wypr.org/post/uncertain-
future-thousands-charter-school-lottery#stream/0. Chapman, Ben and Stephen Rex Brown. 2014. New York Daily
News.” Success Academy Charter Schools Admissions Rate is Only 20%, Lower Than NYU.” April 4.
http://nydn.us/1fJapci. Pisano, Chris. 2015. WGGB. “Hundreds Turn Out for Holyoke Charter School Enrollment
Lottery.” March 4. http://www.masscharterschools.org/media/news/hundreds-turn-out-holyoke-charter-school-
enrollment-lottery. Rahman, Fauzeya. 2015. Houston Chronicle. “Word of Mouth Major Factor for Parents Charting
Charter School Course.” November 7. http://www.houstonchronicle.com/news/houston-texas/houston/article/Word-
of-mouth-major-factor-for-parents-charting-6617645.php.
4
  Many centralized school assignment mechanisms draw upon Alan Roth’s work on market design, and most notably
his design of the National Resident Matching Program. For example, both New Orleans and Denver use matching
algorithms to assign students to schools.
5
  Brown, Emma. 2014. “Joy and Anguish for Parents as D.C. Releases School Lottery Results.” Washington Post,
March 31. https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/education/joy-and-anguish-for-parents-as-dc-releases-school-
lottery-results/2014/03/31/a04aea1e-b8ff-11e3-9a05-c739f29ccb08_story.html

                                                      3
         The required random assignment from oversubscribed demand in the charter schools’

admissions process generates worry and letdown for those who lose, but it also generates

opportunity for exceptional research. Over the past decade, a relatively small number of studies

have been able to gather data from lottery results and match them to administrative records to

allow for rigorous evaluation of the impact of charter school attendance on student outcomes.

Most of these studies look at 3 to 30 schools at a time and estimate the average impact of charter

school attendance on state-level standardized test scores. They find a wide dispersion of effect

sizes: some schools are estimated to increase performance (especially math scores) by more than

half a standard deviation per year of attendance, while others are estimated to have substantial

negative effects. Whether students gain from winning any charter school lottery is by no means

certain. A general conclusion seems to be emerging, however, that what distinguishes schools

with the largest positive effect sizes is that they adopt an intensive “No Excuses” approach with

strict and clear disciplinary policies, mandated intensive tutoring, longer instruction times,

frequent teacher feedback, and a relentless effort to help all students. 6 There has even been

evidence that reinventing traditional public schools in urban settings with these characteristics

leads to similarly large performance improvements (Fryer 2014).




6
  This pattern seems to have emerged from a number of studies looking at the association between charter school
effectiveness and school characteristics. In a study of New York City public schools, Dobbie and Fryer (2013)
identify an index of five policies—frequent teacher feedback, data-driven instruction, high-dosage tutoring,
increased instructional time, and relentless focus on academic achievement—that explains roughly half of their
observed variation in school effectiveness. In a study of Massachusetts charter schools, Angrist, Pathak, and Walters
(2013) identify five variables that are highly correlated with so-called “No Excuses” charter schools and also highly
correlated with charter effectiveness: strict discipline, cold-calling, Teach for America alumni, and videotaping of
lessons for teacher feedback. In a national study of Charter Management Organizations, Furgeson et al. (2012) find
that comprehensive behavioral policies, intensive teacher coaching, and the use of Teach for America and teaching
fellow teachers are positively associated with student impacts. Hoxby, Muraka, and Kang (2009) find that a long
school year, more minutes of English instruction, a discipline system with small rewards/penalties, a teacher pay
scale that incorporates merit, and a mission statement focused on academic performance all are associated with
larger charter school gains.

                                                          4
       In this paper, we take a closer look at what can be learned from charter school lotteries by

pooling data from 113 schools. We refer to previous studies to summarize the state of the

literature so far, but we also take a more school-specific approach in analyzing what charter

schools actually do. We use both qualitative and quantitative approaches for trying to disentangle

why some schools consistently out- or under-perform. Isolating specific effective school

strategies is challenging because no one school can be considered a simple derivative of another.

A more ethnographic look at effective schools reveals multiple potential factors for explaining

why some charters are more successful than others.

       In line with the earlier literature, we also find that schools that have adopted a “No

Excuses” approach are correlated with large gains in academic performance. However, “No

Excuses” schools are concentrated in urban neighborhoods with very poor performing schools

and scarce in nonurban areas. Thus, one reason for the gains achieved by “No Excuses” urban

schools is that the fallback traditional public schools for urban students have such poor

performance. Neal (2009) makes a similar point that private school returns are largest for urban

minority students. Once the performance levels of fallback schools are taken into account, and

we look at the individual components of a “No Excuses” approach using charter-school-level

data, we find that intensive tutoring is the only characteristic that remains significant in

improving student performance. Tutoring offered at charter schools is typically more intense

than tutoring offered at traditional public schools. Charter schools often use paid tutors, add

tutoring on top of already long school days, and require all students to participate. This finding

about the importance of tutoring is in line with other recent evidence pointing to dramatic gains

from intensive tutoring on its own, suggesting a good place to start for effective and practical

reform at traditional public schools.



                                                  5
         Our intent is not to enter the debate on whether charter public schools should exist at all. 7

Rather, in keeping with the original intent of charter schools to serve as laboratories for best

practices, we focus on what researchers and policymakers can learn from charter lotteries. In

Section 2, we present a brief history of the charter school movement, with a particular focus on

how admissions lotteries led to new avenues for research. We also discuss issues around external

validity in determining the extent to which conclusions from lottery studies can carry over to

traditional public school settings. In Section 3, we present an analysis of estimated charter school

impacts from pooling multiple datasets. We describe the distribution of these estimates, how they

vary by student characteristics, their degree of precision, their relation to counterfactual school

characteristics, and their implied cumulative impacts over time. In Section 4, we explore what

school factors might explain the wide distribution using a combination of methodologies. Section

5 concludes, noting the exciting possibilities for further research with more lotteries and more

support behind matching them to administrative data.



II.      Oversubscribed Charter Schools and Their Lotteries



A. A Brief History of Charter Schools in the United States



         An interesting chain of events led to the birth of charter schools and the need for

admissions lotteries (Junge 2014). In the early 1980s, the Secretary of Education created the

National Commission on Excellence in Education and directed it to write a report about “the



7
 For a good overview of the research on charter schools that more directly addresses this debate, see: “Charter
Schools in Perspective: A Guide to Research” (2015). The Spencer Foundation and Public Agenda. www.in-
perspective.org.

                                                         6
widespread public perception that something is seriously remiss in our educational system”

(National Commission on Excellence in Education 1983). The report, A Nation at Risk, was

released in 1983 and concluded that declines in educational performance in the United States

were due to a diluted curriculum with more students taking intermediate or basic-level classes, a

decline in expectations in terms of what skills graduates should possess, less time studying, and

“too many teachers being drawn from the bottom quarter of graduating high school and college

students” (National Commission on Excellence in Education 1983).

       Albert Shanker, president of the American Federation of Teachers, acknowledged many

points in the report and a need for reforms. In a remarkable 1988 speech to the National Press

Club, he also lamented a constant back and forth between making curricula too easy or too

tough. He asserted that raising the bar in terms of harder questions, more homework, or a faster

pace was only helpful to the top 20 percent of students and that neither raising standards nor

lowering them helped the bottom 80 percent (“students who are not able to sit still and listen for

that many hours, and are not able to read that long”). Shanker argued that teachers and principals

need to be allowed to innovate and try alternative strategies for improving performance,

recognizing that not all students learn the same. He proposed that:

       The school district and the teacher union develop a procedure that would encourage any
       group of six or more teachers to submit a proposal to create a new school. Do not think of
       a school as a building, and you can see how it works. Consider six or seven or twelve
       teachers in a school who say, 'We've got an idea. We've got a way of doing something
       very different. We've got a way of reaching the kids that are now not being reached by
       what the school is doing.' That group of teachers could set up a school within that school
       which ultimately, if the procedure works and it's accepted, would be a totally autonomous
       school within that district. (Shanker 1988)

       Shortly following this speech, the Citizens League of Minnesota, which had supported

school choice reforms in the past, organized a seminar around K-12 education and invited

Shanker to present. Several attendees, including Ember Reichgott, then a Minnesota state

                                                 7
senator, subsequently began to work on developing specifics to Shanker's proposal. A few weeks

later, the League produced a report, “Chartered Schools = Choices for Educators + Quality for

All Students,” which included the idea of teachers applying for ‘charters’ to set up small

schools—not within existing traditional public schools as Shanker envisioned, but separate

(Citizens League of Minnesota 1998). For logistical and practical reasons, it was easier for the

report’s authors to imagine experimental schools operating apart from the existing regulatory

systems. The new charter schools would still be publicly funded, without tuition or admissions

requirements, but they would be allowed to operate with autonomy from some of the rules and

regulations governing traditional public schools.

        Senator Reichgott tried two times unsuccessfully to introduce a bill allowing for charter

schools. Critics argued that charters would drain public resources away from traditional schools

and raised concerns that higher-ability students, white students, and students without special

needs would disproportionately shift out of the traditional public school system (Frankenberg

and Lee 2003; Fiske and Ladd 2000; Cobb and Glass 1999). The sentiment among Minnesota's

Governor and many state politicians, however, was that the idea was at least worth trying, and an

amended bill capping the program at eight schools and making districts the only sponsors

narrowly passed in 1991 (Kolderie 1998).

        Since then, the number of charter schools has grown rapidly, to about 7,000 schools, and

continues to grow. 8 All but eight states now have legislation authorizing charter schools. Support

from legislators for the expansion of charter schools appears to be more a response to increasing




8
 National Center for Education Statistics. 2015. “The Condition of Education 2015: Charter School Enrollment.”
U.S. Department of Education. http://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/indicator_cgb.asp (accessed January 11, 2016).


                                                        8
parental demand for alternatives to traditional public schools, rather than a commitment to the

idea that charters can serve as laboratories to improve public education. 9

         Charter school authorizers, designated by state law, choose which charters to grant. They

also provide ongoing oversight of charter schools and make renewal decisions at the end of the

charter contract term, typically every five years. Decisions to renew are often based on relative

test score measures or financial health (including enrollment). Schools do close—sometimes

suddenly—compelling students to find another charter school option or revert back to their local

traditional public school. 10 In Texas and North Carolina, respectively, Baude at al. (2014) and

Ladd et al. (2015) conclude that charters that close are disproportionately less effective, while

those that remain open improve in value-added over time.



B. The Methodology of Lottery Studies

         In broad terms, the methodology of charter school lottery studies is to compare those who

won a charter school lottery with those who did not. Of course, complexities arise. One challenge

is that researchers must take into account that not all winners attend charter schools and not all



9
  There have been some attempts to learn from what has worked for charter schools and what has not. At the
national level, the U.S. Department of Education’s Charter School Exemplary Collaboration grants supported
collaboration and lesson sharing between charter schools and traditional public schools and school districts. The Bill
& Melinda Gates Foundation has awarded grants to 16 cities that have signed District-Charter Collaboration
Compacts detailing plans for collaboration between charter and traditional public schools. Many state laws
authorizing charter schools include the sharing of best practices as one of their aims, but generally this is encouraged
rather than mandated.
10
   According to the National Alliance for Public Charter Schools, 216 charter schools, or about 3 percent of the total
charter schools, closed in 2014 (National Alliance for Public Charter Schools 2015b, 2). For some examples of
charter school closures see: Bush, Bill. 2015. “Closure of North Side Charter School Strands About 300 Students.”
The Columbus Dispatch, August 26.
http://www.dispatch.com/content/stories/local/2015/08/26/FCI_Academy_charter_school_closed.html. Jacobsen,
Morgan. 2015. “Two Charter Schools Closing Within Days of Starting Dates.” Deseret News, August 20.
http://www.deseretnews.com/article/865634957/Alianza-Academy-charter-school-closing-only-days-after-school-
begins.html?pg=all. Vevea, Becky. 2015. “Four Charter Schools Push Back Against Sudden Closings.” WBEZ,
November 13. http://www.wbez.org/news/four-charter-schools-push-back-against-sudden-closings-113767.


                                                           9
losers end up at traditional public schools. In Boston, for example, Abdulkadiroğlu et al. (2011)

find one-fifth of lottery winners never attend a charter school and some lottery losers eventually

end up in one (by moving off a waitlist, entering a future admissions lottery, or gaining sibling

preference when a sibling wins the lottery). Most of the studies of how charter schools affect test

scores therefore measure the effects in two stages: first, estimating how winning a lottery

predicts increased attendance at charter schools; and second, estimating how this predicted

increased attendance affects achievement. 11 Because the effects of attending a charter school are

identified based on differences between initial lottery winners and losers, selection in who

enrolls or persists in charter schools does not bias the causal estimates. While this approach

addresses internal validity, external validity concerns may arise if the potential impact of charters

is weaker for those who do not apply or do not adhere to their lottery assignment, a topic we

return to below.

         Fixed effects are usually added to the estimating equation for each group of students that

applied to the same set of school lotteries to ensure that winner-loser comparisons are between

those who had an equal chance of being selected (to the set of schools they applied). In many

cases, test score data from different grade levels are stacked together, implicitly assuming that

attendance effects increase equally for each year spent in a charter school versus not. Pooling

data from multiple test results while clustering standard error estimates by grouping at the

student level may also help increase precision.



11
  In other words, winning a charter school lottery is used as an instrumental variable for charter school attendance.
Conceptually, researchers estimate the “intention-to-treat” (ITT) effect of winning a lottery for a charter school seat
on the outcome of interest (e.g. student test scores) by calculating the difference in average outcomes between
lottery winners and losers. The “local average treatment effect” (LATE) of charter school attendance on the outcome
of interest is calculated by scaling up the ITT estimate by the difference in charter school attendance between lottery
winners and lottery losers (this is sometimes called the treatment on the treated (TOT) when no or few lottery losers
gain entry to charter schools).


                                                          10
C. An Overview of the Studies

         When charter schools are oversubscribed, they must admit students using lotteries, 12

although some states allow charters to give preference to siblings (National Alliance for Charter

Public Schools 2015c). In most cases, families must submit separate applications for each charter

school, though this is changing with an increasing number of districts using centralized

applications that allow students to rank schools, which maximize the chances that each student

gets into at least one school.

         Table 1 lists the set of charter schools with lotteries that have been studied to date. 13 The

studies described in Table 1 do not include all charter schools that have held lotteries. To do

research on outcomes of winners and losers in a charter school lottery; records must be in

suitable condition; enough time must elapse to observe student outcomes of interest; researchers

must obtain permission from schools to work with their lottery records; and, because of federal

privacy law, matching lottery records to student test scores often requires either individual

consent from study participants or collaboration with state or school district administrators who

can conduct or supervise the match. In cases of multiple studies working with the same data, we

focus here on the most recent published academic study or report. In some cases in the

discussion that follows, we will rescale the estimates of charter school effects to be comparable

across studies. 14


12
   The first charter school law anticipated the possibility of oversubscribed demand. In 1991, Minnesota legislation
stated that if “the number of applications exceeds the capacity of a program, class, grade level, or building...pupils
shall be accepted by lot” (Minnesota Statute § 120.064).
13
   Some of these studies are primarily observational; for the purpose of this paper, we focus on the lottery-based
findings and do not report observational findings.
14
   More specifically, in cases where a study reported only the “intention-to-treat” effect (the outcome effect from
winning a lottery) and no first stage estimate (the effect of winning a lottery on attendance), we noted this in Table
1. If the first stage and intention-to-treat are reported but a local average treatment effect is not, we divide by the


                                                           11
         Hoxby and Rockoff (2004) collected admissions lottery data from three “No Excuses”

style Chicago International Charter Schools (CICS), which deliberately locate in disadvantaged

urban communities to target low-income families. Hoxby and Rockoff had admissions lottery

data matched to Chicago Public School administrative data on test score outcomes. They find

small positive changes, not statistically significant at standard levels.

         Around the same time as Hoxby and Rockoff’s study, another team of economists began

collecting charter school lottery data from Massachusetts and, with support from state officials,

obtained access to administrative public school data for matching. Abdulkadiroğlu et al. (2011)

focus on students in Boston who applied to at least one of five charter middle schools or one of

three charter high schools where high demand causes the schools to be oversubscribed. They find

very large average effects: charter school attendance increases state-level English/language arts

and math test scores by 0.2 and 0.35 standard deviations per year, respectively. Given that that

the achievement gap between black and white students in Massachusetts is about 0.7 to 0.8

standard deviations, these estimates suggest that three years of charter school attendance for

black students would eliminate the black-white performance gap. Angrist et al. (2013) update

this analysis to include urban and nonurban schools across Massachusetts, along with additional

years of test score data. They continue to find positive average test score effects, but these effects




best estimate of the first stage. In cases where a study reported only cumulative estimates, we divided the final year
estimate by the number of years observed to obtain a per year estimate. When we convert estimates to per year or
second stage estimates, we also divide the standard errors by the same factors we divide the coefficients. In the cases
where we are converting intention-to-treat estimates to second stage estimates, this will not correct the standard
errors as a typical two-stage least squares procedure would in a statistical software program. Thus our standard
errors are likely slightly too small for a subset of the charter school impact estimates that are based on intention-to-
treat estimates (see Table 1 for details). We follow these conventions in our data analysis as well. Means and
standard deviations are weighted by the inverse of the standard error of the relevant point estimates, both here and
throughout our study.


                                                          12
appear in urban schools only and with wide variance across schools—a finding we revisit later in

this paper.

       The New York City Department of Education also facilitated matching charter school

lottery data with standardized test scores in English/language arts and math. Dobbie and Fryer

(2013) collected data from 19 elementary and 10 middle schools with oversubscribed demand.

They find large average effects from each year of charter school attendance, especially for math

scores, though again with large variance across schools. In an earlier lottery-based study of New

York City charter schools, Hoxby et al. (2009) also found large and significant results for middle

schools and report even larger effects for charter high schools.

       Studies that use survey data for a national sample of charter schools tend to find positive

but not statistically significant overall impacts. Both Gleason et al (2010) and Furgeson et al.

(2012) contacted charter schools asking for permission to survey lottery applicants and obtain

consent prior to randomization, and the Furgeson et al. group also collected retrospective data to

match directly with administrative data. Among the 77 charter middle schools that agreed to

participate in Gleason et al. (2010), only 32 ended up with a sufficiently large enough waiting list

to use in their study. On average, lottery winners performed no better and no worse in math and

reading scores than lottery losers two years after students applied. Furgeson et al. (2012)

identified 16 of 109 charter schools run by Charter Management Organizations (CMOs) with

adequate records and also find insignificant overall test score effects from winning the lottery.

Estimates from survey data, however, are generally more imprecise than those using

administrative data.

       Seven additional lottery-based studies estimate charter impacts for specific schools or

organizations. Three of these studies examine the Knowledge Is Power Program (KIPP) charter



                                                 13
schools. KIPP is the largest network of charter schools in the country and often described as the

source of the “No Excuses” movement (as reported in Rotherham 2011). In KIPP schools,

principals and teachers have high behavioral and academic expectations for all students. Further,

parents, students, and teachers sign a ‘learning pledge’ and follow a strict disciplinary code.

School hours are extended typically to between 7:30AM and 5:00PM and include occasional

Saturdays and summer weeks, and tutoring is also offered during these times. In the 2014-2015

school year, KIPP’s network included 162 schools serving 58,495 students in prekindergarten

through grade 12 (Clark Tuttle et al. 2015). All three KIPP lottery studies listed in Table 1 find

significant achievement effects from attendance (Angrist et al. 2012; Clark Tuttle et al. 2013;

Clark Tuttle et al. 2015). In addition to the test score results, Clark Tuttle et al. (2013) also find

that KIPP attendance increases the amount of homework per night by about 45 minutes and

increases school satisfaction but does not affect effort or engagement.

        The Promise Academy charter schools in the Harlem Children's Zone (HCZ) contain

many similar “No Excuses” elements. Dobbie and Fryer (2011) estimate that attendance at the

Promise Academy raises test scores by about 0.20 standard deviations per year, although effects

on English/language were not significant. The study also finds that attendance at the Promise

Academy reduces absenteeism.

        Two other charter schools aligned with the “No Excuses” model have been evaluated.

The Unlocking Potential (UP) Network focuses on in-district school turnaround for chronically

underperforming schools. In 2011, UP Academy Charter School of Boston replaced a failing

traditional public school in Boston; within a year, the school was required to hold a lottery to

address oversubscribed demand (as reported in Nix 2015). Abdulkadiroğlu et al. (2014) find UP

attendance effects of 0.12 standard deviations per year for English/language arts scores and 0.27



                                                   14
standard deviations for math. SEED schools are “No Excuses” boarding schools in Baltimore

and Washington, D.C. for students from disadvantaged backgrounds in grades 6 through 12. At

the Washington, D.C. school, Curto and Fryer (2014) estimate increases in math scores of 0.23

standard deviations and in reading scores of 0.21 standard deviations per year of attendance.

       Many of the estimated effects in Table 1 are impressive. Attendance at some charter

schools leads to test score gains of more than half a standard deviation after two years of

attendance. Most educational interventions such as class size reductions, teacher or student

incentives, more resources, or extended time, generate gains that are less than one-quarter of this

amount (Fryer, 2016). However, while the large impacts from attending “No Excuses” schools

like KIPP, UP Academy, and the Promise Academy are encouraging, some of the other charters

generate no effect or even negative effects. Overall, the per-year mean effect of attending a

charter school in our sample of 113 schools is 0.080 standard deviations in math and 0.046

standard deviations in English/language arts. Our real interest from these papers, therefore, is not

whether charter schools are effective on average, but rather what makes an effective charter

school. To investigate this, we dig a little deeper.



III. School-Specific Effects



A. Wide variance in outcomes

       We collected data for school-specific charter effects and their corresponding standard

errors and sample sizes from the lottery studies in Table 1, with the exception of schools used in




                                                  15
Hoxby and Rockoff (2004) and Hastings et al. (2012). 15 Figure 1A plots a histogram of the

standardized math score effects from a year of attending these schools. Figure 1B plots the same,

but for English/language arts scores. The range in estimates is wide, with outliers ranging from -

0.57 to 1.16 for math and -0.78 to 1.06 for English/language arts. The estimates are slightly

skewed to the left. The mean per-year math test score effect is 0.080 and its standard deviation is

0.23. 16 The mean English/language arts effect is 0.046 with a standard deviation of 0.21.

         Some of this variation is likely due to imprecision. Not surprisingly, larger effects are

related to larger standard errors. Figures 2A and 2B plot the math and English/language arts

effect sizes against their corresponding standard errors, respectively. The largest math effect of

1.16 standard deviations from a year of charter attendance at a New York City school has an

associated standard error of 0.66. On the other end, the lowest English/language arts effect of -

0.78 from a school in Massachusetts has a standard error of 0.75. Estimates from the two

national studies using survey data from Gleason et al. (2010) and Furgeson (2012) generally

have higher standard errors than those from the other studies.

         To get a better sense as to the range of charter school effects, Figure 3 plots the math and

English/language arts score impacts for cases with standard errors less than or equal to 0.1.

Among these more precise results, effects on math scores range from -0.27 to 0.57, with a mean

of 0.092 and standard deviation of 0.18. The separate math and English/language arts effects are


15
   Table 2 lists the sources of these 113 school estimates and their availability of corresponding school characteristic
data. We thank the authors of these studies for their willingness to share data and results. The reasons for excluded
studies are as follows. Hoxby and Rockoff (2004) do not report results on a scale we can convert to standard
deviations. Hastings et al. (2012) do not report estimates that we can convert to per-year estimates. We also exclude
studies where the schools are included in a more comprehensive or a more recent study. The KIPP Lynn and
Promise Academy studies are not included as single studies since those schools are included in studies of the same
regions with larger school samples. Hoxby, Muraka, and Kang (2009) estimate effects on New York City schools;
we use the more recent estimates from Dobbie and Fryer (2013). The same reasoning applies to estimates of Boston
schools – these are included within the Massachusetts study.
16
   Means and standard deviations are weighted by the inverse of the standard error of the relevant point estimates,
both here and throughout our study.

                                                          16
strongly correlated, with math effects being generally larger than English/language arts in

absolute terms. The slope from regressing English/language arts on math scores is 0.64.



B. Larger Effects in Poor Performing Urban Neighborhoods

         A charter school which attracts students who would have otherwise attended a

particularly poor-performing traditional public school would appear more effective than an

identical charter school that draws students who would have otherwise attended a better

performing school. Estimates of charter school impacts should therefore be interpreted relative to

the experience of students who lose the lottery at that school. 17

         As mentioned earlier, Angrist et al. (2013) find stark differences in the gain that can be

attributed to a charter school according to whether the school is located in an urban or nonurban

setting. 18 The large positive effects from the Massachusetts studies are concentrated among the

urban charter schools, while nonurban charters are generally ineffective and may even reduce

achievement for some. We show this pattern in Figure 4, Panel I, which plots the Massachusetts

estimates by average achievement levels at the fallback schools for lottery losers. The fallback

school achievement level is measured as the average test score at the noncharter school that

lottery losers attend the following year, weighted by the number of students that attend. 19


17
   Hastings et al. (2012) examine whether winning a school choice lottery impacts students’ academic achievement
even before they enroll in their chosen schools by raising their intrinsic motivation. They find that charter and
magnet school lottery winners in an anonymous urban school district had truancy rates that were 7 percent lower
than lottery losers in the period after the lottery was held but before winners enrolled in their new schools.
18
   Angrist et al. (2013) define urban schools as those located in areas in which the district superintendent participates
in the Massachusetts Urban Superintendents Network. This includes Boston, as well as smaller districts such as
Cambridge, Holyoke, Lawrence, and Worcester. In Massachusetts, urban charter schools are almost uniformly
located in areas with high poverty rates and high minority enrollment. We follow the definitions of variables as
defined in their original studies. See Appendix Table 2 for a full list of variable definitions across studies.
19
   Results are very similar, though less precise, when we use control complier test scores rather than the average
school outcome of lottery losers. Additionally, to address the concern that these findings reflect a mechanical
correlation due to the presence of lottery losers’ outcomes in the fallback school scores, we recalculate the fallback
school scores using the prior year’s scores (which the lottery losers do not contribute to). The findings are essentially
identical, likely due to the relatively small proportion of lottery losers in any given school.

                                                           17
Students at urban fallback schools score well below average in test scores while the students at

nonurban schools generally score above average. The black circles indicate effects from

attendance at urban charter schools, which are almost all uniformly positive. Larger circles

indicate more precise estimates (that is, smaller standard errors). The average urban charter

school math effect is 0.25 (se=0.044). The grey, open circles that indicate nonurban effects are

mostly close to zero or even negative. The average math impact at nonurban charters is -0.07

(se=0.092).

        Regressing performance gains in math at the charter school on the average test scores at

the fallback schools, we get a strong negative relationship (-0.629, se=0.086). The R2 is more

than half (0.513). An indicator for whether a school is in an urban area has no additional

explanatory power. 20 Panel B of Figure 4 shows a qualitatively similar pattern, although less

extreme, for the gains by charters in English/language arts scores compared to the fallback

schools. Clearly, the most impressive charter school effects are found where fallback schools

have the least impressive academic performance.

        The national charter school study by Gleason et al. (2010) also displays a noticeable

negative relationship between charter school effects and conditions at fallback schools. In this

case, we use their dummy variable indicating “Large City” to define urban versus nonurban

areas. For the performance level of fallback schools, we use the average proficiency rate of the

traditional public schools attended by lottery applicants in the year and grade level after losing a

charter lottery (which is not on the same scale as the Massachusetts variable). Figure 4, Panel C

shows that the slope from regressing charter impacts on performance levels at fallback schools is

also negative in this data (-0.227, se=.073). Again, the slope remains essentially the same when


 Specifically, the slope and R2 remain about the same when adding a dummy variable for the school being in an
20

urban city (-0.658, se=0.375).

                                                       18
adding the urban dummy (-0.191, s.e.=0.088). The slope for English/language arts test score

impacts regressed on fallback school performance is also negative, but less steep and

insignificant.

        The importance of the fallback school in affecting the gains from enrolling in a charter

school can also been seen in Figure 5, Panel I which traces the accumulation of charter school

effects over time for applicants to urban and nonurban middle schools in Massachusetts. We

calculate percent proficient 21 on the state standardized exam for urban charter attendees (solid,

dark line) and noncharter attendees (solid, lighter line) at each grade level, with similar

calculations for the nonurban charter applicants (dashed lines), using the methods from Abadie

(2002, 2003) as described in Angrist et Al. (2016). In both subjects in middle school, applicants

to urban and nonurban charters have very low proficiency rates at baseline. Then the proficiency

rates diverge, with lottery winners that attend charter schools increasing their qualifications over

time substantially, from about 30 to 70 percent. In math, lottery losers that attend noncharter

urban schools actually have proficiency rates lower than their baseline rate by 8th grade. In

nonurban schools (dashed lines), the opposite is true: noncharter schools (the light dashed lines)

improve over time, and charter schools (the dark dashed lines) do worse. The figure also shows

that, by 8th grade, proficiency levels for urban charter school attendees are in the range of

children in the suburbs. The pattern for urban high schools shown in Figure 5, Panel II also

indicates a large proficiency gap of about 20 percentage points that opens up between charter and

noncharter schools after two years for both math and English/language arts.



C. Larger Effects for Black, Hispanic, and Previously Poor Performing Students


21
  We use percent proficient as opposed to mean scores, so that we are making comparisons to a set standard rather
than the state mean. However, mean scores show a very similar pattern.

                                                        19
           The urban charter school advantage is fairly consistent across subgroups. Table 2 reports

per-year results of two-stage least squares regressions as discussed earlier, but for different

subgroups of students after combining data from the Massachusetts and national charter school

studies mentioned in the previous section. The dependent variables for the four columns are

school-specific gains for students in charter schools in math and English/language arts test scores

for urban and nonurban students.

           For urban charter schools, the coefficients reveal positive and statistically significant

effects across each of the subgroups we examine, with the exception of white students, for whom

the charter school effect is positive and marginally significant in math and essentially zero in

English/language arts. Effects are generally larger for less advantaged students, including black

and Hispanic students, those with low baseline scores, those who receive subsidized lunch, and

English language learners. Special education and non-special education students in urban

charters have essentially the same test score impact estimates (for more details on impacts on

English language learners and special education students, including effects on classification, see

Setren 2015).

           For nonurban charter schools, we find negative and statistically significant effects for

female students, white students, and those without low baseline test scores, who do not receive

subsidized lunch, who are not in special education, or who are not English language learners.

There are marginally positive effects in math in nonurban schools for black students and those

with low baseline scores. 22



D. Similar Estimated Effects for Students Who Do Not Apply



22
     See Appendix Table 1 for results for subgroups by each study.

                                                          20
       Using lottery outcomes to estimate charter school effects provides a useful estimate of the

gains from charter schools for those who students who applied to oversubscribed charter schools.

However, the lottery studies cannot clearly tell us whether adopting approaches practiced by the

most successful oversubscribed charter schools would help the type of students who don't apply.

For example, charter schools often try to engage parents in their child’s learning; if students who

do not apply to charter schools have less involved parents, these types of parental engagement

strategies may not work for these students.

       In fact, there are a few studies suggesting that charters also benefit those who end up in

them without applying. Abdulkadiroğlu et al. (2014) examine charter takeovers in New Orleans

and Boston, where chronically poor performing schools were replaced with charters, most of

which follow the “No Excuses” pedagogy. By comparing students at schools not yet taken over

with students at schools that were taken over and turned into charter schools, the authors estimate

charter school effects for students who passively enroll. They calculate estimates of charter

school impacts at New Orleans takeover charters of 0.21 standard deviations in math and 0.14

standard deviations in English/language arts per year of charter school attendance. These

estimates are similar to or larger than lottery estimates for the sample of Massachusetts urban

charters schools in Angrist et al. (2013). At Unlocking Potential Academy Boston,

Abdulkadiroğlu et al. (2014) find that students who passively enroll in UP due to being

grandfathered into the school have substantially larger gains in English/language arts test scores

than students who attend due to winning an admissions lottery. Students who have been

grandfathered have baseline English/language arts achievement 0.23 standard deviations below

that of their lottery counterparts; attendance at UP effectively closes this gap.




                                                 21
       Indeed, evidence from the lottery studies suggests that charter schools may actually be

more effective at increasing the achievement of students who are less likely to apply. In

Massachusetts prior to 2011, charter applicants were slightly less likely to participate in special

education programs or to qualify for a subsidized lunch and had slightly higher test scores at

baseline, compared to their traditional public school counterparts (Angrist et al. 2013). However,

these subgroups tend to have larger gains in test scores. In their study of KIPP Lynn, Angrist et

al. (2012) find that students with special needs or those who have limited English proficiency

experience larger gains in reading (0.42 and 0.27 standard deviations for students with special

needs and with limited English proficiency, respectively, compared to an average of 0.12

standard deviations) and math (0.47 and 0.42 standard deviations, respectively, compared to an

average of 0.35 standard deviations) for each year of attendance. They also find that the effects

of attendance at KIPP Lynn are larger for students with lower baseline scores. In Boston, Walters

(2014) finds that high-achieving students from higher-income families are more likely to apply

to charter schools, but charter schools generate larger gains for disadvantaged, low-achieving,

and non-white applicants. These results are promising because they suggest these charter schools

may be good at helping the most disadvantaged among the group of disadvantaged students.

       Evidence is mixed as to whether charter schools for which lottery estimates are not

available—either because the schools are not oversubscribed or because lottery records are not

available—are more or less effective than the charter schools included in lottery-based studies.

Angrist et al. (2011) find that for Massachusetts urban charter middle and high schools,

observational estimates, calculated using a combination of matching and regression, and lottery-

based estimates are very similar. However, for nonurban charter middle schools, the

observational and lottery-based estimates are not as close, with the observational estimates



                                                 22
seeming to overstate the effect of charter schools. Using observational estimates, they find that

for urban charter schools, gains are larger in the lottery sample relative to the set of schools that

are undersubscribed or have poorly documented lotteries. Following Angrist et al. (2011),

Dobbie and Fryer (2013) also find that the observational estimates for the lottery sample are

somewhat higher than for the full sample of New York City charter schools, but the difference is

quite small. In their study of KIPP middle schools, Clark Tuttle et al. (2013) find that matching-

based estimates for the 10 schools in their lottery sample are similar to the matching-based

estimates for all 41 study schools.



E.. Effects on Non-Test Score Outcomes

       Most of the available research focuses on how charter school attendance affects scores on

state-mandated tests, but some studies look at subsequent educational attainment and other

outcomes likely linked to adult well-being (e.g. Oreopoulos and Salvanes 2011). Angrist et al.

(2016) find that charter attendance increases pass rates on the state high school graduation exam

(which also qualifies students for state-sponsored college scholarships), as well as increasing

SAT scores, advanced placement exam test-taking, and advanced placement scores. While

charter school attendance does not result in a statistically significant increase in overall college

enrollment, it seems to shift enrollment from two-year to four-year colleges: charter school

attendance decreases immediate enrollment in a two-year college by 11 percentage points and

increases immediate enrollment in a four-year college by 17 percentage points.

       Dobbie and Fryer (2015) collect longer-term survey and administrative data for the

earliest cohorts of the Promise Academy middle school. Six years after the admissions lottery,

the authors estimate a 0.075 standard deviation increase in math achievement among youth



                                                  23
offered admission to Promise Academy, higher college enrollment immediately following high

school graduation, higher rates of immediate enrollment in a four-year college, a 10.1 percentage

point drop in female pregnancy, and a 4.4 percentage point drop in male incarceration.



IV. Why Are Some Charter Schools Effective, But Not Others?



A. “No Excuses” Studies

         Lottery studies that use admissions data from identifiable schools, like KIPP Lynn, UP

Academy, SEED, and the Promise Academy charter schools, allow for a more in-depth analysis

of the mechanisms behind why some types of charter schools are more effective than others. All

four of these charters boost student performance substantially (especially in math) compared to

the low-performing urban schools that lottery losers attend. Because each of these charter

schools targets disadvantaged areas, they also have a competitive advantage against surrounding

traditional public schools. Because these charters are all trying to turn around the prospects of

youth from disadvantaged neighborhoods, it is perhaps not surprising that they have adopted

similar “No Excuses” strategies, which have been cited for decades by qualitative researchers as

important for improving student performance (Dobbie and Fryer 2013). As noted earlier, these

strategies include uniforms, high expectations from principals and teachers, a tightly enforced

discipline code, along with intensive tutoring, longer instruction time, regular feedback, college

preparation services, and an energetic commitment to ensuring the academic success of all

students. Another feature of these schools are empowered, flexible, and inspiring principals,

whose presence may be necessary to implement “No Excuses” schools successfully (Carter

2000).



                                                 24
        There is some question about the extent to which the “No Excuses” framework captures

what is different about these schools. While these schools share many similarities, they also

exhibit distinct differences in curricula and culture—for example, KIPP schools follow a

particularly unique setup, with middle schools starting in Grade 5 instead of 6, students receiving

'paychecks' for exhibiting good behavior that can be used for participation in school activities,

and classrooms requiring students to ‘SLANT' (Sit up straight, Listen, Ask questions, Nod, and

Track the person speaking with your eyes). At Harlem Children’s Zone’s 's Promise Academy,

students receive a free daily breakfast and regular instruction on character and social emotional

issues in gender-based groups, and all classrooms are equipped with smart boards. Suspension

rates also differ. UP Academy and SEED report relatively high suspension rates (33.5 percent in

2013 for UP compared to a 2.8 percent state average, and 52 percent for SEED compared to a 23

percent city average), while KIPP Lynn and Harlem Children’s Zone's Promise Academy report

low suspension rates that are close to state averages (4.7 and 2.5 percent, respectively). 23

        Moreover, some evidence suggests that these four charter schools may spend more per

student than the traditional public schools, because they receive additional funding from

charitable foundations. KIPP, for example states that 15 percent of its annual operation expenses

is covered by philanthropic contributions. 24 Goldman Sachs Gives made a $20 million donation


23
   For UP Academy: “2015 Massachusetts School Report Card Overview: UP Academy Charter School of Boston,”
Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education, accessed January 21, 2016,
http://profiles.doe.mass.edu/reportcard/SchoolReportCardOverview.aspx?linkid=105&orgcode=04800405&fycode=
2015&orgtypecode=6&. For SEED: “SEED PCS of Washington, DC: 2014-2015 Equity Report,” District of
Columbia, accessed January 21, 2016, http://learndc.org/schoolprofiles/view?s=0174#equityreport. For KIPP Lynn:
“2015 Massachusetts School Report Card Overview: KIPP Academy Lynn Charter School,” accessed January 21,
2016,
http://profiles.doe.mass.edu/reportcard/SchoolReportCardOverview.aspx?linkid=105&orgcode=04290010&fycode=
2015&orgtypecode=6&. For Promise Academy: “Charter School Suspension Rates: Way Above District Averages,”
United Federation of Teachers, accessed January 21, 2016, http://www.uft.org/files/charter-school-suspension-rates-
way-above-most-district-averages. Note that, according to the UFT report, suspension rates for KIPP schools in New
York City vary widely, from 0% (KIPP NYC Washington Heights Academy Charter School) to 23% (KIPP AMP).
24
   “Frequently Asked Questions,” KIPP, accessed January 21, 2016, http://www.kipp.org/faq.


                                                        25
to aid in the construction of the Promise Academy's new school building. 25 UP Academy relies

primarily on philanthropy to support new school startup costs and head-office administration. 26

Capital and start-up operating costs at SEED are also funded by donations from foundations and

private individuals. 27 The extent to which these revenues are pursued do to less per-student

funding from public sources remains a source of debate. 28 KIPP schools, at least, appear to spend

significantly more in per-student spending compared to traditional schools (Miron et al. 2011,

Baker et al. 2012), though this pattern is not observed in Boston’s charter high schools (Angrist

et al. 2016).

        Extensive research would be needed to document and appreciate the detailed differences

across these schools (for an example, see Merseth et al. 2009). However, the similarity in

effectiveness of these charter schools suggests that it is their common set of “No Excuses”

characteristics that matter most in boosting performance. One exception might be the higher

reading score effects for SEED Academy. Curto and Fryer (2014) suggest that this may be due to

the fact that SEED is a boarding school. 29


25
   “Supporting the Harlem Children’s Zone,” Goldman Sachs, accessed January 21, 2016,
http://www.goldmansachs.com/citizenship/goldman-sachs-gives/building-and-stabilizing-communities/hcz/.
26
   “UP Education Network (Unlocking Potential Inc),” The Giving Common, accessed January 21, 2016,
https://www.givingcommon.org/profile/1108725/up-education-network-unlocking-potential-inc/.
27
   “FAQs,” The SEED Foundation, accessed January 21, 2016, http://www.seedfoundation.com/index.php/about-
seed/faqs.
28
   For more on charter school finances, see: “Charter Schools in Perspective: A Guide to Research” (2015). The
Spencer Foundation and Public Agenda. www.in-perspective.org.
29
   For UP Academy: “2015 Massachusetts School Report Card Overview: UP Academy Charter School of Boston,”
Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education, accessed January 21, 2016,
http://profiles.doe.mass.edu/reportcard/SchoolReportCardOverview.aspx?linkid=105&orgcode=04800405&fycode=
2015&orgtypecode=6&. For SEED: “SEED PCS of Washington, DC: 2014-2015 Equity Report,” District of
Columbia, accessed January 21, 2016, http://learndc.org/schoolprofiles/view?s=0174#equityreport. For KIPP Lynn:
“2015 Massachusetts School Report Card Overview: KIPP Academy Lynn Charter School,” accessed January 21,
2016,
http://profiles.doe.mass.edu/reportcard/SchoolReportCardOverview.aspx?linkid=105&orgcode=04290010&fycode=
2015&orgtypecode=6&. For Promise Academy: “Charter School Suspension Rates: Way Above District Averages,”
United Federation of Teachers, accessed January 21, 2016, http://www.uft.org/files/charter-school-suspension-rates-
way-above-most-district-averages. Note that, according to the UFT report, suspension rates for KIPP schools in New
York City vary widely, from 0% (KIPP NYC Washington Heights Academy Charter School) to 23% (KIPP AMP).


                                                        26
B. What Relationships Exist Between Charter School Characteristics and Effectiveness?

         We combine data from three studies for which school-specific charter effects and school

characteristics are available in order to explore the relationship between school characteristics

and effectiveness. We first use Dobbie and Fryer’s (2013) definition of school characteristics.

These include five “non-traditional” inputs that are measured on a binary basis: teacher feedback,

data-driven instruction, instructional time, high dosage tutoring, and high expectations, as well as

a standardized index of the five characteristics. They also include an index based on four

traditional inputs: class size, per pupil expenditures, highly qualified teachers (as measured by

masters degrees), and teacher certification. We create equivalent variables for schools in the

Massachusetts and Gleason et al. (2010) survey data. In general, our method for creating

equivalent dummy variables to the New York City data is to estimate the median of a school

characteristic—for example, per pupil expenditure—and assign values of one for schools that

were above the median and zero for schools that were below. We are able to create fairly similar

measures in the Massachusetts study. Unlike Angrist et al. (2013) and Dobbie and Fryer (2013),

when we combine the three studies our sample size is large enough to use lottery-based rather

than observational estimates as our outcome of interest. 30

         In Table 3, we present results from regressing the estimated charter school effects from

the studies themselves on the school characteristics defined above. All regressions include study

fixed effects and a control for school level (elementary, middle, high) and are weighted by the




30
  In Appendix Table 2, we describe in detail the variables and our adaptations across the underlying studies. See
Appendix Tables 4a and 4b for the individual study results, which tend to be similar though less precisely estimated.
The most dissimilar study is IES, which is not surprising given that the available survey variables do not map well to
the constructs from the New York City study.

                                                         27
inverse of the outcome’s standard error. We also cluster standard errors by school to account for

the fact that a handful of the charter schools in this sample have campuses serving multiple

school levels. Columns 1 and 5 include results from single variable regressions, while all other

columns include multiple school characteristics. We also present results using an index of “No

Excuses” school practices, equal to a standardized sum of each characteristic employed, as well

as an index for school resource inputs summarized by a second standardized index.

       When each characteristic is considered separately, in both math (in Column 1) and

English/language arts (in Column 5), all of the school practice inputs but one are positive and

statistically significant (excluding data-driven instruction for math and teacher feedback for

English/language arts). The coefficient on the index summarizing “No Excuses” practices is

positive and precise. In math, none of the school resource variables have predictive power for

charter school effects. In English/language arts, there appears to be a positive association

between per pupil expenditures and school level impacts, and the coefficient on class size is

significant but in the ‘wrong’ direction. For both subjects, the summary index of resource inputs

in Columns 1 and 5 has no explanatory power. The other columns include multiple

characteristics and generally show that school practices remain important even when controlling

for resource inputs. These findings are consistent with the results from Angrist et al. (2013) and

Dobbie and Fryer (2013).




C. Taking Location into Account

       We pointed out earlier that the charters with the highest value-added locate in areas

where lottery losers end up in some of the worst performing schools; conversely, charter schools

with the lowest value-added are in more suburban areas, where neighboring traditional public


                                                 28
schools do relatively well. Also, charter schools that are more likely to locate in highly

segregated and disadvantaged areas tend to be “No Excuses” schools, while nonurban charter

schools, in contrast, tend to emphasize other priorities, such as performing arts, interdisciplinary

group projects, field work, or customized instruction. In Massachusetts, for example, no charter

schools in nonurban areas identify with a “No Excuses” philosophy, while two-thirds of charter

schools in urban areas identify as “No Excuses” (Angrist et al. 2013).

        Thus, we condition on test performance at fallback schools to explore whether the

remaining variance in estimated charter school effectiveness still relates to “No Excuses”

practices. 31 We drop data from New York City (Dobbie and Fryer 2013), for which we have no

information about fallback school performance, leaving us with a sample of 57 schools. In

Column 1 of Table 4 we regress charter school effect estimates on a dummy variable for whether

the charter is located in an urban area, while also including study fixed effects and school level

dummies, again weighted by the inverse of the school effect standard error. Urban charters

increase annual math scores by 0.28 standard deviations more than nonurban charters per year of

attendance, on average. In bivariate relationships shown in Columns 2-4, we see that the

counterfactual mean—that is, the test scores in the fallback school if not chosen in the charter

school lottery—as well as school practice inputs also have explanatory power for charter school

impacts

        Beginning in Column 5, we combine the additional variables with the urban indicator.

When we include average test performance at fallback schools as a conditioning variable, along



31
  Several others have also pointed out the importance of the fallback, or counterfactual, option in estimating
program effects. See, for example, Heckman, Hohmann, Smith, and Khoo (2000) for evidence from job training,
Kirkebøen, Leuven, and Mogstad (2014) for evidence from post-secondary decisions, and Kline and Walters (2015)
for evidence on Head Start.



                                                      29
with an urban indicator and index variables for practice and resource inputs, the variables for

fallback school performance remain strongly significant in math. This finding is consistent with

Figure 4, which shows a strong relationship between charter effects and test scores at fallback

schools, even within urban areas. Remember, “No Excuses” characteristics are strongly related

with charter school effects. But when including controls for urban areas and fallback school

performance, the coefficient falls by about half (to 0.065) and becomes insignificant. 32 A similar

pattern holds for English/language arts scores: the coefficient on the index variables of “No

Excuses” practices falls by about half (from 0.077 to 0.047) and loses statistical significance. Of

course, in both cases the loss of statistical significance could be due, in part, to an increase in the

standard error. The estimated impact of more resource inputs remains negligible, with or without

additional controls.

         We rerun these results in Table 5, this time breaking up the school practice index variable

into specific charter school characteristics and adding high suspension rates to the list of

variables, following the method used by Dobbie and Fryer (2013). When including urban and

fallback school performance controls, the characteristics that remain significantly correlated with

charter school math effects are teacher feedback, intensive tutoring, and above average

suspension rates (significant at the 10 percent level). These variables may serve as proxies for

other underlying characteristics. Notably, the importance of the high expectations variable

disappears once both urban status and fallback performance is taken into account. When all of

the school characteristics variables are included together in Column 7, the point estimates for the

tutoring and high suspension rate variables remain about the same, while the others drop or



32
  In other specifications we tried, with an additional squared and cubic fallback school quality term, and without the
urban dummy, the coefficient for “No Excuses” characteristics also falls by about half. For the model without the
urban dummy, the coefficient is significant.

                                                         30
remain negligible. Charter schools that offer intensive tutoring have math test scores 0.15

standard deviations higher, on average, for each year of charter attendance. This value is large

and significant at the 10 percent level. After three years of attendance, students at these schools

have test scores almost half a standard deviation higher than lottery losers at fallback schools.

Charter schools with high suspension rates have math test scores that are 0.12 standard

deviations higher, on average, though this measure is not statistically significant. For

English/language arts test outcomes, only differentiated instruction is significant when included

with urban and fallback school performance controls, and none of the school characteristics

variables are significant when they are included together in the same regression.

       Overall, once one accounts for surrounding neighborhood and school characteristics,

many of the specific charter school practices are no longer associated with student improvement.

The main exception is intensive tutoring. Its estimated impact remains large and relatively stable,

especially in math, even when conditioning on other charter school characteristics. Nonurban

schools account for most of the variation in charter school effects that identifies the importance

of tutoring after conditioning on fallback school quality. When the model in Column 7 of Table 5

is estimated for the 21 urban schools only (conditioning on fallback quality), the coefficients for

all school characteristics are statistically insignificant with large standard errors. The

characteristic coefficients when using only the 28 nonurban schools are also insignificant except

the one for intensive tutoring (0.254, with a standard error of 0.112).

       This evidence in support of tutoring is of course only suggestive, based on analysis of

correlations rather than on the randomized provision of tutoring services. However, the potential

importance of intensive tutoring is in line with recent quasi-experimental and experimental

studies that find large increases in student performance from tutoring, delivered either as part of



                                                  31
a package of school reforms or on its own. Kraft (2015) uses two quasi-experimental methods to

estimate the impact of implementing individualized tutoring classes four days a week at MATCH

Charter Public High School in Boston and finds large and statistically significant impacts on

English/language arts achievement. In his review of randomized experiments in education, Fryer

(2016) distinguishes high-dosage tutoring—which he defines as being tutored in groups of 6 or

fewer for more than three days per week, or being tutored at a rate that would equate to 50 hours

or more over a 36-week period—from low-dosage tutoring. Consistent with our findings, Fryer

finds that high-dosage tutoring programs have, on average, statistically significant positive

treatment effects on math and reading achievement. In contrast, the meta-coefficient on low-

dosage tutoring is not statistically significant for either subject. Some examples of recent

randomized experiments showing gains from intensive tutoring include Lee et al. (2010), who

study the Experience Corps® (EC) program for placing older volunteers in elementary schools to

tutor reading; Fryer (2014), who studied the use of intensive tutors in fourth, sixth and ninth

grades in Houston public schools; Markovitz et al. (2014), who evaluated the Minnesota Reading

Corps, a literacy tutoring program for kindergarten through third grade students; Cook et al.

(2015), who studied an intensive tutoring serving male ninth and tenth graders in 12 public high

schools in Chicago; and May et al. (2014), who evaluated an early-intervention literacy tutoring

program called Reading Recovery.



Conclusions



       Charter schools were originally intended to serve as research laboratories for learning

about best practices in education. They have since become viewed more as competitive



                                                 32
alternatives to traditional public schools. But with many charters now receiving more

applications than spots available, the requirement that oversubscribed charter schools admit

students through lottery has unintentionally created the research setting that the charter school

movement’s originators were seeking.

       Our purpose in this paper is not to enter the debate on whether charter schools should

exist or expand: we have not discussed issues like how increased competition from charters

affects traditional public schools over time, or the possible effects of charter schools on the

racial/ethnic or socioeconomic mixture of students (for an example of discussion of this point in

North Carolina, see Ladd et al. 2015). Instead, our purpose is to gather existing evidence from

charter lotteries to learn more about the education production function.

       We confirm a finding from previous studies that a sharp divide exists between the

effectiveness of charter schools in urban and nonurban settings. However, there are two

important differences between the urban and nonurban charters that have been studied. One is

that almost all the charter school alternatives that have been the subject of lottery studies in

disadvantaged urban areas use a “No Excuses” approach, while there are few “No Excuses”

schools in nonurban settings. The other main difference is that students who attend charter

schools in disadvantaged urban areas are usually being compared to students who end up in very

poor performing schools, while students in charter schools in nonurban areas are being compared

to students who attend better performing schools. This pattern arises because the charter schools

aiming to attract students from the worst performing traditional public schools often find them

residing in highly segregated and disadvantaged urban neighborhoods.

       Many charter schools in disadvantaged urban schools have proven to be impressively

effective, often raising average test score performance by more than half a standard deviation



                                                  33
after just two years of attendance. For less advantaged students, including black and Hispanic

students, those with low baseline scores, and English language learners, impacts are similar or

higher than for the more-advantaged. Other studies find corresponding improvements to longer-

term outcomes, such as reductions in incarceration rates and teen pregnancies and increases in

enrollment in four-year colleges (Dobbie and Fryer 2015, Angrist et al. 2016). It is unclear,

however, if other types of charter schools would deliver similarly impressive results in areas with

very poor performing traditional schools, since there are currently not enough of them in these

areas to tell. It is also unclear if “No Excuses” schools would deliver similar results in nonurban

areas; again, there are currently not enough of them to tell. For now, the kinds of charters that

have been created in nonurban areas—such as those emphasizing performing arts, exploratory

learning, or instruction tailored to different learning styles—may offer other benefits but do not

appear to be improving standardized test scores.

       After accounting for the charter school effect variation explained by urban status and

performance levels at fallback schools, we examine which charter school characteristics most

strongly correlate with the little remaining variation. In line with previous studies, we find no

evidence that differences in class size, per pupil expenditures, or teacher certification explain

charter school effectiveness. The “No Excuses” explanatory factor that remains significant after

controlling for fallback school performance (even for nonurban schools only) is whether a

charter has an intensive tutoring program (though the effect of high suspension rates is close to

significant). Of course, this variable could be a proxy for other school differences, and the

relationships between effectiveness and several other associations are estimated imprecisely. But

a push for intensive tutoring—more frequent and convenient than currently provided at




                                                 34
traditional public schools, and in some cases mandatory —may serve as an important

complement to instruction in many different kinds of classrooms.




       .




                                              35
Acknowledgements

For sharing the data from and answering question about their studies, we thank Ira Nichols-Barrer,
Brian Gill, Phil Gleason, Josh Furgeson, and Christina Clark Tuttle of Mathematica Policy
Research; Danielle Eisenberg of the KIPP Foundation; Josh Angrist, Parag Pathak, and Chris
Walters; and Will Dobbie and Roland Fryer. We also thank Carrie Conaway of the Massachusetts
Department of Elementary and Secondary Education and the National Center for Education
Statistics for additional data access, and Josh Angrist, Will Dobbie, and Mike Gilane, as well as
seminar participants at Teachers College Columbia University and IFN-Stockholm for helpful
comments.




                                               36
References

Abadie, Alberto. 2002. "Bootstrap Tests for Distributional Treatment Effects in Instrumental
      Variables Models." Journal of the American Statistical Association 97 (457):284-292.
      http://www.hks.harvard.edu/fs/aabadie/dtep.pdf

———. 2003. "Semiparametric Instrumental Variable Estimation of Treatment Response
   Models." Journal of Econometrics 113 (2):231-263.
   http://www.hks.harvard.edu/fs/aabadie/gtep.pdf

Abdulkadiroğlu, Atila, Joshua D. Angrist, Susan M. Dynarski, Thomas J. Kane, and Parag A.
      Pathak. 2011. “Accountability and Flexibility in Public Schools: Evidence from Boston’s
      Charters and Pilots.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(2): 669-748. doi:
      http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjr017

Abdulkadiroğlu, Atila, Joshua D. Angrist, Peter D. Hull, and Parag A. Pathak. 2014. “Charters
      Without Lotteries: Testing Takeovers in New Orleans and Boston.” National Bureau of
      Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper 20792.

Abdulkadiroğlu, Atila, Joshua D. Angrist, Yusuke Narita and Parag A. Pathak. 2015. “Research
      Design Meets Market Design: Using Centralized Assignment for Impact Evaluation.”
      National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper 21705.

Angrist, Joshua D., Sarah R. Cohodes, Susan M. Dynarski, Parag A. Pathak, and Christopher R.
       Walters. 2016. “Stand and Deliver: Effects of Boston’s Charter High Schools on College
       Preparation, Entry, and Choice.” Journal of Labor Economics 34(2).
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/683665

Angrist, Joshua D., Susan M. Dynarski, Thomas J. Kane, Parag A. Pathak, and Christopher R.
       Walters. 2012. “Who Benefits from KIPP?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management
       31(4): 837-860. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/pam.21647

Angrist, Joshua D., Parag A. Pathak, and Christopher R. Walters. 2011. “Explaining Charter
       School Effectiveness.” National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper
       17332.

———. 2013. “Explaining Charter School Effectiveness.” American Economic Journal: Applied
   Economics 5(4): 1-27. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/app.5.4.1

Baker, Bruce D., Ken Libby, and Kathryn Wiley. 2012. “Spending by the Major Charter
       Management Organizations: Comparing Charter School and Local Public District
       Financial Resources.” Boulder, CO: National Education Policy Center.
       http://nepc.colorado.edu/publication/spending-major-charter




                                              37
Baude, Patrick L., Marcus Casey, Eric A. Hanushek, and Steven G. Rivkin. 2014. “The
       Evolution of Charter School Quality.
       http://harris.uchicago.edu/sites/default/files/Rivkin.paper_.pdf

Brown, Emma. 2014. “Joy and Anguish for Parents as D.C. Releases School Lottery Results.”
      Washington Post, March 31. https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/education/joy-and-
      anguish-for-parents-as-dc-releases-school-lottery-results/2014/03/31/a04aea1e-b8ff-
      11e3-9a05-c739f29ccb08_story.html

Carter, Samuel Casey. 2000. No Excuses: Lessons from 21 High-Performing, High-Poverty
        Schools. Washington, DC: Heritage Foundation. http://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED440170

Chapman, Ben and Stephen Rex Brown. 2014. New York Daily News.” Success Academy
     Charter Schools Admissions Rate is Only 20%, Lower Than NYU.” April 4.
     http://nydn.us/1fJapci.

Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hilger, Emmanuel Saez, Diane Whitmore
       Schanzenbach, and Danny Yagan. 2011. “How Does Your Kindergarten Classroom
       Affect Your Earnings? Evidence from Project Star.” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 126(4): 1593-1660. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjr041

Citizens League of Minnesota. 1998. “Chartered Schools = Choices for Educators + Quality for
       All Students.” http://citizensleague.org/wp-
       content/uploads/2013/05/424.Report.Chartered-Schools-Choices-for-Education-Quality-
       for-All-Students.pdf

Clark Tuttle, Christina, Brian Gill, Philip Gleason, Virginia Knechtel, Ira Nichols-Barrer, and
       Alexandra Resch. 2013. “KIPP Middle Schools: Impacts on Achievement and Other
       Outcomes.” Washington, DC: Mathematica Policy Research. http://www.mathematica-
       mpr.com/our-publications-and-findings/publications/kipp-middle-schools-impacts-on-
       achievement-and-other-outcomes-full-report

Clark Tuttle, Christina, Philip Gleason, and Melissa Clark. 2012. “Using Lotteries to Evaluate
       Schools Of Choice: Evidence from a National Study of Charter Schools.” Economics of
       Education Review 31(2): 237-253. doi:
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.econedurev.2011.07.002

Clark Tuttle, Christina, Philip Gleason, Virginia Knechtel, Ira Nichols-Barrer, Kevin Booker,
       Gregory Chojnacki, Thomas Coen, and Lisbeth Goble. 2015. “Understanding the Effect
       of KIPP as It Scales: Volume I, Impacts on Achievement and Other Outcomes.”
       Washington, DC: Mathematica Policy Research. http://www.mathematica-mpr.com/our-
       publications-and-findings/publications/executive-summary-understanding-the-effect-of-
       kipp-as-it-scales-volume-i-impacts-on-achievement

Cobb, Casey D. and Gene V. Glass. 1999. “Ethnic Segregation in Arizona Charter Schools.”
      Education Policy Analysis Archives 7(1). doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.14507/epaa.v7n1.1999

                                               38
Cohodes, Sarah R., Elizabeth M. Setren, Christopher R. Walters, Joshua D. Angrist, and Parag
      A. Pathak. 2013. “Charter School Demand and Effectiveness: A Boston Update.” The
      Boston Foundation and New Schools Venture Fund.
      http://seii.mit.edu/research/study/charter-school-demand-and-effectiveness-a-boston-
      update/

Cook, Philip J., Kenneth Dodge, George Farkas, Roland G. Fryer, Jr., Jonathan Guryan, Jens
       Ludwig, Susan Mayer, Harold Pollack, and Laurence Steinberg. 2015. “Not Too Late:
       Improving Academic Outcomes for Disadvantaged Youth.” Institute for Policy Research
       Northwestern University Working Paper WP-15-01.
       http://www.ipr.northwestern.edu/publications/papers/2015/ipr-wp-15-01.html

Curto, Vilsa E. and Roland G. Fryer, Jr. 2014. “The Potential of Urban Boarding Schools for the
       Poor: Evidence from SEED.” Journal of Labor Econoics 32(1): 65-93. doi:
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/671798

Dobbie, Will and Roland G. Fryer, Jr. 2011. “Are High-Quality Schools Enough to Increase
      Achievement Among the Poor? Evidence from the Harlem Children’s Zone.” American
      Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3(3): 158-87. doi:
      http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/app.3.3.158

———. 2013. “Getting Beneath the Veil of Effective Schools: Evidence from New York City.”
   American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5(4): 28-60. doi:
   http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/app.5.4.28

———. 2015. “The Medium-Term Impacts of High-Achieving Charter Schools.” Journal of
   Political Economy 123(5): 985-1037. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/682718.

Dougherty, Chris. “Getting FERPA Right: Encouraging Data Use While Protecting Student
      Privacy.” In A Byte at the Apple: Rethinking Education for the Post-NCLB Era, edited by
      Marci Kanstoroom and Eric C. Osberg. Washington, D.C.: Thomas B. Fordham Institute,
      2008. http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED504444.pdf.


Fiske, Edward B. and Helen F. Ladd. 2000. When Schools Compete: A Cautionary Tale.
        Washington, D.C.: Brooking Institute Press.

Frankenburg, Erica and Chungmei Lee. 2003. “Charter Schools and Race: A Lost Opportunity
      for Integrated Education.” Education Policy Analysis Archives 11(32). doi:
      http://dx.doi.org/10.14507/epaa.v11n32.2003

Fryer, Roland G. 2014. “Injecting Charter School Best Practices into Traditional Public Schools:
        Evidence from Field Experiments.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(3): 1355-
        1407. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/qje/qju011



                                               39
———. 2016. “The Production of Human Capital in Developed Countries: Evidence from 196
   Randomized Field Experiments.” Handbook of Field Experiments. Elsevier.
   https://www.povertyactionlab.org/handbook-field-experiments

Furgeson, Joshua, Brian Gill, Joshua Haimson, Alexandra Killewald, Moira McCullough, Ira
       Nichols-Barrer, Bing-Ru The, Natalya Verbitsky-Savitz, Melisa Bowen, Allison
       Demerrit, Paul Hill, and Robin Lake. 2012. “Charter School Management Organizations:
       Diverse Strategies and Diverse Student Impacts.” Princeton, NJ: Mathematica Policy
       Research. http://www.mathematica-mpr.com/our-publications-and-
       findings/publications/charterschool-management-organizations-diverse-strategies-and-
       diverse-student-impacts

Gleason, Philip, Melissa Clark, Christina Clark Tuttle, and Emily Dwoyer. 2010. The Evaluation
      of Charter School Impacts: Final Report (NCEE 2010-4029). Washington, DC: U.S.
      Department of Education, National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional
      Assistance, Institute of Education Sciences. http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/pubs/20104029/

Hastings, Justine S., Christopher A. Nielson, and Seth D. Zimmerman. 2012. “The Effect of
       School Choice on Intrinsic Motivation and Academic Outcomes.” National Bureau of
       Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper 18324.

Heckman, James, Neil Hohmann, Jeffrey Smith, and Michael Khoo. 2010. “Substitution and
     Dropout Bias in Social Experiments: A Study of an Influential Social Experiment.” The
     Quarterly Journal of Economics: 115 (2): 651-694 doi:10.1162/003355300554764


Hoxby, Caroline M., Sonali Murarka, and Jenny Kang. 2009. “How New York City's Charter
      Schools Affect Achievement.” Cambridge, MA: The New York City Charter Schools
      Evaluation Project. http://users.nber.org/~schools/charterschoolseval/

Hoxby, Caroline M. and Jonah E. Rockoff. 2004. “The Impact of Charter Schools on Student
      Achievement.”
      https://www0.gsb.columbia.edu/faculty/jrockoff/hoxbyrockoffcharters.pdf

Junge, Ember Reichgott. 2014. “Charter School Path Paved with Choice, Compromise, Common
       Sense.” Phi Delta Kappan 95(5): 13-17. doi:
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/003172171409500504

Kirkebøen, Lars and Edwin Leuven, and Magne Mogstad. 2015. “Field of Study, Earnings, and
      Self-Selection.” National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper 20816
.Kline, Patrick and Christopher Walters. 2015. “Evaluating Public Programs with Close
        Substitutes: The Case of Head Start” National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER)
        Working Paper 21658.




                                              40
Kolderie, Ted. 2008. “How the Idea of ‘Chartering’ Schools Came About: What Role Did the
       Citizens League Play?” Minnesota Journal 25(5): 5-6.
       http://www.educationevolving.org/pdf/Origins-of-Chartering-Citizens-League-Role.pdf

Kraft, Matthew A. 2015. “How to Make Additional Time Matter: Integrating Individualized
       Tutorials into an Extended Day.” Education Finance and Policy 10(1): 81-116. doi:
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/EDFP_a_00152

Krueger, Alan B. 1999. “Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions.” Quarterly
      Journal of Economics 114(2): 497-532. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/003355399556052

Ladd, Helen F., Charles T. Clotfelter, and John B. Holbein. 2015. “The Growing Segmentation
       of the Charter School Sector in North Carolina.” National Bureau of Economic Research
       (NBER) Working Paper 21078.

Lee, Yung Soo, Nancy Morrow-Howell, Melissa Jonson-Reid, and Stacey McCrary. 2010. “The
       Effect of the Experience Corps Program on Student Reading Outcomes.” Education and
       Urban Society 44(1): 97-118. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0013124510381262

Markovitz, Carrie E., Marc W. Hernandez, Eric C. Hedberg, and Benjamin Silberglitt. 2014.
      “Impact Evaluation of the Minnesota Reading Corps K-3 Program.” Chicago, IL.
      http://www.nationalservice.gov/documents/research-and-reports/2014/impact-evaluation-
      minnesota-reading-corps-k-3-program

May, Henry, Heather Goldsworthy, Michael Armijo, Abigail Gray, Philip Sirinides Toscha J.
      Blalock, Helen Anderson-Clark, Andrew J. Schiera, Horatio Blackman, Jessica Gillespie,
      and Cecile Sam. 2014. “Evaluation of the i3 Scale-up of Reading Recovery: Year Two
      Report, 2012-2013.” Philadelphia, PA: Consortium for Policy Research in Education.
      doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.12698/cpre.2014.RR79

Merseth, Katherine K., Kristy Cooper, John Roberts, Mara Casey Tieken, Jon Valant, and Chris
      Wynne. 2009. Inside Urban Charter Schools: Promising Practices and Strategies in Five
      High-Performing Schools. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Education Press.

Miron, Gary, Jessica L. Urschel, and Nicholas Saxton. 2011. “What Makes KIPP Work? A Study
       of Student Characteristics, Attrition, and School Finance.” New York, NY: National
       Center for the Study of Privatization in Education.
       http://www.ncspe.org/readrel.php?set=pub&cat=253

National Alliance for Public Charter Schools. 2015a. “A Growing Movement: America’s Largest
       Charter School Communities.” http://www.publiccharters.org/publications/enrollment-
       share-10/

National Alliance for Public Charter Schools. 2015b. “Estimated Number of Public Charter
       Schools & Students.” http://www.publiccharters.org/publications/open-close-2015/



                                             41
National Alliance for Public Charter Schools. 2015c. “State Laws on Weighted Lotteries and
       Enrollment Practices.” http://www.publiccharters.org/publications/weighted-lotteries-
       paper/

Neal, Derek. 2009. "The Role of Private Schools in Education Markets,” Handbook of Research
       on School Choice, edited by Mark Berends, Matthew G. Springer, Dale Ballou, and
       Herbert J. Walberg, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates/Taylor & Francis Group.

National Center for Education Statistics. 2015. “The Condition of Education 2015: Charter
       School Enrollment.” U.S. Department of Education.
       http://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/indicator_cgb.asp (accessed January 11, 2016).

National Commission on Excellence in Education. 1983. “A Nation at Risk: The Imperative for
       Educational Reform.” http://www2.ed.gov/pubs/NatAtRisk/index.html

Nix, Naomi. 2015. “A Boston Breakthrough: UP Academy Goes from Failing to First.” The
       Seventy Four: August 10. https://www.the74million.org/article/a-boston-breakthrough-
       up-academy-goes-from-failing-to-first

Oreopoulos, Philip and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2011. “Priceless: The Nonpecuniary Benefits of
      Schooling.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(1): 159-184. doi:
      http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/jep.25.1.159

Pisano, Chris. 2015. WGGB. “Hundreds Turn Out for Holyoke Charter School Enrollment
       Lottery.” March 4. http://www.masscharterschools.org/media/news/hundreds-turn-out-
       holyoke-charter-school-enrollment-lottery.

Rahman, Fauzeya. 2015. Houston Chronicle. “Word of Mouth Major Factor for Parents Charting
     Charter School Course.” November 7. http://www.houstonchronicle.com/news/houston-
     texas/houston/article/Word-of-mouth-major-factor-for-parents-charting-6617645.php

Rotherham, Andrew J. 2011. “KIPP Schools: A Reform Triumph, or Disappointment.” Time,
       April 27. http://content.time.com/time/nation/article/0,8599,2067941,00.html

Setren, Elizabeth. 2015 “Special Education and English Language Learners in Boston Charter
        Schools: Impact and Classification.” School Effectiveness and Inequality Institute (SEII)
        Discussion paper 2015.05. http://seii.mit.edu/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/SEII-
        Discussion-Paper-2015.05-Setren1.pdf
Shanker, Albert. “National Press Club Speech.” Washington, DC, March 31, 1998.
      https://reuther.wayne.edu/files/64.43.pdf

Walters, Christopher R. 2014. “The Demand for Effective Charter Schools.” National Bureau of
       Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper 20640.




                                               42
Wiltenburg, Mary. 2015. WYPR. “Uncertain Future for Thousands in Charter School Lottery”
       February 13. http://news.wypr.org/post/uncertain-future-thousands-charter-school-
       lottery#stream/0.




                                            43
                                          Data Appendix

Overview
We are grateful to the authors of the various studies who have generously shared data and
answered questions about their charter school projects. This data appendix details the sources of
the data that goes into our analyses and details any modifications we needed to make to the
original studies in order to combine materials. Our goal was to generate second-stage (LATE),
per-year estimates of charter school impacts in both math and ELA, which were directly obtained
from the Massachusetts, NYC, SEED, and UP studies.
We were able to estimate per-year local average treatment effects from the student level data for
the IES and KIPP 2015 studies. However, for the CMO and KIPP 2013 studies, we needed to
modify reported estimates to get our best estimate of the per-year, LATEs (student level data for
these studies was not available). When studies reported estimates for a specific year (e.g. year
two), we divided reported estimates by the number of years to generate a per-year impact. When
studies reported intention-to-treat estimates, we divided by our best estimate of the associated
first stage. We also divide the standard errors by the same factors we divide the coefficients. In
the cases where we are converting intention-to-treat estimates to second stage estimates, this will
not correct the standard errors as a typical 2SLS procedure would in a statistical software
program. Thus our standard errors are likely slightly too small for a subset of the charter school
impact estimates.
Appendix Table 1 summarizes the information on the studies and Appendix Table 2 provides
information about the creation of comparable school characteristic variables across studies. Note
that means and regressions using school-level data are weighted by the inverse of the standard
error of the relevant estimate.
Study-Specific Details

CMO: Site level experimental estimates of charter school effects are in the appendix of the
report; researchers at Mathematica shared information about the number of schools per site. The
experimental estimates are not linked to school characteristic information. The estimates of
charter school impacts were intention-to-treat with varying outcome years. We converted these
estimates to per-year, second stage effects by dividing by the participation rate (also available in
the appendix) and dividing by the number of years before the exam (provided by Mathematica
researchers). We followed the same procedure for standard errors, which likely makes the
standard errors too small, since we cannot make the appropriate correction for IV estimation.
IES: We accessed the student-level data from the federal study of charter school impacts through
a National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) restricted use data license. Using this data, we
calculated per year, second stage school level estimates of charter school effects and their
associated 2SLS standard errors. The IES report focuses on intention-to-treat estimates, whereas
we use the second stage estimates for our analysis. The IES data also included survey
information that we used to generate school characteristic variables. However, given the limits of
the survey questions asked, it was sometimes difficult to generate variables consistent with those

                                                 44
from Dobbie and Fryer (2013), which we used as the basis of our descriptive school
characteristics.
KIPP 2013: Mathematica researchers provided school level intention-to-treat estimates. To
convert these estimates to per-year, second stage effects, we divided the year 2 estimates by 2
and also by 0.6, the overall first stage. First stage effects by school were not available, and we
must assume that there was some variation in the first stages. Thus these estimates are our best
guess of the per-year, second stage impacts. It was not possible to link these estimates to school
characteristics for privacy reasons.
KIPP 2015: The KIPP Foundation provided access to the student-level data for this report. Due
to data use agreements, the only lottery-based data available was for elementary schools. We
calculated the second stage impacts using student level data, however years of attendance was
not in the data. Thus we divided the year 3 impacts by 3 for per year estimates. At this time, we
cannot link the school level estimates to school characteristic information. Note that the two
KIPP studies have non-overlapping samples as the 2013 study is limited to middle schools and
only elementary school experimental results were available in the 2015 study.
Massachusetts: Angrist, Pathak, and Walters provided the school level lottery estimates and
school characteristic information from surveys and administrative from their 2013 paper for 23
schools in Massachusetts. The estimates of charter school impacts were per year, second stage
effects, with associated standard errors and sample sizes. We use the exact same estimates from
the 2013 paper. We also have access to the student-level lottery, demographic, and test score data
through the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education (DESE) to
conduct additional analyses that require the micro data, such as the analysis of subgroup effects
and Figure 2 which shows the accumulation of effects over time.
NYC: The AEJ: Applied website hosts school level estimates and summary dummy variable
school characteristic data from Dobbie and Fryer (2013). The estimates of charter school impacts
were per year, second stage effects. This database also provided information for 9 school
characteristics.




                                                45
                                      Table 1: Summary of Lottery-Based Charter School Estimates of Reading and Math Test Score Impacts

                                                                                                                           Per year of charter attendance second stage impacts
                                                                                                                            (unless otherwise noted; all effects significant at 5%
      Setting                                Sample                                          Paper                                     level unless otherwise noted)
        (1)                                    (2)                                             (3)                                                   (4)
                        Boston (8 schools)                               Abdulkadiroglu, Angrist, Dynarski, Kane, and      MS: 0.198sd ELA, 0.359sd math
                                                                         Pathak (QJE, 2011)                                HS: 0.265sd ELA, 0.364sd math

                        Boston (13 schools)                              Cohodes, Setren, Walters, Angrist, and Pathak MS: 0.138sd ELA, 0256sd math
        Massachusetts




                                                                         (The Boston Foundation, 2013)                 HS: 0.271sd ELA, 0.354sd math

                        Massachusetts (26 schools)                       Angrist, Pathak, and Walters (AEJ: Applied        MS: 0.075sd ELA, 0.213sd math
                                                                         Economics, 2013)                                  HS: 0.206sd ELA, 0.273sd math
                        KIPP Lynn                                        Angrist, Dynarski, Kane, Pathak, and Walters      MS: 0.133sd ELA, 0.352sd math
                                                                         (JPAM, 2012)
                        UP Academy Charter School of Boston              Abdulkadiroglu, Angrist, Hull, and Pathak         MS: 0.118sd ELA, 0.270sd math
                                                                         (NBER Working Paper, 2014)
                        15 states (36 schools)                           Gleason, Clark, Clark Tuttle, Dwoyer, &           MS: -0.04sd reading, -0.04sd math (not significant).
                                                                         Silverberg (IES, 2010)                            *Year2 impacts divided by 2 to get a per year
                                                                                                                           estimates
                        KIPP schools (24 schools)                        Clark Tuttle, Gleason Knechtel, Nichols-          ES: 0.11sd on letter-word identification and 0.10sd
                                                                         Barrer, Booker, Chojnacki, Coen, and Goble        on passage comprehension test in reading, 0.14sd on
                                                                         (Mathematica, 2015)                               calculation, 0.02sd (not significant) on applied
                                                                                                                           problems in math. From study-administered
                                                                                                                           Woodcock-Johnson exam. *Year 3 impacts divided
                                                                                                                           by 3 to get a per year estimate
        National




                                                                                                                           MS: 0.08sd reading, 0.12sd math. *Year 2 impacts
                                                                                                                           divided by 2 to get a per year estimate
                        KIPP middle schools (12 schools)                 Clark Tuttle, Gill, Gleason, Knechtel, Nichols-   0.08 reading (not significant), 0.18 math.
                                                                         Barrer, Resch (Mathematica, 2013)                 *Year 2 impacts divided by 2 to get a per year
                                                                                                                           estimate
                        Charter schools that were members of             Furgeson, Gill, Haimson, Killewald,               Intention-to-treat estimates: MS/HS: -0.02 reading
                        Charter Management Organizations (CMOs)          McCullough, Nichols-Barrer, Teh, Verbitsky-       (not significant), -0.05 math (not significant).
                        in 14 states (16 schools in 6 sites; estimates   Savitz, Bowen, Demeritt, Hill, and Lake
                        aggregated by site)                              (Mathematica, 2012)

                        New York City (42 schools)                       Hoxby, Murarka, Kang (2009)                     ES/MS: 0.09sd ELA, 0.12sd in math
                                                                                                                         HS: 0.18sd ELA, 0.19sd math
                        New York City (29 schools)                       Dobbie and Fryer (AEJ: Applied Economics,       ES: 0.058sd ELA, 0.113sd math
                                                                         2013)                                           MS: 0.048 ELA (not significant), 0.126 math
        New York City




                        Harlem Children's Zone Promise Academy           Dobbie and Fryer (Journal of Political Economy, 0.031sd (not significant) reading, 0.075sd math.
                        middle school                                    2015)                                           From study-administered Woodcock-Johnson exam.

                        Harlem Children's Zone Promise Academy           Dobbie and Fryer (AEJ: Applied Economics,         ES: 0.114sd ELA (not significant), 0.191sd math (not
                        middle and elementary schools                    2011)                                             significant)
                                                                                                                           MS: 0.047sd ELA (not significant), 0.229sd math

Chicago                 Chicago International Charter School schools Hoxby and Rockoff (Unpublished working             No significant impacts on math or reading
                        (3 schools)                                  paper, 2004)                                       (dependent variable is percentile score on Iowa Test
                                                                                                                        of Basic Skills)
Unknown                Anonymous "No Excuses" charter schools run Hastings, Nielson, Zimmerman (NBER Working 0.346sd reading, -0.092sd math (not significant),
                       by prominent CMO in mid-sized urban school Paper, 2012)                                          estimates are a mix of different years
                       district (4 schools)
Washington, DC SEED School                                            Curto and Fryer (Journal of Labor Economics, 0.211sd reading, 0.229sd math
                                                                      2014)
Notes: This table only includes studies that use charter school lotteries to estimate effects on test scores. Some of these studies also include or focus on observational
results, which are not reported here. In some cases where there are multiple studies of the same setting, we focus on published academic studies, adding studies when
it appears that a substantial number of additional schools have been added. All impacts are second stage estimates reported in standard deviations and are
statistically significant unless noted otherwise. Citations in boldface type indcate that this study contributes to the analyses presented in this paper. See Appendix Table
1 for more details on the studies indicated in boldface. Key to abbreviations: ES = elementary school, MS = middle school, HS = high school, sd = standard deviation, ELA
= English/Lanugage Arts.
Figure 1: Distribution of School-Level Charter Effects


                                A. Math                                                        B. ELA
        40




                                                                      40
                                      Mean = 0.080                                                  Mean = .046
        30




                                                                      30
     Percent




                                                                   Percent
      20




                                                                    20
        10




                                                                      10
        0




                                                                      0




               -1     -.5         0           .5         1                   -1      -.5        0           .5          1
                                Math effect                                                   ELA effect




Notes: This graph shows the distribution of school-level lottery-based charter school effects, where the effects are per-year
school-level second stage point estimates for the 113 schools that contribute to our analysis. The means are weighted
means of the school-level estimates, weighted by the inverse of the standard error of each estimate. The following studies
are included in this figure: CMO, IES, KIPP 2013, KIPP 2015, Massachuestts, NYC, UP and SEED. See Table 2 for details on
these studies and for notes on modifications of published point estimates which put estimates on the same scale.
Figure 2: School-Level Charter School Effects vs. their Standard Errors


                                 A. Math                                                          B. ELA
            1




                                                                       1
            .8




                                                                       .8
     Standard Error




                                                                Standard Error
                .6




                                                                           .6
     .4




                                                                .4
            .2




                                                                       .2
            0




                                                                       0




                      -1   -.5     0         .5      1                           -1        -.5      0          .5   1
                                 Math Effect                                                      ELA Effect


            CMO            IES      KIPP 2013         KIPP 2015                       MA         NYC       SEED     UP


Notes: This graph shows school-level lottery-based charter school effects, where the effects are per-year school-level
second stage point estimates, plotted against the standard error of the school-level estimate. The following studies are
included in this figure: CMO, IES, KIPP 2013, KIPP 2015, Massachuestts, NYC, SEED, and UP. See Table 2 for details on these
studies and for notes on modifications of published point estimates which put estimates on the same scale.
Figure 3: Distribution of School-Level Charter Effects, Restricted to More Precise Estimates



        .6
        .4  .2
    ELA effect




                                                                                                    ELA mean = .066
    0   -.2




                                                           Math mean = .092
        -.4




                    -.2                      0                   .2                          .4                      .6
                                                         Math effect

                 CMO        IES        KIPP 2013          KIPP 2015           MA        NYC         SEED          UP


Notes: The notes for this figure are the same as those for Figure 1, except that the school level estimates that contribute
to this figure are restricted to those with standard errors less than or equal to 0.1 in either subject, which restricts to 42
schools.
Figure 4: School-Level Charter School Effects by Scores of Counterfactual Schools




Notes: This graph shows school-level lottery-based charter school effects, where the effects are per-
year school-level second stage point estimates, plotted against the average scores of counterfactual
schools attended by noncharter students that applied to the charter school. The size of the point is
weighted by the inverse of the standard error (larger points are more precise estimates). The following
studies are included in this figure: IES (Gleason et al. 2010) and Massachuestts (Angrist et al. 2013).
See Appendix Table 1 for details on these studies and for notes on modifications of published point
estimates which put estimates on the same scale. See Appendix Table 2 for description of the
calculation of the fallback school scores.
Figure 5: Middle School Urban and Nonurban Charter School Effects over Time




Notes: This graph shows charter school effects for urban (solid lines) and nonurban charters (dashed lines) in
Massachusetts over time. The darker line in each pair shows mean scores for charter school compliers over
time and the light line shows mean scores for noncharter compliers. Scores for compliers were calcuated
using the methods from Abadie (2002, 2003). The gap between the lines is the second stange charter school
effect at that grade level, using a dummy variable endogenous variable for charter school attendance.
Percent proficient or above is the percentage of students who score at least 240 or higher on the scaled score
of their state adminstered standadardized test (MCAS). Due to data availability, the following study is
included in this figure: Massachusetts.
Table 2: Per-Year Lottery Estimated Charter School Attendance Effects for Subgroups
                                        Urban                      Nonurban
                                 Math           ELA           Math            ELA
                                  (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)
Male                           0.228***     0.122***         -0.039         -0.046
                                (0.046)       (0.043)       (0.049)        (0.042)
                           N     8310          8180           4020           4050
Female                          0.299***     0.117***         -0.126***     -0.097**
                                 (0.045)      (0.040)           (0.045)      (0.039)
                           N      8800         8690              4230         4260
Black/Hispanic                  0.337***     0.126***          0.107*         0.003
                                 (0.046)      (0.042)          (0.062)       (0.055)
                           N      9460         9220             1140          1150
White                            0.098*         -0.005        -0.128***    -0.097***
                                 (0.059)       (0.051)          (0.036)      (0.032)
                           N      3830           3790            7130         7190
Low Baseline Score              0.289***      0.123**           0.003         0.022
                                 (0.051)      (0.050)          (0.052)       (0.051)
                           N      4370         4380             2030          2090
Not Low Baseline Score          0.250***     0.100***         -0.180***    -0.130***
                                 (0.034)      (0.030)           (0.034)      (0.029)
                           N      12200        11730             5780         6080
Subsidized Lunch                0.315***     0.156***          0.126*         0.075
                                 (0.039)      (0.035)          (0.066)       (0.062)
                           N      11650        11500            1320          1340
Not Subsidized Lunch            0.171***        0.042         -0.130***    -0.107***
                                 (0.057)       (0.051)          (0.037)      (0.032)
                           N      5460          5370             6930         6970
Special Education               0.246***        0.117           0.025         -0.117
                                 (0.073)       (0.074)         (0.095)       (0.093)
                           N      3120          3090            1310           1330
Not Special Education           0.277***     0.123***         -0.108***     -0.074**
                                 (0.036)      (0.032)           (0.035)      (0.030)
                           N      13990        13790             6940         6990
English Language Learner        0.382***      0.204**           0.166         -0.123
(ELL)                            (0.088)      (0.090)          (0.168)       (0.142)
                           N      1400         1390              240           250
Not-ELL                            0.253***    0.101***        -0.105*** -0.081***
                                     (0.035)    (0.032)          (0.033)        (0.029)
                              N       15710      15480            8000           8070
Notes: This table shows per-year two-stage least squares estimates of charter school
impacts for various subgroups, by urban and nonurban schools. Standard errors are
clustered by student and school by grade by year. The following studies are included
in this figure: IES (Gleason et al. 2010) and Massachuestts (Angrist et al. 2013).
Individual study results are estimated with the microdata. Since data security
restrictions preclude combining the microdata from these two studies, the combined
estimates are the inverse variance weighted average. Sample sizes are rounded to the
nearest 10.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.
                      Table 3: Correlation between Lottery-Based Charter School Math Effects and Key Variables from Dobbie & Fryer (2013)
                                                                                              IES, Massachusetts, and NYC
                                                                            Math                                                       ELA
                                                      Single                                                    Single
                                                    Variable                                                   Variable
                                                  Regression            Multivariable Regressions            Regression             Multivariable Regressions
                                                        (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)             (7)          (8)
Teacher Feedback                                    0.140**        0.104**                                      0.050          0.023
                                                     (0.062)        (0.047)                                    (0.047)        (0.048)
                                               N        86                                                        86
Differentiated Instruction (Data Driven)              0.093          0.055                                     0.106**        0.081*
                                                     (0.072)        (0.055)                                    (0.049)        (0.046)
                                               N        82                                                        82
Instructional Time                                 0.146***          0.071                                     0.078**         0.027
                                                     (0.051)        (0.049)                                    (0.038)        (0.041)
                                               N        86                                                        86
High Quality Tutoring                              0.260***        0.153**                                    0.136***         0.073
                                                     (0.064)        (0.069)                                    (0.050)        (0.056)
                                               N        86                                                        86
High Expectations                                   0.145**         0.080*                                     0.100**        0.072*
                                                     (0.057)        (0.047)                                    (0.042)        (0.042)
                                               N        86                                                        86
    Index of Practice Inputs                       0.109***                      0.142***       0.110***      0.064***                      0.067***      0.064***
                                                     (0.026)                      (0.027)        (0.027)       (0.020)                       (0.023)       (0.020)
                                               N        87                                                        87
Class Size                                            0.015                         0.063                      -0.079*                        -0.053
                                                     (0.066)                      (0.045)                      (0.047)                       (0.037)
                                               N        85                                                        85
Per Pupil Expenditures                                0.089                        -0.015                      0.086**                        0.030
                                                     (0.055)                      (0.054)                      (0.041)                       (0.045)
                                               N        81                                                        81
Teachers with Masters                                 0.039                      0.126***                       0.049                       0.088***
                                                     (0.062)                      (0.040)                      (0.043)                       (0.034)
                                               N        84                                                        84
Teachers with Certification                          -0.020                         0.034                       -0.034                        -0.012
                                                     (0.061)                      (0.044)                      (0.043)                       (0.037)
                                               N        85                                                        85
   Index of Resource Inputs                           0.021          0.028                         0.023        0.000          0.007                        0.002
                                                     (0.041)        (0.026)                      (0.028)       (0.025)        (0.019)                      (0.019)
                                               N        87            81             78             87            87             81             78           87
Notes: This table shows estimates from regressions of school characteristics on school-level charter school effect estimates. Columns (1) and (5) show results
from single variable regressions; each coefficient comes from its own regression. Columns (2)-(4) and (6)-(8) show results from multivariate regressions, with
the school characteristics included as indicated. Regressions are weighted by the inverse of the school-level standard error. Regressions include dummies for
school levels (elementary, middle) as well as study fixed effects, and standard errors are clustered by the school level to account for schools with campuses at
multiple grade levels. The following studies are included in this figure: IES (Gleason et al. 2010), Massachuestts (Angrist et al. 2013), and NYC (Dobbie and
Fryer 2013). See Appendix Table 1 for details on these studies and for notes on modifications of published point estimates which put estimates on the same
scale. See Appendix Table 2 for variable definitions across studies.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.
          Table 4: Correlation between Lottery-Based Charter School Effects and Urbanicity, Counterfactual Mean, and School Inputs
                                                                                   IES and Massachusetts
                                                   (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)         (6)           (7)
                                                               Panel A: Math
Urban                                           0.280***                                                0.170*        0.113         0.111
                                                 (0.076)                                                (0.088)      (0.116)       (0.121)

Counterfactual Mean                                             -0.327***                                  -0.238***      -0.197**      -0.197**
                                                                  (0.076)                                    (0.090)       (0.080)       (0.080)

Index of Practice Inputs                                                       0.131***                                    0.064          0.065
                                                                                (0.032)                                   (0.045)        (0.047)

Index of Resource Inputs                                                                       0.015                                      0.008
                                                                                              (0.047)                                    (0.030)
                                             N        58             57           58             58            57            57             57
                                     R-Squared      0.272          0.299        0.283          0.076         0.357         0.391          0.392
                                                                   Panel B: ELA
Urban                                             0.145***                                                   0.090         0.048          0.052
                                                   (0.054)                                                  (0.060)       (0.070)        (0.072)

Counterfactual Mean                                              -0.169**                                    -0.120        -0.083         -0.084
                                                                  (0.068)                                   (0.076)       (0.080)        (0.080)

Index of Practice Inputs                                                       0.077***                                    0.048          0.047
                                                                                (0.024)                                   (0.033)        (0.034)

Index of Resource Inputs                                                                       -0.007                                     -0.010
                                                                                              (0.028)                                    (0.021)
                                             N        58            57             58            58            57            57             57
                                     R-Squared      0.147         0.154          0.187         0.052         0.183         0.217          0.220

Notes: This table shows estimates from regressions of school characteristics on school-level charter school effect estimates. Columns (1) and
(5) show results from single variable regressions; each coefficient comes from its own regression. Columns (2)-(4) and (6)-(8) show results from
multivariate regressions, with the school characteristics included as indicated. Regressions are weighted by the inverse of the school-level
standard error. Regressions include dummies for school levels (elementary, middle) as well as study fixed effects, and standard errors are
clustered by the school level to account for schools with campuses at multiple grade levels. The following studies are included in this figure: IES
(Gleason et al. 2010) and Massachuestts (Angrist et al. 2013). See Appendix Table 1 for details on these studies and for notes on modifications
of published point estimates which put estimates on the same scale. See Appendix Table 2 for variable definitions across studies.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.
            Table 5: Correlation between Lottery-Based Charter School Effects and Urbanicity, Counterfactual Mean, and Detailed School Inputs
                                                                                                 IES + Massachusetts
                                                                (1)            (2)         (3)             (4)          (5)         (6)            (7)
                                                                      Panel A: Math
Teacher Feedback                                             0.131**                                                                              0.066
                                                              (0.059)                                                                           (0.064)
Differentiated Instruction (Data Driven)                                     0.066                                                                0.046
                                                                            (0.070)                                                             (0.066)
Instructional Time                                                                        0.072                                                  -0.011
                                                                                         (0.071)                                                (0.078)
High Quality Tutoring                                                                                  0.185***                                 0.153*
                                                                                                         (0.068)                                (0.091)
High Expectations                                                                                                     -0.021                     -0.013
                                                                                                                     (0.079)                    (0.076)
High Suspensions                                                                                                                  0.144*          0.120
                                                                                                                                  (0.083)       (0.076)
Urban                                                        0.184**         0.114        0.104           0.097      0.181*        0.114          0.091
                                                              (0.088)       (0.084)      (0.089)         (0.080)     (0.105)      (0.082)       (0.112)
Counterfactual Mean (test scores in the fallback school)    -0.220***     -0.272***    -0.240***       -0.223***   -0.242***    -0.250***     -0.204***
                                                              (0.083)       (0.086)      (0.092)         (0.080)     (0.088)      (0.086)       (0.074)
                                                         N      56             55          56              56           57          50             49
                                                 R-Squared     0.411         0.403        0.401           0.460       0.358        0.469         0.546
                                                                       Panel B: ELA
Teacher Feedback                                               0.017                                                                            -0.063
                                                              (0.057)                                                                           (0.071)
Differentiated Instruction (Data Driven)                                    0.124**                                                              0.071
                                                                            (0.054)                                                             (0.064)
Instructional Time                                                                        0.040                                                 -0.009
                                                                                         (0.046)                                                (0.064)
High Quality Tutoring                                                                                     0.101                                  0.084
                                                                                                         (0.067)                                (0.105)
High Expectations                                                                                                     0.073                      0.109
                                                                                                                     (0.071)                    (0.076)
High Suspensions                                                                                                                   0.095         0.111
                                                                                                                                  (0.062)       (0.077)
Urban                                                          0.092         0.025        0.052           0.047       0.055        0.047        -0.046
                                                              (0.063)       (0.053)      (0.053)         (0.056)     (0.069)      (0.056)       (0.062)
Counterfactual Mean (test scores in the fallback school)      -0.117       -0.148**      -0.124          -0.112      -0.099     -0.185***      -0.154*
                                                              (0.079)       (0.068)      (0.076)         (0.078)     (0.083)      (0.070)       (0.087)
                                                         N       56            55           56              56          57           50            49
                                                 R-Squared     0.182         0.250        0.198           0.226        0.199       0.284          0.371

Notes: This table shows estimates from regressions of school characteristics on school-level charter school effect estimates. Regressions are weighted by
the inverse of the school-level standard error. Regressions include dummies for school levels (elementary, middle) as well as study fixed effects, and
standard errors are clustered by the school level to account for schools with campuses at multiple grade levels. The following studies are included in this
figure: IES (Gleason et al. 2010) and Massachuestts (Angrist et al. 2013).. See Appendix Table 1 for details on these studies and for notes on modifications
of published point estimates which put estimates on the same scale. See Appendix Table 2 for variable definitions across studies.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.
                                            Appendix Table 1: Details on Studies that Contribute School-Level Data to Our Analyses
                                                                                                       Notes on Conversion of Lottery
                Paper                       Setting         Abbreviation     Lottery Estimates       Estimates to Per-Year 2SLS Effects Available School Characteristic Data
                  (1)                         (2)                (3)                  (4)                             (5)                                  (6)
                                                                          Panel A: Multi-Site Studies
Angrist, Pathak, and Walters (AEJ: Massachusetts           MA             23 schools               n/a                                   Extensive survey and administrative
Applied Economics, 2013)                                                                                                                 data
Clark Tuttle, Gleason Knechtel,     KIPP elementary        KIPP 2015      8 schools                2SLS estimates calculated from raw Extensive survey and administrative
Nichols-Barrer, Booker, Chojnacki, schools                                                         data accessed through a data use      data, currently not possible to link to
Coen, and Goble (Mathematica,                                                                      agreement with the KIPP               school effects
2015)                                                                                              Foundation, divided by 3 to convert
                                                                                                   to per year estimates
Clark Tuttle, Gill, Gleason,        KIPP middle schools KIPP 2013         12 schools               Year 2 estimates divided by 2, then n/a
Knechtel, Nichols-Barrer, Resch                                                                    divided by the overall first stage of
(Mathematica, 2013)                                                                                0.6
Dobbie and Fryer (AEJ: Applied      New York City          NYC            29 schools               n/a                                   School characteristics summarized in 9
Economics, 2013)                                                                                                                         dummy variables
Furgeson, Gill, Haimson, Killewald, Charter schools that CMO              6 sites (2 sites have 1 Year 1 impacts divided by individual Index of 2 charter school practices: (1)
McCullough, Nichols-Barrer, Teh, were members of                          school each, 3 sites     first stages, and in the case of one intensive teacher coaching and (2)
Verbitsky-Savitz, Bowen,            CMO's in 14 states                    have 3 schools each, estimate that was a year 3 estimate, comprehensive behavior policy; only
Demeritt, Hill, and Lake                                                  and 1 site has 8         divided by 3                          in observational data
(Mathematica, 2012)                                                       schools)
                                                                                                   Per year 2SLS estimates calculated
Gleason, Clark, Clark Tuttle,       15 unidentified                                                from raw data accessed through an Extensive survey and administrative
Dwoyer, & Silverberg (IES, 2010) states                    IES            35 schools               NCES restricted used data licsence data
                                                                          Panel B: Single-Site Studies
Abdulkadiroglu, Angrist, Hull, and UP Academy Boston UP                   1 school                 n/a                                   n/a
Pathak (NBER Working Paper,
2014)
Curto and Fryer (Journal of Labor SEED School              SEED           1 school                 n/a                                   n/a
Economics, 2014)
Notes: Lottery estimates refers to per-year two-stage least squares (2SLS) estimates of charter school impacts, with calculation differences noted in the table. In the 2013
KIPP study, for the 3 schools missing year 2 outcomes, year 3 outcomes were substituted, dividing by 3 instead of 2 for the per year effect. Studies from Table 1 that are not
included in our analyses are either studies that are superseded by another paper (for example, the Boston schools are included in the Massachusetts study, and the NYC
2009 study is replaced by the more recent 2013 study) or have characteristics that are incompatible with our analysis (Hoxby and Rockoff (2004) cannot be converted to
standard deviations and Hastings et al. (2012) cannot be converted to per year effects).
                                                                         Appendix Table 2: Definition of Variables across Studies
                                                                       IES                                           Massachusetts                                              NYC
                                                                        (1)                                                (2)                                                  (3)
                                                                                     Panel A: Variables for Table 3
                                              = 1 if school has at least two requirements for
                                              teacher hires (temporary certification, full         =1 if new teachers are observed at least twice a
                                              certification, relevant major, graduate of           month and veteran teachers are observed at          = 1 if school gives teachers feedback >=10 times
Teacher Feedback                              education program, and/or pass a test)               least once a month                                  per semester
                                                                                                                                                       = 1 if school administers >= 5 interim
                                              =1 if school uses ability grouping for some or all   =1 if school uses informal tests to gauge           assessments & uses >= 4 differentiation
Instruction (Data Driven/Differentiated)      students in math or English                          understanding (5 on scale of 1 to 5)                strategies
                                              = 1 if school is held for more than 1260 hours       = 1 if school is held for more than 1347 hours       = 1 if school has 25% more instructional time
Instructional Time                            (days*minutes per day)                               (days*minutes per day)                              than a traditional public school
                                                                                                    = 1 if all students in school participate in in-
                                                                                                   school or after-school tutoring or school hires     = 1 if tutoring >=4 times per week & tutoring
High Quality Tutoring                         =1 if school reports having a tutoring program       paid staff exclusively as tutors                    groups <= 6
                                              = 1 if school has uniforms & school informs          = if school self reports being "No Excuses" (>=4    = 1 if school prioritizes high academic and
High Expectations                             parents of bad behavior                              on scale of 1 to 5)                                 behavioral expectations for all students
  Index of Practice Inputs                                                          Sum of the above 5 variables standardized to be mean 0, standard deviation 1.
Class Size                                    = 1 if class size < 13.61                            = 1 if class size < 11.65                           = 1 if class size < 13
Per Pupil Expenditures                        = 1 if PPE > $7,160                                  = 1 if PPE > $12,345.5                              = 1 if PPE > $15,000
                                              = 1 if if percent of teachers highly qualified >     = 1 if if percent of teachers highly qualified >    = 1 if percent of teachers with advanced degree >
Highly Qualified Teachers                     96.83%                                               84.95%                                              11%
Teachers with Certification                   = 1 if percent of teachers certified >85.71%         = 1 if percent of teachers certified > 65.95%       = 1 if percent of certified teachers > 89%*
  Index of Resource Inputs                                                          Sum of the above 4 variables standardized to be mean 0, standard deviation 1.
                                                                            Panel B: Additional Variables for Tables 4 and 5

                                                                                                   =1 if town is any of: Boston, Brockton,
                                                                                                   Cambridge, Chelsea, Chicopee, Everett, Fall
                                                                                                   River, Fitchburg, Framingham , Haverhill,
                                                                                                   Holyoke, Lawrence, Leominster, Lowell, Lynn,
                                                                                                   Malden, New Bedford, Pittsfield, Quincy, Revere,
Urban                                         = 1 if NCES location code indicates "Large City"     Somerville, Springfield, Taunton, or Worchester n/a


                                              Average test score of the noncharter schools
                                              attended by lottery applicants in the year and       Average test score of the noncharter schools
                                              grade level after charter school application;        attended by lottery applicants in the year and
                                              school averages are weighted by number of            grade level after charter school application;
                                              students attending and the test score is the         school averages are weighted by number of
                                              mean of standardized math and reading average        students attending and the test score is the
Counterfactual Mean                           proficiency levels                                   mean of the math and ELA z-scores                   n/a

                                              =1 if in top quartile of suspensions (suspension     =1 if in top quartile of suspensions (suspension
High Suspensions                              rate > 10%)                                          rate > 17%)                                         n/a
Notes: *Reversed from Dobbie & Fryer so that all resource inputs are in the same direction. Inflection points are determined by the within-sample mean.
                                              Appendix Table 3: Per-Year Lottery Estimates for Subgroups, Study-Specific Effects
                                                              Urban                                                                     Nonurban
                                       IES                      MA                    IES + MA                   IES                       MA                IES + MA
                                Math         ELA         Math        ELA          Math         ELA         Math         ELA          Math        ELA      Math         ELA
                                 (1)          (2)         (3)        (4)           (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)           (9)       (10)      (11)        (12)
Male                            0.070       -0.050     0.265*** 0.168***       0.228*** 0.122***          -0.042      -0.032        -0.034     -0.073    -0.039      -0.046
                               (0.080)     (0.070)      (0.038)    (0.036)       (0.046)     (0.043)     (0.042)     (0.037)       (0.062)    (0.053)   (0.049)     (0.042)
                           N     770         770         7540       7410          8310        8180         1500        1510          2520       2540      4020        4050
Female                       0.167***      0.085      0.351*** 0.129***       0.299*** 0.117***        -0.117*** -0.070**      -0.142*** -0.140*** -0.126*** -0.097**
                              (0.061)     (0.055)      (0.038)  (0.034)        (0.045)  (0.040)          (0.040)  (0.036)        (0.054)   (0.045)   (0.045)  (0.039)
                           N    880         890         7920     7810           8800     8690             1610     1630           2610      2630      4230     4260
Black/Hispanic               0.155***      -0.040     0.421*** 0.211***       0.337*** 0.126***         0.119**      0.012          -0.230    -0.241    0.107*      0.003
                              (0.058)     (0.052)      (0.040)  (0.037)        (0.046)  (0.042)         (0.054)     (0.048)        (0.285)   (0.251)    (0.062)    (0.055)
                           N   1050         1050        8420     8180           9460     9220             900         910            240       240       1140       1150
White                           0.042      -0.039      0.137**     0.018        0.098*      -0.005     -0.145*** -0.076***         -0.099** -0.132*** -0.128*** -0.097***
                               (0.064)    (0.058)      (0.054)    (0.047)       (0.059)    (0.051)       (0.032)   (0.029)          (0.042)   (0.037)   (0.036)   (0.032)
                           N     940        940         2890       2850          3830        3790         2500      2520             4630      4670      7130      7190
Low Baseline Score           0.174***      -0.039     0.370*** 0.264***       0.289***    0.123**        0.075*     0.093**        -0.174** -0.154**     0.003      0.022
                              (0.056)     (0.051)      (0.047)  (0.048)        (0.051)    (0.050)        (0.044)    (0.044)         (0.070)  (0.069)    (0.052)    (0.051)
                           N    690         770         3680     3610           4370       4380            840        840            1190     1260       2030       2090
Not Low Baseline Score         0.118*      0.046      0.278*** 0.110***       0.250*** 0.100***        -0.224*** -0.148*** -0.106*** -0.105*** -0.180*** -0.130***
                               (0.061)    (0.057)      (0.028)  (0.025)        (0.034)  (0.030)          (0.031)   (0.027)   (0.041)   (0.032)   (0.034)   (0.029)
                           N     970        880         11230    10850          12200    11730            2270      2310      3510      3780      5780      6080
Subsidized Lunch             0.262***      0.071      0.331*** 0.181***       0.315*** 0.156***         0.152***    0.096*          -0.028    -0.014    0.126*      0.075
                              (0.058)     (0.055)      (0.032)  (0.030)        (0.039)  (0.035)          (0.055)    (0.052)        (0.133)   (0.106)    (0.066)    (0.062)
                           N    950         950         10700    10550          11650    11500             790        800            520       540       1320       1340
Not Subsidized Lunch            -0.003     -0.065     0.243***    0.088**     0.171***      0.042      -0.157*** -0.106***         -0.084* -0.108*** -0.130*** -0.107***
                               (0.076)    (0.067)      (0.049)    (0.044)      (0.057)     (0.051)       (0.034)   (0.030)         (0.044)   (0.037)   (0.037)   (0.032)
                           N     710        710         4760       4670         5460        5370          2320      2340            4610      4640      6930      6970
Special Education            0.250***      0.045      0.244***    0.155**     0.246***      0.117         0.035      -0.111         0.007     -0.131     0.025      -0.117
                              (0.092)     (0.090)      (0.064)    (0.065)      (0.073)     (0.074)       (0.084)    (0.082)        (0.116)   (0.117)    (0.095)    (0.093)
                           N    410         400         2710       2680         3120        3090           410        420            890       910       1310        1330
Not Special Education        0.141***      0.030      0.321*** 0.152***       0.277*** 0.123***        -0.114*** -0.064**          -0.097** -0.090*** -0.108*** -0.074**
                              (0.054)     (0.048)      (0.031)  (0.027)        (0.036)  (0.032)          (0.031)  (0.027)           (0.043)   (0.034)   (0.035)  (0.030)
                           N   1250        1250         12750    12530          13990    13790            2700     2720              4240      4270      6940     6990
ELL                            0.264*      0.069      0.415*** 0.258***       0.382***    0.204**         0.164      -0.124         0.618     0.213      0.166      -0.123
                               (0.139)    (0.121)      (0.074)  (0.077)        (0.088)    (0.090)        (0.158)    (0.136)        (2.187)   (2.727)    (0.168)    (0.142)
                           N     210        210         1190     1180           1400       1390            190        190             50        50        240        250
Not-ELL                         0.148***    0.014      0.291*** 0.132***         0.253*** 0.101***       -0.112*** -0.065** -0.091** -0.110*** -0.105*** -0.081***
                                  (0.050)  (0.045)      (0.030)    (0.027)        (0.035)   (0.032)        (0.029)    (0.026)      (0.042)   (0.035)      (0.033)    (0.029)
                             N     1440     1450         14270      14030          15710     15480          2920       2950         5080      5120         8000       8070
Notes: This table shows per-year 2SLS estimates of charter school impacts for various subgroups, by urban and nonurban schools. Standard errors are clustered by student
and school by grad by year. The following studies are included in this figure: IES and Massachuestts. Individual study results are estimated with the microdata. Since data
security restrictions preclude combining the microdata from these two studies, the combined estimates are the inverse variance weighted average. Sample sizes are
rounded to the nearest 10.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.
                                                                Appendix Table 4A: Correlation between Lottery-Based Charter School Math Effects and Key Variables from Dobbie & Fryer, Study Specific Effects
                                                              Single Variable Regressions                  Multivariable Regression: Practices + Resource Index       Multivariable Regression: Resources + Practice Index            Multivariable Regression: Both Indicies
                                                       IES           MA            NYC           All            IES          MA             NYC           All               IES          MA           NYC            All           IES           MA            NYC            All
                                                       (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)          (6)            (7)           (8)               (9)          (10)         (11)          (12)          (13)           (14)          (15)          (16)
Teacher Feedback                                     -0.013       0.265**      0.141**        0.140**          0.059       0.162*        0.216**       0.104**
                                                    (0.105)       (0.127)       (0.058)       (0.062)         (0.107)      (0.086)       (0.090)       (0.047)
                                              N         35            22            29            86
Differentiated Instruction (Data Driven)              0.017         0.253         0.012         0.093          0.016        0.138         -0.045        0.055
                                                    (0.091)       (0.163)       (0.062)       (0.072)         (0.087)      (0.134)       (0.073)       (0.055)
                                              N         34            22            26            82
Instructional Time                                    0.046     0.324***          0.039      0.146***          0.081        0.167         -0.124        0.071
                                                    (0.095)       (0.096)       (0.043)       (0.051)         (0.112)      (0.123)       (0.119)       (0.049)
                                              N         34           23             29            86
High Quality Tutoring                              0.237**      0.332***        -0.003       0.260***        0.212**        0.085         -0.069       0.153**
                                                    (0.099)       (0.092)       (0.047)       (0.064)         (0.100)      (0.142)       (0.094)       (0.069)
                                              N         34           23             29            86
High Expectations                                     0.070       0.281**         0.075       0.145**          0.118        0.057          0.121       0.080*
                                                    (0.092)       (0.110)       (0.060)       (0.057)         (0.097)      (0.147)       (0.104)       (0.047)
                                              N         35           23             28            86
   Index of Practice Inputs                           0.042     0.157***       0.050**       0.109***                                                                      0.124     0.169***        0.071      0.142***         0.040       0.157***        0.048*       0.110***
                                                    (0.099)       (0.027)       (0.023)       (0.026)                                                                    (0.086)      (0.061)      (0.045)       (0.027)        (0.105)        (0.027)       (0.025)       (0.027)
                                              N        35            23             29           87
Class Size                                          0.153*         -0.019        -0.095         0.015                                                                     0.147*        0.113       -0.055         0.063
                                                    (0.089)       (0.137)       (0.068)       (0.066)                                                                    (0.080)      (0.135)      (0.081)       (0.045)
                                              N         33            23            29            85
Per Pupil Expenditures                               -0.037        0.219*         0.053         0.089                                                                     -0.033       -0.032       -0.005        -0.015
                                                    (0.098)       (0.118)       (0.056)       (0.055)                                                                    (0.094)      (0.099)      (0.080)       (0.054)
                                              N         30            22            29            81
Teachers with Masters                                 0.060         0.034         0.025         0.039                                                                    0.182**        0.040        0.058      0.126***
                                                    (0.093)       (0.135)       (0.065)       (0.062)                                                                    (0.089)      (0.082)      (0.090)       (0.040)
                                              N         32           23             29            84
Teachers with Certification                           0.128      -0.247**       0.105*         -0.020                                                                      0.096      -0.019         0.082         0.034
                                                    (0.088)       (0.112)       (0.061)       (0.061)                                                                    (0.082)      (0.143)      (0.067)       (0.044)
                                              N        33            23             29           85                                                                                                                                                                            .
  Index of Resource Inputs                            0.040        -0.013        0.048          0.021         0.057*        0.017          0.051        0.028                                                                    0.040          0.003         0.046         0.023
                                                    (0.041)       (0.084)       (0.046)       (0.041)         (0.034)      (0.044)       (0.061)       (0.026)                                                                  (0.040)        (0.038)       (0.047)       (0.028)
                                              N        35            23             29           87             34           22              25           81                27            22           29            78            35             23            29            87
Notes: This table shows estimates from regressions of school characteristics on school-level charter school effect estimates. Columns (1) and (5) show results from single variable regressions; each coefficient comes from its own regression. Columns (2)-(4) and (6)-(8) show
results from multivariate regressions, with the school characteristics included as indicated. Regressions are weighted by the inverse of the school-level standard error. Regressions include dummies for school levels (elementary, middle) as well as study fixed effects, and
standard errors are clustered by the school level to account for schools with campuses at multiple grade levels. The following studies are included in this figure: IES, Massachuestts, and NYC. See Appendix Table 1 for details on these studies and for notes on modifications
of published point estimates which put estimates on the same scale. See Appendix Table 2 for variable definitions across studies.
                                                                 Appendix Table 4B: Correlation between Lottery-Based Charter School ELA Effects and Key Variables from Dobbie & Fryer, Study Specific Effects
                                                              Single Variable Regressions                  Multivariable Regression: Practices + Resource Index       Multivariable Regression: Resources + Practice Index            Multivariable Regression: Both Indicies
                                                       IES          MA             NYC           All             IES          MA            NYC           All               IES          MA           NYC            All           IES           MA            NYC            All
                                                       (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)             (5)          (6)           (7)           (8)               (9)          (10)         (11)          (12)          (13)           (14)          (15)          (16)
Teacher Feedback                                     -0.121       0.153*       0.115**          0.050          -0.117      0.118**       0.201**        0.023
                                                    (0.085)       (0.092)       (0.055)       (0.047)         (0.099)      (0.052)       (0.094)       (0.048)
                                              N         35           22             29            86
Differentiated Instruction (Data Driven)              0.069     0.244***          0.013       0.106**           0.080        0.070        -0.047       0.081*
                                                    (0.075)       (0.080)       (0.057)       (0.049)         (0.081)      (0.123)       (0.082)       (0.046)
                                              N         34           22             26            82
Instructional Time                                    0.024      0.177**          0.024       0.078**          -0.005        0.038        -0.173        0.027
                                                    (0.078)       (0.071)       (0.039)       (0.038)         (0.092)      (0.070)       (0.132)       (0.041)
                                              N         34           23             29            86
High Quality Tutoring                                 0.142      0.164**        -0.005       0.136***           0.136       -0.018        -0.059        0.073
                                                    (0.105)       (0.066)       (0.033)       (0.050)         (0.101)      (0.094)       (0.078)       (0.056)
                                              N         34           23             29            86
High Expectations                                     0.025     0.264***          0.015       0.100**           0.052     0.194***         0.141       0.072*
                                                    (0.079)       (0.055)       (0.050)       (0.042)         (0.082)      (0.053)       (0.104)       (0.042)
                                              N        35            23             28            86
   Index of Practice Inputs                          0.002      0.104***         0.030       0.064***                                                                     0.094      0.106***        0.056      0.067***         0.002       0.103***         0.029       0.064***
                                                    (0.062)       (0.022)       (0.026)       (0.020)                                                                    (0.074)      (0.024)      (0.046)       (0.023)        (0.063)        (0.024)       (0.026)       (0.020)
                                              N        35            23             29           87
Class Size                                          -0.060        -0.093         -0.081       -0.079*                                                                     -0.095       -0.007       -0.055        -0.053
                                                    (0.081)       (0.092)       (0.062)       (0.047)                                                                    (0.075)      (0.066)      (0.081)       (0.037)
                                              N         33           23             29            85
Per Pupil Expenditures                                0.123        0.130          0.012       0.086**                                                                  0.228***       -0.042        -0.033         0.030
                                                    (0.080)       (0.081)       (0.054)       (0.041)                                                                    (0.085)      (0.039)      (0.076)       (0.045)
                                              N         30           22             29            81
Teachers with Masters                                 0.108        0.017          0.029         0.049                                                                      0.040        0.051        0.040      0.088***
                                                    (0.083)       (0.083)       (0.054)       (0.043)                                                                    (0.074)      (0.057)      (0.086)       (0.034)
                                              N        32            23             29            84
Teachers with Certification                         -0.064       -0.131*       0.095**         -0.034                                                                    -0.152*        0.000        0.072       -0.012
                                                    (0.083)       (0.075)       (0.049)       (0.043)                                                                    (0.083)      (0.069)      (0.061)       (0.037)
                                              N        33            23             29           85                                                                                                                                                                            .
  Index of Resource Inputs                           0.009        -0.026         0.032          0.000         -0.001         0.004         0.060        0.007                                                                    0.009         -0.016         0.031         0.002
                                                    (0.025)       (0.051)       (0.040)       (0.025)         (0.025)      (0.035)       (0.053)       (0.019)                                                                  (0.026)        (0.028)       (0.040)       (0.019)
                                              N        35           23              29           87              34           22             25           81                27            22           29            78            35             23            29            87
Notes: This table shows estimates from regressions of school characteristics on school-level charter school effect estimates. Columns (1) and (5) show results from single variable regressions; each coefficient comes from its own regression. Columns (2)-(4) and (6)-(8) show
results from multivariate regressions, with the school characteristics included as indicated. Regressions are weighted by the inverse of the school-level standard error. Regressions include dummies for school levels (elementary, middle) as well as study fixed effects, and
standard errors are clustered by the school level to account for schools with campuses at multiple grade levels. The following studies are included in this figure: IES, Massachuestts, and NYC. See Appendix Table 1 for details on these studies and for notes on modifications
of published point estimates which put estimates on the same scale. See Appendix Table 2 for variable definitions across studies.
                                 Appendix Table 5: Correlation between Lottery-Based Charter School Effects and Urbanicity, Counterfactual Mean, and School Inputs, Study Specific Effects

                                                                                                                                             Multivariable Regression: Urban,             Multivariable Regression: Urban,
                                                                                               Multivariable Regression: Urban and          Counterfactual Mean, and Index of          Counterfactual Mean, Index of Practice
                                                       Single Variable Regressions                    Counterfactual Mean                             Practice Inputs                   Inputs, and Index of Resource Inputs
                                                     IES           MA            All             IES            MA           All             IES           MA            All               IES           MA            All
                                                     (1)           (2)           (3)             (4)            (5)          (6)             (7)            (8)          (9)              (10)          (11)          (12)
                                                                                                        Panel A: Math
Urban                                              0.234**       0.315***      0.280***         0.155         -0.020       0.170*            0.155        -0.061          0.113           0.149        -0.061         0.111
                                                    (0.111)       (0.105)       (0.076)        (0.120)       (0.257)       (0.088)          (0.124)       (0.248)        (0.116)         (0.136)       (0.255)       (0.121)
                                             N        35            23            58
                                     R-Squared       0.117         0.361         0.272
Counterfactual Mean                               -0.227***     -0.629***     -0.327***       -0.191**       -0.658*      -0.238***        -0.194**       -0.304        -0.197**        -0.194**       -0.303       -0.197**
                                                    (0.073)       (0.086)       (0.076)        (0.088)       (0.375)        (0.090)         (0.085)       (0.390)        (0.080)         (0.086)       (0.394)       (0.080)
                                             N        34            23            57
                                     R-Squared       0.168         0.513         0.299
Index of Practice Inputs                             0.042       0.157***      0.131***                                                     -0.012        0.115**         0.064          -0.011       0.115**         0.065
                                                    (0.099)       (0.027)       (0.032)                                                     (0.087)       (0.051)        (0.045)         (0.091)      (0.052)        (0.047)
                                             N        35            23            58
                                     R-Squared       0.010         0.573         0.283
Index of Resource Inputs                             0.040        -0.013         0.015                                                                                                    0.014         0.002         0.008
                                                    (0.041)       (0.084)       (0.047)                                                                                                  (0.042)       (0.038)       (0.030)
                                             N        35            23            58             34            23            57               34            23            57               34            23            57
                                     R-Squared       0.026         0.027         0.076          0.217        0.513          0.357            0.218         0.595         0.391            0.221         0.595         0.392
                                                                                                         Panel B: ELA
Urban                                               0.022        0.245***     0.145***         -0.020        0.188           0.090          -0.018         0.148          0.048          -0.019         0.148         0.052
                                                   (0.082)        (0.058)      (0.054)         (0.083)      (0.144)         (0.060)         (0.083)       (0.114)        (0.070)         (0.090)       (0.121)       (0.072)
                                             N       35             23           58
                                     R-Squared      0.002          0.440        0.147
Counterfactual Mean                                -0.100       -0.373***     -0.169**         -0.106        -0.110         -0.120          -0.115         0.168         -0.083          -0.115         0.167        -0.084
                                                   (0.078)        (0.063)      (0.068)         (0.078)       (0.193)        (0.076)         (0.083)       (0.234)        (0.080)         (0.085)       (0.236)       (0.080)
                                             N       34             23           57
                                     R-Squared      0.048          0.384        0.154
Index of Practice Inputs                            0.002        0.104***     0.077***                                                      -0.023        0.093*          0.048          -0.023        0.092*         0.047
                                                   (0.062)        (0.022)      (0.024)                                                      (0.068)       (0.050)        (0.033)         (0.069)       (0.051)       (0.034)
                                             N       35             23           58
                                     R-Squared      0.000          0.516        0.187
Index of Resource Inputs                            0.009         -0.026       -0.007                                                                                                     0.001        -0.017        -0.010
                                                   (0.025)        (0.051)      (0.028)                                                                                                   (0.028)       (0.026)       (0.021)
                                             N       35             23           58              34            23            57               34            23            57               34            23            57
                                     R-Squared      0.002          0.074        0.052           0.050         0.449         0.183            0.055         0.555         0.217            0.055         0.563         0.220
Notes: This table shows estimates from regressions of school characteristics on school-level charter school effect estimates. Columns (1) and (5) show results from single variable regressions; each coefficient comes from
its own regression. Columns (2)-(4) and (6)-(8) show results from multivariate regressions, with the school characteristics included as indicated. Regressions are weighted by the inverse of the school-level standard error.
Regressions include dummies for school levels (elementary, middle) as well as study fixed effects, and standard errors are clustered by the school level to account for schools with campuses at multiple grade levels. The
following studies are included in this figure: IES and Massachuestts. See Appendix Table 1 for details on these studies and for notes on modifications of published point estimates which put estimates on the same scale.
See Appendix Table 2 for variable definitions across studies.
                                                                                         Appendix Table 6: Correlation between Lottery-Based Charter School Effects and Urbanicity, Counterfactual Mean, and Detailed School Inputs, Study-Specific Results
                                                                                                IES                                                                                      Massachusetts                                                                                        IES + Massachusetts
                                                     (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)           (9)            (10)         (11)         (12)         (13)          (14)            (15)            (16)          (17)           (18)        (19)          (20)          (21)
                                                                                                                                                                   Panel A: Math
Teacher Feedback                                    0.072                                                                               0.060        0.142                                                                             0.080          0.131**                                                                                 0.066
                                                   (0.087)                                                                            (0.094)       (0.109)                                                                           (0.143)          (0.059)                                                                               (0.064)
Differentiated Instruction (Data Driven)                         0.041                                                                  0.064                       0.068                                                              0.028                            0.066                                                                 0.046
                                                                (0.074)                                                               (0.083)                     (0.101)                                                             (0.241)                          (0.070)                                                               (0.066)
Instructional Time                                                             -0.064                                                  -0.075                                      0.153                                                0.079                                         0.072                                                   -0.011
                                                                              (0.084)                                                 (0.122)                                    (0.109)                                              (0.146)                                        (0.071)                                                 (0.078)
High Quality Tutoring                                                                       0.163**                                     0.156                                                  0.147                                    0.141                                                      0.185***                                  0.153*
                                                                                             (0.072)                                  (0.095)                                                 (0.104)                                 (0.196)                                                       (0.068)                                  (0.091)
High Expectations                                                                                           -0.043                     -0.009                                                                0.011                     -0.017                                                                     -0.021                      -0.013
                                                                                                           (0.088)                    (0.117)                                                              (0.108)                    (0.134)                                                                    (0.079)                     (0.076)
High Suspensions                                                                                                          0.182         0.174                                                                             0.092        0.075                                                                                   0.144*          0.120
                                                                                                                         (0.114)      (0.116)                                                                           (0.131)       (0.167)                                                                                  (0.083)       (0.076)
Urban                                               0.173         0.080         0.100         0.072          0.164        0.134         0.138        0.080         -0.053         -0.014       0.039        -0.030       -0.007         0.126         0.184**            0.114        0.104          0.097       0.181*         0.114          0.091
                                                   (0.123)       (0.099)       (0.105)       (0.099)       (0.130)       (0.110)      (0.161)       (0.284)       (0.241)        (0.252)      (0.231)      (0.242)      (0.270)       (0.262)          (0.088)          (0.084)      (0.089)        (0.080)      (0.105)       (0.082)       (0.112)
Counterfactual Mean                               -0.194**     -0.223***     -0.235***      -0.208**     -0.198**       -0.223**    -0.224***        -0.425       -0.670*         -0.470       -0.413      -0.658*       -0.552        -0.042        -0.220***        -0.272***    -0.240***      -0.223***    -0.242***     -0.250***     -0.204***
                                                   (0.085)       (0.085)       (0.085)       (0.081)       (0.083)       (0.089)      (0.074)       (0.438)       (0.390)        (0.382)      (0.351)      (0.387)      (0.451)       (0.579)          (0.083)          (0.086)      (0.092)        (0.080)      (0.088)       (0.086)       (0.074)
                                            N         34            33            33             33            34            29           29           22             22             23           23           23           21            20              56               55           56             56           57            50             49
                                    R-Squared       0.230         0.245         0.250         0.286         0.222         0.349        0.422         0.573          0.529          0.563       0.550         0.513        0.456        0.567            0.411            0.403        0.401          0.460        0.358         0.469         0.546
                                                                                                                                                                    Panel B: ELA
Teacher Feedback                                    -0.120                                                                            -0.185*        0.124                                                                              0.083           0.017                                                                                 -0.063
                                                   (0.084)                                                                            (0.099)       (0.076)                                                                           (0.114)          (0.057)                                                                               (0.071)
Differentiated Instruction (Data Driven)                         0.080                                                                  0.071                       0.108                                                               0.015                          0.124**                                                                 0.071
                                                                (0.073)                                                               (0.086)                     (0.092)                                                             (0.164)                          (0.054)                                                               (0.064)
Instructional Time                                                             0.008                                                   -0.059                                      0.060                                                0.006                                         0.040                                                   -0.009
                                                                              (0.074)                                                 (0.091)                                    (0.072)                                              (0.085)                                        (0.046)                                                 (0.064)
High Quality Tutoring                                                                          0.133                                    0.164                                                   0.059                                   0.071                                                        0.101                                     0.084
                                                                                             (0.141)                                  (0.179)                                                 (0.083)                                 (0.120)                                                       (0.067)                                  (0.105)
High Expectations                                                                                           -0.016                      0.084                                                              0.214*                       0.196                                                                     0.073                        0.109
                                                                                                           (0.088)                    (0.092)                                                              (0.118)                    (0.157)                                                                    (0.071)                     (0.076)
High Suspensions                                                                                                           0.045        0.049                                                                             0.124         0.100                                                                                   0.095          0.111
                                                                                                                         (0.110)      (0.107)                                                                           (0.086)       (0.109)                                                                                  (0.062)       (0.077)
Urban                                               -0.049        -0.073        -0.074        -0.080        -0.018        -0.042       -0.087       0.269*          0.128          0.187       0.211         0.005        0.198        0.107            0.092           0.025         0.052          0.047        0.055         0.047         -0.046
                                                   (0.078)       (0.070)       (0.069)       (0.066)       (0.086)       (0.068)      (0.076)       (0.163)       (0.145)        (0.135)      (0.134)      (0.154)      (0.130)       (0.213)          (0.063)         (0.053)       (0.053)        (0.056)      (0.069)       (0.056)       (0.062)
Counterfactual Mean                                 -0.105       -0.136*       -0.125*        -0.116        -0.110     -0.197***     -0.190**        0.083         -0.125         -0.041       -0.013       -0.098        0.041         0.287           -0.117        -0.148**        -0.124         -0.112       -0.099     -0.185***       -0.154*
                                                   (0.086)       (0.072)       (0.073)       (0.077)       (0.081)       (0.074)      (0.095)       (0.221)       (0.196)        (0.230)      (0.213)      (0.195)      (0.221)       (0.293)          (0.079)         (0.068)       (0.076)        (0.078)      (0.083)       (0.070)       (0.087)
                                            N     (34.000)      (33.000)      (33.000)      (33.000)      (34.000)      (29.000)     (29.000)      (22.000)      (22.000)       (23.000)     (23.000)     (23.000)     (21.000)      (20.000)         (56.000)        (55.000)      (56.000)       (56.000)     (57.000)      (50.000)      (49.000)
                                    R-Squared       0.105         0.105         0.078         0.118         0.051         0.172         0.353        0.524          0.478          0.463       0.460         0.510        0.456        0.581            0.182           0.250         0.198          0.226        0.199         0.284          0.371

Notes: This table shows estimates from regressions of school characteristics on school-level charter school effect estimates. Regressions are weighted by the inverse of the school-level standard error. Regressions include dummies for school levels (elementary, middle) as well as study fixed effects, and standard errors are clustered by the
school level to account for schools with campuses at multiple grade levels. The following studies are included in this figure: IES and Massachuestts. See Appendix Table 1 for details on these studies and for notes on modifications of published point estimates which put estimates on the same scale. See Appendix Table 2 for variable
definitions across studies.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level.
** Significant at the 5 percent level.
* Significant at the 10 percent level.
