                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        HIT OR MISS? TEST TAKING BEHAVIOR IN MULTIPLE CHOICE EXAMS

                                          Ş. Pelin Akyol
                                            James Key
                                           Kala Krishna

                                       Working Paper 22401
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22401


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2016




We would like to thank Paul Grieco, Sung Jae Jun, Stephen Yeaple and Mark Roberts for their
helpful comments on an earlier draft. We would also like to thank seminar and conference
participants at the WEAI 11th International Conference, 11th World Congress of the Econometric
Society, 30th Congress of the European Economic Association, Conference on the Economics of
Health, Education, and Worker Productivity, Massey University Albany, Otago University,
Victoria University Wellington, Hacettepe University, Sabanci University and Bilkent University.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Ş. Pelin Akyol, James Key, and Kala Krishna. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Hit or Miss? Test Taking Behavior in Multiple Choice Exams
Ş. Pelin Akyol, James Key, and Kala Krishna
NBER Working Paper No. 22401
July 2016
JEL No. I21,J24,D61,C11

                                         ABSTRACT

We model and estimate the decision to answer questions in multiple choice tests with negative
marking. Our focus is on the trade-off between precision and fairness. Negative marking reduces
guessing, thereby increasing accuracy considerably. However, it reduces the expected score of the
more risk averse, discriminating against them. Using data from the Turkish University Entrance
Exam, we find that students' attitudes towards risk differ according to their gender and ability.
Women and those with high ability are significantly more risk averse: nevertheless, the impact on
scores of such differences is small, making a case for negative marking.


Ş. Pelin Akyol                                  Kala Krishna
Bilkent University                              Department of Economics
Department of Economics                         523 Kern Graduate Building
06800 Ankara / TURKEY                           The Pennsylvania State University
pelina@bilkent.edu.tr                           University Park, PA 16802
                                                and NBER
James Key                                       kmk4@psu.edu
University of Western Australia
james.key@uwa.edu.au
1         Introduction
In this paper we argue that the standard approaches to examining the performance of people
taking multiple choice exams are usually inadequate, often misleading, and sometimes just
plain wrong. Such exams are widely used in practice being seen as objective, fair and
low cost, especially when large numbers of exam takers are involved. Thus, improving
on existing methods is vital for understanding what lies behind performance differences of
different groups and for policy making.1 University entrance exams in a number of countries
including Turkey, Greece, Japan and China use multiple choice exams. In the US, the
Scholastic Aptitude Tests (SATs) and Graduate Record Exams (GREs) that are taken before
applying to undergraduate and graduate schools are also mostly of this form. Such exams
are also widely used to measure effectiveness of schools, teachers, to enter the civil service,
and to allocate open positions.2
        We specify and estimate a structural model of students’ exam taking behavior and ex-
plore how different characteristics of students, like their ability and risk aversion, affect their
exam performance. Our objective is to understand how students behave when taking these
exams, whether exam taking behavior seems to differ across groups, what seems to lie be-
hind any such differences and to understand the consequences of these differences and their
implications for public policy. Our focus is on the trade-off between precision and fairness.
Negative marking reduces guessing, thereby increasing accuracy. However, it reduces the
expected score of the more risk averse, discriminating against them. Our approach also lets
us shed light on how, when, and why existing approaches give misleading results and we
argue that this is due to their failure to explicitly model behavior and build their estimation
around the model.
        Our work contributes to the literature in two ways. First, we provide an innovative way
to identify differences in risk preferences (with negative marking for incorrect answers) even
without having question by question responses for students.3 Such penalties for guessing
    1
        For example, women tend to perform worse in multiple choice exams featuring negative marking.
    2
        For example, in Turkey, public sector jobs are allocated according to the score obtained in a multiple
choice central exam, called KPSS.
   3
     Of course, our approach can also be used with question by question responses.



                                                        2
makes risk averse examinees less willing to guess and more likely to skip questions with
consequent adverse effects on expected score. Our approach uses the insight that when a
mass of students answer all questions, certain scores become a lot more likely. Second, we
provide a richer model than the standard Rasch model used in the literature, see for example
Pekkarinen [2014]. The Rasch model, using what is termed “item response theory”, boils
down to predicting the probability of a correct answer using a logit setup, with individual and
question fixed effects. The individual fixed effect is thought of as ability, and the question
fixed effect as the difficulty of the question. By allowing for skipping, and relating this to
risk aversion, we use all the information in the data, in contrast to the standard Rasch
model. By ignoring information on skipping, the Rasch model gives biased estimates of a
student’s ability. To understand why this bias occurs, consider for example, a setting where
all questions are equally difficult so that there are no question specific differences. In this
case, the Rasch model would estimate the “ability” or probability of answering a question
correctly, of someone answering 20 of 80 questions and getting half right, as 1/8 and that of
someone answering 40 questions and getting 20 right as 1/4. However, the difference in the
two could be largely due to differences in risk aversion rather than ability. Such differences
in risk aversion are likely to exist: students close to a cutoff for a highly desirable school
may well be very risk averse, and it has been argued, see for example Eckel and Grossman
[2008], that women are more risk averse than men in such exams. To disentangle the two
and obtain unbiased estimates of both risk aversion and ability, we need to specify a more
complete setting, one that includes the choice of skipping the question as done here. It
is worth noting that despite the interest in such exams in the Psychology, Education, and
Economics literature, there is little formal modeling and estimation based on the behavior
of individual students.
      We use administrative data from the Turkish University Entrance Exam (ÖSS) in our
work. The ÖSS is a highly competitive, centralized examination that is held once a year.
It is selective as only about a third of the exam takers are placed at all, and admission to
top programs is extremely competitive. College admission depends on the score obtained
in the ÖSS, and the high school GPA4 , with at least 75% of the weight being given to
  4
      The high school GPA is normalized at the school-year level using school level exam scores to make GPAs


                                                      3
the ÖSS score. For each correct answer the student obtains one point, and for each wrong
answer he is penalized 0.25 points, while no points are awarded/deducted for skipping a
question. Students expend significant time and effort to prepare for this exam and have a
good understanding of how the system works.
    Our results show that students’ attitudes towards risk differ according to their gender
and expected score. Women seem to be more risk averse at all score levels than men. This is
in line with a large literature, see Croson and Gneezy [2009], that suggests that part of why
women perform worse than men in college and in the job market is due to their behavior
which is less assertive and more risk averse. Students with low expected scores also tend
to be less risk averse. This makes sense as there is a cutoff score to qualify for possible
placement and most likely a jump up in utility upon becoming eligible for placement.
    We then run counterfactual experiments to investigate the impact of these differences
by gender and ability. Since women tend to guess less often than they should if they were
maximizing their expected score, they tend to have lower scores, and less variance in their
scores, than otherwise similar men. This tends to make them under represented at both the
top and the bottom end of the score distribution. The consequences of under representation
at the top are particularly relevant when university entrance is restricted. This is certainly
the case in many developing countries where only a small fraction of students are able to
proceed to university. In the baseline model, males are over-represented in the top 5%:
55.9% of all test takers are male but 60.1% of students in the top 5% are male.5 We find, for
example, that if there was no negative marking so that guessing when in doubt was optimal,
irrespective of risk aversion, women’s representation in the top 5% of placements increases
by 0.3%. They go from being 39.9% of the population in these placements to being 40.2% of
them.6 Thus, though the actual mean score change may look small, its impact on the gender
gap at top institutions is not trivial. The differences in risk preferences account for a small
part (10%) of the gender gap, though looking at the overall gap is misleading as the bottom
comparable across schools in each year. This also removes the incentive to inflate high school grades.
  5
    We call this over-representation of male students in the top 5% of scorers (of 4.2% in this case) the
gender gap.
   6
     For the top 20%, the gender gap is smaller, and the reduction in over-representation of males when
penalties are eliminated is also smaller, 0.1% versus 0.3%.


                                                     4
is pushed up while the top is pulled down by greater risk aversion on the part of women.
       We also try to quantify the importance of using our approach as opposed to the standard
Rasch model. We use the estimated model to generate individual level data on performance,
question by question. As women tend to skip more often, the Rasch model tends to under
estimate their ability compared to a more structural model, such as ours, which explicitly
accounts for skipping behavior. The difference is quite substantial. Taking males and females
of equivalent ability, but different risk aversion, can lead to males being mistakenly judged
by the Rasch model to be of 5% higher ability than females.7


1.1        Related Literature

The psychology and education literature has long been interested in developing test designs
that generate fair results. A disadvantage of the multiple choice framework is that candidates
may get the right answers just by guessing, especially if they can eliminate some options.8
In other exam types, such as short answer based exams, pure guessing is unlikely to help.
Negative marking for incorrect answers is applied to deter such guessing. If the expected
payoff from randomly guessing is equal to zero, the incentive to guess can be removed, at least
for risk neutral agents. However, if risk neutrality does not prevail, then such an adjustment
may be problematic. If agents are risk loving, they may still guess. Moreover, if agents differ
in their risk preferences, negative marking of this kind may create differences in guessing
behavior across groups that may undermine the validity and the fairness of test scores,
reducing the efficacy of the testing mechanism as well as biasing the estimates obtained by
the standard Rasch model.
   7
       We set ability at the median in estimation results, and risk aversion as in the estimation results (equiva-
lent to cutoffs in the baseline regime of 0.26 vs 0.25 females vs males). Under the Finnish university entrance
exam scoring system (Pekkarinen [2014]), males correctly answer 5.13% more questions than females. Under
the Rasch model, the number of correct answers is a sufficient statistic for ability. Even in the Turkish
scoring system, where the penalties are not as harsh, males of median ability correctly answer 1.83% more
questions than females of equivalent ability. This is a substantial difference.
   8
     For example, with no knowledge of the subject and four options on each question, a student would on
average get 25% correct.




                                                         5
      Baker et al. [2010] criticize the use of test results of students to evaluate the value-added of
teachers and schools partly because of the measurement error generated by random guessing.
Baldiga [2013] shows in an experimental setting that, conditional on students’ knowledge of
the test material, those who skip more questions tend to perform worse suggesting that such
exams will be biased against groups who skip questions rather than guess.
      Burgos [2004] investigates score correction methods that reward partial knowledge by
using prospect theory.9 They compute a fair rule which is also strategically neutral so that
an agent with partial knowledge will answer, while one without any knowledge will not.
Similarly, Bernardo [1998] analyzes the decision problem of students in a multiple choice
exam to derive a “proper scoring rule”, i.e., one that truthfully elicits the probability of each
answer being correct. Espinosa and Gardeazabal [2010] models students’ optimal behavior
in a multiple choice exam and derives the optimal penalty that maximizes the validity of
the test, i.e., maximizes the correlation between students’ knowledge and the test score by
simulating their model under distributional assumptions on students’ ability, difficulty of
questions and risk aversion. Using simulations, the paper argues that the optimal penalty
is relatively high. Even though the penalty discriminates against risk averse students, this
effect seems to be small compared with the measurement error that it prevents, especially for
high ability students. None of these attempt to estimate ability and risk aversion of agents
or to test the implications of their models empirically as we do. We use a simple Bayesian
setting where students of better ability get a more informative signal about the correct
answer. This feature, together with risk aversion, allows us to use the skipping behavior of
agents, as well as their accuracy, to estimate ability and risk aversion.
      On the empirical side, there are two broad approaches: the first is experimental, and
the second empirical. See Eckel and Grossman [2008] for a survey of some of the work on
the experimental side, especially work focusing on the differences in risk aversion by gender.
Most recently, Espinosa et al. [2013] looks at data from an experiment to show that penalizing
wrong answers or rewarding skipping are not the same and that the differences between such
scoring rules come from risk aversion. Their results suggest that skipping behavior depends
  9
      Prospect theory describes the way people choose between alternatives when the probabilities associated
with them are known taking a behavioral approach. For example, there may be loss aversion.



                                                      6
on the scoring rule, knowledge, gender, and other covariates.
   Baldiga [2013] explores the gender differences in performance in multiple choice exams
in an experimental setting. Lab experiments are cleverly designed to see whether a gender
gap in performance exists, and if so, whether this gap is driven by differential confidence in
knowledge of the material, differences in risk preferences (elicited in one of the treatments),
or differential responses to a high pressure testing environment. She finds that confidence
differences and the pressure of the environment do not seem to be important and that a
greater tendency to skip questions remains important in explaining the gender gap even
after controlling for differences in risk aversion. She speculates that these differences may be
due to sociological (women are encouraged to be less assertive) or behavioral factors (women
put a higher cost on getting a wrong answer than men). However, as with all lab experiments,
because the stakes are low, it is hard to expect their behavior to perfectly reflect that in
high stakes exams. In addition the data set is small with about 400 observations.
   The other line of work relies on non experimental data. However, even when there is an
explicit model being used, the approach tends to be reduced form as the focus is on whether
the patterns predicted by the model are observed in the data rather than on the estimation
of the (structural parameters of) the model itself.
   Risk attitudes of students are an important factor in the decision to attempt a question
whenever there is uncertainty associated with the outcome. In the literature, females are
shown to be more risk averse than males (see Eckel and Grossman [2008]). To test the hy-
pothesis that female students skip more questions than males since they are more risk averse,
Ben-Shakhar and Sinai [1991] investigates test taking strategies of students in Hadassah and
PET tests in Israel and find that women do, in fact, tend to skip more questions.
   Tannenbaum [2012], in a closely related but flawed paper uses data on the SATs and
question by question responses of students. He investigates the effect of gender differences in
risk aversion on multiple choice test results. He exploits differences in the number of choices
offered in a question to tease out risk aversion, since the more the options, the lower the
penalty for a wrong answer. He shows that, as might be expected, a higher penalty (fewer
choices) makes skipping more likely and makes the correct answer being chosen more likely,
conditional on not skipping and controlling for individual fixed effects. He also shows that


                                               7
women are more likely to skip at a given penalty level, than men, and that their skipping
behavior is more responsive to increases in the penalty. He argues that greater risk aversion
on the part of women is able to account for 40% of the gender differences in performance in
multiple choice exams. He backs this out from estimates that use the variation in the number
of possible answers as an instrument. We question this result as his identifying assumption
is that the variation in the number of possible answers has the same effect on agents of all
abilities. But, Espinosa and Gardeazabal [2010], shows that differences in risk aversion have
small effects on performance, especially for higher ability students. This is exactly what
simple economics would predict: higher ability students are more able to tell the right from
the wrong answers and as a result are less affected by differences in risk aversion. Thus, we
know that this identifying assumption is wrong. Since differences in risk aversion have larger
effects on performance for lower ability agents, and as the ability distribution for women
in the SATs seems to be slightly worse than that of men, the risk aversion difference is
magnified in Tannenbaum’s estimates. Our results show a far smaller part of the gender gap
being accounted for by differences in risk aversion even though risk aversion is significantly
greater for women. We attribute the difference in our results to the mis-specification in
Tannenbaum’s work: in effect his identification assumption does not hold. As a check, we
use our model in another paper (Akyol et al. [2016]) to simulate data on responses where
questions have different numbers of answers, but where there is no difference in risk aversion
between groups but there is a difference in ability. We show that the approach used by
Tannenbaum mistakenly estimates a difference in risk aversion where none exists.
   In some ways our data is more limited than that in Tannenbaum [2012], though in
other ways, it is better. We do not have question by question responses as are available
to him. As a result, we cannot directly look at the probability of skipping and getting a
correct answer as done in his paper. Despite this, we are able to use information on the
distribution of scores in the presence of negative marking to infer skipping tendencies and
ability distributions as well as risk aversion, while allowing them to differ across groups.
Thus, one of our contributions is to provide a way to estimate structural parameters of the
model with limited data on question by question responses. In addition, having a structural
model lets us do counterfactual exercises. Our data is much better than Tannenbaum’s in


                                              8
that we have a considerable amount of information on past performance and socio-economic
background not available to him.
       In the next section, we present an overview of the data and testing environment. The
particular patterns seen in the multiple choice tests are discussed in more detail in Section
3. In Section 4, the model is presented. Section 5 details the estimation strategy with the
results in Section 6. Section 7 contains counterfactual experiments. Appendix 1 extends the
                                               10
estimation to different student types.              Section 8 concludes.



2        Background and Data
In Turkey, college admission is based on an annual, nationwide, central university entrance
exam governed by the Student Selection and Placement Center (ÖSYM). Most high school
seniors take the exam and there is no restriction on retaking. However, the score obtained
in a year can be used only in that year. All departments, with the exception of those that
require special talents (such as art schools) accept students based on a weighted average
score of university entrance exam and the high school grade point average.
       The university entrance exam is held once a year all over the country at the same time.
It is a multiple choice exam with four tests, Turkish, Social Science, Math, and Science.
Students are given 180 minutes for 180 questions and can choose where to spend their time.
Each part of the test has 45 questions, and each question has 5 possible answers. Students
get one point for each correct answer, and they lose 0.25 points for each wrong answer. If
they skip the question, they receive 0 points. The university entrance exam is a paper-based
exam. All students receive the same questions, and they do not receive any feedback on
whether their answer is correct or not during the exam.
       Students choose one of the Science, Turkish-Math, Social Science, or Language tracks
at the beginning of high school. Students’ university entrance exam scores (ÖSS score by
track) are calculated as a weighted average of their raw scores in each test.
       Table 1 shows the test weights to obtain the track score, by track. For the Social Science
  10
       While the main body of the paper focuses on students in the Social Science track, this section examines
those in the Language and Turkish-Math track.



                                                        9
track students, the placement score (Y-ÖSS) is a composite of the track score (ÖSS-SÖZ)
and the standardized GPA11 (AOBP). The track score in Social Science gives the highest
weight (1.8) to the Turkish and Social Science sections of the tests, while Math and Science
have a relatively low weight (0.4).12

                                           Table 1: Test Weights


                                             Math     Science    Turkish    Social Science     Language
        Science Track (ÖSS-SAY)               1.8      1.8         0.4            0.4              0
        Social Science Track (ÖSS-SÖZ)       0.4      0.4         1.8            1.8              0
        Turkish-Math Track (ÖSS-EA)           0.8      0.4         0.8            0.3              0
        Language Track (ÖSS-DIL)               0          0        0.4            0.4             1.8



       Students with scores above 105 points can submit preferences (submit an application) to
2-year college programs, while 120 points are needed to apply to 4-year college programs.
The placement score (Y-ÖSS) is calculated as follows:


                                     Y ÖSS Xi =ÖSS Xi +αAOBP Xi

where X∈{SAY,SÖZ,EA,DIL}, α is a weight on the standardized high school GPA. The
placement score varies by track, preferred department and whether the student was placed
(accepted) into a regular program in the previous year or not.13 There are penalties if a
  11
       The standardized GPA is the GPA normalized by the performance of the school in the university entrance
exams which adjusts in effect for different grading practices across schools.
  12
     In the calculation of ÖSS scores, firstly raw scores in each track are normalized so the
mean is 50 and the standard deviation is 10.                    Then these normalized scores are multi-
plied by the weights presented in Table 1.               According to the data, the equation is ÖSS-
SÖZ=0.8755*rawTurkish+0.8755*rawSS+0.187*rawMath+0.l187*rawScience+78.89
  13
     The α used is chosen according to fairly complex rules. For example, ÖSYM publishes the lists of
departments open to students’ according to their tracks. When students choose a program from this list, α
will be 0.5, while if it is outside the open list, α will be 0.2. If the student has graduated from a vocational
high school, and prefers a department that is compatible with his high school field, α will be 0.65. If the
student was placed in a regular university program in previous year, the student is punished and α will be


                                                      10
student switches tracks, or refuses a placement. Examining Social Science track students,
the distributions of track scores (ÖSS-SÖZ) as well as normalized GPAs for first time takers
are depicted in Figures 1 and 2. First, note that women seem to dominate men in terms
of GPAs. However, this does does not carry over to exams. Men seem to do a bit better
than women in the exam at the top of the track score distribution, but considerably worse
at the low end. One explanation for this pattern could be greater risk aversion on the part
of women which makes them skip questions with a positive expected value.

                Figure 1: Distribution of Social Science Track (ÖSS-SÖZ) Scores
                      .025
                      .02
                        .015
                   Density
                .01   .005
                      0




                               80          100           120                140             160
                                                   OSS−SOZ score

                                                    Female              Male




    The data used in this study comes from multiple sources. Our main source of data is
administrative data from the test administering body (ÖSYM) and the high schools on a
random sample of roughly 10% of the 2002 university entrance exam takers. This data
includes students’ raw test scores in each test, weighted test scores, high school, track, high
school GPA, gender, and number of previous attempts. The second source of data is the
2002 university entrance exam candidate survey. This survey is filled by all students while
they are making their application for this exam. This data set has information on students’
family income, education level, and time spent and expenditure on preparation. We have
equal to either 0.25, 0.1, or 0.375. For those students, the α coefficient is equal to half of the regular α.


                                                       11
                                   Figure 2: Distribution of Normalized GPA




                        .06
                        .04
              Density
                        .02
                        0




                              30        40         50          60          70   80
                                                         GPA

                                                   Female           Male




around 40,000 students from each track (Social Science, Turkish-Math, Science). Here we
focus on Social Science track students. For questions in this subject, students are likely to
have partial knowledge, choosing the best answer. This is exactly what we model and use
to estimate risk aversion. In contrast, many math and science questions involve solving the
problem so that students are either certain of the answer or have no information. In the
former case, everyone answers, and in the latter, everyone skips independent of the extent of
their risk aversion, which makes identification of risk aversion impossible. Table A1 presents
the summary statistics for Social Science students.
    As a robustness check, we also estimate the model with data from the Language track
and from the Turkish-Math track. We only use the Language exam in the former and the
Turkish exam in the latter. This is presented in Appendix I.



3     Multiple Choice Exam Scores
We begin by taking a first look at students’ scores in the Turkish, Social Science, Math and
Science exams. Recall that each section of the exam has 45 questions. The scoring structure


                                                        12
results in each multiple of 0.25 between −11.25 and 45 (with the exception of certain numbers
above 42) being possible outcomes in an exam.14 For example, attempting all questions and
getting all wrong results in a score of − 45
                                          4
                                             = −11.25.
       Most Social Science students do not even attempt the Math and Science parts of the
exam and those that do fare badly as the mean score is close to zero. This makes sense
as these students are poorly prepared in Math and Science as they have not done much of
it since the ninth grade and the questions are very challenging. Also, Math and Science
questions involve solving the problem and are not amenable to guessing. Finally, Math and
Science test scores have relatively little weight (0.4 each) in the track score for students in
the Social Science track. Turkish and Social Science scores, in contrast, have a weight of 1.8.
Students are explicitly advised to spend less time on the Math and Science test.15
       Obtaining a particular raw subject score could happen in only one way or in many ways.
For example, there is only one way that a student could obtain −11.25 or 45, similarly a
score of 42.5 could only have arisen through attempting all questions, getting 43 questions
correct and 2 incorrect. On the other hand, a score of 40 has two possible origins: 40 correct
and 5 skips, or 41 correct and 4 incorrect. It is impossible to achieve a score of 42.25: the
student must have at least 43 questions correct, and at least 3 questions incorrect, which is
not possible given there are only 45 questions.
       There are 46 particular scores that are worth noting: those which correspond to attempt-
ing all questions. These are spaced 1.25 points apart, starting at −11.25, and ending at 45
points. The distributions of raw subject scores in Social Science and Turkish for first time
takers, as seen in Figures 3 and 4, have very prominent spikes.16 It is no coincidence that the
spikes appear evenly placed; they correspond to the 46 scores that occur after attempting all
questions and come from the fact that there is a mass point of students, of differing abilities,
  14
       Recall that for each question, there are five possible answers; answering correctly gains the student a
single point, skipping the question (not giving an answer) gives zero points, but attempting the question and
answering incorrectly results in a loss of a quarter point.
  15
     In the exam booklet there is a note before the Social Science/Turkish part of the exam that says: ”If
you want a higher score in ÖSS-SÖZ, it may be better for you to spend more than 90 minutes on verbal part
of the exam.”
  16
     Gridlines spaced 1.25 marks apart correspond with these spikes.



                                                       13
who answer all the questions. This is a big part of our identification strategy as we do not
have question by question data for students. Math and Science score distributions for Social
Science track do not exhibit this behavior as most students obtain a score of zero. Nor do any
of the subject score distributions for the Science track students exhibit this pattern of spikes
across the entire support of the distribution. These spikes are only there for the top part of
the distribution consistent with only the very best students attempting all the questions. In
addition, as social science track students do not spend much time on the Science and Math
parts of the exam, there is less of a worry about modeling time constraints that relate the
different components of the exam. For this reason, we choose to use the Social Science track
in our estimation and restrict attention to only the Social Science and Turkish sections of
the exam.

                             Figure 3: Distribution of Social Science Test Scores

                                                          Female
                .1
                .08
            .04 .06
              Density
                .02
                0




                    −11.25    −5     1.25    7.5      13.75        20       26.25   32.5   38.75   45
                                                   Raw Social Science Score
                                                           Male
                .1
                .08
            .04 .06
              Density
                .02
                0




                    −11.25    −5     1.25    7.5      13.75        20       26.25   32.5   38.75   45
                                                   Raw Social Science Score




                                                          14
                                  Figure 4: Distribution of Turkish Test Scores

                                                       Female
               .08.06
          Density
           .04 .02
               0




                    −11.25   −5        1.25   7.5    13.75       20     26.25   32.5   38.75   45
                                                    Raw Turkish Score
                                                         Male
               .08.06
          Density
           .04 .02
               0




                    −11.25   −5        1.25   7.5    13.75       20     26.25   32.5   38.75   45
                                                    Raw Turkish Score




4     Model
We model test taking behavior as follows. When a student approaches a question, he gets
a signal for each of the five possible answers. The vector of signals for the question is then
transformed into a belief. This belief is the likelihood that each answer is in fact the correct
answer. The student then decides whether or not to answer the question, and if so, which
answer to choose.
    We model the test taking procedure as if each test and each question is answered in
isolation. We do not allow for outcomes in one section of the test to have any bearing on
other sections. For example, it may be that a student feels he is doing well and this makes
him more confident so that he does better on the rest of the exam. Nor do we allow for any
time pressure that results in skipping. For example, a student may know he is bad at one
component of the test and so skip the entire section in order to have more time on another.
    Signals for each of the five answers depend on whether or not the answer is actually
correct. Signals for incorrect answers are drawn from a distribution G, where G is Pareto


                                                       15
with support [AI , ∞) and shape parameter β > 0. Thus, the density of the signal for an
                         βAI                           βAI
incorrect answer is      xβ+1
                              .   The mean signal is   β−1
                                                             which is decreasing in β. Signals for correct
answers are drawn from a distribution F , where F is Pareto with support [AC , ∞) and shape
                                                                                    αAC                            αAI
parameter equal to α > 0, so that the density of the signal is                      xα+1
                                                                                         .    The mean signal is   α−1

which is decreasing in α.

Assumption 1. AI = AC = A.

       This rules out complete certainty that an answer is correct or incorrect.17
       Suppose that the student observes five signals, given by the following vector:

                                           X = (x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 , x5 )                                           (1)

where xi is the signal that the student receives when examining answer i. What then is the
student’s belief regarding the likelihood that each answer is correct? Using Bayes’ rule, the
probability that answer i is correct conditional on X, can be expressed as:

                                                       Prob(X|Answer i is correct) × 0.2
                  Prob(Answer i is correct|X) =                                                                    (2)
                                                                 Prob(X)
       Expressing the numerator in terms of the densities of the two distributions, F and G, for
the case where i = 1:

                                                              αAα βAβ βAβ βAβ βAβ
                       Prob(X|Answer 1 is correct) =                                                               (3)
                                                              xα+1
                                                               1   xβ+1
                                                                    2   xβ+1
                                                                         3   xβ+1
                                                                              4   xβ+1
                                                                                   5
       In essence, the density of F (·) at x1 (as this is conditional on 1 being correct) multiplied
by the product of the density of G(·) at the other signals.
       It follows, by substituting equation 3 into equation 2, that the probability that answer i
is correct, conditional on X, can be expressed as:

                                                               αAα
                                                                        Q          βAβ
                                                               xα+1
                                                                i
                                                                              j6=i xβ+1
                                                                                    j
                            Prob(i is correct|X) = P                                                             (4)
                                                    5                  αAα
                                                                              Q        βAβ
                                                             m=1       xα+1
                                                                        m         n6=m xβ+1
                                                                                        n

  17
       The assumption that the lower bound for the correct one is higher, i.e., AC > AI , would mean that it is
possible for student to be sure that an answer is wrong: i.e. to rule out a wrong answer. It is also possible
for a student to be sure he had the right answer: this would be the case when all but one answer had a score
between AI and AC . Assuming AC < AI would make no sense if β ≥ α.


                                                        16
       where i, j, m, n ∈ {1, ..., 5}.
       This can be further simplified to:

                                                                     1                  1
                                                                           Q
                                                                  xα+1
                                                                   i
                                                                                 j6=i xβ+1
                                                                                       j
                            Prob(i is correct|X) = P                                                          (5)
                                                    5                      1
                                                                                 Q            1
                                                                m=1       xα+1
                                                                           m         n6=m    xβ+1
                                                                                              n

       Thus, the choice of A is irrelevant. For this reason we will set it at 1 from here on.
Letting γ = β − α, so that           1
                                  xα+1
                                         =      1
                                                  xγ ,
                                             xiβ+1 i
                                                         the expression further simplifies to:
                                   i


                                                                               xγi
                                    Prob(i is correct|X) = P5                                                   (6)
                                                                            m=1      xγm

       Note that the sum of beliefs for each of the five answers adds up to unity. We assume
that β ≥ α, so that the mean signal for the incorrect answer is lower than that for the
correct answer. Thus, the higher the signal, the greater the likelihood that the answer is
correct.18 A higher shape parameter for a Pareto distribution shifts probability mass to the
left so that the signals would generally be smaller. Hence, if we fixed α, a higher γ (i.e., a
higher β) would correspond to greater ability. In fact, it is worth emphasizing that it is the
difference in the distributions of the signals of correct and incorrect answers that captures
ability. Someone who thinks all answers are great is as bad as someone who thinks none of
the answers are great: it is the extent to which one can distinguish between the right and the
wrong answers that indicates ability. This is why the mean signals mean nothing: it is only
the difference in their means that matters. In addition, we assume that the lower bound for
signals for both correct and incorrect distributions is the same. Given these assumptions,
we can rescale so that the correct answer is drawn from a distribution where A = 1 and the
shape parameter is also 1, while the signal drawn for an incorrect answer is drawn from a
                                                                            β
distribution where A = 1 and the shape parameter is                         α
                                                                                 > 1. As a result, the structure of
a student’s signals can be represented by the shape parameter of the incorrect answer: β.
A higher value of β draws the the mass of the distribution towards the minimum, A = 1,
allowing the student to more clearly separate the incorrect signals from the signal given by
the correct answer. In other words, higher β students are what would be referred to as
  18
       If a student were to draw from distributions with β < α, smaller signals would be associated with the
correct answer and we would reverse our interpretation of the signal.


                                                           17
high ability students. Signal distributions for a student with ability β = 3 (approximately
median) are shown in Figure 5.

                      Figure 5: Distributions of signals for a student with β = 3
                 1
                 .8
                 .6
           CDF
                 .4
                 .2
                 0




                      1                 3                       5                7
                                                       Signal

                                      Correct Answer                Incorrect Answer



   The effect of a higher β on test outcomes can be decomposed into three effects. First, the
correct answer has a higher probability of generating the highest signal. Increasing β shifts
the CDF of the incorrect answers’ signals to the left, and the student’s best guess (the answer
with the highest signal) will be correct more often. Second, when the correct answer actually
gives the highest signal, the probability with which the student believes that it comes from
the correct answer increases as the weighted sum of the incorrect signals decreases. If the
first answer is the correct answer, lowering 5i=2 xγi increases the student’s belief that answer
                                            P

one is correct.
   Finally, there is a subtle effect of β on tests. Students with high ability, i.e. a high value
of β, will be more confident in their choices. Even with the same signals, as we increase β,
the student’s belief that the highest signal comes from the correct answer increases. This is
formally stated below:

Lemma 1. Suppose there are two students: one with ability parameter β = b1 and the other

                                                  18
with ability parameter β = b2 > b1 . Suppose that the two students receive identical signals
X for a question. Let xmax = max{x1 , ..., x5 }. The student with the higher value of β has a
higher belief that xmax is drawn from the correct answer.
                                      xγ
   Proof: The belief is given by     P5 max γ .   Taking logs, and differentiating with respect to γ,
                                      m=1 xm

yields the following expression:


        d log(Belief)              xγ1 log x1 + xγ2 log x2 + xγ3 log x3 + xγ4 log x4 + xγ5 log x5
                      = log xmax −                                                                  (7)
             dγ                                      xγ1 + xγ2 + xγ3 + xγ4 + xγ5
   Since log xmax ≥ log xi , and xi > 0,

                                              dBelief
                                                      ≥0                                            (8)
                                                dγ
   with the inequality strict unless x1 = x2 = x3 = x4 = x5 . 
   Once students have observed the signals for each of the five possible answers to the
question, they are faced with six possible alternatives: choosing one of the five answers,
or skipping the question. Skipping the question does not affect their test score, answering
correctly increases the score by 1, while answering incorrectly decreases the score by 0.25
points. Note that the expected value of a random guess is (0.2)(1) − (0.8)(0.25) = 0.
   If a student were to choose an answer, they would choose the one which was most likely
to be correct. A slightly higher score is clearly preferred. In this model, the answer which is
most likely to be correct is the one with the highest value of xi . Also, this answer trivially
has a probability of being correct (conditional on observed signals and the student’s ability)
greater than or equal to twenty percent.
   The relationship between ÖSS score and utility need not be linear. Utility could be
convex in score: for example students must score above 120 in order to be qualified to
submit preferences to a four year college program. If being able to do so makes a student
much better off, students could be risk loving when their scores are near this cutoff. It could
be concave in regions where schools are similar in quality so that higher scores bring little
gain.
   To incorporate this we allow students to have a cutoff for the belief, below which they
will skip the question. If the student believes that the best answer (highest signal) has a

                                                    19
probability of being correct greater than this cutoff, he will attempt the question, choosing
the best answer. This cutoff lies in the interval [0.2, 1].19 A higher value for the cutoff
implies a higher degree of risk aversion, while a cutoff of 0.2 would be supported by risk
neutral preferences.
       Consider a student with ability parameter β (recall that α = 1) and attempt threshold
c ∈ (0.2, 1). In order to answer a question, with answer n, the signal drawn for answer n, xn ,
must satisfy two conditions. First, it must be the highest signal. Second, it must be high
enough (given the other signals, and ability β) that the belief that it is correct is greater
than c, the cutoff required to attempt the question. A diagram showing choices conditional
on signal observations for a simplified two answer setup (with β = 3 and c = .55) is shown in
Figure 6. If the signal for j is sufficiently high, then j is selected. In between the two lines,
where signals are very close to each other, the best option is to skip the question. This skip
region is larger the greater the risk aversion of the agent (the greater the value of c).



5        Estimation Strategy
In our model, students’ scores depend on students’ ability (β) and attempt cutoff, c, which
captures attitudes towards risk. In our data set we observe only the student’s score in each
part of the exam, and not the outcome question by question. In this section we explain how
we can use our model to estimate the distribution of ability and attempt cutoffs, c, which
captures the extent of risk aversion.
       Estimation of the parameters of interest, the distribution of student ability β = (βT , βSS )
and attempt cutoff c, is conducted separately for each gender. In addition, we recognize that
the relationship between ÖSS-SÖZ score and utility is not necessarily constant throughout
the range of scores: the degree of risk aversion may be different. In particular, we might
expect that students anticipating low scores would be considerably less risk averse, since
scores below a cutoff result in the same outcome: an inability to submit preferences/apply
  19
       There will always exist an answer with probability of being correct greater than or equal to 0.2, therefore
we do not consider cutoffs below 0.2, as they would result in the same behavior: always attempting the
question, never skipping.



                                                        20
                                               Figure 6: Actions for a Question with Two Possible Answers



                            3
           1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8
                                                                 Choose Answer 2
                      Answer 2 Signal




                                                                                   Skip




                                                                                          Choose Answer 1
                            1




                                                1    1.2   1.4    1.6   1.8    2      2.2        2.4   2.6   2.8   3
                                                                         Answer 1 Signal



to universities. This would result in a jump in the payoff function as students cross the cutoff
score.
   For this reason we allow cutoffs to vary by gender, and allow cutoffs to depend on the
interval in which the student’s predicted Social Science track score (ÖSS-SÖZ) lies, for
example 120-130. This predicted score in effect proxies for ability. The next section explains
how we predict the Social Science track score (ÖSS-SÖZ).


5.1      Predicted Social Science Track (ÖSS-SÖZ) Score

The risk taking behavior of students is likely to depend on their score as the utility derived
from obtaining a given score is driven by the effect on the placement potential. Two different
scores may give the same utility if both result in the student failing to gain admission and
very similar scores may have very different utilities if they are on two opposite sides of a
very desirable program’s cutoff. However, we cannot use students’ actual exam scores as a
proxy for ability as these are endogenous objects that are affected by students’ risk taking



                                                                            21
behavior in the exam. If, for example, students who skip more questions get lower scores
systematically, grouping according to actual exam score will put those students into lower
groups, and then finding higher cutoffs for those students will not be informative as grouping
is done partially based on risk behavior of the students. Therefore, we predict students’ scores
by using their observable characteristics. Specifically, GPA (adjusted for school quality)20 ,
education level of both parents, income levels/monthly income of parents, preparation on
the four subject areas, and the school type. We run an OLS regression separately for male
and female first time takers in the Social Science track, and use the results to predict track
(ÖSS-SÖZ) scores for each student.21


5.2        Estimation

We divide students into groups, according to gender, and the range into which their predicted
track score (ÖSS-SÖZ) lies: (0, 90)22 , [90, 100), [100, 110), [110, 120), [120, 130), [130, 140),
and [140, ∞).23 These groups do not contain equal numbers of students, but do contain
at least 100 students.24 For each group, we examine the two subjects (Social Science and
Turkish) jointly as we allow correlation in the ability of a student in the two. We assume that
students in each group have a common attempt cutoff, c, and draw from the joint distribution
of ability (βT urkish , βSocialScience ). The ability of each student in subject k ∈ (T, SS) is given
by 1+eXk , where (XT , XSS ) are distributed normally with mean µ = (µT , µSS ) and covariance
matrix Σ.25 This ensures that each student has an ability in both subjects greater than 1,
and results in a log normal distribution (shifted 1 unit to the right).26 It also allows for
  20
       To adjust for school quality, we adjust the GPA of student within a school based on the performance
of the school in the exam. We observe normalized GPA for each student, which is converted to a ranking
within the school. As we observe the mean and variance of exam scores for each school, we can easily convert
the GPA to a measure that reflects the quality of the school.
  21
     The R2 values of the predictive regression were 56% and 58% for males and females respectively.
  22
     In this bin, all but two students had predicted scores above 80.
  23
     Most of the students in this bin has predicted scores between 140 and 150.
  24
     With the exception of females in the lowest expected score range.
  25
     In practice, correlation coefficients ρ were obtained rather than covariance, to assist the minimization
procedure and for interpretation. The covariance obtained is therefore cov(T, SS) = ρσT σSS .
  26
     Earlier analysis showed that the distribution is skewed; in addition the likelihood of answering correctly
is roughly proportional to the log of ability.


                                                      22
abilities in the two subjects to be correlated, as would typically be the case.27
       Under the assumptions made, the probability of obtaining each score is approximated
through simulation. For student n, we take a draw from N (µ, Σ) and label the vector as
Xn . From Xn , we find (βT , βSS ) = (1 + eXs (1) , 1 + eXs (2) ), the student’s ability vector. As we
now have (βT , βSS , c) for student n, we can generate the simulated student’s test outcome,
denoted by o, namely the Turkish score and Social Science score.
       In order to estimate the relevant parameters for the group (cutoff, means of XT , XSS ,
variances of XT , XSS and correlation between XT and XSS ), we use simulated method of
moments. For every group we postulate a cutoff, the mean of XT , XSS , the variance of
XT , XSS and correlation between XT and XSS . We make 30 draws for each student in the
group and construct the relevant moments for the group. These moments are the mean
scores in the two subjects, the variance of these scores, the correlation between the scores
in the two subjects, and the intensity of the spikes in the two subjects. The difference
between the mass of students with scores corresponding to attempting all questions (i.e.
45, 43.75,..,−11.25) and the mass of students with scores corresponding to skipping a single
question (i.e. 44, 42.75,...,−11) is what we mean by the intensity of the spikes. If the spikes
are very prominent, this difference will be large; if they are non-existent, this difference will
be minimal. In a given exam, for each such pair, we find this difference and take its sum to
get the overall measure of the spike intensity. This gives us two more moments to match.
       We compare simulated test score moments to those observed in the data and choose the
parameters that minimize the objective function. Accordingly, the estimates of the vector
θg = (cg , µg , Σg ), cutoff c and ability distribution parameters for each group g, denoted by the
                            
         g         g   g   g
vector θ̂ = ĉ , µ̂ , Σ̂ , are estimated by minimizing the distance between the simulated
moments, m̂(g), and the observed moments, m(g).

                            θ̂g = arg min(m̂(g) − m(g))0 WT−1 (m̂(g) − m(g))                            (9)
                                        θ


where WT is the weighting matrix. As usual, we begin by using the identity matrix as
the weighting matrix thereby obtaining an estimate of the parameters of each group that
  27
       Within the Social Science track as a whole, the scores in the Turkish and Social Science sections are
highly correlated.


                                                      23
is consistent and asymptotically normal. Applying the two step procedure,(Hansen [1982],
Gourieroux and Monfort [1997], Duffie and Singleton [1993]) this estimate is used to gener-
ate a weighting matrix. Using the new weighting matrix, the procedure is repeated which
improves the efficiency of the estimate.
   For a given c, the means of scores help pin down the means of the ability distributions
that students are drawing from, and the variances/covariances of scores help pin down the
variances of the ability distributions and the correlation between ability draws. The choice
of c is pinned down by the extent of spikes in the two score distributions as explained below.
Identification of the attempt cutoff, c, is achieved through matching the intensity of the
spikes. For example, if students are risk averse then they will tend to skip, ceteris paribus.
Thus, at low values of c, students will have a very low probability of skipping a question: it is
unlikely that the answer with the highest signal has a low enough probability of being correct
to be below the attempt cutoff. As a result, almost all of the probability mass of a given
student’s distribution will be located on scores corresponding to attempting all questions. As
the attempt cutoff increases, students become more and more likely to skip some questions,
resulting in more mass lying on scores unreachable by attempting all questions (for example
a score of 40.5 is impossible to obtain unless 2 questions are skipped). Increasing the attempt
cutoff further results in enough skipping activity so that spikes can no longer be seen.
   This is illustrated in Figure 7, where the score distribution for a student (with a fixed,
approximately median, ability of β = 3) is shown for various cutoff levels. A cutoff of
c = 0.225 puts virtually all of the mass of the score distribution on values that correspond
to students attempting all questions. As the attempt cutoff increases to 0.3, the spikes all
but disappear as very few attempt all questions.
   The relationship between the intensity of the spikes and the attempt cutoff is not constant.
As we increase ability, given a cutoff c, the intensity of the spikes increases. This makes sense
as high ability agents are more likely to distinguish the right answer from the wrong one and
answer all questions for any given cutoff. While low ability students might have an answer
with a belief above the attempt cutoff, this becomes increasingly rare as ability rises.
   The parameters of the distribution of the ability of a group of students, (µT , µSS ) and
Σ, are identified by the distribution of scores. An increase in the mean parameter µT moves


                                               24
                Figure 7: Distribution of scores resulting from various cutoff levels

                                                 Cutoff=0.225                                                Cutoff=0.25




                                                                                         .04
                      .02 .04 .06 .08 .1




                                                                            .02          .03
                             P




                                                                              P
                                                                                         .01
                               0




                                                                                         0
                                           -20   0           20   40                                   -20   0           20   40
                                                     Score                                                       Score


                                                 Cutoff=0.275                                                Cutoff=0.3




                                                                            0 .005 .01 .015 .02 .025
                               .03
                               .02
                      P




                                                                                      P
                               .01
                               0




                                           -20   0           20   40                                   -20   0           20   40
                                                     Score                                                       Score




the Turkish score distribution to the right, increasing the mean, while an increase in the
variance parameter σT2 increases the variance of the Turkish score distribution. This is due
to a strong relationship between ability and exam scores. Similarly with the Social Science
section. Finally, the correlation between Turkish and Social Science ability draws is reflected
in the correlation of scores.



6       Results
Figure 8 displays estimates of the cutoff (the belief below which a student skips) graphically.28
Male and female attempt cutoffs are significantly different in all bins except the lowest and
highest.29 Two facts are apparent. Males tend to have lower attempt cutoffs, especially
for students whose predicted score is above the threshold that allows them to submit a
preference list. This is in line with the literature as discussed previously. Secondly, the
cutoff is systematically lower in the predicted score ranges below 120. This matches what
we know about the payoff structure. For low scores, students should be much less risk averse
since any score below 105 will not allow the student to submit preferences for any school,
 28
      Full results, including standard errors, are shown in Table A2.
 29
      Test statistics are shown in Table A3.


                                                                       25
and any score below 120 will not permit the student to submit preferences for four year
college programs. Above 120, the cutoff remains relatively high30 and seems to rise with the
predicted score bin consistent with increasing risk aversion.
       Figures 9 and 10 show the simulated score distributions compared to observed distribu-
tions for the various groups. The figure clearly consists of spikes for attempting all questions.
To help visualize these, these are presented in different the grid lines correspond to scores
which could be obtained by skipping no questions. While the estimation procedure was de-
signed only to match subgroups of the sample, the entire simulated distribution fits the data
relatively well overall. It is worth noting that estimation methods which grouped students
based on actual track (ÖSS-SÖZ) score did better here.
       Estimates of the parameters governing the distribution of ability for each group are
presented in Table A4. Recall that ability is parameterized as (1 + eX , 1 + eX ), where
X ∼ N (µ, Σ). The means and variances of the components of X in each group are presented.
       As we estimate the distributions for students in the Social Science track, differences could
come from selection into this track as well as differences given selection. For example, if the
track was seen as female friendly in some way, it might attract more women, especially weak
ones, with better women going into less female friendly tracks. With this qualification, we
see that females tend to have higher ability in Turkish, but slightly lower ability in Social
Science, when compared to males in the corresponding group.31 This is consistent with
males having a comparative and absolute advantage in Social Science and is consistent with
findings in the literature that women have the advantage in Language skills.32




  30
       Cutoffs for the top students are approximately 0.26, which has meaning that these students will only
answer a question if they are at least 26% sure of their answer. Significantly more than the 20% likelihood
of a random guess.
  31
     The estimated ability distributions for the two sections of the test are depicted in Figure A5-A7 in
Appendix II.
 32
    See Lynn [1992].


                                                     26
                    Figure 8: Estimates of Attempt Cutoffs: Social Science Track



              .28
              .26
   Attempt Cutoff
        .24   .22
              .2




                     80        90          100        110       120             130          140       150
                                                      Expected Score

                                                      Female          Male




               Figure 9: Data vs Simulated Score Distribution: Social Science

                                             Real Social Science Score
     .08.06
Density
 .04 .02
     0




          −11.25          −5        1.25     7.5      13.75        20       26.25     32.5     38.75    45
                                                   Raw Social Science Score
                                           Simulated Social Science Score
     .08.06
Density
 .04 .02
     0




          −11.25          −5        1.25     7.5      13.75        20       26.25     32.5     38.75    45
                                                   Raw Social Science Score




                                                          27
               Figure 10: Data vs Simulated Score Distribution: Turkish

                                       Real Turkish Score
     .08.06
Density
 .04 .02
     0




          −11.25   −5     1.25   7.5      13.75       20     26.25   32.5   38.75   45
                                         Raw Turkish Score
                                  Simulated Turkish Score
     .08.06
Density
 .04 .02
     0




          −11.25   −5     1.25   7.5      13.75       20     26.25   32.5   38.75   45
                                         Raw Turkish Score




                                            28
       In addition, we observe that males tend to have higher variance in their distribution of
ability. In fact, the variance is greater for all groups.33 The correlation between ability in
Turkish and Social Science seems to be higher for each decile for females, as seen in Table
A5. This would tend to give females an advantage in terms of being at the top: in order
to gain admission students must perform well in both Turkish and Social Science. It would
also explain the higher variance for males.
       An issue we wish to acknowledge is that in both the model and estimation procedure we
assume that all questions are at the same level of difficulty. This assumption is necessary as
we do not observe item responses. Would this create biases in our estimation? We check for
this using simulations.
       In a companion paper, (Akyol et al. [2016]), we construct a model and estimation proce-
dure to examine data sets with item responses. In addition, we examine data from a mock
exam, aimed to prepare Social Science track students for the university entrance exam. Hav-
ing recovered question difficulty parameters (in addition to individual student ability and
risk aversion), we are able to see the effect on score distributions of having questions of a
uniform level of difficulty. We first find the expected score of the median student with the
original questions. We then find the level of difficulty which, if all questions were to have
identical difficulty, would give the same expected score to the median student. Comparing
score distributions, we find that the variance of the median student’s score would be 9%
higher with questions of constant difficulty, as opposed to the variance obtained with the
original questions.34 On the one hand, having more homogeneous questions removes one
source of variability. On the other, the level of difficulty matters: if the exam is difficult,
then the median student facing the average difficulty question will guess more often than
when the questions are of variable difficulty. For this reason, we think of our estimates
on variance as being an upper bound and explains why some of them are located at the
boundary.
       We also run the model for the Language test in the Language track and the Turkish
  33
       The estimated ability distributions for Turkish and Social Sciences by gender reflect this higher variance
as in Figures A5 and A6.
  34
     Similar results when looking at the 25th and 75th percentile students: 10% and 7% (respectively) higher
variance with constant difficulty.


                                                        29
exam in the Turkish-Math track as a robustness check. These are presented in Appendix 1.
It is reassuring to note that the estimates look a lot like those above, despite the raw data
looking quite different.



7     Counterfactuals
Having recovered the parameters regarding risk aversion exhibited by students in the multiple
choice tests, in addition to estimates regarding the distribution of ability (as measured by β
for each subject, the parameter in the Pareto distribution that governs dispersion of signals),
we are now able to perform counterfactual experiments.
    In these experiments, we will compare outcomes of a number of testing regimes, and
student behaviors. For example, how would exam outcomes differ if all students attempted
(answered) every question, as would happen if the penalty for answering incorrectly were
removed? This is relevant because it is fully feasible to change the testing regime, and the
regime may well affect outcomes. Our focus is on two things. First we look at the gender
gap, defined as the over-representation of males at the top of the score distribution. This
comes both from ability differences and from differences in behavior. In particular we will
quantify the impact of risk aversion differences on test outcomes as the test format changes.
Second, we look at the effectiveness of test as the format varies. Effectiveness is defined
as the extent to which performance matches abilities. The rationale behind penalties is
to reduce the amount of random guessing, therefore reducing score variance and improving
effectiveness. The down side is that as women seem to be significantly more risk averse than
men, this accentuates the gender gap. Our focus is to understand the extent of this trade-off.
    For this reason we consider seven possible regimes in our counterfactual experiments.
These are:

    1. The baseline model, as estimated in the previous section.

    2. All students attempt all questions. This is equivalent to assuming that all students are
       risk neutral/loving, and identical to removing the penalty for answering incorrectly.
       Both would cause rational students to answer every question. Scores would, however,


                                              30
         need to be rescaled to reflect the absence of such a penalty: instead of ranging from
         −11.25 to 45, they would range from 0 to 45.

   3. Risk preferences of females are altered, so that the cutoff used by a female student in
         predicted ÖSS-SÖZ score interval k is is changed to that used by a male student in
         predicted ÖSS-SÖZ score interval k (labeled as “Equal Cutoffs” in the figures). Note
         that the second regime eliminates risk aversion differences across gender, and makes
         all agents risk neutral. The third regime keeps risk aversion, but eliminates the gender
         differences in risk aversion. While this is not feasible to perform in practice, we can use
         the counterfactual exercise to quantify the effect of gender differences in risk aversion
         in the current system.

   4. Each question has only four answers to choose from, with the penalty for an incorrect
         answer adjusted accordingly. This will increase the impact of risk aversion and accen-
         tuate the gender gap and hinder the effectiveness of the exam. Reducing the number
         of choices makes the gamble involved in answering have higher stakes. This should
         exacerbate the effect of different risk preferences across the genders. In the default
         regime, there are five answers, with a single point for correct answers and a quarter
         point lost for incorrect answers. This results in an expected gain of zero from a ran-
         dom guess; accordingly, we set the penalty equal to one third of a point in the four
         answer scenario, resulting in a random guess having an expected gain of zero. As a
         result, the cutoffs for attempting a question must be different. To convert cutoffs from
         the five answer case, we first assume a CARA utility function, and solve for the risk
         aversion parameter that generates a given cutoff. This is repeated for each group. We
         then convert the risk aversion parameter to a cutoff in the four answer case.35 Note
         that having four answers instead of five, and increasing the penalty accordingly, can
                                                                                                           36
         increase variances of scores for a given student even in the absence of risk aversion.
  35
       For example, a cutoff of 0.240 in the five answer case implies risk aversion coefficient of 0.383 (CARA
utility), which results in a cutoff of 0.300 in the four answer case.
  36
     The standard deviation of the points earned for a single question is, for a student of (approximately
median) ability β = 3, 0.66 (four answers) vs 0.62 (five answers) i.e. scores are more precise when there are
five answers than when there are four answers. For a student of ability β = 6 (approximately the top 10%)


                                                       31
   5. The penalty for answering incorrectly is increased from 0.25 points to 1 point. This
      will accentuate the gender gap but increase effectiveness as guessing is reduced. This
      counterfactual is designed to elicit more skipping from students and to amplify the
      impact of differences in risk preference across the genders. As in the four-answer
      counterfactual, cutoffs are translated into implied CARA parameters and new cutoffs
      are obtained for both counterfactuals.

   6. The number of questions in each section is doubled, from 45 to 90. This will improve the
      effectiveness of the exam and can increase the gender gap if males are more prevalent at
      higher abilities. This allows us to place results in the context of a more precise exam:
      increasing the number of questions increases the ability of the exam to distinguish
      students based on ability.

    For each of the six possible regimes, we find the resulting distributions of scores for the
entire sample of (first time exam takers) students in the Social Science track.
    We simulate students using the parameters estimated,37 generating scores in the Turkish
and Social Science section, adding the two to generate an exam score for each student.38 We
then segment students into bins by using the total score. The bins are constructed such that
five percent of students are in each bin, so that we observe the 5% of students who perform
the worst, the 5% who perform the best etc.39
    We first examine the effect of the different regimes on the ability of the exam to select the
most capable students. To do so we look the relationship between exam score percentile and
(average log) ability in the two subjects, Turkish and Social Science. Figures 11 and 12 show
the difference between the counterfactual of interest and the baseline model. A positive value
for a score percentile means that the ability of students in that score percentile is higher in
the counterfactual than in the baseline model. A regime that delivers a positive value on the
the standard deviation is 0.58 vs 0.56.
  37
     1000 students were simulated for each student observed in the data.
  38
     We did not simulate scores from math and science as the majority of students skipped these sections,
and scores of those who attempted were close to zero.
  39
     As seen in Figures A8 and A9 in the Appendix, the exams do sort by ability as higher score percentiles
are associated with higher average ability in all the regimes studied.



                                                     32
right (high scoring students) and a negative value on the left (low scoring students) would be
preferred to the baseline model, as it more correctly identifies the strong and weak students.

                                                      Figure 11: Turkish Ability (∆ vs baseline)
                                   .1
                  ∆ Average log Turkish Ability
                    −.05      0    −.1 .05




                                                  0        20           40            60             80         100
                                                                        Score Percentile

                                                        Attempt All                        Equal Cutoffs
                                                        Four Answers                       Quadrupled Penalty
                                                        Number of Questions Doubled




       As the Turkish and Social Science abilities show very similar patterns, they will be
discussed jointly. We see that the “Attempt All”, “equal cutoffs”, and “four answers” regimes
show very little difference in terms of the quality of admitted students in Figures 11 and
12 consistent with the small differences in risk aversion estimated. Although the differences
between the higher penalty regime and the baseline are small, higher penalties clearly do
a better job sorting. Average abilities under these regimes are lower than the baseline
on the left (more accurately identifying weak students)40 and higher than the baseline on
the right (more accurately identifying strong students). The pattern of differences between
the baseline and the “number of questions doubled” regime is similar, suggesting this also
  40
       With the exception of the quadruple penalty regime for the lowest ventile. Examining more carefully,
the lowest 5% actually has a higher average ability than the second lowest 5% (see Figures A8 and A9). This
is not due to any risk aversion differences (the pattern remains even if all students are given the same cutoff
of 0.25). The explanation is simple: The bottom 5% tends to consist of students who attempted questions
and had bad luck. Since attempting is related to a higher ability we observe this interesting pattern.



                                                                            33
                                                                   Figure 12: Social Science Ability (∆ vs baseline)




                                                          .1
                     ∆ Average log Social Science Ability
                  −.05         0           .05




                                                               0           20           40            60             80         100
                                                                                        Score Percentile

                                                                        Attempt All                        Equal Cutoffs
                                                                        Four Answers                       Quadrupled Penalty
                                                                        Number of Questions Doubled




improves sorting.
       The reason for the higher effectiveness of the high penalty regime is simple. It strongly
discourages attempting when the student is relatively uncertain of their answer. This results
in much less guessing which reduces the variance in the score distributions of an individual
student, resulting in a cleaner signal. The downside is that their partial knowledge will not
be conveyed as students will skip even when they have some knowledge of the right answer
and differences in risk aversion by gender will have more of an impact.
       Both greater penalties for wrong answers and more questions improve the ability of the
exam to sort students. How do they compare to each other? The impact of the increased
penalties on average abilities of combined score quantiles is most evident for the top quantiles.
Note that the top 13.5% roughly get admission in the Social Science track. We find that an
additional 25 questions (70 in total) must be asked in each section in order for the baseline
model to have a comparable admitted class, to the 45 question, quadrupled penalty version.41
       Finally, we examine the impact of the various regimes on the fraction of males in the
  41
       Alternatively, if the penalty were quadrupled, the number of questions in each section could be reduced
to only 27 yet would retain equivalent validity.


                                                                                            34
different score percentiles. In particular, we want to see if there is any effect on the (over)-
representation of males in the top scoring percentiles: the gender gap. Lower risk aversion
raises the presence of men at the top and the bottom. Thus the male fraction is U shaped
as shown in Figure 13.

                                  Figure 13: Male Fraction Counterfactuals
                     .75
                     .7
              Male Fraction
               .6     .65
                     .55
                     .5




                              0        20           40            60             80         100
                                                    Score Percentile

                                    Attempt All                        Equal Cutoffs
                                    Four Answers                       Quadrupled Penalty
                                    Number of Questions Doubled




   In the baseline model, the top 10% of student (by score) are 42% female. But females
are 44% of the Social Science track first time takers: a 2% gender gap against females. Ex-
amining Figure 14, we see that risk aversion does not appear to be a major component of
the gender gap. There is a minimal reduction in the gender gap if we were to eliminate skip-
ping, or eliminate risk aversion differences. The impact on the gender gap of the remaining
counterfactuals, while slightly higher, remains small.
   Why do risk aversion differences seem to matter so little? There are two reasons. Firstly,
there is a relatively low chance that a student has a belief lying between 0.23 and 0.25,
for a given question. Secondly, if the belief does lay in this region, the expected gain from
answering (and hence that from having a low cutoff) is at most 0.0625 points. Even when
the penalty is raised, leading to more skipping behavior, the total effect on allocations is
minor. Essentially, differences in choices made due to skipping behavior are not common,

                                                        35
                                       Figure 14: Male Fraction (∆ vs baseline)




                        .06  .04
             ∆ Male Fraction
               0     .02−.02
                        −.04




                                   0       20           40            60             80         100
                                                        Score Percentile

                                        Attempt All                        Equal Cutoffs
                                        Four Answers                       Quadrupled Penalty
                                        Number of Questions Doubled




and when they do arise have small consequences. Intuitively, this is like saying that while
ordering at a restaurant, the best option is usually clear, and when it is not, the choice made
has little consequence!
   The small impact of risk aversion, especially for students with high ability, is clear when
examining Table 2. A student with a cutoff of 0.275 with ability β = 4 (approximately top
25%) has an expected score 0.09 lower than a risk neutral student of the same ability. The
impact on students in the top 10% is even smaller.




                                                            36
Table 2: Question outcomes for various parameter values: probabilities of skipping (S), being
correct (C), being incorrect (I), expected score out of 45, and the reduction in expected score
as compared to a risk neutral student of the same ability

     β   Cutoff Prob(S)      Prob(C)   Prob(I) Expected Score       Loss vs Risk Neutral
     2      0.2          0     0.405      0.595        11.57                  -
     2    0.225     0.012      0.403      0.585        11.57                0.00
     2     0.25     0.085      0.386      0.529        11.43                0.14
     2    0.275     0.192      0.359      0.449        11.12                0.45
     2      0.3     0.303      0.328      0.370        10.58                0.99
     2    0.325     0.403      0.297      0.300        9.99                 1.58
     3      0.2          0     0.535      0.465        18.86                  -
     3    0.225     0.003      0.534      0.463        18.86                0.00
     3     0.25     0.030      0.528      0.442        18.81                0.05
     3    0.275     0.081      0.515      0.404        18.63                0.23
     3      0.3     0.143      0.498      0.360        18.36                0.50
     3    0.325     0.208      0.478      0.315        17.96                0.90
     4      0.2          0     0.619      0.381        23.58                  -
     4    0.225     0.001      0.619      0.380        23.58                0.00
     4     0.25     0.017      0.616      0.368        23.58                0.00
     4    0.275     0.049      0.608      0.344        23.49                0.09
     4      0.3     0.091      0.596      0.314        23.27                0.31
     4    0.325     0.137      0.581      0.281        23.00                0.58




                                              37
    However, a degree of caution should be applied when applying this result to other tests
with different students. Here, the lack of an effect is the result of a relatively low degree of
risk aversion overall, in addition to an exam where students are able to be confident enough
to answer a vast majority of the time. While there is no obvious reason why the first might be
particular to this group of students, it is very reasonable to suggest that the second depends
very much on the style of the exam, questions asked and so on.



8       Conclusions
This paper investigates the factors that affect students’ exam taking behavior in multiple
choice tests. By constructing a structural model of a student’s decision to attempt/skip a
question in a multiple-choice exam, we estimate deep structural parameters of the model.
We allow these to differ by group, according to their gender and ability. We allow different
groups of students to have different risk aversion and ability distributions in each part of the
test.
    Our work has focused on two questions: the extent to which multiple choice exams with
negative marking are biased against women versus their better performance in terms of their
effectiveness.
    It has long been a puzzle why women do worse than men in university entrance exams,
despite doing better in school. One reason might be greater risk aversion on the part of
women which reduces their performance in multiple choice exams. Overall we find that
while female students do act in a more risk averse manner, the impact of this is relatively
limited in terms of performance and the prevalence of women in the group admitted to
university. Thus, we need to look elsewhere to quantitatively match the above puzzle. A
hypothesis worth exploring is the extent to which this arises from women putting in less
effort in high stakes exams because they have less at stake. To the extent that women are
less likely to work, or more likely to take time off, their gains from expending effort would
fall. We also find that negative marking has a considerable impact on the effectiveness of
the exam: a penalty of -1 is similar to doubling the number of questions. Moreover, it does
so with a minimal impact on gender bias.


                                              38
References
Akyol, S. P., Key, J., and Krishna, K. (2016). Estimation of multiple choice exams. mimeo.

Baker, E. L., Barton, P. E., Darling-Hammond, L., Haertel, E., Ladd, H. F., Linn, R. L.,
  Ravitch, D., Rothstein, R., Shavelson, R. J., and Shepard, L. A. (2010). Problems with
  the use of student test scores to evaluate teachers, volume 278. Economic Policy Institute
  Washington, DC.

Baldiga, K. (2013). Gender differences in willingness to guess. Management Science.

Ben-Shakhar, G. and Sinai, Y. (1991). Gender differences in multiple-choice tests: The role
  of differential guessing tendencies. The Journal of Educational Measurement, 28(1):23–35.

Bernardo, J. (1998). A decision analysis approach to multiple-choice examinations. Applied
  Decision Analysis, IV:195–207.

Burgos, A. (2004). Guessing and gambling. Economics Bulletin, 4(4):1–10.

Croson, R. and Gneezy, U. (2009). Gender differences in preferences. Journal of Economic
  Literature, 47(2):448–474.

Duffie, D. and Singleton, K. J. (1993). Simulated moments estimation of markov models of
  asset prices. Econometrica, 61(4):pp. 929–952.

Eckel, C. C. and Grossman, P. J. (2008). Men, women, and risk aversion: Experimental
  evidence. Handbook of Experimental Economics, 1(113):1061–1073.

Espinosa, M. P. and Gardeazabal, J. (2010). Optimal correction for guessing in multiple-
  choice tests. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 54(5):415–425.

Espinosa, M. P., Gardeazabal, J., et al. (2013). Do students behave rationally in multiple
  choice tests? evidence from a field experiment. Journal of Economics and Management,
  9(2):107–135.

Gourieroux, C. and Monfort, A. (1997). Simulation-based econometric methods. Oxford
  University Press.

                                            39
Hansen, L. P. (1982). Large sample properties of generalized method of moments estimators.
  Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, pages 1029–1054.

Lynn, R. (1992). Sex differences on the differential aptitude test in british and american
  adolescents. Educational Psychology, 12(2):101–102.

Pekkarinen, T. (2014). Gender differences in behaviour under competitive pressure: Evidence
  on omission patterns in university entrance examinations. Journal of Economic Behavior
  & Organization.

Tannenbaum, D. I. (2012). Do gender differences in risk aversion explain the gender gap in
  sat scores? uncovering risk attitudes and the test score gap. mimeo.




                                            40
9     Appendix I: Other Tracks
So far we have focused on the Social Science track (ÖSS-SÖZ). Our approach can be used for
subjects where there is partial knowledge such as the Turkish component in the Turkish-Math
and Language tracks. As seen in Table 1, the Turkish-Math track (ÖSS-EA) also places high
emphasis on the Turkish section of the exam, a section which is well described by the model.
The model also applies to the Language section of the Language track (ÖSS-DIL), which as
would be expected, accounts for a large part of the student’s admission score. We do not use
our model on the Math and Science tests. This is because of the limited presence of spikes
which are a key part of our identification strategy. The lack of spikes we hypothesize, comes
from the questions being of a different type. Science and Math problems have to be worked
out and if done correctly, this eliminates all but one answer. As a result, there is a lack of
partial knowledge: either the signal is fully informative, or there is no information.
    There are some differences between the Language exam and the regular exam. First,
the Language exam is held separately, some time after the regular (Science, Math, Turk-
ish and Social Science sections) exam. In addition to this, students are able to view the
correct answers following the regular exam. This would give the Language track students
information regarding their score in the regular exam. As the Social Science and Turkish
sections contribute to the Language track score (albeit a small contribution) this information
is relevant. Secondly, although the scoring system is the same for each question (1 point
for correct, -0.25 for incorrect, 5 possibilities and the option to skip), there are in total 100
questions in the Language exam. As previously, we only observe the total section score.
    We estimate the model for the Turkish-Math track students, examining the Turkish
section only. We then estimate the model for the Language track students, examining the
Language exam only.


9.1    Estimation

Estimation follows that in the main body of the paper. After separating first attempt
students by gender and into predicted ÖSS score bins, we use simulated method of moments
to obtain the distribution of ability, and the attempt cutoff for the group. As we are only


                                               41
examining one subject, the ability distribution is univariate. Moments to be matched are
analogous to before.
       To obtain the predicted score bins, we run a regression between score and observable
characteristics, and use predicted values. While the Turkish Math section binning process is
the same as before, the Language track is slightly different. As students are able to see the
general test questions and correct answers after the exam, it is reasonable to expect students
to accurately determine their score from the Turkish and Social Science sections of the exam,
at least to a reasonable degree. We therefore use the students’ actual performance in the
general test when predicting their score in the Language exam.


9.2        Data

Focusing on students making their first attempt, we obtain for the Turkish Math track 7972
female and 7919 male students. For the Language track42 we obtain 9280 female and 3681
male students.
       Separating into score bins, we have sample sizes as shown in Tables A6 and A7.
       The aggregate score patterns can be seen in Figures A1 and A2.43 While the Turkish exam
section of the Turkish-Math track students looks relatively similar to previous histograms, the
Language track students illustrate a much different pattern. This is due to the large number
of questions of the Language section: 100 compared to 45 in other sections. As a result,
the medium ability students will tend to skip enough questions for the spikes to diminish
greatly. While in the other exam sections there were 45 opportunities for a student to skip a
question, in the Language section there are more than double the amount of chances to skip.
It follows that there will be more skipped questions, which have the effect of reducing the
intensity of the spikes, especially in the middle of the distribution.44 Estimating the model
for data showing a very different aggregate pattern also serves as a robustness check.


  42
       There were three different foreign language options, each with their own exam. We chose to focus on the
English language students as they were the vast majority. Sample sizes are those for the English language
track.
  43
     Gridlines are 1.25 points apart in Figure A1 and 2.5 apart in Figure A2.
  44
     This was also the location where the spikes were least intense in the social science and Turkish sections


                                                       42
Figure A1: Turkish Score Distribution of Turkish Math Track Students



   .08
   .06
Density
.04.02
   0




      −11.25      −5   1.25   7.5      13.75    20     26.25   32.5   38.75   45
                                     Raw Turkish Score


 Figure A2: Language Score Distribution of Language Track Students
   .08
   .06
Density
 .04
   .02
   0




          −12.5   0    12.5   25       37.5    50     62.5     75     87.5    100
                                    Raw Language Score




                                         43
9.3    Results

Estimates of ability distributions for the different groups. For the sake of brevity, only the
attempt cutoffs are presented.

              Figure A3: Estimates of Attempt Cutoffs: Turkish Math Track
                           .3
                           .28
                    Attempt Cutoff
                         .26
                           .24
                           .22




                                     80   90   100   110       120      130   140   150
                                                     Expected Score

                                                     Female      Male




           Figure A4: Estimates of Attempt Cutoffs: Language Track (English)
                           .27
                           .26
                    Attempt Cutoff
                     .24     .25
                           .23
                           .22




                                     80   90   100   110       120      130   140   150
                                                     Expected Score

                                                     Female      Male




   As before, there are two important patterns. First, as seen in Figures A3 and A4, the
cutoff increases as we move from students who expect to perform poorly to students who
expect to perform well. This is in line with expectations, given the payoff structure: students

                                                       44
are less risk averse for low scores as they are below the cutoff for applying. Secondly, males
tend to have lower cutoffs than females, i.e., they are less risk averse, and this difference
tends to be significant only in higher score bins. Another important observation is that
these cutoff patterns are very similar to those observed in the Social Science track. Even the
Language track, where the data exhibited very different patterns, has a similar pattern of
risk aversion, providing further support for the model and empirical approach.
   Note the magnitude of and patterns in the cutoffs, and the degree of differences between
male and female students, are relatively similar across tracks. In all three tracks, cutoffs rise
with score and males are less risk averse.



10       Appendix II


                                Table A1: Summary Statistics

  Variable                                          Obs.    Mean     Std.Dev.   Min      Max
  Male                                              9273    0.558                0        1
  ÖSS-SÖZ score                                   9273   108.219    19.030     0      161.166
  Normalized High School GPA                        9273   47.144     8.199      30       80
  Raw Turkish Score                                 9273   19.268     9.778     -6.25     45
  Raw Social Science Score                          9273   14.805     9.640     -8.75    43.75
  Raw Math Score                                    9273    0.851     2.884      -9       37
  Raw Science Score                                 9273    0.115     1.260     -8.75    19.5
  Education level of Dad
  Primary or less                                   9273    0.557
  Middle/High School                                9273    0.285                0        1
  2-year higher education                           9273    0.023                0        1
  College/Master/PhD                                9273    0.046                0        1
  Missing                                           9273    0.089                0        1
  Education level of Mom
  Primary or less                                   9273    0.795
                                    (continued on next page)

                                               45
Variable                                   Obs.   Mean    Std.Dev.   Min   Max
Middle/High School                         9273   0.128               0     1
2-year higher education                    9273   0.007               0     1
College/Master/PhD                         9273   0.011               0     1
Missing                                    9273   0.058               0     1
Prep School Expenditure
No prep school                             9246   0.010               0     1
Scholarship                                9246   0.208               0     1
<1000 TL                                   9246   0.065               0     1
1000-2000 TL                               9246   0.015               0     1
>2000 TL                                   9246   0.364               0     1
Income Level
<250 TL                                    9122   0.459               0     1
250-500 TL                                 9122   0.386               0     1
>500 TL                                    9122   0.155               0     1
Time Spent in Turkish Preparation
<100 hours                                 9273   0.078               0     1
100-200 hours                              9273   0.102               0     1
>200 hours                                 9273   0.042               0     1
Time Spent in Social Science Preparation
<100 hours                                 9273   0.081               0     1
100-200 hours                              9273   0.095               0     1
>200 hours                                 9273   0.064               0     1
Time Spent in Math Preparation
<100 hours                                 9273   0.116               0     1
100-200 hours                              9273   0.072               0     1
>200 hours                                 9273   0.017               0     1
Time Spent in Science Preparation
<100 hours                                 9273   0.074               0     1
100-200 hours                              9273   0.014               0     1
>200 hours                                 9273   0.004               0     1



                                     46
                Table A2: Estimates of Risk Aversion Cutoff

              Female 1st time takers                     Male 1st time takers
(0,90)                   0.2135                                  0.2152
                         (0.0028)                                (0.0018)
[90,100)                 0.2304                                  0.2269
                         (0.0012)                                (0.0009)
[100,110)                0.2387                                  0.2355
                         (0.0008)                                (0.0008)
[110,120)                0.2533                                  0.2493
                         (0.0015)                                (0.0012)
[120,130)                0.2661                                  0.2584
                         (0.0028)                                (0.0017)
[130,140)                0.2743                                  0.2619
                         (0.0042)                                (0.0026)
[140,∞)                  0.2706                                  0.2639
                         (0.0050)                                (0.0032)
Standard errors are reported in parentheses.




           Table A3: t-stat for test: (female cutoff-male cutoff)=0

                            <90     90-100   100-110   110-120   120-130    130-140   > 140
  Social Science Track      -0.51    2.43      2.86     2.06       2.38      2.50     1.14




                                               47
Table A4: Estimates of Ability Distribution Parameters

                      Social Science Test
                          Female               Male
                         µ           σ     µ          σ
          (0,90)       -1.10     0.78    -1.38     0.97
                       (0.21)   (0.18)   (0.18)   (0.12)
          [90,100)     -0.65     0.71    -0.62     0.80
                       (0.04)   (0.04)   (0.04)   (0.03)
          [100,110)    -0.08     0.59     0.07     0.70
                       (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)
          [110,120)     0.49     0.56     0.69     0.65
                       (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)
          [120,130)     1.02     0.49     1.28     0.57
                       (0.03)   (0.03)   (0.03)   (0.03)
          [130,140)     1.49     0.43     1.72     0.57
                       (0.05)   (0.05)   (0.05)   (0.04)
          [140,∞)       1.91     0.43     2.22     0.34
                       (0.06)   (0.08)   (0.05)   (0.08)
                         Turkish Test
                          Female               Male
                         µ           σ     µ          σ
          (0,90)       -0.38     0.72    -0.85     0.77
                       (0.16)   (0.13)   (0.11)   (0.09)
          [90,100)      0.08     0.58    -0.15     0.67
                       (0.03)   (0.03)   (0.03)   (0.02)
          [100,110)     0.58     0.53     0.40     0.61
                       (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)
          [110,120)     1.10     0.52     0.93     0.57
                       (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)
          [120,130)     1.67     0.47     1.43     0.53
                       (0.03)   (0.03)   (0.03)   (0.03)
          [130,140)     2.23     0.42     1.98     0.56
                       (0.05)   (0.05)   (0.05)   (0.05)
          [140,∞)       2.91     0.61     2.62     0.56
                       (0.09)   (0.10)   (0.08)   (0.09)
           Standard errors are reported in parentheses.




                                48
Table A5: Estimates of Correlation between logs of Turkish and Social Science Ability

                     Female 1st time takers                 Male 1st time takers
        (0,90)                 1.000                               0.783
                                n/a                                (0.108)
        [90,100)               0.920                               0.848
                              (0.035)                              (0.029)
        [100,110)              0.948                               0.888
                              (0.024)                              (0.021)
        [110,120)              0.921                               0.928
                              (0.027)                              (0.020)
        [120,130)              0.990                               0.900
                              (0.042)                              (0.036)
        [130,140)              1.000                               0.948
                                n/a                                (0.054)
        [140,∞)                0.862                               0.841
                              (0.144)                              (0.211)
        Standard errors are reported in parentheses.




                                                       49
  Figure A5: Distributions of Social Science and Turkish ability




            .8
            .6
       Density
        .4  .2
            0




                     0   1           2                    3               4        5
                                           log(Ability)

                                 Turkish                      Social Science




Figure A6: Distributions of Social Science ability - Female vs Male
            1
            .8  .6
         Density
       .4   .2
            0




                     0       1             2                 3                 4
                                 log(Social Science Ability)

                                      Female                       Male




                                           50
Figure A7: Distributions of Turkish ability - Female vs Male
       .8
       .6
    Density
      .4
       .2
       0




              0   1        2              3             4   5
                          log(Turkish Ability)

                           Female                Male




                              51
                                         Figure A8: Turkish Ability Counterfactuals



                    2.5
Average log Turkish Ability
.5      1      1.5  0   2




                                         0        20           40            60             80         100
                                                               Score Percentile

                                               Attempt All                        Equal Cutoffs
                                               Four Answers                       Quadrupled Penalty
                                               Number of Questions Doubled




         Figure A9: Social Science Ability Counterfactuals
                                   2.5
Average log Social Science Ability
    .5      1      1.5
                    0      2




                                         0        20           40            60             80         100
                                                               Score Percentile

                                               Attempt All                        Equal Cutoffs
                                               Four Answers                       Quadrupled Penalty
                                               Number of Questions Doubled




                                                                   52
      Table A6: Number of observations vs predicted score bin, Turkish-Math track

                   80-90     90-100    100-110     110-120      120-130     130-140     > 140
         Male        69       1224       2407          2011       1302        711        195
         Female      21       825        2406          2137       1408        853        322



        Table A7: Number of observations vs predicted score bin, Language track

                   80-90     90-100    100-110     110-120      120-130     130-140     > 140
         Male       259       417        618           735        823         642        187
         Female     437       798        1299          1828       2181        2062       675



Table A8: Estimates of Attempt Cutoffs for Turkish-Math Track students - Turkish Section

                   < 90      90-100 100-110         110-120      120-130     130-140     > 140
        Male       0.2267    0.2338     0.2497      0.2606       0.2669      0.2711      0.2750
        Female     0.2240    0.2358     0.2534      0.2660       0.2783      0.2823      0.2881



Table A9: Estimates of Attempt Cutoffs for Language Track students - Language Section

                    <90      90-100     100-110     110-120      120-130     130-140     > 140
        Male       0.2252    0.2297     0.2395      0.2485       0.2554      0.2596      0.2622
        Female     0.2233    0.2329     0.2400      0.2525       0.2596      0.2672      0.2618



                  Table A10: t-stat for test: (female cutoff-male cutoff)=0

                            <90       90-100    100-110       110-120    120-130     130-140      > 140
  Turkish Math Track        -0.518    1.199       1.984        2.771       4.764       3.660      2.198
  Language Track            -0.382    0.905       0.237        1.830       2.457       3.836      -0.089




                                                  53
