NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DISABILITY BENEFIT GENEROSITY AND LABOR FORCE WITHDRAWAL
Kathleen Mullen
Stefan Staubli
Working Paper 22419
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22419

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2016

We thank Arie Kapteyn, Nicole Maestas, Philippe Ruh, Josef Zweimüller, participants of the
2015 NBER Summer Institute Aging Workshop and seminar participants at RAND and the
University of Manitoba for helpful comments and suggestions, and Sarah Kups for excellent
research assistance. This paper was supported by the National Institute on Aging through grant
numbers R21AG037891 and R01AG046290. Its contents are solely the responsibility of the
authors and do not represent the official views of the National Institute on Aging. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22419.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Kathleen Mullen and Stefan Staubli. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Disability Benefit Generosity and Labor Force Withdrawal
Kathleen Mullen and Stefan Staubli
NBER Working Paper No. 22419
July 2016
JEL No. H53,H55,J14,J22
ABSTRACT
A key component for estimating the optimal size and structure of disability insurance (DI)
programs is the elasticity of DI claiming with respect to benefit generosity. Yet, in many
countries, including the United States, all workers face identical benefit schedules, which are a
function of one’s labor market history, making it difficult to separate the effect of the benefit
level from the effect of unobserved preferences for work on individuals’ claiming decisions. To
circumvent this problem, we exploit exogenous variation in DI benefits in Austria arising from
several reforms to its DI and old age pension system in the 1990s and 2000s. We use
comprehensive administrative social security records data on the universe of Austrian workers to
compute benefit levels under six different regimes, allowing us to identify and precisely estimate
the elasticity of DI claiming with respect to benefit generosity. We find that, over this time
period, a one percent increase in potential DI benefits was associated with a 1.2 percent increase
in DI claiming.

Kathleen Mullen
RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
Kathleen_Mullen@rand.org
Stefan Staubli
Department of Economics
University of Calgary
2500 University Drive NW
Calgary, AB T2N 1N4
CANADA
and NBER
sstaubli@ucalgary.ca

1. Introduction
Leaving the work force before the statutory retirement age has become the norm in many
industrialized countries. Since the 1960s the labor force participation rate of males aged 55-64 in
the OECD countries has decreased from 80 to 65 percent despite considerable improvements in
aggregate health. 1 At the same time, disability insurance participation has grown substantially,
especially among older workers who are not yet eligible for public pensions. The negative effects
of this trend on economic growth and public expenditure are exacerbated by falling fertility rates
and significant increases in average life expectancy. While retirement incentives arising
explicitly from public old age pension systems (i.e., Social Security) have been well explored
(see, e.g., Burtless 1986, Gustman and Steinmeier 1986, Stock and Wise 1990, Berkovec and
Stern 1991, Blau 1994, Phelan and Rust 1997, Gruber and Wise 2004, French 2005), the impact
of financial incentives arising from alternative retirement channels, most notably disability
insurance (DI), still lacks a careful analysis. Although recent studies (e.g., Maestas, Mullen and
Strand, 2013) have demonstrated convincingly that substantial work capacity exists among
marginal DI program entrants, credible estimates of the effect of DI benefit levels on individuals’
labor force participation and claiming decisions have remained elusive due to lack of exogenous
variation in DI benefits, which in most countries are determined by a single function of past
earnings and work experience.
In this paper we employ a novel identification strategy that exploits a series of reforms to
the Austrian old age and disability insurance public pension system between 1987 and 2010. We
make use of individual administrative data containing detailed information regarding earnings
and employment histories and pension claiming, covering all of Austria in the period 1972 to

1

The labor force participation rate of males aged 55-64 in OECD countries reached a minimum of 59 percent in the
late 1990s and has increased since then to 65 percent.

1

2010. The combination of detailed administrative data and policy variation from a series of
national pension reforms presents us with a unique opportunity to learn about individuals’ labor
force withdrawal decisions in ways that are impossible in the U.S. and other settings. Given the
similarity in characteristics of the social security system and the aging population structure, and
because many of the Austrian reforms mimic policy changes that are currently debated by
policymakers around the world, studying their effects can yield important insights to guide social
security and disability insurance reforms in other industrialized countries, including the U.S.
We find that generally Austrians in this period are sensitive to the level of DI benefits in
determining their labor force participation. Over our sample period, 1.6 percent of labor force
participants ages 35-59 withdraw from the labor force to claim DI benefits each year. We find
that the DI inflow rate increases by 0.02 percentage points, or 1.2 percent, for every 1 percent
increase in DI benefit levels over our entire sample period, 1987-2010. That is, we estimate an
elasticity of DI claiming with respect to DI benefit generosity of 1.2.
We estimate a smaller elasticity of 0.7 in the later years of the sample, 2004-2010, which
experienced the lowest replacement rates over our observation period. During the same time
period, we estimate that DI application rates increased by 1.6 percent per 1 percent increase in
DI benefits, more than twice the percent increase in new DI beneficiaries. This implies that the
allowance rate for the marginal DI applicant induced by a 1 percent increase in DI benefits is less
than half the overall DI allowance rate. We are unaware of any studies that examine the role of
application screening in mediating the effect of DI benefit levels on new DI beneficiaries. 2
There exist a wide range of estimates of the elasticities of DI application, award and labor
force non-participation rates, respectively, with respect to DI benefit levels. Bound and
2

Maestas, Mullen and Strand (2015) examine the effect of local unemployment rates on DI applications and initial
allowances during the Great Recession; they find that virtually all of applications induced by the Great Recession
were denied at the initial level, although it is not clear how the additional applications fared in the appeal process.

2

Burkhauser (1999) reviewed the literature and found estimates in the range of 0.2-1.3
(applications), 0.3-0.4 (awards) and 0.2-1 (nonparticipation). Virtually all of these studies use
observational data on older workers (ages 45 and older) in the U.S. in the 1960s and 1970s. 3 Of
these, Kreider’s (1999) study using data from the 1978 Survey of Disability and Work is
generally considered the most credible (e.g., see Bound et al., 2004). Kreider estimates a
structural model of SSDI applications, awards and lifetime income inflows, and simulates the
effect of a 10 percent increase in DI benefit levels, finding an estimated 8.6 percent decline in DI
applications, for an elasticity of DI applications with respect to benefit levels of just under 0.9. 4
It is not clear how many of these induced applications would be allowed, but applying our
estimate of half the average allowance rate this translates to an elasticity of DI claiming with
respect to benefit generosity of 0.43—about three times lower than our estimated elasticity.
An exception to the previous studies using observational data in the U.S. is a study by
Gruber (2000) that exploits quasi-experimental variation in DI benefit levels arising from a 1987
Canadian reform in all provinces except Quebec. 5 Using a difference-in-differences framework,
Gruber estimates that the 36 percent increase in DI benefit levels was associated with an 11.5
percent increase in the nonemployment rate among men ages 45-59 in the first two years after
the reform. These estimates imply a short run elasticity of nonemployment with respect to DI
benefit levels of around 0.3. To obtain the long run elasticity of nonemployment
(nonparticipation) we need to scale this estimate by the inverse of the fraction of the stock of DI
participants who are new entrants, approximately 20 percent in Austria. Thus, Gruber’s estimate
3

Haveman and Wolfe (1984) attempt to instrument the DI replacement rate, recognizing it is endogenous, but they
have difficulty finding credible exclusion restrictions.
4
Intriguingly, Kreider finds that when time (i.e., the waiting period) is eliminated from the model, the estimated
decline in applications is 1.3 times as large, or 11.1 percent.
5
Campioleti (2004) examines the effect of a smaller ($50) increase in DI benefits in Quebec compared to other
provinces in 1973. His estimates of the effect of the reform on nonemployment are very small but extremely
imprecise, with standard errors on the order of five times larger than the estimated effects.

3

implies a long run elasticity of nonparticipation with respect to benefits of around 1.5, slightly
higher than our estimate of 1.2.
Our large sample also allows us to examine heterogeneity in responsiveness to benefit
generosity on several different margins. We find that the elasticity of DI claiming with respect to
benefit generosity is highest for prime-age workers (ages 45-49) and increases with skill level
and prior earnings, consistent with the idea that very young or very old, low skilled and poorer
workers tend to have fewer labor market opportunities and thus less discretion in whether to
apply for DI benefits vs. continuing to work. Notably, we find that individuals experiencing a
current involuntary unemployment spell are much more responsive to DI benefit levels than
employed individuals. This is consistent with Autor and Duggan’s (2003) finding that
“conditional applicants,” or those applicants who apply for DI benefits only after losing their job,
are more responsive to DI incentives than non-conditional applicants in the U.S.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we describe the data and
institutional background on the Austrian DI system including a detailed description of the policy
reforms enacted between 1987 and 2010. Section 3 describes our empirical strategy for isolating
the effect of DI benefit level on labor force withdrawal, separating out the effect of unobserved
preferences for work that are correlated with both DI benefits. Section 4 presents the results of
our estimation models. Finally, Section 5 concludes.

2. Data and Institutional Background
2.1. The Austrian Social Security Database
We use administrative data from the Austrian Social Security Database (ASSD), provided
by Hauptverband der Österreichischen Sozialversicherungsträger (the Austrian Social Security

4

Administration). The ASSD covers the universe of workers in Austria and contains detailed
information on the labor market and earnings histories of individuals beginning in 1972.
Specifically, all employment, unemployment, disability, sick leave, and retirement spells are
recorded. 6 Summaries of spells before 1972 (e.g., number of years employed, unemployed, etc.)
are available for individuals who have claimed a public pension by the end of 2008. At the
individual level, the ASSD contains information on gender, age, work experience, job tenure,
and blue- or white-collar status. 7 The ASSD also contains some firm-specific information such
as geographic region and industry affiliation. See Zweimüller et al. (2009) for a detailed
description of the data. Although the ASSD does not contain information on DI applications
(only claiming), we are able to merge to administrative application records starting in 2004.
A key feature of the data set is that it provides all of the information necessary to
compute individuals’ hypothetical disability insurance (DI) benefits at any given point in time
and, with some minor assumptions, individuals’ hypothetical DI benefits under different policy
regimes, which is critical to our identification strategy (see Section 3). We verify the accuracy of
our calculations by comparing our predicted DI benefit levels with actual DI benefit payments
for the subsample of beneficiaries who received benefits in 2001 or who began receiving benefits
after 2001, using matched data obtained from the Austrian Social Security Administration.
Figure A1 in the appendix plots mean matched DI benefits against mean predicted DI benefits
(in 1,000-Euro bins), pooling all years together. Figure A2 presents matched vs. predicted DI
benefits by claiming year. In all years actual benefits track our predicted benefits very closely.
Our main sample includes all male private sectors workers ages 35-59 during the time
period 1987-2010 who have not already claimed a disability pension. Although we can
6

Individuals do not have to be receiving unemployment insurance benefits to be registered unemployed. Individuals
who have exhausted their UI benefits may still register as unemployed and receive General Assistance.
7
Unfortunately, it is not possible to link individuals’ and their spouses’ earnings records.

5

confidently say that we are able to calculate potential DI benefits for men, unfortunately this is
not the case for women, since maternity leave spells are known to be observed with error in the
ASSD data. 8 Therefore, we focus our analysis on men only. We chose 1987 as the beginning of
our sample period in order to observe at least 180 months (15 years) of earnings for everyone in
our sample. We chose age 59 as the upper age limit because the early retirement age (ERA) in
Austria is age 60 for men and those who satisfy the eligibility requirements for early retirement
are not eligible for a disability pension. We limit the sample to private sector employees, who are
covered by the same pension system and hence face the same eligibility restrictions and financial
incentives. That is, we exclude self-employed and civil service workers who are covered by a
different pension system. 9 Our sample covers more than three quarters of all active labor market
participants in Austria.
We construct the sample by defining a reference date, January 1, and obtaining
individuals’ information on factors that might affect DI application (i.e., previous earnings, and
demographic characteristics such as employed or registered unemployed) as of that date for each
year they are in the labor market. The main outcome of interest is whether they were observed to
receive disability insurance benefits within a year (i.e., by December 31). 10 For a subset of years
(2004-2010) we are able to observe applications in addition to claiming.
Table 1 presents descriptive statistics, overall and grouped by observation period roughly
corresponding to the different policy regimes (see Section 2.3 for more details). During the

8

Women also have different early and full retirement ages (55 and 60, respectively, for most of the sample period),
although these are shifting to become equal to those of men by 2033.
9
One potential concern is that different policy regimes may induce individuals to switch from the private sector to
self-employment or the public sector or vice versa. However, transitions between sectors are rare—generally less
than 0.2-0.4 percent per year. Furthermore, we find no evidence of discontinuous changes in switching rates around
any of the pension reforms, suggesting that such strategic responses are not very common.
10
Disability insurance spells are back-dated in the ASSD to the date the claim was filed, so an individual who
applied for disability benefits late in the calendar year and was awarded benefits in the next calendar year is
observed to “receive” disability benefits in the original calendar year.

6

twenty-three year sample period between 1987 and 2010, we observe just over 1.5 million
individuals, each for an average of 10.5 years between ages 35 and 59. At any given point in
time, the average individual in our sample is 45 years old. Approximately 10 percent of private
sector labor market participants are unemployed on any given January 1 and 54 percent are blue
collar workers. Thirteen percent claimed sick leave at some point in the last two years and the
average sick leave spell among claimants was 51 days (beyond the first 6-12 weeks, which are
covered by the individuals’ health insurance plan and not recorded in the ASSD). The average
worker was employed 13 out of the last 15 years.
On average workers in our sample have accumulated 26 insurance years, which include
both contribution years (i.e., periods of employment, including sick leave) and non-contributory
periods of labor force participation (e.g., unemployment) over their working lives. The average
number of insurance years accumulated declined over the sample period, from 27.6 in 1987 to
25.1 in 2010. The average annual earnings in the year prior to observation is 33,364 Euros (in
2010 Euros), or $38,035 (1 Euro=$1.14), and increasing in real terms over the sample period. 11
Since wages in Austria are generally monotonically increasing over time, last year’s wage
generally exceeds average previous earnings calculated over the best 180 months of one’s career.
We calculated individuals’ hypothetical DI benefits if they were to claim disability in that year;
the average disability pension would be 17,845 Euros, or about 57 percent of the average wage
over the best 15 years. The inflow rate into DI from employment is 0.9 percent on average
throughout our sample period, starting at 1.35 percent in the mid-80s to mid-90s and declining
by more than 75 percent to 0.33 percent by the late-2000s. The inflow rate into DI from

11

Following Austrian pension system rules, we calculate monthly earnings in all months in which we observe
positive earnings and then take the average.

7

unemployment is considerably larger, 4.7 percent on average over the sample period, and
correlates positively with national unemployment levels.
To examine DI inflow rates among unemployed individuals, we constructed a second
sample of all involuntary UI spells occurring between 1987 and 2010. We identify involuntary
spells by limiting the sample to UI claims occurring within 28 days of the end date of the prior
employment spell since voluntary quitters must wait at least 28 days to start drawing UI benefits.
The last column of Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the UI sample. Compared to the
overall population, the average individual experiencing a UI spell in our sample period is much
more likely to be a blue collar worker (80.5%), much more likely to have drawn from sick leave
in the past two years (40.3%), and has on average two fewer years of work experience and three
and half fewer insurance years. His prior year’s earnings are about 30% lower than the average
over the entire population and his replacement rate (defined as the ratio of DI benefit to the
average wage over best 180 months) is about 5% lower. The DI inflow rate from unemployment
spells is 5.25 percent. 12

2.2. The Austrian Disability Insurance Program
Like the United States and other countries, the Austrian disability insurance (DI) program
is part of a larger Old Age, Survivors and Disability Insurance system that is financed by a
payroll tax on earned income and provides pension benefits to qualifying workers who have
accumulated enough labor market experience (insurance years). Generally, a disabled worker in
Austria must have accumulated at least 5 insurance years within the last 10 years to be eligible
for DI benefits; the insurance years requirement increases month for month after age 50 up to a

12

For the UI spell sample, we measure DI receipt from within one year of the UI spell end date.

8

maximum of 15 insurance years. 13 The insurance years requirement does not apply if the
disability is job-related; for each occupation there exists an explicit list of qualifying
impairments. To apply for benefits, individuals must submit an application to the local DI office.
Employees at the DI office first check whether applicants meet the insurance years criteria. In a
second stage, a team of disability examiners and physicians assesses the medical severity of the
disability and the applicant’s ability to work. Disability pensions are awarded to individuals
whose earnings capacity, due to a physical or mental health impairment, has been reduced to less
than half of the earnings capacity of a healthy person with comparable education in any
“reasonable” occupation the individual could be expected to hold. 14 The standard is relaxed at
age 57 by changing the comparison from a healthy worker performing any type of work in the
economy to a healthy worker in a similar occupation. 15
Unlike DI applicants in the U.S., DI applicants in Austria are not required to reduce their
earnings below a given threshold (or separate from their employers) in order to apply for
benefits. 16 Like many European countries, employed individuals may draw sickness benefits
from their employers—up to 52 weeks (assuming they have worked at least 6 months in the
previous 12 months before onset) —while applying for DI (Social Security Administration,
2012). In addition, individuals who are or become disabled while unemployed can apply for DI
benefits while continuing to receive unemployment insurance (UI) benefits. Applying for DI
13

Note the work history requirement in the U.S. is similar to that in Austria: 20 covered quarters (or 5 years) earned
in the last 10 years, with fewer credits required before age 31 and more required after age 42 up to a maximum of 40
quarters (or 10 years).
14
Practically, eligibility standards are less strict for white collar workers, whose set of reasonable occupations is
more limited.
15
Prior to 1997, the age at which disability screening is relaxed was 55 for both men and women (see Staubli, 2011).
In 1997 (2000), the age was raised to 57 for men (women). Practically, access to disability insurance in the U.S. is
also relaxed at older ages (50 and 55, depending on impairment severity) for workers with limited education and
skill level (see Chen and van der Klaauw, 2008).
16
However, it is the case that DI beneficiaries earning more than 380 Euros per month (approx. $484) would lose up
to 50 percent of their benefits, depending on their earnings. (In the U.S. DI beneficiaries earning more than approx.
$1,000 per month would lose their entire benefit.)

9

benefits while unemployed does not stop the clock on individuals’ maximum UI benefit
durations but it does suspend the requirement that individuals must actively search for work.
The acceptance rate for initial DI applications in 2010 was just over 40 percent according to
official statistics; about 60 percent of rejected applicants appeal, of whom 20 percent are
ultimately awarded benefits, implying an ultimate award rate of 47 percent. In our sample, the
ultimate allowance rate is slightly higher (55 percent) since we exclude younger workers below
age 35. We are not aware of any changes to DI screening policy over our time period with the
exception of a change in the age of relaxed screening discussed above. 17 Once receiving DI
benefits, very few claimants (fewer than 4 percent) ever leave the DI rolls because of medical
improvements and return to work.
The formula for computing DI benefits is the same one used to compute old age (Social
Security) pensions. 18 Generally it consists of a pension coefficient (PC), which varies by age and
insurance years, multiplied by an assessment basis (AB), which is average indexed capped
earnings over a given period of time (e.g., the last 120 months (10 years) in 1987 at the
beginning of our observation period). Younger DI beneficiaries with limited work experience are
eligible for a “special increment” to supplement their accumulated insurance years up to a certain
amount to compensate for their limited ability to establish long work histories. For example, in
1987, individuals younger than age 50 who had accumulated less than 26.3 insurance years could
add one additional “insurance year” for each year less than age 50 up to a maximum of 26.3 total
insurance years (i.e., up to a maximum pension coefficient of 50).

17

Unfortunately we cannot directly test this since any observed changes to award rates over time are partially due to
changes in the applicant pool induced by the reforms.
18
We include controls for old age pension levels in a robustness check.

10

The rules governing eligibility and calculation of benefits have been publicly available at
www.sozdok.at since 2001 and are also published (with examples) in a series of books (see
Marek (1987-2001; 2002-2005; 2006-2010) for the years covering our sample period).

2.3. Policy Reforms
To identify the effect of benefit levels on DI pension claiming, we exploit exogenous
variation in DI benefits between 1987 and 2010 stemming from a number of changes to the DI
benefit formula in 1988, 1993, 1996, 2000 and 2004. Starting in 1988, Austria enacted a series of
reforms designed to decrease pension levels and introduce bonuses (penalties) for delayed (early)
claiming. 19 However, not all reforms were detrimental to all potential DI recipients; as a result,
we observe both increases and decreases in DI pension levels during our sample period that are
independent of changes in work histories and preferences over time. The reforms were
immediately implemented (or in some cases phased in) without grandfathering any cohorts into
the previous regime. 20
Table 2 summarizes the rules used to compute DI pensions between 1987 and 2010. The
first two columns describe changes to the assessment basis (AB) and pension coefficient (PC)
formulas respectively and the third column describes other important changes such as the age of
relaxed screening for DI benefits or changes to the old age (OA) pension program, which could
affect DI participation for older individuals on the margin of claiming DI and waiting until
eligible for (early) retirement benefits. 21 We are not aware of any changes in screening policy
19

While initially the reforms aimed to encourage delayed retirement/claiming of old age pensions, they also affected
DI pensions since the programs were connected through the shared benefit formula. Later reforms broke apart this
relationship and added penalties specific to claiming DI pensions.
20
With the exception of the 1993 and 1996 reforms, which were implemented in July and September respectively,
the new DI benefit rules went into effect on January 1. Current beneficiaries were not affected by the reforms.
21
Disability benefits are subject to regular income taxes and over the course of our study period the income tax
system was changed in 1989, 1994, 2000, 2005, and 2009. These reforms generally lowered the income tax liability

11

around the time of the reforms other than a change in policy affecting older workers ages 55-57
occurring in 1997 (discussed below).
Figures 1A and 1B illustrate the effect of the reforms on the average AB and PC,
respectively, by age group and observation year for three different fixed cohorts of individuals
(those observed in 1990, 2000 and 2010). 22 For example, panel A tracks on the y-axis the AB
(PC) calculated under different pension rules (x-axis) for a fixed cohort of individuals observed
in 1990. The increase in AB across panels is due to real earnings growth over time. Figure 2
combines the effects of the reforms on the individual components of the pension formulas and
shows the distribution of year-to-year changes in the overall hypothetical DI pension
immediately following each reform for a fixed (1997) cohort. Below we discuss the main
features of each reform.
Initially, in 1987, an individual’s DI pension was based on an AB of the last 120 months
(10 years) of earnings and a PC increasing by 1.9 percentage points for each insurance year up to
30, and by 1.5 percentage points thereafter, up to a maximum PC of 80. A special increment was
added to IY for DI beneficiaries under age 50 with insufficient IY (see Section 2.2). 23 The 1988
reform gradually increased the length of the AB by 12 months each year between 1988 and 1992,
to the last 180 months (15 years) of earnings in 1992, while holding the pension coefficient
formula fixed. As Figure 1A shows, because earnings are generally monotonically increasing in
Austria, these changes had the effect of decreasing the average benefit level for all age groups
by cutting tax rates and increasing deductions. We estimate a version of the model using after-tax benefits to account
for these changes and find that it lowers the estimated elasticity (see Section 4).
22
Figures A3-A5 illustrate the PC formula as a function of insurance years (IY) for individuals aged 47, 55 and 59,
respectively, under the different pension regimes, including any penalties for early claiming applied in later years.
Since the changes to the PC under the 2000 and 2004 reforms were phased in, we illustrate the PC formulas in 2003
and 2010, at the end of each regime. Note the AB does not depend on age or IY but varies primarily by the number
of months over which earnings are averaged.
23
The solid line in Figure A3 illustrates the effect of the special increment on PC for an individual at age 47.
Individuals with fewer than 26.3 (=50/1.9) IY received three “bonus” IY in the calculation of their PC up to a
maximum PC of 50.

12

and cohorts. As can be seen in Figure 2, the 1988-1992 reform to the AB had a detrimental effect
on DI benefits for about 80 percent of potential claimants, a negligible effect for 10 percent of
potential claimants, and a slightly positive effect for the remaining potential claimants.
The 1993 reform, in contrast, made DI benefits more generous by increasing the age
before which the special increment applied, from 50 to 56, and at the same time increasing the
maximum supplemented PC from 50 to 60. 24 For many relatively younger individuals the
effective minimum PC set by the “special increment” rules was binding both before and after the
1993 change; as a result the reform increased DI pensions by 20 percent almost exactly for
almost one quarter of the sample (see Figure 2). Figure 1B illustrates the effect of the reforms on
the mean PC by age group and observation year. As can be seen in the figure, the 1993 reform
leads to a large increase in the PC for all age groups, with the largest increase coming from the
youngest individuals. The 1993 reform also affected the assessment basis by changing it from the
last 180 months of earnings to the best 180 months of earnings, which could only increase
benefit levels. As a result, no one was adversely affected by the 1993 reform (Figure 2).
The 1996 reform reduced the return to IY before 30 IY, from 1.9 percent to 1.83 percent,
and increased the return to IY thereafter, from 1.5 percent to 1.675 percent. Combined with the
introduction of a penalty for “early” claiming (before age 60) for those individuals with 33 to 40
IY (see Table 2), this had the effect of decreasing pensions for about 40 percent of potential
claimants (see Figure 2). 25 It did not affect pensions for those at the maximum PC under the
special increment rules or for older individuals with very high insurance years (see Figures A3A5). Notably, the 1996 reform also changed the age of relaxed screening for DI benefits from 55
24

For example, a 47-year old could now receive nine “bonus” IY (from three) up to a maximum PC of 60 (from 50)
(see Figure A3). A 55-year old could now receive one bonus IY up to a maximum PC of 60, increasing PCs for all
those with fewer than 32 (=(60-1.9*30)/1.5+30) IY (see Figure A4).
25
The reform reduced pensions by exactly 3.683 (=(1.9-1.83)/1.9) percent for a small group of potential claimants
with fewer than 30 insurance years who were not eligible for the special increment.

13

to 57 for men, which led to large reductions in DI claimants among older men independent of the
reform’s effect on benefit levels (Staubli, 2011).
The 2000 reform broke apart the connection between the DI and OA pension formulas,
introduced a plateau in the PC at 60 and further (gradually) reduced the return to IY before the
plateau and increased the return to IY after the plateau. (See Table 2, and Figures A4 and A5.)
Similar to the 1996 reform, this had the effect of decreasing DI benefits for any potential
claimants whose PC was not at the maximum PC under the special increment rules. The reform
also increased the early retirement age from 60 to 61.5 for men (Staubli and Zweimüller, 2013).
Finally, the 2004 reform reversed some of the changes of the 2000 reform. The reform
reunified the DI and old age pension formulas and linearized the (gradually decreasing) return to
IY (in line with the OA pension formula since 2000). It phased in a new age of special increment
from age 56 to age 60. However, at the same time it increased the penalty for early claiming and
raised the early retirement age from 61.5 to 62 for men. In addition, the reform gradually
increased the length of the AB from 180 months to 480 months by 2028, thereby decreasing the
generosity of benefits. As a result, the reform resulted in a large scale curtailment of benefits
(especially for old age pension claimants) which was met with intense public criticism.
Responding to the backlash, the Austrian government passed legislation in 2005 that reduced the
maximum penalty for early retirement from 15 percent to 5-6.5 percent of the projected pension
from the 2000 reform (with higher penalties phased in over time) and enlarged the group of
people who were not affected by the raise in the early retirement age. Thus, the effect of the
2004/05 reform was to increase pension levels for some (mostly workers with very low IY) and
decrease pension levels for almost everyone else (see Figure 2).

14

Figure 3 gives us a first look at how the reforms affected DI inflow rates (panel B) as DI
replacement rates (panel A) rose and fell over the same time period. While we see some evidence
that changes in DI inflows generally track changes in replacement rates the time series are
generally noisy and seem to indicate that other factors may have largely influenced overall
patterns in DI inflows over time. In the next section we discuss our strategy to isolate changes in
DI inflows stemming from changes in benefit levels due to the policy reforms vs. changes in
other factors that may have influenced DI receipt over time.

3. Empirical Strategy
To estimate the elasticity of labor force withdrawal with respect to benefit generosity, we
are interested in estimating regressions of the form:
yit= X it b + γ bt ( Z it ) + φt + ε it ,

(1)

where yit is a labor supply outcome such as DI claiming for individual i observed at time t who
has not already claimed DI benefits, X it is a vector of demographic and labor market
characteristics (e.g., socioeconomic status, experience, earnings in the previous year), bt ( Z it ) are
(lagged) log potential DI benefits which are a function (potentially varying with t) of a subset of
labor market characteristics Z it ∈ X it (e.g., age, insurance years, and assessment basis), φt are
year fixed effects, and ε it are any unobserved factors affecting DI claiming such as tastes for
work. The parameter of interest is γ , the effect of log DI benefits on DI claiming, which, when
scaled by the DI inflow rate, directly gives the claiming elasticity.
A problem may arise if the benefit formula b does not vary across individuals. In this
case, if b is a linear function of Z it then, even if all of the components of Z it are orthogonal to

15

unobserved tastes ε it , we cannot separately identify the effect of the benefit level from the
effects of the individual components of Z it . For example, if benefits are a linear function of past
wages, then benefits are perfectly collinear with past wages and we cannot independently vary
them; thus we cannot identify γ .
If, on the other hand, b is a non-linear function of Z it and E[ε it | Z it ] = 0 then we can
independently vary b and Z it and identify both γ and β . Even if E[ε it | Z it ] = kZ it (where Z it
may contain polynomials or other transformations of one or more of its elements) we can
identify γ , if not β , in the case of a single benefit formula that applies to all individuals. In this
case, Z it serves as a control function such that, conditional on Z it , b is orthogonal to ε it and the
estimated coefficient on b obtained by OLS regression of equation (1) is unbiased as long as the
components of Z it are correctly specified. The problem with this identification strategy is that it
relies heavily on functional form. For example, if benefits are a nonlinear function of past wages
where the replacement rate falls as wage rises (as is the case in most countries), a problem could
arise if preferences for work also vary with earnings history in a concave fashion that cannot be
captured by a polynomial function or other transformation of earnings that could serve as a
control function. 26
A way around this impasse occurs if another policy regime (i.e., different benefit
formula) were observed. Then observing individuals’ behavior under the different policy regimes
would enable one to break apart even a nonlinear relationship between benefits and unobserved
factors. Intuitively, one can use the second policy regime to implement a “difference in

26

This approach is identified based on residual variation in benefit levels after netting out the effect of
2

Z it on b. In

our case regressing benefits on age, insurance years and assessment basis produces an R of 0.903. If the R2 is too
high, and hence the residual variation too low, then this will inflate the standard error of the coefficient on log
benefits in equation (1).

16

differences” (DID) type estimation strategy, where identification is obtained by relating
individuals’ differential responses to the reform to their differential exposure in terms of change
in benefits. To do this, we implement a control function approach that calculates hypothetical
benefits under each policy regime for each individual and includes them as controls in the
regression:
R

yit= X it b + γ bt ( Z it ) + ∑ κ r br ( Z it ) + φt + υit ,

(2)

r =2

where br ( Z it ) represents hypothetical benefits under policy regime r=2,…,R, where R is the total
number of policy regimes observed. Conditioning on the hypothetical benefit variables ensures
the actual benefit is uncorrelated with unobservable factors and an OLS regression of equation
(2) gives an unbiased estimate of the effect of DI benefit levels on labor force withdrawal. This
approach has been used by Nielsen et al. (2010) to study the response of college enrollment to
changes in student aid arising from a Danish reform and by Fevang et al. (forthcoming) to study
the effect of temporary disability insurance (TDI) benefits on the duration and outcome of TDI
spells using policy variation in Norway.
A simple example illustrates the intuition of our approach. 27 Let Z it be a scalar binary
variable that takes on one of two values, Z LOW or Z HIGH . Then benefits under policy regime r
take on two values, brLOW and brHIGH corresponding to the respective values of Z it . Assume that
there are two policy regimes r=1,2. Then, suppressing conditioning on X,

27

E[ yi1 | Z=
γ b1d + κ b2d , and
d]

(3)

E[ yi 2 | Z d ] =
(γ + κ ) b2d + φ ,

(4)

This example was inspired by Nielsen et al. (2010).

17

where d=LOW,HIGH. Then the difference between pre- and post-reform outcomes for an
individual with Z it = Z d is:
E[ yi1 | Z d ] − E[ yi 2 | Z d ]= γ ( b1d − b2d ) − φ .

(5)

Subtracting this difference for d=HIGH vs. d=LOW and rearranging yields the following:

γ=

[ E[ yi1 | Z HIGH ] − E[ yi 2 | Z HIGH ]] − [ E[ yi1 | Z LOW ] − E[ yi 2 | Z LOW ]]

(b

HIGH
1

− b2HIGH ) − ( b1LOW − b2LOW )

.

(6)

Thus, γ is identified by the ratio of the average difference in differences of the outcome y to the
difference in differences of the benefit b. In a regular DID framework in which a treatment group
is compared to a control group, the difference in benefits for the control group (say those with
Z = Z LOW ) would be zero and (6) gives the DID estimate scaled by the “first stage” estimate of
the effect of the reform on benefit levels for the treatment group. In the example above, even
though both groups are treated by the reform, the fact that they are treated differentially allows us
to identify γ . In the case of the disability insurance reforms observed in this paper, every cluster
of individuals with a unique set of characteristics Z it that affect disability benefits (i.e., age,
insurance years and average prior earnings) serves as a comparison group, so our estimate is
based on approximately 2,334 differential responses to potential benefits under six different
policy regimes with 19 different benefit formulas (due to the phased-in nature of many of the
reforms). 28
To test the appropriateness of our identification strategy, we estimate a series of placebo
regressions in which we randomly assign individuals’ potential benefits from a different year,
with and without hypothetical benefits in the control variables. If conditioning on hypothetical
DI benefits indeed isolates the policy-induced variation in DI benefits, then we expect the
28

We cluster observations by the individual’s age in years, number of insurance years (twenty-three two-year
categories) and assessment basis (five quintiles).

18

coefficient on randomized benefits in this regression to be insignificant and close to zero when
hypothetical benefits are included as controls but not necessarily otherwise. Table A1 presents
the results of these placebo regressions. The first column presents estimates with base controls,
which include age dummies, two-year insurance year group dummies and assessment basis. This
is equivalent to estimating a placebo version of equation (1) with X it = Z it , so that all control
variables are variables that affect the DI benefit level directly. The second column presents
estimates with saturated controls, that is, including in addition to the base controls a number of
variables capturing job tenure, prior sick leave, maximum UI benefit duration, industry, region
(of the firm), blue collar status, Austrian national status and 4th order polynomials in last year’s
wage and average wage in the best 180 months ( Z it ∈ X it ). The last column presents estimates
adding controls for hypothetical benefits. We find a positive and statistically significant effect of
random DI benefits on DI claiming in the models without controls for hypothetical benefits;
however, once we control for hypothetical benefits, we estimate a very small, precise and
statistically insignificant effect of random DI benefits on DI claiming.
An implicit assumption of our preferred methodology is that individuals with the same
Z it , and hence the same potential benefits, at different points in time are comparable to one
another. That is, we assume someone with the same age, insurance years and average past
earnings has the same unobservable factors affecting DI claiming (e.g., preferences for work) in
1987 as they do in 2010. There is reason to be skeptical of this assumption. For example, earlier
we noted that real earnings increased and insurance years decreased over our 23-year time period
(see Table 1). These changes could be driven by changes in another factor (e.g., education) that
also affects unobservable tastes or they could reflect changes in unobservable tastes over time.
Furthermore, as Figure A6 (Panel A) illustrates, the distribution of potential benefits calculated
19

under any given year’s rules (1997 in the figure) is observed to shift upward with each later
cohort, so that an individual in the 1990s who is in the upper tail of the potential benefits
distribution would find himself compared to an individual in the 2000s who is closer to the
middle of the same base year’s potential benefits distribution.
One way to indirectly test the plausibility of this assumption is to see whether there are
changes in observable characteristics over time conditional on potential benefits in a given base
year (1997). To do this we ran a series of regressions of various observable characteristics (years
of tenure, number of sick days in the last two years, etc.) on indicators for quartile of 1997
benefits, year dummies and the interaction of benefit quartile and year dummies. Figure 4 plots
the estimated coefficients on the interaction terms with 95 percent confidence intervals. As can
be seen in the figure, the interaction terms are all closely centered around zero; that is, consistent
with our identifying assumption, observable characteristics tend to evolve in parallel over time
conditional on potential benefits.

4. Results
We apply each approach discussed above in turn to estimate the effect of DI benefit
generosity on DI claiming (i.e., separate regressions by year, and pooled regression without and
with hypothetical benefits as controls). Since we analyze decisions over the course of a calendar
year, yet two of the changes (1993 and 1996) were implemented at a point other than January 1,
we measure benefits as the weighted average of benefits over the year in those cases. (For
example, since the 1996 reform was implemented in September, we calculate benefits in 1996 as
two-thirds of the 1995 benefit plus one-third of the 1996 benefit.) Similarly, we include a
variable indicating eligibility for relaxed screening that weights eligibility over the year (e.g., an
individual who turns 57 in September is eligible for relaxed screening one-third of the year).
20

Finally, we assume a one-year lag to learn the new DI benefit level after a policy reform. We
also estimate the model using current-year benefits as a robustness check. To account for crosssectional correlation within groups and serial correlation across time, we cluster standard errors
by cells according to an individual’s age in years, number of insurance years (twenty-three twoyear categories), and assessment basis (five quintiles) because these three variables determine the
policy-induced variation in benefits. 29 The total number of clusters is 2,334.

4.1. The Effect of Disability Insurance Benefit Generosity on Claiming
In this section we present estimates of the effect of disability insurance (DI) benefit levels
on DI pension receipt in Austria. First, we estimate separate regressions of equation (1) for each
year 1987-2010. Next, we pool individuals from all years to estimate the same regression with
and without hypothetical benefits calculated under each of the policy regimes as a control
function. We estimate several robustness checks to examine the sensitivity of our estimates to
different samples and specifications. In the next section, we examine heterogeneity in the
estimated claiming elasticities for different observable characteristics such as age, blue vs. white
collar status, lifetime earnings and employment status. Finally, we present estimates of the effect
of DI benefit levels on applications and awards for 2004-2010, the years in which we observe
application records.
Table 3 presents cross sectional estimates separately for each year between 1987 and
2010. The first set of estimates presents models with base controls ( X it = Z it ) and the second set
of estimates presents models with saturated controls ( Z it ∈ X it ), defined above. As Table 3
shows, the estimated effects of benefit levels on DI claiming in Austria are generally between
29

We experimented with different levels of clustering including clustering on individual, Z*year and year alone. We
find that statistical inference is not sensitive to the level of clustering.

21

0.01 and 0.03, implying that a one percent increase in benefits is associated with a 0.01-0.03
percentage point increase in DI inflow. The estimates are not very sensitive to whether the base
or saturated controls are included; sometimes the estimates are smaller with saturated controls,
sometimes larger. Since DI inflow rates are on average 0.016 over this time period, the estimates
imply a claiming elasticity with respect to DI benefit generosity in the range of 0.6 to 2.
Table 4 presents estimates of the DI benefit elasticity pooling individuals over the entire
sample period. Columns 1 and 2 present pooled versions of the models presented in Table 3,
respectively, and column 3 presents estimates adding hypothetical benefits calculated under each
of the policy regimes in order to control flexibly for nonlinear variation in unobservable tastes
for work that may also vary across cohorts. As expected, the estimates without the hypothetical
benefits center around 0.02, roughly the center of the year-by-year estimates. Including
hypothetical benefits to the pooled model does not change the estimate substantially. In this case
we fail to reject the hypothesis that the coefficients on the hypothetical benefits are jointly zero
(p=0.141). Scaling the estimated coefficient on log benefits by the DI inflow rate, we estimate an
elasticity of DI claiming with respect to benefit generosity of 1.2. (See Table 4 for the implied
elasticity and standard error, estimated via delta method.) That is, we estimate for every one
percent increase in DI benefit levels, an additional 1.2 percent of labor force participants will
withdraw from the labor market and become a DI beneficiary.
Table 5 presents several robustness checks to examine the sensitivity of our estimates to
different subsamples and specifications. First, we add into our sample those individuals ages 6064 (below the full retirement age) who are not eligible for early retirement because they lack
sufficient insurance years. Including these individuals does not have a significant impact on the
estimated elasticity. Even if we exclude those who may qualify for old age retirement benefits, it

22

may be the case that forward-looking individuals are influenced by changes in the old age
pension system coinciding with the DI reforms. Therefore we estimate a version of the model
where we include one’s potential old age pension in the controls. As can be seen in Table 5, this
also has a negligible impact on the estimated elasticity.
As discussed in Section 2, the insurance years restriction on DI benefits does not apply if
the disability is job-related. In our baseline specification, we included all labor market
participants under age 60, but we also estimate a version of the model where we exclude those
with insufficient insurance years to qualify for DI benefits for non-job-related impairments. We
estimate a larger labor supply elasticity with respect to DI benefits close to 2 for this restricted
group, which is likely because individuals who qualify based on job-related disabilities have a
job by construction and are therefore more likely to be able to retain their attachment to the labor
force and use discretion when applying for DI benefits.
Also as discussed in Section 2, DI benefits are taxed and there were several changes to
the tax system during our time period, some of which coincide with the DI reforms. We
estimated a version of the model using after-tax benefits and found a smaller elasticity of one.
This may be due to potential DI claimants having a harder time calculating after-tax vs. pre-tax
benefit levels. The lower after-tax elasticity also likely reflects attenuation bias due to
measurement error in post-tax benefits since we estimate individuals’ tax liabilities using their
earned income vs. total income which contains several income categories (most notably capital
and rental income) that we do not observe. We also estimated a version of the model on current
log benefits instead of lagged benefits and again found a smaller response to changes in current
benefits, which likely reflects a lag in learning the details of the reforms. Note in these last two
cases including the control function of hypothetical benefits to isolate the policy-induced (and

23

therefore exogenous) variation in benefits is vital to estimating an unbiased elasticity of claiming
with respect to benefits; the hypothetical benefit control variables are jointly statistically
significant (p<0.05).
We explore the sensitivity of our estimates to model specification by estimating a discrete
time Cox proportional hazard model using logistic regression. An advantage of the proportional
hazard specification is that the coefficient on log benefits gives the elasticity directly. When we
estimate the model using a proportional hazard specification, we estimate an elasticity of 1.4,
slightly higher than our baseline estimate of 1.2 but not statistically different.
Finally, as discussed in Section 3, we explore the sensitivity of our estimates to the
identifying assumption that individuals with the same age, insurance years and average past
earnings are comparable to one another over time. First, we reweight the sample to hold the
distribution of age, insurance years and earnings fixed at their 1997 levels throughout the 19872010 time period and re-estimate the model on the reweighted sample. Reweighting the sample
has little impact on the estimated elasticity (1.20 vs. 1.23). Next, we control for percentileranked hypothetical benefits instead of actual hypothetical benefits in the control function (see
Figure A6). In this specification we are leveraging changes in DI claiming behavior across
individuals in the same quantile of the benefits distribution over time. For example, we compare
someone in the 1990s in the 90th percentile of the potential benefits distribution with all other
individuals in the same percentile of the potential benefits distribution in any given year. The
estimated elasticity is slightly higher, 1.35; note that the percentile-ranked hypothetical benefits
are jointly highly statistically significant (p<0.001).

24

4.2. Heterogeneity in the Effect of DI Benefit Generosity on Claiming
To examine heterogeneity in claiming responses, Table 6 presents estimates of our
preferred specification (with hypothetical DI benefits as controls) separately by different groups.
Some interesting patterns emerge. Most notably, despite the fact that DI inflow rates increase
sharply with age, especially at ages 50 and 55, the elasticity of DI claiming with respect to
benefit generosity is actually highest for prime-age workers (ages 45-49). (The estimated effects
for younger workers are small and imprecise.) This contradicts conventional wisdom that older
individuals tend to use the DI system as an alternative pathway to early retirement whereas
prime-age individuals are unlikely to exit the labor force unless they are facing very serious
health conditions. We also find that white collar workers are more sensitive to changes in DI
benefit levels than blue collar workers and richer individuals (in terms of lifetime earnings) are
more sensitive than poorer individuals; in both cases the former group is likely to have more
labor market opportunities than the latter group. Moreover, eligibility criteria for white collar
workers in Austria are generally less strict than that for blue collar workers (see Section 2.2).
Next we divide individuals into quartiles based on (1997) potential benefits and
regressing DI inflow on DI benefits within each quartile. We find that the estimated elasticity is
increasing in the benefit level, more than five-fold between the bottom and top quartiles of DI
benefits, from 0.35 to 2.0. 30 This suggests that DI benefits may be higher than optimal for those
who receive higher benefits.
Finally, the estimated elasticity for DI claiming is three times higher for individuals
currently experiencing an involuntary unemployment spell compared with the overall labor force
(largely made up of employed workers). We find that a one percent increase in DI benefits leads
to a nearly 0.2 percentage point increase in DI claiming among this group. Since 5.25 percent of
30

The average DI benefits in each quartile are: 1) 10,217; 2) 15,502; 3) 19,718; and 4) 25,944.

25

UI spells transition to DI, this amounts to a nearly 3.8 percent increase in DI inflow rates from
UI. Thus, laid off workers are much more influenced by financial incentives than employed
workers when making decisions about withdrawing from remaining in the labor force, although
this may be specific to Austria’s institutional environment which allows unemployed workers to
simultaneously search for work and seek disability benefits.

4.3. The Effect of DI Benefit Generosity on Applications and Awards
Finally, we investigate the role of the application screening process by examining the
effect of DI benefits on applications, compared with DI inflow, for the years in which we are
able to match application records, 2004-2010. Although the elasticity of DI claiming with respect
to benefits is important for fiscal solvency, the elasticity of DI applications with respect to
benefits is presumably a better measure of the level of moral hazard occurring in the DI system.
The ratio of the two elasticities is also informative about the effectiveness of the application
screening process, since an effective screening process should be more likely to reject applicants
induced by an increase in DI benefits, who are on the margin of applying for DI and continuing
to remain in the labor force.
Table 7 presents the results of these analyses. The first column presents estimates of the
effect of log lagged DI benefits on DI applications and the second column presents estimates of
the effect of log lagged DI benefit on DI inflow (=awards) restricted to the years 2004-2010
using our preferred specification controlling for potential DI benefits in all years. Note that we
estimate a lower claiming elasticity, 0.7, over this time period compared with the entire 19872010 sample period. 31 This is likely because the 2004-2010 period experienced the lowest

31

This estimate is much lower than the average implied elasticity from Table 3 because it includes potential benefits
as controls, which are highly statistically significant (p<0.001) in the 2004-2010 period.

26

replacement rates observed over our sample period. We also observe a slightly lower percentage
of potential claimants, 1.2 percent, receiving DI benefits in any given year in the 2004-2010
period compared with the overall sample period.
In 2004-2010 2.35 percent of potential claimants applied for benefits in any given year
and 1.2 percent were awarded benefits, implying an award rate of 51 percent (= 1.2/1.25) for the
average applicant. We find that DI benefit levels have a strong influence on the probability of
filing a DI application. A one percent increase in DI benefits increases the application rate by
0.032 percentage points, or 1.4 percent. This implies that the award rate for the marginal
applicant, induced to apply for DI benefits by a 1 percent increase in the benefit level, is 26
percent (=0.0085/0.032)—approximately half the award rate for the average applicant in this
time period.

5. Discussion and Conclusion
While disability insurance (DI) programs are generally intended to insure against the risk
of acquiring a career-ending health impairment, often individuals who would qualify for DI
choose to work, at least for a time, instead. Understanding what drives these decisions is
important for designing effective reforms, which are necessary to guarantee the financial stability
of public pension systems. If individuals are relatively elastic in their labor supply responses to
DI benefit levels, then cutting DI benefits will induce many potential DI entrants to remain in the
labor force and significantly decrease program participation. On the other hand, if individuals are
relatively inelastic, then cutting DI benefits is only likely to harm disabled workers who would
not otherwise choose to work or try to find work after the onset of a disabling health condition.

27

Using detailed administrative data and policy variation in DI benefits stemming from a
series of national pension reforms in Austria between 1987 and 2010, we find convincing
evidence that the labor supply of Austrian workers is responsive to DI benefit levels. We find
that the DI claiming rate increased by 1.2 percent per 1 percent increase in DI benefits over the
entire sample period, and by 0.7 percent per 1 percent increase in DI benefits between 2004 and
2010, when average replacement rates were at their lowest. Our findings are fairly robust to
sample selection and model specification. Because Austrian DI applicants are not required to quit
their jobs or refrain from receiving unemployment insurance benefits during the disability
determination period (unlike in some other systems, e.g., the U.S.), in this setting the elasticity of
DI claiming with respect to DI benefit generosity is equivalent to the elasticity of labor force
withdrawal. 32
The elasticity of DI claiming with respect to benefit generosity is highest for prime-age
workers (ages 45-49) and increases with skill level and prior earnings, consistent with the idea
that very young or very old, low skilled and poorer workers tend to have fewer labor market
opportunities and thus less discretion in whether to apply for DI benefits vs. continuing to work.
We also find that (involuntarily) unemployed individuals are extremely responsive to benefit
levels.
Note that the application screening process—particularly at the appeals level—dampens
but does not eliminate the responsiveness of DI claiming to benefit levels. We find the elasticity
of DI applications with respect to benefit generosity is more than twice as high as the elasticity
of DI claiming in 2004-2010. This implies the marginal applicant induced to apply for DI
benefits due to a 1 percent increase in benefit levels is half as likely to be allowed as the average
32

In the U.S., where withdrawing from the labor market to apply for DI benefits can adversely affect subsequent
reemployment, the effect of DI benefits on labor force withdrawal is likely larger than the effect of benefits on DI
claiming (see, e.g., Autor et al., 2015).

28

applicant. Thus, it is important to account for a lower allowance rate among marginal applicants
when linking estimates of the elasticity of DI applications to changes in the number of DI
beneficiaries.
One caveat in interpreting our estimates as applicable to other settings is that under
Austria’s rules DI applicants do not have to withdraw from the labor market in order to apply for
benefits but only do so if they are awarded benefits. It is not clear how this difference would
affect the magnitude of the elasticity, since on the one hand the lower cost of application may
encourage more individuals to try their luck but on the other hand rejected applicants do not face
significant barriers to work since they do not have to re-enter the labor market after a potentially
lengthy absence. Additionally, Austria’s universal health insurance system and strong public
safety net may also encourage applications to a greater extent than in other countries such as the
U.S. (although recent changes in the availability of health insurance outside the employment
relationship and DI participation in the U.S. as a result of the Affordable Care Act may make the
two countries more comparable in recent years).

29

References
Autor, David, and Mark Duggan (2003). “The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline in
Unemployment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1), pp. 157-206.
Autor, David, Nicole Maestas, Kathleen J. Mullen and Alexander Strand (2015). “Does Delay
Cause Decay? The Effect of Administrative Decision Time on the Labor Force Participation
and Earnings of Disability Applicants.” NBER Working Paper 20840.
Berkovec, James and Steven Stern (1991): Job Exit Behavior of Older Men, Econometrica, Vol.
59, No. 1, pp. 189-210.
Bound, J. and Burkhauser R. (1999). “Economic analysis of transfer programs targeted on people
with disabilities.” Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3, ch. 51.
Bound, J., J. Cullen, A. Nichols and L. Schmidt (2004). “The welfare implications of increasing
disability insurance generosity.” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 88, pp. 2487-2514.
Blau, David M. (1994): Labor Force Dynamics of Older Men, Econometrica, Vol. 62, No. 1, pp.
117-156.
Burtless, Gary (1986): Social Security, Unanticipated Benefit Increases, and the Timing of
Retirement, The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 53, No. 5, pp. 781-805.
Campioleti, M. (2004) “Disability Insurance Benefits and Labor Supply: Some Additional
Evidence.” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 22, No. 4 (October 2004), pp. 863-889
Chen, Susan and Wilbert van der Klaauw (2007): The Work Disincentive Effects of the
Disability Insurance Program in the 1990s, Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 142, No. 2, pp.
757-784.
Fevang, E., I. Hardoy and K. Roed (forthcoming). “Temporary Disability and Economic
Incentives” Economic Journal, forthcoming.
French, Eric (2005): The Effects of Health, Wealth, and Wages on Labour Supply and
Retirement Behaviour, Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 72, pp. 395-427.
Gruber, Jonathan. 2000. “Disability insurance benefits and labor supply.” Journal of Political
Economy 108, no. 6:1162–83.
Gruber, Jonathan and David A. Wise (2004): Social Security Programs and Retirement Around
the World: Micro Estimation, University of Chicago Press.
Gustman, Alan L. and Thomas L. Steinmeier (1986): A Structural Model of Retirement,
Econometrica, Vol. 54, No. 3, pp. 555-584.
Kreider, B. (1999). “Social Security Disability Insurance: Applications, awards and lifetime
income flows.” Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 17, No. 4, pp. 784-827.
30

Marek, E. (1987-2001). Pensionsberechnung Leicht Gemacht. Weiss Verlag.
Marek, E. (2002-2005). ASVG-Pensionen ab dem Jahr. Weiss Verlag.
Marek, E. (2006-2010). Die Pensionen ab dem Jahr. Weiss Verlag.
Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen J. Mullen and Alexander Strand (2013). “Does Disability Insurance
Receipt Discourage Work? Using Examiner Assignment to Estimate Causal Effects of SSDI
Receipt.” American Economic Review, 103(5), pp. 1797-1829.
Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen J. Mullen and Alexander Strand (2015). “Disability Insurance and the
Great Recession.” American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings, 105(5), pp. 177-182.
Nielsen, Helena Skyt, Torben Sorensen and Christopher Taber (2010). “Estimating the Effect of
Student Aid on College Enrollment: Evidence from a Government Grant Policy Reform.”
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 2, pp. 185-215.
OECD (2005). Ageing and Employment Policies: Austria. ISBN-92-64-01008-4
Phelan, Christopher and John Rust (1997): How Social Security and Medicare Affect Retirement
Behavior In a World of Incomplete Markets, Econometrica, Vol. 65, No. 4, pp. 781-831.
Social Security Administration (2012). Social Security Programs Throughout the World:
Europe, 2012. Downloaded on 11/25/13 from
http://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/progdesc/ssptw/2012-2013/europe/index.html.
Staubli, Stefan (2011). “The Impact of Stricter Criteria for Disability Insurance on Labor Force
Participation.” Journal of Public Economics, 95 (9-10), 1223–1235, 2011.
Staubli, Stefan and Josef Zweimüller (2013). “Does Raising the Early Retirement Age Increase
Employment of Older Workers?” Journal of Public Economics, 108, 17–32, 2013.
Stock, John and David Wise (1990): Pensions, the Option Value of Work, and Retirement,
Econometrica, Vol. 58, No. 5, pp. 1151-1180.
Zweimüller, Josef, Rudolf Winter-Ebmer, Rafael Lalive, Andreas Kuhn, Jean-Phillippe
Wuellrich, Oliver Ruf and Simon Büchi (2009). “Austrian Social Security Database.”
Manuscript available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=1399350.

31

Table 1. Summary Statistics, Men Ages 35-59
All
1987-1992
1993-1996
1997-1999
Age
45.3
45.8
45.5
45.3
% unemployed
10.3
9.5
11.7
12.0
% blue collar
53.9
56.1
54.5
53.6
% positive sick leave days last 2 years
13.3
12.7
14.3
13.9
Sick leave days past 2 years (if > 0)
51.3
47.3
53.1
56.7
Experience last 15 years
13.1
13.5
13.0
12.9
Insurance years
26.0
27.6
26.5
26.1
Last wage
33,364
30,310
31,516
32,505
Avg. wage best 15 years
30,799
27,769
29,370
30,370
Disability benefits
17,845
16,015
17,866
18,235
Replacement rate
0.57
0.57
0.60
0.59
DI infow from employment (in %)
0.90
1.35
1.35
1.06
DI inflow from unemployment (in %)
4.68
3.69
5.21
4.82
No. of observations
16,199,158
3,507,613
2,550,646
2,026,008
No. of individuals
1,548,093
762,470
758,828
764,959
Note: All monetary amounts are in 2010 Euros.

2000-2003
44.9
10.3
53.6
12.7
62.2
12.9
25.3
33,741
31,277
18,504
0.58
0.84
5.26
2,806,316
845,650

2004-2010
45.1
9.5
52.4
13.2
45.2
13.1
25.1
36,398
33,398
18,547
0.55
0.33
4.63
5,308,575
990,452

UI Spells
45
n/a
80.5
40.3
57.6
10.9
22.6
23,322
25,919
14,202
0.54
n/a
5.25
1,226,228
589,855

Table 2. Summary of Austrian Disability Pension Regimes
Regime
Assessment Basis
Pension Coefficient (%)
Other
Baseline PC:
1.9*min(IY,30)
Relaxed screening at age 55
+1.5*max(IY-30,0) up to
Prior to
maximum PC of 80
Last 120 months of earnings
1988
"Special increment":
If PC<50 and AGE<50, then ERA: 60/55 for men/women
FRA: 65/60 for men/women
add (50-AGE) to IY up to
maximum PC of 50
1988Phased in change to last 180
No change
1992
months of earnings
Changed special increment:
Changed from last 180
Introduced bonus for claiming
1993If PC<60 and AGE<56, then
months to best 180 months of
DI/OA pension after ERA:
1996
add (56-AGE) to IY up to
earnings
~2.1 % per year
maximum PC of 60
Changed baseline PC:
1.83*min(IY,30)
+1.675*max(IY-30,0) up to
1997Changed age of relaxed
No change
maximum PC of 80
1999
screening to 57 for men
Introduced penalty (bonus) if
claim before (after) ERA
Changed age of relaxed
Phased in new baseline PC:
screening to 57 for women
min(60,1.8-.02*(YR2000Split DI and OA formulas
No change
2000)*min(IY,35))+
2003
2*max(IY-35,0) up to
Phased in increase in ERA to
maximum of 80
61.5/56.5 for men/women
Starting in 2005 phased in
new baseline PC:
Returned to same formula for
max(1.96-.04*(YROA and DI pensions in 2005
2004),1.78)*IY
Phased in change to best 480 Phased in new age of special
2004months of earnings
increment to 60
2010
(-2028)
Increased penalty for early
Phased in increase in ERA to
claiming; backlash limited
62/60 for men/women (-2017)
loss to 5-6.5% of projected
2004 pension under prior
regime
Notes: PC="pension coefficient," IY="insurance years," ERA="early retirement age," FRA="full
retirement age," DI="disability insurance," OA="old age."

Table 3. Cross-Sectional Regressions by Year, Men, 1987-2010
Base controls
Saturated controls
No.
DI inflow Coeff. on log
Coeff. on log
rate
benefits Std. error
ben.
Year
No. obs. clusters
R2
Std. error
R2
2,242
1987
575,268
0.0218
0.0231*** (0.0022) 0.057
0.0153*** (0.0021) 0.076
2,238
1988
573,481
0.0179
0.0186*** (0.0020) 0.046
0.0138*** (0.0019) 0.064
2,239
1989
573,739
0.0171
0.0205*** (0.0019) 0.045
0.0147*** (0.0018) 0.065
2,249
0.0174
0.0186*** (0.0020) 0.048
0.0113*** (0.0019) 0.070
1990
581,386
2,246
1991
595,221
0.0166
0.0160*** (0.0015) 0.046
0.0098*** (0.0013) 0.069
2,249
1992
608,518
0.0175
0.0182*** (0.0015) 0.052
0.0108*** (0.0013) 0.073
2,239
1993
621,477
0.0182
0.0188*** (0.0016) 0.052
0.0119*** (0.0014) 0.074
2,239
1994
632,256
0.0196
0.0242*** (0.0019) 0.058
0.0155*** (0.0015) 0.083
2,221
1995
643,841
0.0232
0.0290*** (0.0024) 0.067
0.0177*** (0.0019) 0.093
2,228
1996
653,072
0.0227
0.0395*** (0.0027) 0.068
0.0261*** (0.0022) 0.092
2,214
0.0158
0.0330*** (0.0022) 0.045
0.0238*** (0.0021) 0.064
1997
661,705
2,220
1998
677,644
0.0178
0.0383*** (0.0030) 0.055
0.0286*** (0.0027) 0.079
2,204
1999
686,659
0.0198
0.0484*** (0.0039) 0.075
0.0370*** (0.0035) 0.102
2,208
2000
692,726
0.0221
0.0591*** (0.0042) 0.088
0.0471*** (0.0038) 0.118
2,194
2001
695,774
0.0125
0.0252*** (0.0020) 0.032
0.0198*** (0.0019) 0.056
2,200
2002
704,258
0.0131
0.0288*** (0.0023) 0.036
0.0230*** (0.0023) 0.064
2,197
2003
713,558
0.0158
0.0385*** (0.0029) 0.050
0.0334*** (0.0030) 0.084
2,200
2004
717,333
0.0125
0.0311*** (0.0025) 0.042
0.0295*** (0.0025) 0.070
2,192
2005
733,995
0.0122
0.0251*** (0.0023) 0.038
0.0235*** (0.0023) 0.078
2,193
2006
749,393
0.0125
0.0246*** (0.0027) 0.038
0.0267*** (0.0027) 0.079
2,191
2007
761,833
0.0118
0.0230*** (0.0026) 0.036
0.0283*** (0.0026) 0.076
2,182
2008
775,437
0.0116
0.0251*** (0.0028) 0.034
0.0335*** (0.0030) 0.073
2,160
2009
782,355
0.0116
0.0234*** (0.0029) 0.032
0.0314*** (0.0034) 0.069
2010
788,229
0.0113
0.0189*** (0.0028) 0.030
0.0255*** (0.0033) 0.065
2,151
Note: Base controls include age dummies, 2-year insurance year group dummies and assessment basis.
Saturated controls include base controls plus dummies for tenure (in 2-year groups), any sick leave, more than 5
days of sick leave or more than 20 days of sick leave in last two years, UI benefit duration, industry, region (of
firm), blue collar status and Austrian national status, and 4th order polynomials in last year's wage and average
wage best 15 years. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by cells according to an individual’s age in
years, number of insurance years, and assessment basis, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Table 4. Pooled Regressions, 1987-2010
Saturated
Base controls
controls
Log benefit
0.0309***
0.0235***
(0.0020)
(0.0014)
Hypothetical log benefit 1987

Full model

0.0197***
(0.0023)
0.0545***
(0.0046)
Hypothetical log benefit 1988
-0.0432***
(0.0075)
Hypothetical log benefit 1989
0.0041
(0.0090)
Hypothetical log benefit 1990
-0.004
(0.0094)
Hypothetical log benefit 1991
0.0652***
(0.0124)
Hypothetical log benefit 1992
-0.0884***
(0.0097)
Hypothetical log benefit 1993-1996
-0.0064
(0.0171)
Hypothetical log benefit 1997-1999
0.428***
(0.109)
Hypothetical log benefit 2000
-0.434***
(0.107)
Hypothetical log benefit 2001
-0.348**
(0.143)
Hypothetical log benefit 2002
0.342
(0.223)
Hypothetical log benefit 2003
-0.0367
(0.121)
Hypothetical log benefit 2004
0.120***
(0.0372)
Hypothetical log benefit 2005
-0.0437
(0.0362)
Hypothetical log benefit 2006
0.0242
(0.0288)
Hypothetical log benefit 2007
-0.0729***
(0.0170)
Hypothetical log benefit 2008
0.0690*
(0.0416)
Hypothetical log benefit 2009
-0.104
(0.0645)
Hypothetical log benefit 2010
0.0810**
(0.0366)
F-test
2.167
Prob > F
0.141
Observations
16,199,158 16,199,158 16,199,158
No. clusters
2,334
2,334
2,334
R-squared
0.046
0.073
0.073
DI inflow rate
0.0161
0.0161
0.0161
Implied elasticity
1.920***
1.459***
1.227***
(0.124)
(0.090)
(0.143)
Note: Base controls include age dummies, 2-year insurance year group dummies
and assessment basis. See text for detailed description of saturated controls.
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by cells according to an individual’s
age in years, number of insurance years, and assessment basis, *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Table 5. Robustness Checks
Coeff. on
Implied
2
Std. error
Std. error
No. obs.
No. clusters F-test Prob > F
R
log benefits
elasticity
2.167
0.141
Baseline specification
0.0197*** (0.0023) 1.227*** (0.143) 16,199,158
2,334
0.073
0.411
0.522
Ages 35-64
0.0204*** (0.0023) 1.252*** (0.141) 1,6287,755
2,784
0.073
Include old-age pension
0.0197*** (0.0023) 1.224*** (0.143) 16,199,158
2334
2.504
0.114
0.073
Restrict insurance years
0.0327*** (0.0034) 1.982*** (0.208) 15,555,955
1,709
3.10
0.079
0.074
After-tax benefits
0.0159*** (0.0022) 0.985*** (0.139) 16,199,158
2,334
4.862
0.028
0.073
Current benefits
0.0131*** (0.0022) 0.813*** (0.134) 16,199,158
2,334
13.46 <0.001
0.073
2,334
0.184
0.668
n/a
Cox proportional hazard
1.402***
(0.131) 1.402*** (0.131) 16,199,158
Propensity score reweighting 0.0180*** (0.0023) 1.120*** (0.145) 16,199,158
2,334
5.132
0.024
0.076
Quantile control function
0.0217*** (0.0018) 1.351*** (0.110) 16,199,158
2,334
36.60 <0.001
0.075
Note: All regressions include saturated controls (see text for detailed description). Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by cells
according to an individual’s age in years, number of insurance years, and assessment basis, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Table 6. Heterogeneity
DI inflow Coeff. on
Implied
Std. error
Std. error
log benefits
elasticity
rate

No. obs.

No.
clusters

F-test Prob > F

2

R

Age 35-39
0.0017
0.0020
(0.0014)
1.037
(0.844) 4,149,741
330
3.619
0.058 0.015
Age 40-44
0.0030
0.0004
(0.0012)
0.145
(0.384) 3,779,899
398
1.574
0.210 0.022
Age 45-49
0.0068 0.0064*** (0.0014) 0.941*** (0.202) 3,419,217
470
0.0861 0.769 0.032
Age 50-54
0.0200 0.0141*** (0.0022) 0.563*** (0.0863) 2,893,098
535
12.23
0.001 0.068
Age 55-59
0.0748
0.0141* (0.0075) 0.189*
(0.100) 1,957,203
601
3.113
0.078 0.086
White collar
0.0092 0.0149*** (0.0018) 1.623*** (0.195) 7,466,445 2,283
8.981
0.003 0.057
Blue collar
0.0220 0.0216*** (0.0034) 0.983*** (0.153) 8,732,713 2,322
1.549
0.213 0.087
Lifetime earnings Q1 0.0193 0.0103*** (0.0031) 0.532*** (0.161) 4,050,178
995
24.21 <0.001 0.075
Lifetime earnings Q2 0.0184 0.0159*** (0.0046) 0.861*** (0.249) 4,049,643 1,340
5.458
0.020 0.090
Lifetime earnings Q3 0.0167 0.0306*** (0.0053) 1.835*** (0.315) 4,049,789 1,495
3.352
0.067 0.087
Lifetime earnings Q4 0.0100 0.0172*** (0.0028) 1.714*** (0.279) 4,049,548
972
3.369
0.067 0.060
DI benefit Q1
0.0160 0.00567*** (0.0018) 0.354*** (0.110) 4,050,002 1,618
85.42 <0.001 0.065
DI benefit Q2
0.0140 0.0199*** (0.0059) 1.425*** (0.422) 4,049,719 1,132
19.55 <0.001 0.086
DI benefit Q3
0.0168 0.0272*** (0.0063) 1.618*** (0.372) 4,049,722
952
30.96 <0.001 0.096
DI benefit Q4
0.0175 0.0354*** (0.0053) 2.019*** (0.301) 4,049,715
557
0.068
0.794 0.084
UI: DI entry
0.0525 0.198*** (0.0177) 3.775*** (0.338) 1,226,228 2,276
70.15 <0.001 0.164
Note: See text for definitions of base and saturated controls. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by cells according to
an individual’s age in years, number of insurance years, and assessment basis, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Table 7. Applications and DI Inflow, 2004-2010
Applications
Log benefit

DI Inflow

0.0321***
0.0085**
(0.0073)
(0.0038)
F-test
4.073
27.59
Prob > F
0.0437
<0.001
Observations
5,308,575
5,308,575
No. clusters
2,226
2,226
R-squared
0.152
0.072
Avg. dependent variable
0.0235
0.0119
Implied elasticity
1.363***
0.713**
(0.312)
(0.317)
Note: All regressions include saturated controls (see
text for detailed description). Standard errors in
parentheses are clustered by cells according to an
individual’s age in years, number of insurance years,
and assessment basis, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Figure 1A: Assessment Basis over Time by Age Group and Observation Year

Source: Own calculations, based on Austrian Social Security Data.

Figure 1B: Pension Coefficient over Time by Age Group and Observation Year

Source: Own calculations, based on Austrian Social Security Data.

Figure 2: Cumulative Distribution Functions of % Change in DI Pension

Note: Calculations based on 1997 cohort.

Figure 3: DI Replacement Rate and DI Inflow Rate in Different Age Groups

Source: Own calculations, based on Austrian Social Security Data.

Figure 4: Change in Covariates over Time

Note: Figure shows estimated coefficients on the interaction of benefit quartile and year dummies with 95 percent
confidence intervals for different observable characteristics. See text for a description of the regression specification.

Table A1. Placebo Regressions
Saturated
Base controls
controls
Log benefit
0.0187***
0.0173***
(0.00118)
(0.00113)
Hypothetical log benefit 1987

Full model

-4.54e-05
(0.000257)
0.0445***
(0.00398)
Hypothetical log benefit 1988
-0.0329***
(0.00738)
Hypothetical log benefit 1989
0.00565
(0.00902)
Hypothetical log benefit 1990
0.00207
(0.00939)
Hypothetical log benefit 1991
0.0585***
(0.0120)
Hypothetical log benefit 1992
-0.0833***
(0.00935)
Hypothetical log benefit 1993-1996
0.00312
(0.0180)
Hypothetical log benefit 1997-1999
0.341***
(0.113)
Hypothetical log benefit 2000
-0.356***
(0.111)
Hypothetical log benefit 2001
-0.253*
(0.149)
Hypothetical log benefit 2002
0.133
(0.234)
Hypothetical log benefit 2003
0.123
(0.126)
Hypothetical log benefit 2004
0.0823**
(0.0413)
Hypothetical log benefit 2005
-0.0273
(0.0463)
Hypothetical log benefit 2006
0.0383
(0.0394)
Hypothetical log benefit 2007
-0.0876***
(0.0224)
Hypothetical log benefit 2008
0.0368
(0.0448)
Hypothetical log benefit 2009
0.0686
(0.0870)
Hypothetical log benefit 2010
-0.0682
(0.0592)
F-test
99.53
Prob > F
<0.001
Observations
16,199,158 16,199,158 16,199,158
No. clusters
2,334
2,334
2,334
R-squared
0.045
0.074
0.074
DI inflow rate
0.0161
0.0161
0.0161
Implied elasticity
1.162***
1.076***
-0.00282
0.0735
0.0701
0.0159
Note: Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by cells according to an
individual’s age in years, number of insurance years, and assessment basis, ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Figure A1: Imputed and Matched DI benefits, All Years Pooled

Source: Own calculations, based on Austrian Social Security and Pension Claims Data.

Figure A2: Imputed and Matched DI benefits, Separate Years

Source: Own calculations, based on Austrian Social Security and Pension Claims Data.

Figure A3: Pension Coefficient by Insurance Years at Age 47

Source: Own calculations, based on Austrian federal laws.

Figure A4: Pension Coefficient by Insurance Years at Age 55

Source: Own calculations, based on Austrian federal laws.

Figure A5: Pension Coefficient by Insurance Years at Age 59

Source: Own calculations, based on Austrian federal laws.

Figure A6: Percentile Ranking of Potential Benefits

Note: Percentile-ranking based on 1997 potential DI benefits.

