NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BRIDE PRICE AND FEMALE EDUCATION
Nava Ashraf
Natalie Bau
Nathan Nunn
Alessandra Voena
Working Paper 22417
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22417

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2016, Revised March 2018

We thank Martha Bailey, Marianne Bertrand, David Baqaee, Sam Bazzi, St´ephane Bonhomme, Melissa
Dell, Esther Duflo, Raquel Fernández, Ingvil Gaarder, Murat Iyigun, Kelsey Jack, Simone Lenzu,
Kenneth Leonard, Corinne Low, Neale Mahoney, Cecilia Machado, Bryce Millett Steinberg, Magne
Mogstad, Suresh Naidu, Ben Olken, Claudia Olivetti, Tommaso Porzio, Al Roth, Aloysius Siow, Chris
Udry, Glen Weyl and participants at various seminars and conferences for helpful comments. Eva
Ng, Parina Lalchandani, and Poulod Borojerdi provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Nava Ashraf, Natalie Bau, Nathan Nunn, and Alessandra Voena. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bride Price and Female Education
Nava Ashraf, Natalie Bau, Nathan Nunn, and Alessandra Voena
NBER Working Paper No. 22417
July 2016, Revised March 2018
JEL No. I21,I25,O53,O55,Z1,Z13
ABSTRACT
Although it is well known that traditional cultural practices can play an important role in
development, we still have little understanding of what this means for development policy. To
improve our understanding of this issue, we examine how the effects of school construction on
girls’ education vary with a widely-practiced marriage custom called bride price, which is a
payment made by the husband and/or his family to the wife’s parents at marriage. We begin by
developing a model of educational choice with and without bride price. The model generates a
number of predictions that we test in two countries that have had large-scale school construction
projects, Indonesia and Zambia. Consistent with the model, we find that for groups that practice
the custom of bride price, the value of bride price payments that the parents receive tend to
increase with their daughter’s education. As a consequence, the probability of a girl being
educated is higher among bride price groups. The model also predicts that families from bride
price groups will be the most responsive to policies, like school construction, that are aimed at
increasing female education. Studying the INPRES school construction program in Indonesia, as
well as a similar program in Zambia, we find evidence consistent with this prediction. Although
the program had no discernible effect on the education of girls from groups without bride price, it
had large positive effects for girls from groups with a bride price. The findings emphasize the
importance of the marriage market as a driver of educational investment and provide an example
of how the cultural context of a society can be crucial for the effectiveness of development
policy.
Nava Ashraf
Department of Economics
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
n.ashraf1@lse.ac.uk
Natalie Bau
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3A3
natalie.bau@utoronto.ca

Nathan Nunn Department
of Economics Harvard
University 1805
Cambridge St Cambridge,
MA 02138 and NBER
nnunn@fas.harvard.edu
Alessandra Voena
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
avoena@uchicago.edu

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22417

1

Introduction
Increasingly, researchers and policy-makers are recognizing the importance of culture for economic

development (World Bank, 2015; Collier, 2017). However, we continue to have a far more limited
understanding of what traditional practices imply for development policy and whether the efficacy
of development programs is related to the particular cultural context in which they are enacted.
Although development policies generally have not been tailored to specific cultural settings, there is
growing recognition that one-size-fits-all strategies may not be optimal and that there may be benefits
to understanding a society’s cultural context when designing policies (Rao and Walton, 2004; World
Bank, 2015).
In an attempt to gain a better understanding of whether the success of development programs can
depend on cultural context, we revisit one of the best-studied historical development projects, the
Sekolah Dasar INPRES school building program of the 1970s in Indonesia, as well as a similar, but
more recent, school-construction program that took place in Zambia starting in the late 1990s. We
show that whether the programs were successful in increasing female education depended critically on
the traditional marriage customs of the local population. Specifically, we document the importance of
the custom called bride price (or sometimes called bride wealth), which is a transfer from the groom
and/or his family to the bride’s parents upon marriage. The payment, which is often greater than
a year’s income and takes the form of money, animals, or commodities, is widely practiced in many
regions of the world, including Southeast Asia and sub-Saharan Africa (Anderson, 2007a). In both
settings, we find that the e↵ect of school construction on overall female education is undetectable,
but among the ethnic groups that practice the bride price, it is large and positive.
We begin our analysis by modeling the relationship between the marriage market and education.
Our model provides a framework for understanding the relationships between the practice of bride
price, the parents’ decision of whether to educate their daughter, and how the latter is a↵ected by a
policy, like school construction, that reduces the cost of education. In the model, imperfectly altruistic
parents choose whether to educate their children. After the educational investment takes place, men
and women match in a frictionless marriage market based on their educational attainments, which are
complementary in the marital output function. The bride price is the marital transfer to women, which
is appropriated by the bride’s parents in cultures with bride price customs, and it is larger for educated
women in equilibrium. Hence, the practice of bride price provides an additional monetary incentive
for parents to invest in their daughters’ education. This mechanism is particularly important when
daughters cannot credibly commit to paying back their parents ex post for educational investments,

1

as in our setup (Becker, 1993; Gale and Scholz, 1994). As a result, female education rates are higher
in bride societies. Moreover, such societies are also more responsive to a decrease in the cost of
schooling, as long as overall female education rates are low, as is common in developing countries.
Importantly, in our framework, when educated women are scarcer than educated men, transferable
utility ensures that the equilibrium education decision of a boy’s parents does not depend on the
presence of a bride price custom.
The model delivers six testable predictions. First, complementarity ensures that matching is
assortative by education in both bride price and non-bride price ethnic groups. Second, in equilibrium,
educated women command higher bride price payments. Third, girls’ education is higher among bride
price ethnic groups. Fourth, the average innate ability of girls enrolled in school is lower among bride
price ethnic groups. The fifth and most important prediction states that, in a developing-country
context with low education rates, policies that decrease the cost of schooling result in a greater
increase in girls’ education for bride price ethnic groups. Sixth, in contrast to the girls’ case, boys’
average educational attainment, the average quality of enrolled boys, and the responsiveness of male
education to policies that reduce the cost of education are no di↵erent for bride price and non-bride
price ethnic groups.
Our empirical analysis is guided by the predictions of the model, and culminates with the heterogeneity analysis of the e↵ects of two large school construction programs in our two countries of
interest. We focus on Indonesia and Zambia because they have sub-national variation in bride price
practices and have also recently experienced large-scale school construction projects. In both countries, the value of bride price payments is quantitatively important today and is correlated with
traditional ethnic customs. In Indonesia, average payments among ethnic groups that practice bride
price are 80% of per capita GDP, while this figure is 205% in Zambia.1
We begin by testing the first prediction and find a strong positive relationship between the education of grooms and that of brides. Moreover, we find that, consistent with the model, this relationship
is similar for couples from bride price and non-bride price ethnic groups.
Turning to the second prediction, we then examine the relationship between the bride’s education
and the value of the bride price she commands at marriage. Within Indonesia, we find that completing
primary school is associated with a 58% increase in the bride price payment, completing junior
secondary is associated with a further 67% increase, and completing college is associated with another
86% increase. These relationships are very robust and remain strong even when conditioning on a
1

As we discuss below, the Zambian sample is taken from the poor suburbs of the capital city Lusaka, and thus is
not necessarily nationally representative.

2

large set of observable characteristics, including the groom’s education. In Zambia, we find the
same patterns in the data. In addition, we collect information on whether people are aware of the
relationship between education and bride price payments and what their perceptions of the reason
behind this positive relationship are – e.g., whether the relationship is causal or spurious. The data
collected indicate that the relationship between the bride’s education and the amount of bride price
received is widely known and that the parents view it as causal.2
We then turn to the prediction of the model that states that the average level of education is
higher for women belonging to bride price ethnic groups (prediction 3), and that, as a result, the
average ability of enrolled, female students from bride price ethnic groups is lower than the average
ability of enrolled students from non-bride price ethnic groups (prediction 4). We find that prediction
3 holds in both Indonesia and Zambia. Female enrollment rates are 4.1–4.9 percentage points higher
for bride price groups in Indonesia relative to non-bride price groups and 1.2–2.1 percentage points
higher in Zambia. Using Indonesian data, we test prediction 4 by examining students’ test scores
in the national Ebtanas exam. We find that the average test score for female students belonging to
bride price ethnic groups is about 0.07 standard deviations lower than for female students belonging
to non-bride price ethnic groups.
We then turn to prediction 5, which is the penultimate prediction of the model and the focus
of the paper. The prediction suggests that school construction policies that decrease the costs of
schooling should have a larger e↵ect on the education of girls from bride price ethnic groups. We
first study the Indonesian Sekolah Dasar INPRES school-construction program, during which 61,807
primary schools were constructed between 1974 and 1980. The seminal paper studying this program,
in line with its objective of measuring the e↵ect of education on wages, only examines a sample of
males (Duflo, 2001). In contrast, we study the impact of the program on girls’ schooling. We first
confirm that there appears to be no e↵ect of this program on female education, consistent with the
small e↵ects found in Breierova and Duflo (2002). We then show that this average e↵ect masks
important heterogeneity that depends on a group’s marriage custom. We observe a positive impact
of the program on female education only among girls from ethnic groups that traditionally engage
in bride price payments. Among these ethnic groups, adding one school every 1,000 school-aged
children in a given district raises female primary school completion rates by 2.5 percentage points.
Sensitivity and robustness checks show that this finding, and the previous ones, are not driven by
2

In our survey, the most common explanation pro↵ered for this relationship was that a higher bride price was due
to a moral obligation on the part of the groom’s family to compensate the bride’s family for the greater educational
investments they had made in their daughter. This view is consistent with anthropological accounts of the perceived
role of bride price by local populations (e.g., Dalton, 1966; Moore, 2016).

3

other important cultural factors that may be correlated with bride price, such as women’s traditional
role in agricultural production, matrilineality, polygyny, or the practice of Islam.
We corroborate these results by studying another nation-wide school expansion program that
took place in Zambia in the late 1990s and early 2000s. Using newly-collected data from the Zambia
Ministry of Education, we find the same patterns as in Indonesia. Among ethnic groups that traditionally practice bride price, school construction has a large and statistically significant e↵ect on
female education. Building an additional school per square kilometer in a given district raises female
primary school completion rates by 4.2 percentage points. However, among ethnic groups that do
not traditionally practice bride price, school construction does not have a detectable e↵ect.
We then turn to testing for alternative explanations for the higher responsiveness of bride price
families to schooling opportunities for their daughters. One possibility is that bride price parents are
more responsive because they tend to either be wealthier, have fewer children, or simply value girls
more. Examining each of these alternative explanations, we find that none are able to explain the
larger e↵ect of school construction on female education among bride price ethnic groups. We find no
evidence that bride price families are wealthier, have fewer children, or have more positive attitudes
towards females. Another possibility is that the returns to education are di↵erent for bride price and
non-bride price ethnic groups. Again, we find no evidence in support of such an explanation. In both
countries, the relationship between income and education is similar for women from bride price and
non-bride price ethnic groups.
The final part of the analysis considers the implications of bride price for the education of males,
which is the sixth prediction of the model. Consistent with the model, we do not observe the same
patterns for males as we do for females. We find no evidence of the same relationships between bride
price and either education, the average ability of those enrolled in school, or the responsiveness of
education to the school-construction programs.
Our findings build on and advance the literature examining the economic e↵ects of culture (e.g.
Fernandez, 2007; Fernandez and Fogli, 2009; Algan and Cahuc, 2010; Fernandez, 2011; Atkin, 2016;
Bau, 2016; Jayachandran and Pande, 2017; Lowes, 2017). In particular, we show that important
large-scale development policies can have very di↵erent e↵ects on di↵erent ethnic groups depending
on the cultural tradition of bride price. This finding reinforces the idea that the cultural and historical contexts have persistent and non-obvious e↵ects that matter for the success of development
programs. Hence, taking these elements into account is important for evaluating treatment e↵ects
and for designing e↵ective policies.

4

We interpret the economic mechanism behind the heterogeneity in the e↵ect of school construction
by ethnic group as evidence of the role of the marriage market in driving educational choices and hence
how households respond to education reforms. While marriage outcomes are generally considered an
important component of the returns to education, especially for women (Goldin, 2006; Chiappori et
al., 2017), it is typically difficult to empirically observe them and to identify their actual impact. In
this paper, we study the marriage market returns to education as reflected in the value of the bride
price and show that they have sizable e↵ects on parents’ decisions to educate daughters, particularly in
response to policies that reduce the cost of schooling. In doing so, we also advance the understanding
of the economics of marriage markets in developing countries. In particular, dowry has received a
considerable amount of attention in the economics literature (Botticini and Siow, 2003; Anderson,
2003, 2007b; Arunachalam and Naidu, 2015; Anderson and Bidner, 2016), but bride price has been
the subject of few studies, despite the fact that the practice is widespread and the payments are often
large in magnitude (Anderson, 2007a; Bishai and Grossbard, 2010).
By exploring the role of the bride price as a payment from the younger to the older generation,
our results also add to the literature on the relationship between human capital investments and
intergenerational transfers. Cultural practices like patrilocal residence, inheritance, son preference,
and polygyny have been shown to play an important role in such investments (Jacoby, 1995; Levine
and Kevane, 2003; Tertilt, 2005, 2006; Gaspart and Platteau, 2010; La Ferrara and Milazzo, 2011; Bau,
2016; Jayachandran and Pande, 2017). In our framework, the practice of bride price allows parents
to partake in the returns that their daughters accrue from education, and hence it helps to complete
the intergenerational contract between parents and daughters. Importantly, this interpretation adds
a new perspective to the growing policy debate about whether bride price should be discouraged or
even banned (e.g., Wendo, 2004; Mujuzi, 2010), suggesting that arguments for the elimination of the
practice should be considered with an understanding of the e↵ect of this practice on female education.
The paper is structured as follows. We begin by providing an overview of the custom of bride
price (section 2). This is followed by our model of the marriage market with premarital educational
investments and bride price (section 3). We then bring the model to the data, testing the model’s
first predictions about marriage, bride price, and education (section 4). We then turn to the primary
prediction of the model, which is about the heterogeneous response to education policies that is
generated by the custom of bride price (section 5). In this section, we also explore alternative
explanations for our findings and examine the model’s predictions for males. We then provide a
discussion of the significance and importance of our findings (section 6). Lastly, we conclude in

5

section 7.

2

The Bride Price Custom

2.1

Overview and variation
The payment of a bride price at the time of marriage is a custom that is widespread throughout

sub-Saharan Africa and many parts of Asia today. The practice also has a long history, dating at least
as far back as 3000 bce, having been practiced by the Ancient Egyptians, Mesopotamians, Hebrews,
Aztecs, and the Incas (Anderson, 2007a, pp. 152–153). Historically and today, the magnitude of the
bride price is typically sizeable. It is common for the value of the bride price to be in excess of a
year’s income (Anderson, 2007a).
Our analysis requires measures of the traditional marriage customs of di↵erent ethnic groups.
One of the data sources that we use is George Murdock’s (1967) Ethnographic Atlas, which provides
information on transfers made at marriage, categorizing ethnic groups as engaging in one of the
following practices (Murdock, 1981, pp. 92–93):3
1. Bride price: Also known as bride wealth. A transfer of a substantial consideration in the form
of goods, livestock, or money from the groom or his relatives to the kinsmen of the bride.
2. Token bride price: A small or symbolic payment only.
3. Bride service: A substantive material consideration in which the principal element consists
of labor or other services rendered by the groom to the bride’s kinsmen.
4. Gift exchange: Reciprocal exchange of gifts of substantial value between the relatives of
the bride and groom, or a continuing exchange of goods and services in approximately equal
amounts between the groom or his kinsmen and the bride’s relatives.
5. Exchange: Transfer of a sister or other female relative of the groom in exchange for the bride.
6. Dowry: Transfer of a substantial amount of property from the bride’s relatives to the bride,
the groom, or the kinsmen of the latter.
7. No significant consideration: Absence of any significant consideration, or giving of bridal
gifts only.
3

Among the 1,265 ethnic groups examined in the Ethnographic Atlas, bride price is traditionally practiced by 52%
globally, although this does not reflect the population weights of the di↵erent ethnic groups. The next most common
custom is for there to be no dominant practice, which is the case for about 22% of societies.

6

Table 1: Distribution of marriage customs
(1)

(2)
Indonesia
Ethnographic
All
Atlas only
Sources
Number Share Number Share

(3)

(4)
Zambia
Ethnographic
All
Atlas only
Sources
Number Share Number Share

Bride Price
Bride Service
Token Bride Price
Gift Exchange
Female Relative Exchange
Absence of Consideration
Dowry

14
2
2
3
4
4
0

0.48
0.07
0.07
0.10
0.14
0.14
0.00

23
4
2
4
4
7
0

0.52
0.09
0.05
0.09
0.09
0.16
0.00

8
7
6
0
0
0
0

0.38
0.33
0.29
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

11
12
7
0
0
0
0

0.37
0.40
0.23
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Total

29

1.00

44

1.00

21

1.00

30

1.00

Notes: This table reports the number of ethnicities that practice di↵erent traditional marriage customs within Indonesia
and Zambia. In columns 1 and 3, the data on traditional marriage practices are from the Ethnographic Atlas (Murdock,
1967). In column 2, the data are from Murdock (1967) and LeBar (1972). In column 4, the data are from Murdock
(1967), Willis (1966), Whiteley and Slaski (1950), and Schapera (1953).

The distributions of marriage customs for Indonesia and Zambia are reported in columns 1 and 3 of
Table 1.4 We also supplement information from the Ethnographic Atlas with additional ethnographic
sources. For Indonesia, we use LeBar (1972), which is a publication produced as part of the Human
Relations Area Files, and for Zambia, we draw on three volumes of the Ethnographic Survey of Africa
(Willis, 1966; Whiteley and Slaski, 1950; Schapera, 1953). These sources provide a finer breakdown
of ethnic groups and greater coverage than is possible using only the Ethnographic Atlas.5 The
distribution of marriage customs using these combined sources is reported in columns 2 and 4 of
Table 1. This is the variation that we use in our analysis.6
Importantly, Table 1 makes clear that none of the ethnic groups within Indonesia and Zambia
practice dowry as their primary marriage practice. Thus, our estimates of di↵erences between bride
price cultures and non-bride price cultures do not reflect the e↵ects of whether a group practices
dowry or not. Therefore, our study does not speak to the question of whether or not the custom of
dowry also influences educational investment.7
4

Ethnic groups are reported in the table if they were matched to groups listed in the 1995 Indonesia Intercensal data
or the 1996, 2001, 2007, and 2013 Zambia Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS). A list of the ethnic groups in each
sample, as well as whether they practice bride price or not, is reported in Appendix Tables A1 and A2 .
5
The additional sources also allow us to check the validity of the Ethnographic Atlas. We find that in the vast
majority of cases the sources report the same marriage practices. There are a very small number of cases where the
sources disagree. In these instances, we use the coding from the Ethnographic Atlas.
6
All of the results that we report are robust to using the Ethnographic Atlas information only.
7
We caution against mistakenly viewing dowry as a “reverse” (or negative) bride price. While bride price is a transfer
of resources from the groom or groom’s parents to the parents of the bride, dowry is a transfer of resources from the
bride’s parents to the bride and her husband at the time of marriage (Goody and Tambiah, 1973; Anderson, 2007a).
This has led scholars to view the dowry as having important pre-mortem bequest motives (e.g., Goody and Tambiah,
1973; Botticini and Siow, 2003; Anderson and Bidner, 2016). The practice that is the “reverse” of bride price is called

7

Figure 1: Geographic distribution of the practice of bride price in Indonesia and Zambia

Legend

F

0.11 0.20

0.41 0.50

0.71 0.80

0.00

0.21 0.30

0.51 0.60

0.81 0.90

0.01 0.10

0.31 0.40

0.61 0.70

0.91 1.00

0

250

500

1,000

Kilometers

Zambia: Traditional Bride Price, by District

Indonesia: Traditional Bride Price, by Province

Legend
Percent Bride
Price

Percent Bride
Price

0.11 0.20

0.41 0.50

0.71 0.80

0.00

0.21 0.30

0.51 0.60

0.81 0.90

0.01 0.10

0.31 0.40

0.61 0.70

0.91 1.00

F

0

75

150

300

Kilometers

Notes: The maps show the spatial distribution of the practice of bride price. The figures are calculated using the 1995
Indonesia Intercensal Survey (left) and the 1996, 2001, 2007, and 2013 Zambia Demographic and Health Surveys (right).
We link individuals to traditional bride price practice using their self-reported mother tongue in Indonesia and using
their self-reported ethnicity in Zambia.

Figure 1 provides an overview of the geographic distribution of the practice of bride price in
Indonesia and Zambia. The figures are constructed by combining survey data that report both
respondents’ locations and their mother tongue or ethnicity. For Indonesia, the data are from the
1995 Indonesia Intercensal Survey and are matched to information on traditional marriage customs
using respondents reported mother tongue.8 For Zambia, the data are from the 1996, 2001, 2007, and
2013 rounds of the Demographic and Health Surveys, and we link individuals to traditional marriage
customs using their self-reported ethnicity.9 Figure 1 reports the proportion of respondents in each
province in Indonesia, and each district in Zambia, that are from an ethnic group that traditionally
practices bride price as opposed to the other customs. In the actual analysis for Indonesia, we
work at a much finer spatial resolution (i.e., districts rather than provinces). However, for clarity of
presentation, we display the more aggregate provincial averages here.
a groom-price, which is a payment made from the bride or bride’s parents to the groom’s parents. It is extremely rare
and has only found in a small number of societies (Divale and Harris, 1976).
8
In total, 174 di↵erent languages are recorded as being spoken in the Intercensal Survey, which we match to 44
distinct ethnic groups for which we have bride price information. All but 11 of the 174 language groups in the Indonesia
Intercensal Survey could be matched to the ethnographic data. These comprise 0.43 percent of the observations with
non-missing language data.
9
The Zambia DHS reports 65 distinct ethnic groups. Of these, we are able to match 53 of them to 30 more coarselydefined groups for which we have bride price information. The remaining unmatched groups are small and comprise
less than 2.5 percent of the DHS sample.

8

Table 2: Correlations between bride price and other customs
(1)

Matrilineal Indicator

(2)

(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Dep Var: Bride Price Indicator
Indonesia
Zambia

-0.270
(0.274)

Female Agriculture Indicator

-0.276
(0.281)

Polygyny Indicator
constant
Number of observations

0.520***
(0.102)
29

0.526***
(0.117)
23

0.056
(0.208)
0.444**
(0.172)
29

-0.247
(0.351)
-0.320
(0.300)
0.040
(0.245)
0.540**
(0.191)
23

-0.500**
(0.207)

-0.415
(0.249)
0.009
(0.288)

-0.038
(0.304)

0.714***
(0.169)
21

0.500*
(0.266)
17

(8)

0.381***
(0.109)
21

0.708**
(0.280)
17

Notes: This table reports cross-ethnicity estimates of the relationship between the listed customs and the practice of bride price. The
data on traditional practices are from the Ethnographic Atlas (Murdock, 1967). An ethnicity from the Ethnographic Atlas was included
here if it was matched with languages or ethnicities listed in the 1995 Indonesia Intercensus or the 1996, 2001, 2007, or 2013 Zambian
DHS. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels.

2.2

The origins and correlates of bride price

While the historical origins of the bride price practice are not known with complete certainty, there
are two dominant theories within the field of anthropology. The first is that the custom historically
originated in patrilineal societies, where the wife joins the husband’s kinship group following marriage
(Vroklage, 1952). Within this system, the bride’s lineage loses a member (as well as future o↵spring)
at the time of marriage. Thus, the bride price arose as a way of compensating the bride’s lineage
for this loss, and as a way of showing appreciation for the investments they made in raising their
daughter. According to this hypothesis, although bride price originated in patrilineal societies, it
subsequently spread to nearby matrilineal societies.
The practice of bride price has also been linked to the participation of women in agriculture.
In societies where women were actively engaged in agriculture, their families would have been more
reluctant to part with a daughter unless compensated and therefore, the custom of transferring money
to compensate for the loss of a daughter may have evolved (Boserup, 1970). The last, related factor
that is potentially relevant for bride price is the practice of polygyny. Work on polygyny by Grossbard
(1978), Becker (1981), and Tertilt (2005) indicates that, in societies where polygyny is prevalent, high
bride prices are necessary to clear the marriage market. Thus, places with polygyny may be more
likely to have also adopted bride price.
Using data from the Murdock (1967), we examine the extent to which cross-ethnicity correlations
are consistent with these hypotheses within our countries of interest. The estimates for our two
samples of interest are reported in Table 2. Each column of the table reports estimates from a
regression where the dependent variable is an indicator variable that equals one if the ethnic group

9

traditionally practiced bride price. By and large, we only find weak evidence of the correlations
suggested by the literature. In Indonesia, none of the variables are correlated with bride price. In
Zambia, all ethnic groups traditionally practice polygyny so, mechanically, there is no relationship
between this variable and bride price. In addition, there is also no relationship between traditional
female participation in agriculture and bride price. There is, however, a negative relationship between
matrilineality and bride price. This can be contrasted with estimates using the global sample (reported
in Appendix Table A3), where one does observe the expected relationships between bride price and
matrilineal societies, female participation in agriculture, and polygyny. Matrilineal societies are less
likely to practice bride price, while groups where women more actively participate in agriculture
and groups that practice polygyny are more likely to practice bride price. Thus, while we observe
strong patterns globally, they are much weaker when looking within our countries of interest. To
be as cautious as possible, our analysis will confirm the robustness of our findings to controlling for
these ethnicity-level characteristics. In addition, in some of our Indonesian and Zambian data (the
Indonesia Family Life Survey and the Zambian Demographic and Health Surveys), where we have
information about the practice of polygyny at the household level, we control for this practice in our
most conservative specifications.

2.3

The modern practice of bride price
Throughout our analysis, our measure of bride price is an ethnicity-level indicator variable for

the traditional presence of the custom (i.e., category 1 in subsection 2.1). Thus, we will not directly
use either the prevalence of the practice today or the value of bride price payments to identify the
e↵ects of bride price. Relative to traditional practices, these are more likely to be endogenous to
contemporary factors, including the policies of interest. However, we now verify that the traditional
custom of bride price is strongly correlated with actual bride price payments today.
For Indonesia, information on bride price payments at marriage is taken from rounds 3 and 4 of
the Indonesian Family Life Surveys (IFLS).10 The survey also collects the self-reported ethnicities of
respondents, which we use to assign the presence of a traditional bride price custom (or not) to a
married couple.11 We find that both bride price and non-bride price groups tend to report positive
10

The IFLS asks about dowry and bride price together and does not distinguish between the two. However, according
to the IFLS documentation, the marriage custom is bride price except for marriages among the matrilocal Minangkabau
group (RAND, 1999), who we omit from the analysis.
11
We use the ethnicity of the individual who reports the characteristics of the marriage to the IFLS to determine
whether the couple belongs to a bride price ethnic group. In cases where both the husband and the wife were surveyed
and both reported on the marriage, we keep the husband’s information, including his ethnic group, under the assumption
that he is more likely to correctly remember the bride price. However, since intermarriage between ethnic groups with
di↵erent bride price customs is very low in Indonesia (less than 2% in the Intercensal data), using the husband or wife’s

10

payments at marriage.12 As we discuss in more detail below, this is because groups in Indonesia
without a tradition of bride price typically still engage in small payments that take the form of a
token bride price, gift exchange, or other forms of symbolic transfer. There are noticeable di↵erences
in the sizes of payments between the two groups. For individuals from groups that traditionally
practice bride price, the median bride price payment equals 8.7% of the per capita GDP in the year
of marriage; the mean payment is 80%. For non-bride price couples, the median is only 4%, and the
mean is 37% (Appendix Table A4).13
We find a similar pattern in Zambia, where we examine information from peri-urban Lusaka that
was collected using a module we created and implemented within the Zambia Fertility Preferences
Survey (ZFPS) (Ashraf et al., 2017).14 Linking couples to traditional bride price customs using the
self-reported ethnicity of the wife, we find that both groups tend to have some payment at marriage,
but that the size of the payment is much larger for bride price groups.15 For bride price couples,
the median bride price payment is 57% of the per capita GDP in the year of marriage, while the
mean is 205%. For non-bride price couples, the median is 45%, and the mean is 87%. The fact that
non-bride price ethnic groups report paying a sizeable bride price is in part explained by the fact that
in both countries, a number of non-bride price groups traditionally had a “token bride price,” and in
Indonesia, a number of groups practiced gift exchange (see Table 2). These practices still involve a
payment or gift at the time of marriage, although one that is much smaller in magnitude than a full
bride price.16
In addition to showing di↵erences in bride price payments across ethnic groups, the statistics also
provide some sense of the magnitude of bride price payments. In both countries, payments are large.
ethnicity is unlikely to a↵ect the results.
12
A non-zero bride price payment is reported for 92% of couples that belong to groups that practice bride price and
for 91% of the couples that do not practice bride price.
13
In the data, a small number of observations report extreme bride price values. These are likely due to data entry
and reporting errors. In the figures we report here, we omit reported bride price payments that are greater than 100
times per capita GDP. This results in the omission of 43 observations in Indonesia and 4 observations in Zambia.
14
Further details of the survey are provided in the data appendix.
15
Among individuals from ethnic groups that traditionally practiced bride price, 86% of couples report non-zero bride
price payments, while this figure is 77% among non-bride price couples.
16
Di↵erences between the two groups are also likely masked by heterogeneity in wealth, which tends to a↵ect the
value of a bride price, token bride price, and gifts exchanged. If we, for example, examine di↵erences for couples with
a similar level of wealth, the di↵erences appear starker. For example, for the 20 percent of the sample with the lowest
wealth, which is likely the population that is most relevant for school construction, we find that the average payment
at marriage is 420% higher for bride price groups than non-bride price groups.

11

3

Model
We now turn to a theoretical framework that helps us understand how parents’ decisions about

whether to educate their daughters depend on the practice of bride price. To do this, we draw on
the seminal models by Chiappori et al. (2009) and Chiappori et al. (2016), where individuals choose
their education before matching in a frictionless marriage market with transferable utility. In our
setting, parents, who are imperfectly altruistic, choose the education of their children. The bride price
payment is modeled as the marriage market transfer to the woman’s side that is appropriated by the
parents. We make the assumption that daughters cannot otherwise commit to pay their parents back
for their educational investments.

3.1

Setup

The model has two periods. There are multiple ethnic groups e, and there is a unit mass of women
(daughters) and a unit mass of men (sons) in each ethnic group. Parents have only one child and
enjoy utility from consumption {ct }2t=1 and from the well-being of their child. A daughter’s utility is
denoted as v and altruism as

2 (0, 1), which is the weight parents place on their daughter’s utility.

A son’s utility is denoted as u and altruism as

2 (0, 1).

Let y be the parents’ income in each period and r

0 be the discount rate. Daughters, indexed

by i, are endowed with innate ability ai , which is distributed according to a unimodal probability
density function g( ) with a strictly monotone cumulative distribution function G( ). Sons, indexed
by j, are endowed with innate ability aj , which has the same distribution. Ability a↵ects the utility
that children derive from schooling in the first period, in a multiplicative way, ai Si , and has no direct
impact on the children’s utility in the second period.
In the first period, parents decide whether or not to educate their children (S 2 {0, 1} for a girl
and P 2 {0, 1} for a boy) at the cost k and enjoy consumption (c1 ). There is no borrowing nor
saving.17 In the second period, children marry, transfers are made, and parents enjoy consumption

(c2 ). At the time of their daughter’s marriage, parents receive a bride price payment if they belong to
an ethnic group that engages in this practice, which is paid by the groom and is the marriage market
transfer the groom would otherwise make to the bride to clear the marriage market. The indicator
Ie denotes ethnic groups in which the groom pays a bride price to the bride’s family at marriage
17

As long as income in the first period is greater than the cost of schooling, the household does not need to borrow
to finance the education of the daughter. Hence, the same household could have multiple daughters and sons, and as
long as borrowing constraints do not bind, their problems can be separated.

12

(Ie = 1) as opposed to ethnic groups in which he does not (Ie = 0).18 There is no intermarriage
between ethnic groups.19
3.1.1

Educational investment

Parents choose whether to educate their child to maximize their utility. Their problem is
max

Si 2{0,1},c 0

s.t.



c2
c1 +
+
1+r
c 1 + k · Si  y

a i Si +

v2 (Ie , Si )
1+r

c2  y + Ie · BP (Si )

and

for a daughter and
max

Pj 2{0,1},c 0

s.t.

c2
+
c1 +
1+r
c1 + k · Pj  y



aj Pj +

and

u2 (Ie , Pj )
1+r

c2  y

for a son. Consistent with the reality of our settings, we assume that the bride price is paid by the
groom, which is done in the second period.20 Given this, u2 depends on the ethnic group e.
3.1.2

Marriage market

We consider ethnic groups with a bride price tradition (Ie = 1), where the bride’s parents
appropriate the marriage market transfer, and ethnic groups without a bride price tradition (Ie = 0),
where the bride and the groom share the marriage surplus through the intra-household allocation of
resources (Choo and Siow, 2006; Iyigun and Walsh, 2007).
Define ⇣if and ⇣jm to be the womens’ and mens’ respective values if they remain single, i.e. their
labor market earnings, and let ⇣ij be the total value of a marriage between i and j, i.e. the marriage
output. These values do not depend on the ethnic group e. Marriage surplus is defined as zij =
⇣ij

⇣if

⇣jm . Since one’s value when single and the marriage surplus only depend on education, they

18
All the predictions of the model are robust to allowing bride price to vary on the intensive rather than the extensive
margin in the model. That is, we could also model belonging to a bride price ethnic group as increasing the share of
the daughter’s marriage market transfer that is appropriated by the parents.
19
In the Indonesia 1995 Intercensal Survey, only 1.50% of married household heads aged 25-45 are in a marriage in
which the bride price practice of the husband and wife di↵er. That proportion is 16.80% in the pooled Zambia DHS.
20
The fact that the groom is generally the one who pays most of the bride price is based on focus groups from Zambia.
This fact has also been documented in similar settings in sub-Saharan Africa. For example, Lowes and Nunn (2017) find
that for 80 percent of the 317 marriages that they study in the Democratic Republic of Congo, the groom contributed
to the bride price payment. A theoretical rationale for assuming that sons pay the bride price is that the bride price
is the portion of the marriage surplus that belongs to the women’s side of the marriage market. If the marital surplus
accrues to the husband’s home, then it is natural to assume that he will be the one to make the payment.

13

can be indexed by Si and Pj :
⇣if = ⇣Sfi ,

⇣ij = ⇣Si Pj ,

⇣jm = ⇣Pmj ,

zij = zSi Pj .

It is assumed that the marriage surplus is increasing in each spouse’s educational attainment (i.e. if
a spouse is educated, then marital output is higher):
z11

z10 > 0,

z11

z01 > 0,

z10

z00 > 0,

z01

z00 > 0.

We also make the standard supermodularity assumption in the assignment literature (Becker, 1973),
which is that there is complementarity between the education of the two spouses: z00 +z11 > z10 +z01 .
Lastly, we also assume that the surplus from the marriage between two uneducated people is always
positive: z00 > 0. This ensures that everyone marries in equilibrium.

3.2

Predictions

To generate empirical predictions, we solve the model backwards. We start with the marriage
market, which determines children’s utilities in the second period (v2 and u2 ) which, in turn, define
the returns to education. Based on such returns, parents decide whether to undertake the educational
investment.
3.2.1

Matching

A match in the marriage market is an equilibrium outcome if the match is stable. That is, no
man and woman can be made better o↵ by leaving their respective spouses and marrying one another.
When utility is transferable, a stable equilibrium maximizes aggregate surplus (Shapley and Shubik,
1971; Becker, 1973). Hence, under the conditions we have imposed on the marriage surplus, everyone
marries in equilibrium and matches assortatively, as shown in Chiappori et al. (2009). Consistently
with the data, we consider the case in which more men than women are educated and provide
conditions for that to occur in equilibrium. Chiappori et al. (2009) show that the unique, stable
equilibrium in this market is one in which educated women only marry educated men, while some
educated men marry uneducated women.21 This result leads to our first prediction.
Prediction 1. Matching is assortative by education irrespective of the practice of bride price.
21

For a proof of existence and uniqueness, see Chiappori et al. (2009) Online Appendix, page 2.

14

⇣0f

Education leads to a labor market return to schooling (R), which varies by gender: Rf ⌘ ⇣1f
and

Rm ⌘ ⇣1m

⇣0m . Let Vi,e be the material surplus that women or their parents (in the

form of a bride price) receive in equilibrium in the marriage market, and Uj,e be the surplus that
men receive. The marriage surplus zSP is then allocated between the women’s side and the men’s
side: Vi,e + Uj,e = zSi Pj . Moreover, let
1)

Vi,e = Vi,e (Si = 1)

Vi,e (Si = 0) and

Uj,e = Uj,e (Pj =

Ui,e (Pj = 0) be the marriage markets returns to education (Chiappori et al., 2009). Then, the

total returns to schooling enjoyed by the daughter are:
v2 (Si = 1, Ie )

v2 (Si = 0, Ie ) = Rf + (1

Ie ) Vi,e ,

while those enjoyed directly by the parents are the bride price returns:
BP (Si = 1)

BP (Si = 0) =

Vi,e .

(1)

An important result in Chiappori et al. (2009) is that, in equilibrium, men with the same education
all obtain the same share of marriage surplus, and the same is true for women (or their parents when
there is bride price). Hence, the shares of surplus, in equilibrium, do not depend on e, i or j. When
men have higher education rates than women, marriage surplus shares, US and VP , satisfy:
V0 + U0 = z00 ,

V1 + U1 = z11 ,

V0 + U1 = z01 ,

V1 + U0 > z10 .

Subtracting these conditions, we obtain the following expressions for the returns to education in
the marriage market, which again do not depend on e, i, or j:
(V0 + U1 )

(V0 + U0 ) =

U = z01

z00 ,

(V1 + U1 )

(V0 + U1 ) =

V = z11

z01 .

Educated women, who are the side in short supply, receive their marginal contribution in a marriage
with an educated man, which parents in bride price communities capture. Educated men, the side
in excess supply, receive their marginal contribution to a marriage with an uneducated woman,
irrespectively of whom they actually marry.22
Hence, thanks to transferable utility and homogeneity within educational groups, men are indif22

If there were more educated women than educated men, before or after the school construction programs, educated
men would only marry educated women, and some educated women would marry uneducated men. Women obtain
their contribution to a marriage with an uneducated man, and the returns to education in the marriage market are
(V1 + U0 ) (V0 + U0 ) = U = z11 z10 and (V1 + U0 ) (V1 + U1 ) = V = z10 z00 , which are still positive.

15

ferent between marrying an educated woman or an uneducated one. A match will only be stable (and
therefore, an equilibrium outcome) if women (or their family) can appropriate the entire additional
surplus they provide to a match with an educated man because educated women are scarce. If they
did not, another man matched to an uneducated woman would outbid the initial transfer by o↵ering
slightly more to the educated woman to convince her to marry him instead, and therefore, the original
match would not be stable (Chiappori et al., 2009).
This result has direct implications for the bride price return to education in equation (1). In bride
price ethnicities, the bride price return to education is the whole marriage market return to education
BP (Si = 1)

BP (Si = 0) =

Vi,e =

V = z11

z01 ,

which is strictly positive and which the parents appropriate as the marriage-market clearing transfer.
This finding generates our second prediction.
Prediction 2. Educated women command higher bride price payments.
3.2.2

The investment stage

Having established what the returns to education are, we now examine their implications for
educational attainment. Substituting the budget constraints into the objective function, we find that
parents choose to educate the daughter (Si = 1) whenever

ai

⇤

a (Ie , k) ⌘

k

Rf
1+r

Vi,e
1+r

✓

1 + Ie

◆

1

.

We denote the daughter’s ability for the household on the margin of making the education investment
by a⇤Ie (k), which depends on Ie and k. Parents will educate their daughter i as long as her ability
a⇤Ie (k).23 Therefore, the probability that daughter i is educated is given by

ai

Pr(Si = 1|k, Ie ) = Pr ai

a⇤Ie (k) = 1

G a⇤Ie (k) .

To derive the condition under which more men than women will be educated in equilibrium, we follow
the same procedure that we used for daughters, and we obtain the probability that a son is educated
23

Efficient investment in schooling implies that every girl with ai

h

k

v(Ie ,k)
1+r

i

gets educated. However, because

altruism is imperfect ( < 1), education rates will be lower than the efficient benchmark. The bride price custom
can help overcome under-investments in daughters’ schooling due to imperfect commitment across generations. When
= 1, all three thresholds are the same.

16

as
✓

Rm
1+r

k

Pr(Pj = 1|Ie , k) = Pr aj

Uj,e
1+r

◆

=1

G

✓

Rm
1+r

k

Uj,e
1+r

◆

.

(2)

Hence, given these conditions and the equilibrium marriage market returns to education, we expect
that more boys than girls will be educated in equilibrium if and only if
✓

1

1

◆

Rm Rf
z01 z00
k+
+
1+r
1+r

z11 z01
1+r

✓

1 + Ie

◆

1

> 0.

(3)

As long as (3) is satisfied before and after the school construction, the marriage market equilibrium
is as described above.24 Therefore, the ability threshold for girls becomes
a⇤Ie (k)

=

k

Rf
1+r

z11 z01
1+r

✓

1 + Ie

1

◆

.

Let a⇤BP = a⇤ (Ie = 1, k) be the ability threshold for girls from bride price groups and let a⇤N oBP =
a⇤ (Ie = 0, k) be the ability threshold for girls from non-bride price groups. For

< 1, the comparison

below leads to our main set of predictions
a⇤BP

=

k

Rf
1+r

z11 z01
1+r

✓

1+

◆

1

< a⇤N oBP =

k

Rf
1+r

z11 z01
,
1+r

and hence G(a⇤BP ) < G(a⇤N oBP ). This is summarized in the following prediction.
Prediction 3. The probability that a girl is educated, Pr(Si = 1), is higher among ethnicities that
engage in bride price payments: Pr(Si = 1|Ie = 1, k) > Pr(Si = 1|Ie = 0, k).
We next turn to the average ability of girls who are educated for bride price and non-bride price
⇣
⌘
1
The first term 1
k is driven by the gender preferences of parents: if they prefer sons to daughters, they are
more willing to educate their sons. The second terms captures di↵erential labor market returns, and it is likely to be
positive in this context in which men have higher employment rates and better opportunities in the labor market. The
third and fourth term capture di↵erential returns in the marriage markets, and the di↵erence between them depends on
the relative contribution of an educated woman compared to an educated man to the marriage surplus. In groups that
Uj,e
Vi,e
z11 z00
don’t engage in bride price, the sign of this term ( 1+r
= 2z01 1+r
) depends on how z01 and z10 compare, i.e.
1+r
if a household with an educated man and an uneducated woman is more productive than the opposite. Finally, the last
term, 1 z111+rz01 , captures the impact of the bride price education premium on the parents’ budget constraint, which
alone should increase female schooling relative to male schooling.
⌘ alsomrulefout that an equilibrium
⇣ exists in which
⌘
⇣ We can
1
k + R 1+rR + z111+rz10 z101+rz00 1 + Ie 1
>0
more women than men get educated because (3) implies that 1
under the assumptions we have imposed on marital surplus.
24

17

groups. The average ability of educated girls is equal to
E[ai |S = 1, Ie , k] = E[ai |ai >
By the Leibniz integral rule,

@E[ai |ai >a⇤ ]
@a⇤

=

a⇤Ie (k)]

g(a⇤ )
1 G(a⇤ )

=

Z

1
a⇤Ie (k)

ai g(ai |ai > a⇤Ie (k))dai .

{E[ai |ai > a⇤ ]

a⇤ } > 0. This gives the following

prediction.
Prediction 4. The average ability of educated girls is lower among ethnicities that engage in bride
price payments relative to ethnicities that do not.
Predictions 3–4 stem from the fact that the bride price provides an additional incentive for parents
to educate their daughter, as long as parents are not perfectly altruistic. Thus, we will observe higher
rates of enrollment among ethnicities that practice bride price. In addition, higher enrollment rates
among bride price ethnicities imply that girls with relatively lower ability will get educated in bride
price ethnicities because the bride price premium justifies the parents’ education investment.
3.2.3

Bride price and the response of female education to education policies

We now turn to our primary comparative static of interest: how the increase in education due to
a reduction in the cost of education k depends on the presence of a bride price custom. Consistent
with our setting of interest, we consider the case in which education levels are low, namely the case in
which a girl with modal ability does not get educated.25 When the distribution of ability is unimodal
and female schooling is low, g (a⇤BP )

g (a⇤N oBP ) > 0.

Our main empirical results then follow directly from a comparison of the two partial derivatives:
@ Pr(Si = 1|k, Ie = 1)
=
@k

g (a⇤BP (k))

versus

@ Pr(Si = 1|k, Ie = 0)
=
@k

g (a⇤N oBP (k))

.

Prediction 5. When female education rates are low, a decline in the cost of schooling increases
education more for girls from bride price ethnic groups than for girls from non-bride price ethnic
groups.
Figure 2 illustrates the intuition behind prediction 5. The figure shows a hypothetical unimodal
distribution of ability ai , as well as the threshold ability a⇤ for both bride price and non-bride price
25
This assumption does not necessarily imply that the median-ability girl is uneducated. If the distribution of
daughters’ schooling abilities has positive skewness (i.e., is right skewed), as with the commonly-observed lognormal or
Pareto distributions, then a girl with modal ability can have an ability that is well below the median ability. Thus, in
this case, the median-ability girl will be educated while the modal-ability girl will not.

18

Figure 2: Distribution of girls’ abilities, schooling decisions, and declines in the cost of education

girls. Girls with ability above this threshold become educated and those below do not. The unimodal
assumption of ai guarantees that at the ability threshold for girls from bride price groups, there is
more density than there is for the threshold for girls from non-bride price groups.26 The decline in the
costs of schooling is shown in Figure 2 by a decline in the thresholds for the two groups. As illustrated,
there will be more girls on the margin who respond to the policy change from bride price ethnicities
relative to non-bride price ethnicities. In other words, the e↵ects of the school construction policy on
girls’ education will be greater among bride price groups than among non-bride price groups.
3.2.4

Bride price and male education

We next turn to the model’s predictions for boys. First, note that the boys’ education probability
in equation (2) does not depend on Ie once we substitute for

Uj,e with the equilibrium marriage

market return to education for men:

Pr(Pj = 1|k) = 1

G

✓

k

Rm
1+r

z01 z00
1+r

◆

.

In the boys’ case, transferable utility and the homogeneity within education groups ensure that
returns to education in the marriage market are the same across ethnic groups as long as boys are
always more likely to be educated than girls. Then, the bride price does not a↵ect educational invest26
The unimodality argument is related to one put forth by Fabinger and Weyl (2013), who show that a unimodal
distribution of consumer valuations leads to S-shaped demand functions. Then, the elasticity of demand with respect
to a price change depends on whether such a change occurs in a part of the demand curve that is concave or convex.
Becker et al. (2010) use a related argument to explain why women’s education rates have overtaken those of men in
developed countries.

19

ments. Because the levels of education do not vary by ethnic group at baseline, ability distributions
are similar among educated boys across ethnic groups. Moreover, for boys, an expansion in the supply
of schools does not a↵ect ethnic groups di↵erently, as long as education rates remain larger among
⇣
⌘
@ Pr(Pj =1|k)
z01 z00
1
Rm
k
boys than among girls in all groups. Indeed, the expression
=
·
g
@k
1+r
1+r

does not depend on Ie . This result leads to our final prediction.

Prediction 6. The probability that a boy is educated, the average ability of educated boys and the
responsiveness of male educational attainment to a reduction in the cost of schooling do not di↵er
among ethnicities that engage in bride price payments relative to other ethnicities.

4

Testing the Predictions of the Model: Bride Price, Marriage Markets and Female Education
We now test the predictions of our model using data from two countries, Indonesia and Zambia.

We have chosen these two because of our ultimate interest in examining how the e↵ectiveness of
school construction projects depends on the practice of bride price. Indonesia’s large-scale school
construction initiative during the 1970s was the largest of its kind and has been well studied (e.g.,
Duflo, 2001). Zambia had a similar large-scale project in the late 1990s and early 2000s. Additionally,
both countries have rich within-country variation in the extent to which di↵erent ethnic groups
practice bride price. Throughout the analysis, we measure traditional bride price practice using the
ethnographic sources discussed in Section 2, which are linked to respondents using their self-reported
ethnicity or mother tongue.

4.1

Prediction 1. Is matching assortative by education?
Prediction 1 of the model suggests that there should be a positive relationship between the

education of the wife and that of the husband, and that this relationship should be the same for
bride price and non-bride price groups. We test for this by examining married couples and estimating
the correlation between the education of the wife and that of the husband. We use the following
estimating equation:
Husband Primary
= ↵e + ↵ d + ↵ t +
Iiedt

Wife Primary
1 Iiedt

+

Wife Primary
2 Iiedt

⇥ IeBrideP rice + Xit + "iedt

(4)

where i indexes a marriage, e indexes the ethnicity of the bride, d districts, and t indexes the survey
year. The indicator variable IeBrideP rice is equal to one if a wife belongs to an ethnic group that
20

Wife Primary
Husband Primary
traditionally practices bride price and zero otherwise. Iiedt
and Iiedt
are indicator

variables equal to one if the wife and husband have completed primary school respectively. ↵e denotes
ethnicity fixed e↵ects, ↵d district fixed-e↵ects, and ↵t survey-year fixed e↵ects (where applicable). To
be conservative, we cluster the standard errors at the district level, which is the level at which the
supply of schools and the marriage market are likely to vary.
We estimate equation (4) using three di↵erent samples: the 1995 Indonesia Intercensal Data, the
2000 and 2007 Indonesia Family Life Surveys (IFLS), and the 1996, 2001, 2007, and 2013 Zambia
Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS). Each data source measures educational attainment slightly
di↵erently. The Intercensus directly reports information for whether individuals have completed
primary school. In the IFLS, we infer primary school completion if reported educational attainment
is “some junior secondary school” or more. In the DHS, we infer primary school completion from
respondents’ reporting that they have attended secondary school (or higher).
The vector Xit includes a quadratic in the year of marriage, a quadratic in the wife’s age of
marriage, an indicator variable that equals one if the wife reports being Muslim and its interaction
with whether she completed primary school, and indicator variables for an individual belonging to an
ethnic group that is matrilineal and that has female dominated agriculture interacted with the wife’s
education. In the IFLS and DHS regressions, Xit also includes an indicator variable for the marriage
being polygynous and its interaction with the wife’s education. These controls do not appear in the
Intercensus regressions because, although asked, no respondents report belonging to a polygynous
marriage.
Estimates of equation (4) are reported in Table 3. Estimates using the Intercensus sample are
reported in columns 1 and 2, those using the IFLS are reported in columns 3 and 4, and those using
the DHS are reported in columns 5 and 6. The odd numbered columns report estimates using a more
parsimonious set of controls, while the even numbered columns use the full set of covariates. The
estimates show that matching on education is positively assortative in all three samples, and that
the strength of this relationship is not statistically di↵erent between bride price and non-bride price
ethnic groups. Thus, as predicted by the model, the practice of the bride price does not a↵ect the
nature of sorting in the marriage market.27
27
The same results also hold if we cluster at the ethnicity-level and generate p-values using the wild bootstrap
procedure.

21

Table 3: Degree of assortative matching in Indonesia and Zambia
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Dep Var: Indicator variable for husband completed primary
Indonesia
Zambia
Intercensus
IFLS
Pooled DHS
IiWife Primary
IiWife Primary ⇥ IeBrideP rice
Ethnicity FE
District FE
Marriage Year Controls
Marriage Age Controls
Wife Muslim Controls
Ethnicity Controls Interactions
Polygynous Marriage Controls
Mean of dependent variable
SD of dependent variable
Number of observations
Clusters
Adjusted R2

0.466***
(0.005)
0.022
(0.014)
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N/A
0.653
0.476
107,338
221
0.367

0.460***
(0.015)
0.021
(0.014)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N/A
0.653
0.476
107,338
221
0.367

0.445***
(0.025)
-0.041
(0.038)
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N
0.655
0.475
4,847
35
0.338

0.440***
(0.025)
-0.042
(0.037)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
0.659
0.474
4,785
35
0.336

0.534***
(0.022)
-0.006
(0.020)
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N
0.565
0.496
22,793
78
0.348

0.510***
(0.041)
0.004
(0.023)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
0.571
0.495
18,574
78
0.336

Notes: This table reports evidence on assortative matching using the Indonesian 1995 Intercensal data, rounds 3 and 4
of the IFLS, and the pooled 1996, 2001, 2007, and 2013 rounds of the Zambia DHS. The unit of observation is a married
couple (i.e., a husband and wife). For all three samples, the husband and wife’s education levels are measured as indicator
variables for completing primary schooling. The mean (and standard deviation) of the indicator for the wife completing
primary school, IiWife Primary is 0.465 (0.499) for the Indonesia Intercensus, 0.599 (0.490) for the IFLS, and 0.204 (0.403)
for Zambia. ‘Marriage Year Controls’ consist of the year married and its square. ‘Marriage Age Controls’ consist of the
wife’s age at marriage and its square. The ‘Wife Muslim Controls’ consist of an indicator variable that equals one if the
wife is Muslim and its interaction with whether she completed primary school. ‘Ethnicity Control Interactions’ consist of
indicator variables for an individual belonging to an ethnic group that is matrilineal and that has female dominated agriculture respectively interacted with the wife’s education. ‘Polygynous Marriage Controls’ consist of an indicator variable
that equals one if the marriage is polygynous and its interaction with the wife’s education. Standard errors clustered at
the district-level appear in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels.

4.2

Prediction 2. Do the bride price amounts increase with the bride’s education?
We now turn to prediction 2 of the model and test whether the value of the bride price is

increasing in the educational attainment of the bride. Our empirical strategy is to estimate hedonic
regressions where bride price payments are a function of the wife’s educational attainment. Therefore,
we estimate the following equation:
ln(BP Amount)iet = ↵e + ↵t +

P rimary
1 Iiet

+

JuniorSec
2 Iiet

+

SeniorSec
3 Iiet

+ Xit + "iet ,

(5)

where i indexes a marriage, e indexes the ethnicity of the wife, and t indexes the survey year.
BP Amount is the value of the bride price that was paid at marriage.28 The variables IiP rimary ,
IiJuniorSec , and IiSeniorSec are indicator variables that equal one if the wife in marriage i completed
primary school, junior secondary, and senior secondary, respectively. The vector Xit includes a
quadratic in the year of marriage. In addition, depending on the specification, it also includes a
28

In cases where both the husband and wife report the bride price amount, we use the amount reported by the
husband under the logic that, as the individual who pays the price, he is most likely to remember it accurately. When
the husband’s report is missing, we use the wife’s reported value. Using the wife’s value instead delivers similar results.

22

quadratic in the wife’s age of marriage, fixed e↵ects for the husband’s education, a quadratic in the
husband’s age at marriage, a measure of the wife’s premarital wealth, an indicator variable for the
wife being Muslim, and an indicator for the marriage being polygynous. We use two di↵erent samples,
one from the 2000 and 2007 Indonesia Family Life Survey and the other from the Zambia Fertility
Preferences Survey, which includes information on 715 monogamous couples from a poor suburb of
Lusaka (Ashraf et al., 2017).
Estimates of equation (5) are reported in Table 4. Columns 1–5 report estimates for the hedonic
regressions in Indonesia, while columns 7–11 report estimates for Zambia. For each country, we report
five di↵erent specifications, with additional covariates added incrementally. The estimates show that
the amount of bride price paid at marriage is positively associated with the bride’s educational
attainment. In addition, as shown in columns 3–5 and 9–11, the relationship remains robust to the
inclusion of controls for the husband’s characteristics, which are potentially endogenous. It is also
robust to accounting for the wife’s premarital socio-economic status, as measured by her self-reported
log pre-marital wealth as measured in the IFLS (column 5) and by whether her family owned any
property or land as measured in the ZFPS (column 11). This is despite the fact that due to missing
data,29 the sample size in the IFLS is reduced from 4,548 observations to 1,597.30
The estimated e↵ects of education on bride price are large in magnitude. For example, according
to the estimates for Indonesia, reported in column 2, completion of primary school is associated with a
58% increase in the value of the bride price (relative to no schooling), completion of junior secondary
school is associated with an additional 67% increase in the bride price, and completion of senior
secondary schooling is associated with an additional 86% increase.31 According to the estimates,
parents of women who completed secondary school, on average, receive bride price payments that are
211% higher than parents of women who did not complete primary education. The estimates for the
smaller Zambian sample are also large and replicate the pattern of findings in Indonesia. According to
the point estimates from column 8, completing primary school is associated with a 2% increase in the
bride price payment, completing junior secondary school is associated with another 26% increase, and
completing secondary school with another 39% increase. Hence, bride price payments for secondary
29
Missing data arises if (1) a wife was not included in the sample, and therefore, she wasn’t asked about her pre-marital
assets, (2) the wife did not know her pre-marital assets, and (3) the wife reported 0 pre-marital assets.
30
Interestingly, we observe a positive and significant relationship between the bride price payment and a man’s
education in Indonesia (although not in Zambia). In our model, where people only sort on education, strictly speaking,
the bride price should not vary with a man’s education. However, the model also predicts that some uneducated women
match with educated men since there are fewer educated women than men. If these women are more desirable in other
dimensions than the uneducated women who match with uneducated men (e.g., attractiveness, health, etc.) and if
these characteristics are reflected in the bride price paid, then, due to assortative matching, we will observe a positive
relationship between the husband’s education and bride price, even after we control for the wife’s education.
31
For Indonesia, the indicator measures having completed secondary school and attended some college.

23

school graduates are 67% higher than payments for women who did not complete primary education.32
It is important to emphasize that, if more desirable women, who command larger bride prices,
are also independently more likely to be educated, the estimates of Table 4 do not have a causal
interpretation, just as Mincerian wage regressions cannot typically identify the labor market returns
to education (Griliches, 1977; Card, 1994; Heckman et al., 2006). Given this, we pursue a number
of alternative strategies to better understand the extent to which the correlations we observe are
potentially driven by third factors, like the wife’s unobserved quality.
First, we follow Duflo (2001) and use primary school construction as an instrument for a wife’s
completion of primary school. In doing this, we restrict our sample to ethnic groups that practice
bride price. As we will show (when testing prediction 5), school construction had no e↵ect on the
education of girls from non-bride price ethnic groups. Following Duflo (2001), we also restrict the
sample to individuals born between 1950 and 1972, and allow the e↵ect of school construction to vary
by a child’s age in 1974, restricting the e↵ect to 0 if a child was older than 12 in 1974.33 In the end,
the restrictions result in a sample of only 264 women.
The 2SLS estimates of the e↵ect of primary school completion on the value of the bride price
at marriage are reported in column 6 of Table 4.34 Although the estimated e↵ect is less precisely
estimated than the OLS estimates, it is larger in magnitude. However, the estimates should be
interpreted with caution given that the school construction instruments are fairly weak (the first-stage
F -statistic is 3.04). This is not surprising given the very small size of our sample (264 observations).35
As a second strategy, we provide additional evidence on the extent to which the bride’s education
has a causal e↵ect on bride price payments by using additional information from the ZFPS. In the
survey, each spouse of the 715 couples was asked a series of questions on the practice of bride price
or lobola as it is called locally. Respondents were unprompted and asked to indicate the factors that
a↵ect the value of the bride price in their community today (starting with the most important). The
answers are summarized in Table 5. The plurality of respondents (39%) listed education as the single
most important determinant of the value of the bride price at marriage. The next most commonly
listed factors as the first determinant were family values (16%) and good morals (15%). Overall, 69%
of respondents listed education as one of the three most important factors a↵ecting the value of the
32
Since the Zambian sample is drawn from the capital city of Zambia, which has levels of educational attainment that
are higher than the rest of the country, secondary schooling may be a more important determinant of bride price (and
primary schooling less important) in this sample than for the rest of Zambia.
33
Full details of the estimating equations for the instrumental variables strategy are reported in Appendix B.
34
The first-stage estimates are reported in Appendix Table A5.
35
To partially address the weak-instruments problem, we also check the robustness of our estimates to using a limited
information maximium likelihood regression. Doing so yields a similarly positive estimate of 3.78 (and standard error
of 2.05).

24

25
Y
Y
N
N
N
N
N
11.501
2.375
5,555
0.467

0.615***
(0.066)
0.658***
(0.066)
0.865***
(0.077)

Y
Y
Y
N
N
N
N
11.495
2.366
5,092
0.463

Y
Y
Y
N
N
N
N
11.553
2.342
4,713
0.472

0.237***
(0.084)
0.414***
(0.077)
0.532***
(0.090)

0.366***
(0.077)
0.471***
(0.074)
0.468***
(0.089)

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N
11.595
2.309
4,548
0.467

0.212**
(0.084)
0.439***
(0.079)
0.540***
(0.090)

0.373***
(0.078)
0.456***
(0.074)
0.457***
(0.091)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
12.438
1.941
1,597
0.354

0.140
(0.138)
0.511***
(0.121)
0.332***
(0.125)

0.234*
(0.130)
0.346***
(0.117)
0.278**
(0.128)

3.04
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N
N
11.234
2.596
264
0.433

2.327**
(1.172)

Y
Y
N
N
N
N/A
N/A
7.327
1.293
542
0.229

0.002
(0.137)
0.134
(0.137)
0.384***
(0.131)

Y
Y
Y
N
N
N/A
N/A
7.327
1.292
543
0.237

0.023
(0.142)
0.258*
(0.137)
0.391***
(0.147)

Y
Y
Y
N
N
N/A
N/A
7.330
1.292
540
0.241

0.230
(0.197)
0.173
(0.164)
-0.080
(0.130)

-0.015
(0.141)
0.255*
(0.142)
0.398**
(0.153)

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N/A
N/A
7.330
1.292
540
0.242

0.239
(0.197)
0.176
(0.164)
-0.079
(0.130)

-0.008
(0.141)
0.279**
(0.142)
0.396**
(0.153)

(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Dependent Variable: Log Bride Price Amount
Indonesia (IFLS)
2SLS
Zambia (ZFPS)

0.579***
(0.071)
0.672***
(0.070)
0.857***
(0.078)

(2)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N/A
N/A
7.326
1.290
539
0.240

0.270
(0.196)
0.158
(0.163)
-0.070
(0.129)

-0.027
(0.141)
0.289**
(0.143)
0.358**
(0.154)

(11)

Notes: This table reports estimates of the relationship between female education and bride price payments. The unit of observation is a married woman. The sample includes all
women from the relevant data source for which a bride price payment was reported. Data for Indonesia are from the 2001 and 2007 rounds of the Indonesia Family Life Survey.
Data for Zambia are from a special module implemented in the first wave of the ZFPS in the Fall of 2014 (Ashraf et al., 2017). The indicator variables for senior secondary school
attainment, IiSeniorSecondary and IiH:SeniorSecondary , are measured slightly di↵erently in Indonesia and Zambia. In Indonesia, they indicate that an individual completed secondary
school and attended some college. In Zambia, they indicate that the individual completed senior secondary school. ‘Marriage Year Controls’ consist of the year married and its
square. ‘Wife Marriage Age Controls’ and ‘Husband Marriage Age Controls’ consist of the wife’s (and husband’s) age at marriage and its square. ‘Wife’s Wealth’ is a measure
of the wife’s pre-marital wealth. In Indonesia, it is measured as the log of pre-marital assets, while in Zambia, it is measured using an indicator variable for pre-marital property
ownership. ‘Wife Muslim’ is an indicator variable equal to one if the wife reports being Muslim. ‘Polygynous Marriage’ is an indicator variable that equals one if the marriage is
polygynous. Column 6 reports 2SLS estimates, where the school-construction-program instrument from Duflo (2001) is used as an instrument for female primary completion with
the sample restricted to women from bride price ethnic groups. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels.

F -test for first stage
Ethnicity FE
Marriage Year Controls
Wife Marriage Age Controls
Husband Marriage Age Controls
Wife’s Premarital Wealth
Wife Muslim
Polygynous Marriage
Mean of dependent variable
SD of dependent variable
Number of observations
Adjusted R2

IiH:SeniorSecondary

IiH:JuniorSecondary

Husband’s Education:
IiH:P rimary

IiSeniorSecondary

IiJuniorSecondary

Wife’s Education:
IiP rimary

(1)

Table 4: Determinants of bride price payment amounts

Table 5: Perceived determinants of bride price values in Zambia
Think about the factors that a↵ect bride price today:
what is the . . . most important factor?
Education

obs.

Family values

obs.

Good morals

obs.

Virginity

obs.

Tribe

obs.

Age

obs.

Other

obs.

First

Second

Third

Not listed

531
39.3%
222
16.4%
197
14.6%
131
9.7%
96
7.11%
39
2.9%
135
10.0%

216
17.0%
268
21.1%
278
21.9%
179
14.1%
115
9.1%
93
7.3%
121
9.5%

150
13.0%
206
17.9%
210
18.2%
177
15.4%
185
16.1%
139
12.1%
86
7.5%

454
30.7%
655
44.6%
666
45.3%
864
60.9%
955
67.8%
1080
77.7%
1009
73.0%

Notes: This table reports respondents’ answers when asked “Think about the
factors that a↵ect bride price today. What is the [first, second, or third] most
important factor?” An observation is a person, either male or female, who is a
member of 715 couples from peri-urban Lusaka. The data were collected as a
special module implemented in the first wave of the ZFPS in the Fall of 2014
(Ashraf et al., 2017).

bride price.
As a further check of whether the relationship between bride price and education is spurious,
respondents were also asked to indicate why, in their opinion, bride price payments are higher for
more educated brides. Respondents indicated several reasons that were categorized and are reported
in Appendix Table A6.36 The most common answer for why they thought that the bride price is
increasing in education was that parents should be compensated for the educational investments
made in their daughter. This is consistent with the common anthropological interpretation of the
bride price as compensation for the parents’ investments made in the bride (e.g., Vroklage, 1952).
Other common explanations attributed the higher bride price to the increased productivity of the
bride, either in relation to earnings in the labor market, improved skills within the household, or
increased ability to promote the health and education of children (Lavy, 1996; Behrman et al., 1999).
This interpretation is in line with the model’s assumption that the wife’s education positively a↵ects
marital output in addition to labor market productivity.
Few respondents agree with the interpretation that the estimated relationship could be driven
by omitted factors, such as more educated brides having richer parents who demand a higher bride
36

Respondents were first asked unprompted and then were asked about specific reasons and could either agree or
disagree. The unprompted responses are reported in column 1 and the prompted responses in columns 2 and 3.

26

price. When asked unprompted, only 7.5% of the sample said the association between bride price
and education is because education “is associated with her parents being rich,” making it the least
popular answer. Taken together, the survey responses from Table 5 and Appendix Table A6 show
that, at least in the minds of individuals, the relationship appears to be causal.37

4.3

Prediction 3. Do bride price ethnic groups have higher levels of female educational attainment?

We now turn to prediction 3, which states that girls from bride price ethnic groups are more likely
to become educated. We test this prediction by estimating the relationship between the traditional
practice of bride price and school enrollment in Indonesia and Zambia.
Our estimating equation is:
Enrolled
= ↵d + ↵t +
Iiedt

BrideP rice
1 Ie

+ Xi + Xe ⇧ + "iedt ,

(6)

where i indexes girls aged 5–22, e ethnic groups, d districts, and t the year of the survey. As before,
for Indonesia, we use the 1995 Intercensal Survey, and for Zambia, we use either the pooled DHS
or the ZFPS. When we use the Indonesia Intercensal Survey and the Zambian DHS, the dependent
Enrolled is an indicator variable that equals one if girl i is enrolled in school. For the ZFPS
variable Iiedt

sample, because the sample comprises married women who are older than school age, the dependent
variable is an indicator that equals one if the woman completed primary school. As before, IeBrideP rice
is an indicator variable that equals one if ethnicity e traditionally engages in the practice of bride
price payments at marriage. ↵d denotes district fixed e↵ects and ↵t denotes survey-year fixed e↵ects
(which are relevant for the Zambia sample only). The vector Xi includes the age of the girl at the time
of the survey, as well as her age squared, and in all samples but the ZFPS sample, it also includes an
indicator that equals one if woman i reports being Muslim, and an indicator for if she reports being
in a polygynous marriage. The vector Xe includes our baseline set of ethnicity-level covariates: an
indicator for traditional matrilineal inheritance and an indicator for traditional female participation
in agriculture. We cluster our standard errors at the ethnicity-level and report p-values from a wild
cluster bootstrap procedure. Estimates of equation (6) are reported in Table 6. Columns 1 and 2
report estimates for Indonesia, while columns 5–9 report estimates for Zambia using either the DHS
(columns 5–7) or the ZFPS (columns 8 and 9). The first column for each sample (columns 1, 5 and
37

The survey findings are also consistent with information garnered from focus groups conducted by our research
team in Lusaka. For example, one respondent told us that when a parent negotiates lobola, he or she calculates how
much was spent on education.

27

8) report estimates of equation (6) without the muslim, polygynous marriage, matrilineal, or female
participation in agriculture controls. The next column of each sample (columns 2, 6, and 9) include
these controls. For the Zambian DHS sample, we also report a third specification (column 7) that
replaces district fixed e↵ects with much finer census cluster fixed e↵ects. Since census clusters are
not harmonized in the DHS over time, these amount to census cluster by survey year fixed e↵ects.
In all specifications, we estimate a positive relationship between belonging to an ethnic group that
practices bride price and female education. The estimates for the larger Indonesian sample indicate
that girls from age 5–22 in bride price ethnic groups are 4.1–4.9 percentage points more likely to be
enrolled in school than girls from ethnic groups that do not practice bride price. In Zambia, in the
nationally-representative DHS sample, the coefficients are smaller (1.2–2.1 percentage points), while
in the smaller Lusaka-based ZFPS sample they are slightly larger in magnitude (4.5–7.7 percentage
points), although imprecisely estimated.

4.4

Prediction 4: Do girls from bride price ethnic groups have lower test scores?
The fourth prediction to emerge from the model states that girls from bride price ethnic groups

should have lower academic ability on average, conditional on attending school. We use self-reported,
retrospective test score data, taken from rounds 3 and 4 of the IFLS, to test whether this is the case
for primary school students in Indonesia. Unfortunately, no similar data are available for Zambia,
and so we only have estimates for Indonesia.
Our sample includes all female students in the IFLS who took the Ebtanas state exam, which was
the national exam between 1980 and 2001.38 Our estimating equation is:
TestScore iepst = ↵t +

ps

+

BrideP rice
1 Ie

+ Xi + Xe ⇧ + "iepst ,

(7)

where i indexes a female primary school student, e indexes her ethnicity, p indexes a province, s
indexes the year the test was taken, and t indexes the IFLS survey year. The dependent variable
is the student’s test score, normalized to have mean of zero and a standard deviation of one in our
sample. ↵t denotes survey-year fixed e↵ects and

ps

denotes province by test-year fixed e↵ects, which

are included because the Ebtanas exam system was standardized at the province-level each year. The
vector Xi includes our age controls, age and age squared, and a control for whether the individual
reports being muslim.39 The vector Xe includes our set of ethnicity-level controls: indicators for
38

In 2001, the Ebtanas exam was replaced by the UNAS exam.
Since test takers are asked about their scores retrospectively as adults, we typically do not observe test-takers in
the same household as their parents. Therefore, we cannot include controls for other household characteristics such as
39

28

29

0.041***
(0.014)
[0.006]
Females 5-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
Y
Y
N
N
N
0.578
0.494
107,994
0.405
39

0.049**
(0.011)
[0.026]
Females 5-22
N/A
N/A
N/A
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
0.578
0.494
107,994
0.407
39

-0.126**
(0.048)
[0.026]
All Females
Y
Y
N/A
N
Y
N
N
N/A
0.036
1.023
2,926
0.088
17

-0.128
(0.061)
[0.132]
All Females
Y
Y
N/A
N
Y
Y
Y
N/A
0.036
1.023
2,926
0.086
17

(6)

(7)
Zambia

0.017
(0.014)
[0.260]
Females 5-22
Y
N/A
N
Y
Y
N
N
N
0.552
0.497
42,252
0.349
29

0.021***
(0.007)
[0.010]
Females 5-22
Y
N/A
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
0.552
0.497
42,306
0.393
29

0.012*
(0.006)
[0.092]
Females 5-22
Y
N/A
Y
N/A
Y
Y
Y
Y
0.539
0.498
31,212
0.412
29

Pooled DHS
Currently Enrolled in School

(5)

(9)

0.077
(0.042)
[0.146]
All Females
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Y
N
N/A
N/A
0.625
0.485
706
0.028
23

0.045
(0.042)
[0.410]
All Females
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Y
Y
N/A
N/A
0.625
0.485
706
0.028
23

ZFPS
Primary School Completion

(8)

Notes: This table reports estimates of the relationship between the traditional practice of bride price and school enrolment (columns 1–2 and 5–7), primary school completion (columns 8–9), or standardized test scores (columns 3–4). In all specifications, the unit of observation is a female. The Indonesia data are from the 1995 Intercensus, and the Zambia data are from either the pooled 1996, 2001, 2007,
and 2013 DHS or the ZFPS. ‘Age Controls’ consist of age and age squared. ‘Ethnicity Controls’ consist of indicator variables for an individual belonging to an ethnic group that is matrilineal and that
traditionally had female dominated agriculture. ‘Muslim’ is an indicator variable equal to one if the individual reports being Muslim. ‘Polygynous Household’ is an indicator variable that equals one if
the individual lives in a polygynous household. The ZFPS and Intercensus do not contain any polygynous households. In the ZFPS, we do not control for district fixed e↵ects since the entire sample lives
in Lusaka. Census cluster fixed e↵ects are finer than district fixed e↵ects. Standard errors clustered at the ethnicity level are reported in parentheses, while wild cluster bootstrap p-values are reported in
square brackets. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels according to the wild cluster bootstrap p-values.

Sample
Survey Year FE
Year Tested by Province FE
Census Cluster by Survey Year FE
District FE
Age Controls
Ethnicity Controls
Muslim
Polygynous Household
Mean of dependent variable
SD of dependent variable
Number of observations
Adjusted R2
Clusters

IeBrideP rice

(2)
(3)
(4)
Indonesia
1995 Intercensal Data
IFLS
Currently Enrolled in School Standardized Test Score

(1)

Table 6: Relationship between bride price, female enrollment, and test scores in Indonesia and Zambia

belonging to a traditionally matrilineal ethnic group or an ethnic group with female participation in
agriculture. We report standard errors clustered at the ethnicity level, as well as p-values from a wild
cluster bootstrap procedure.
Estimates of equation (7) are reported in columns 3 and 4 of Table 6. Column 3 reports estimates
without the muslim and ethnicity controls, while column 4 reports estimates with the controls. Consistent with proposition 4, the test scores of girls from bride price groups are estimated to be 0.126
standard deviations lower than girls from non-bride groups.

5

Prediction 5. Di↵erential E↵ects of Education Policies
We now turn to the main prediction of our model, which describes how the presence of a bride price

custom generates heterogeneity in the e↵ects of a decline in the cost of schooling on female enrollment.
To test the prediction, we first exploit the same quasi-experimental variation as in Duflo (2001) and
estimate the e↵ects of Indonesia’s INPRES school construction program on female education. We
then explore a large expansion in the supply of schools in Zambia in the late 1990s and early 2000s.

5.1

Evidence from Indonesia
The INPRES program was initiated in 1973, and over the following five years, 61,800 primary

schools were constructed, which is equivalent to two schools for every thousand children enrolled in
1971. Between 1973 and 1978, the average aggregate enrollment rate for boys aged 7–12 increased
from 69 to 83 percent. In her study, Duflo (2001) estimates the causal e↵ect of the program on boys’
education. She finds that in the average district, the program increased years of schooling completed
by male students by 0.27 years. Since Duflo (2001) mainly used the program to estimate the returns
to education in terms of wages, her sample only included males. We now turn to an examination of
the e↵ects of the program on females.
We start with the baseline estimating equation from her analysis:
yidk = ↵k + ↵d +

P ost
1 Ik

⇥ Intensity d +

X

X0 d Ijk

j

+ "idk ,

(8)

j

where i indexes individuals, d indexes the district of birth, and k indexes the year of birth. The
dependent variable, yidk , is an indicator that equals one if individual i completed primary school.40
socioeconomic status or whether parents practiced polygyny.
40
Because the school construction program built primary schools, we focus our analysis on primary school completion
rates. Examining years of schooling, we find estimates that are similar but slightly less precise.

30

↵k denotes birth-year fixed e↵ects and ↵d denotes district fixed e↵ects. IkP ost is an indicator variable
equal to one if an individual belongs to the younger cohort that was born between 1968 and 1972
(and would have fully experienced the intervention). IkP ost equals zero for the older cohort that was
born between 1950 and 1962 (and would not have experienced the intervention since they would have
been too old for primary school by time it was implemented). As in the baseline specification of
Duflo (2001), partial treatment cohorts born between 1963 and 1967 are not included in the sample.
Intensity d is the number of schools (per 1,000 school-age children) built in birth district d during the
school construction program. Ikj is an indicator variable that equals one if individual i’s year of birth
P
is equal to j and zero otherwise, and j X0 d Ijk j denotes birth-year fixed e↵ects interacted with the

following district-level covariates: the number of school-aged children in the district in 1971 before

the school building program took place, the enrollment rate of the district in 1971, and the exposure
of the district to the second largest INPRES program, a water and sanitation program. Following
Duflo (2001), we cluster standard errors at the level of an individual’s district of birth. However, for
robustness, we also report Conley standard errors that account for spatial correlation.
Estimates of equation (8) are reported in column 1 of Table 7. We see that in contrast to
Duflo’s findings for males, for females, the estimated e↵ect of school construction on primary school
enrollment is small in magnitude and not statistically di↵erent from zero. This is a fact that has been
previously documented in Hertz and Jayasundera (2007).
We next show that this average e↵ect masks significant heterogeneity. To do this, we estimate
an extension of equation (8) that allows for a di↵erential e↵ect of the school construction program
depending on whether a girl’s ethnic group traditionally practices bride price:
yiedk =

P ost
1 Ik

⇥ Intensity d ⇥ IeN oBrideP rice +

P ost
2 Ik

⇥ Intensity d ⇥ IeBrideP rice

+↵k IeN oBrideP rice + ↵k IeBrideP rice + ↵e + ↵e IkP ost + ↵e Intensity d + ↵d IeN oBrideP rice
X
X
+↵d IeBrideP rice + IeN oBrideP rice
X0 d Ijk j + IeBrideP rice
X0 d Ijk ⌥j + "iedk ,
(9)
j

j

where all indices and variables are defined as in equation (8). As in our previous analyses, e indexes
the ethnicity of individual i, and IeBrideP rice is an indicator variable equal to one if ethnic group e
traditionally practices bride price. Additionally, IeN oBrideP rice is an indicator that equals one if the
group does not traditionally practice bride price. The inclusion of IkP ost ⇥ Intensity d ⇥ IeN oBrideP rice

and IkP ost ⇥ Intensity d ⇥ IeBrideP rice allow us to estimate the impact of school construction separately

for ethnic groups that make bride price payments at marriage and those that do not. Thus,

31

1

and

2

are our primary coefficients of interest.
Equation (9) allows the district fixed e↵ects to vary depending on the bride price customs of

the ethnic group: ↵d IeN oBrideP rice and ↵d IeBrideP rice . These terms absorb the double interactions,
Intensity d ⇥ IeN oBrideP rice and Intensity d ⇥ IeBrideP rice , of the triple interactions of interest. We also

interact the ethnicity fixed e↵ects with the post-treatment indicator variable, ↵e IkP ost . These fixed

e↵ects absorb the double interaction terms IkP ost ⇥ IeN oBrideP rice and IkP ost ⇥ IeBrideP rice . Lastly,
we allow the e↵ects of our baseline set of district-level covariates interacted with cohort fixed efP
fects to vary depending on whether ethnicity e practices bride price: IeN oBrideP rice j X0 d Ijk j and
P
IeBrideP rice j X0 d Ijk j .41
The estimates of equation (9) are reported in column 2 of Table 7. We find a positive and

statistically significant e↵ect of the school construction program on primary school completion rates
for bride price females but not for non-bride price females. The point estimates suggest that an
increase of one school per 1,000 school-aged children in a district increases the likelihood that a
female from a bride price ethnicity will complete primary school by 2.6 percentage points. The Wald
test of the equality of the e↵ects of school construction for bride price and non-bride price ethnic
groups gives an F -statistic of 2.84 (p = 0.09). Thus, the equality of the estimated e↵ects for the two
groups can be rejected at a 10% significance level.
We confirm this finding by estimating equation (9) separately for girls belonging to ethnic groups
with bride price (column 3) and for those belonging to ethnic groups without bride price (column
4). The separate estimates also help to illustrate the importance of bride price for policy evaluation.
If an evaluator estimated the e↵ects looking within bride price ethnic groups (column 3), she would
conclude that the program was highly successful. However, if she estimated the e↵ects looking within
non-bride price groups (column 4), she would conclude the program was a failure.42
The remaining columns of Table 7 test the robustness of the estimates. First, we focus on the
possible relationship between bride price and religion in Indonesia. Although the dominant religion
in Indonesia is Islam, the custom of the bride price does not have its roots in Islam, but in traditional
indigenous customs, referred to as adat, that pre-date conversion to Islam (Vroklage, 1952).43 As a
41
For the interested reader, balance statistics for the di↵erence between bride price and non-bride price groups are
reported in Appendix Table A7.
42
One important caveat to keep in mind when interpreting the estimates is the possibility of classical measurement
error, which would bias the estimated e↵ect downwards for both bride price and non-bride price groups. Thus, although
it would not a↵ect the di↵erential response between the two groups, it would a↵ect the level for each group. Therefore,
it is possible that the e↵ect for bride price girls is higher than estimated, and the e↵ect for the non-bride girls is not
exactly zero, but a small or even modest positive e↵ect.
43
The fact that Indonesian bride price customs do not originate from Islamic customs is important given the common
Muslim custom/law that a payment, or mehr, be paid by the husband to the wife at the time of marriage. Upon divorce,
the mehr is kept by the woman, thereby serving as a form of divorce insurance (Ambrus et al., 2010; Quale, 1988). It

32

Table 7: Bride price status and the INPRES school expansion in the 1995 Indonesia Intercensal Data
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Dep Var: Indicator Variable for Completion of Primary School
NonBride Price Bride Price
Females Females
Females
Females
Females
Females
IkP ost ⇥ Intensityd
IkP ost ⇥ Intensityd ⇥ IeBrideP rice

-0.002
(0.007)
{0.009}

IkP ost ⇥ Intensityd ⇥ IeN oBrideP rice
Ethnicity FE
Ethnicity FE ⇥IkP ost
Ethnicity FE ⇥Intensityd
District FE
District FE ⇥IeBrideP rice
Duflo Controls
Duflo Controls ⇥IeBrideP rice
Cohort FE
Cohort FE ⇥IeBrideP rice
Muslim Controls
Ethnicity Controls Interactions
F -test (equality of coe↵)
Mean of dependent variable
SD of dependent variable
Number of observations
Clusters
Adjusted R2

N
N
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
N
N
N
0.642
0.480
76,959
255
0.179

0.025**
(0.012)
{0.011}
-0.001
(0.010)
{0.008}
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
2.67
0.609
0.488
65,403
240
0.184

0.025**
(0.013)
{0.011}

-0.001
(0.010)
{0.008}

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
N
Y
N
N
N

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
N
Y
N
N
N

0.638
0.481
9,707
155
0.175

0.603
0.489
55,696
217
0.185

0.035***
(0.011)
{0.010}
0.003
(0.009)
{0.006}
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
4.61
0.609
0.488
65,403
240
0.189

0.034***
(0.011)
{0.010}
0.004
(0.009)
{0.007}
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
4.20
0.609
0.488
65,403
240
0.188

Notes: This table reports estimates of the e↵ect of school building on educational attainment for females from ethnicities with and
without bride price traditions. Following the empirical strategy of Duflo (2001), the sample consists of individuals born between
either 1968 and 1972 or 1950 and 1962. IkP ost refers to the treated cohort, born between 1968 and 1972, while the untreated cohort
was born between 1950 and 1962. Educational attainment data are taken from the 1995 Indonesia Intercensal Survey. Intensityd
is the number of schools built in a district per 1,000 people in the school-aged population. ‘Duflo Controls’ consist of the interaction of cohort fixed e↵ects with the number of school-aged children in the district in 1971, with the enrollment rate in 1971 and
with the district level implementation of a water and sanitation program under INPRES. ‘Muslim Controls’ consist of an indicator
variable for being muslim, its interactions with birth year and birth district fixed e↵ects, and the triple interaction of the muslim
indicator, belonging to a treated cohort, and treatment intensity. ‘Ethnicity Controls’ consist of the interactions between ethnicitylevel indicator variables for female dominated agriculture and matrilineality, being a treated cohort, and treatment intensity. The
subscript d indexes birth districts, k indexes cohorts, and e indexes ethnic groups. Standard errors clustered at the level of the district of birth are reported in parentheses. Conley standard errors that allow for correlation in errors of observations within 400 km
appear in curly brackets. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels according to the clustered standard errors.

33

robustness check, we allow the estimated e↵ects of the school construction program to di↵er for those
that report being muslim in the Intercensal survey. In practice, this means including the individuallevel muslim indicator variable interacted with: birth-cohort fixed e↵ects ↵k , district-of-birth fixed
e↵ects ↵d , and the post treatment indicator times the district-level treatment intensity measure,
IkP ost ⇥ Intensity d . The estimates, which are reported in column 5 of Table 7, show that our finding
of interest remains robust, with the e↵ect of the school construction program becoming slightly larger
and more precisely estimated for bride price females.44
Our last robustness check accounts for the possibility that bride price might be correlated with
other ethnicity-level characteristics that could lead to di↵erential e↵ects of the schooling program.
Thus, we allow the e↵ect of the school-construction program to di↵er depending on whether an
ethnic group traditionally has matrilineal inheritance or significant female participation in agriculture.
This is done by re-estimating equation (9) with the inclusion of the ethnicity-level characteristics,
each interacted with IkP ost ⇥ Intensity d . The double interaction terms associated with this triple
interaction are captured by ethnicity fixed e↵ects interacted with the post treatment indicator IkP ost

and ethnicity fixed e↵ects interacted with the district-level treatment intensity measure Intensity d ,
which are already included in the specification. The estimates, which are reported in column 6, show
that the inclusion of these variables leave the bride price and non-bride price interactions virtually
unchanged.
An alternative estimation strategy to equation (8), which rigidly defines a pre-treatment and
post-treatment cohort, is to allow the e↵ects of school construction to vary flexibly and across a
fuller range of cohorts. Specifically, in the more flexible specification, in equation (8), the term
P
P ost ⇥ Intensity is replaced by
l
1 Ik
d
l l Ik ⇥ Intensity d , where l indexes 3-year birth cohorts (e.g.

those born from 1950–1952, those born from 1953–1955, and so on). This gives the following equation:
yidk = ↵k + ↵d +

X
l

l
l Ik

⇥ Intensity d +

X

X0 d Ijk

j

+ "idk ,

(10)

j

To examine the di↵erential e↵ects of the program, we estimate equation (10) separately for females
from bride price and non-bride price ethnic groups. The estimated relationships between school
is important to point out that the bride price, which is common in our context, is di↵erent from mehr.
44
As another robustness check, we re-estimate equation (9) also allowing the di↵erential e↵ect of schooling between
bride price and non-bride price groups to di↵er depending on whether an individual reports being Muslim or not.
The estimates, which are reported in Appendix Table A8, show that the di↵erential e↵ect by bride price is similar for
Muslims and non-Muslim girls. If anything, the di↵erential e↵ect of bride price is larger and more significant among
non-Muslims, suggesting that the presence of Islam is not driving our results. This is also consistent with the fact that,
as we show in the following subsection, we obtain very similar estimates in Zambia, which is a predominantly Christian
country.

34

−.02

0

Coefficient
.02

.04

.06

Figure 3: Estimates of the e↵ect of school-construction in Indonesia on female education by cohort
of birth

22 to 24 19 to 21 16 to 18 13 to 15 10 to 12

7 to 9

4 to 6

1 to 3

−2 to 0 −5 to −3

Age in 1974
Bride Price

Non−Bride Price

Notes: The figure reports estimates of the e↵ect of school construction on primary school completion for 3-year cohorts separately
for females from ethnicities with and without bride price traditions. The x-axis reports the age range (in 1974) for each cohort and
the y-axis reports the estimated coefficient. The sample consists of individuals born between 1950 and 1979. The left vertical line
indicates the youngest cohort that did not receive any treatment from school construction. The right vertical line indicates the
youngest cohort that could not have received full treatment from school construction. Thus, the “10 to 12” and “7 to 9” cohorts
are ones that received partial treatment. The corresponding coefficients and standard errors are reported Appendix Table A9.

construction and primary school completion for the di↵erent cohorts – i.e., the

l ’s

– are reported

in Appendix Table A9 and shown visually in Figure 3. The x-axis denotes each cohort’s age as of
1974, the year in which the first schools were completed, and the y-axis is the estimated coefficient.
The vertical lines in the figure indicate the cohorts that were partially treated. The vertical left
line indicates the youngest cohort that would have been too old to have been a↵ected by the school
construction program. This cohort was older than primary school age when the construction began
in 1974. The right line indicates the youngest cohort that would not have received full treatment.
The next youngest cohort, which would have been 4–6 years old in 1974, had the potential to receive
virtually full treatment if their location received new schools early in the project period.
The estimates show that for all cohorts that were 13–15 years old or older in 1974, there is
no detectable e↵ect of the program on elementary school completion. This is expected since girls
belonging to these cohorts would have already finished primary school by the time the program
35

was completed in 1978. The program had the potential to fully a↵ect the cohorts who were 4–6 or
younger in 1974. Figure 3 shows that for these cohorts there is a positive e↵ect for girls from bride
price groups, but not for girls from non-bride price groups. More generally, we see a very di↵erent
pattern for the two groups. For bride price girls, the program appears to have had e↵ects exactly
on the expected cohorts, while for non-bride price groups, there is little e↵ect of the program across
cohorts.
We next turn to an examination of the sensitivity of our estimates of a di↵erential e↵ect of school
construction. We begin by checking the sensitivity of our findings to the use of an alternative dataset,
the 2010 Indonesia Census, which is a more recent data source than the 1995 Indonesia Intercensal
Survey. A benefit of the 2010 data over the 1995 data is its much larger sample size due to its being
a Census rather than an Intercensus. However, the data also have a number of important drawbacks,
which is why we follow Duflo (2001) and use the 1995 Intercensal Survey as our baseline source.
First, in 2010, the oldest members of the sample are 60 (compared to 45 in the 1995 data), which
raises concerns about selective attrition due to mortality. Second, due to the creation of many new
districts in Indonesia between 1995 and 2010, the school construction data are less precisely matched
to individual birth districts in the 2010 data.45 Despite these shortcomings of the 2010 data, we check
the robustness of our findings by re-estimating equations (8) and (9) using this alternative sample.
The estimates, which are reported in columns 1–2 of Appendix Table A10, show that we obtain
similar results using the 2010 Census data. As with the 1995 Intercensus data, the estimated e↵ect
of school construction is positive and significant for bride price ethnic groups but is not statistically
di↵erent from zero for non-bride price groups.
The second check that we perform is to test the robustness of our results to the inclusion of
linear time trends that are allowed to vary at the district level (and di↵erentially for bride price and
non-bride price ethnic groups). Estimates of equation (9) with the new district-specific time trends
are reported in columns 3-4 of Appendix Table A10. Although including the controls reduces the
precision of the estimates, it does not change the qualitative pattern that the school construction had
larger e↵ects for bride price groups in Indonesia. The estimated e↵ect of school construction remains
positive for bride price girls and very close to zero for non-bride price girls.
Lastly, we also report the results of a placebo test from Duflo (2001) where we re-estimate equations (8) and (9), but assign children aged 12–17 at the time of the school construction to be the
placebo treated cohort and children aged 18–24 at the time to be the placebo untreated cohort.
The estimates, which are reported in columns 5–6 of Appendix Table A10, show that the placebo
45

IPUMS is currently in the process of attempting to harmonize district definitions over time in Indonesia.

36

treatment had no statistically significant e↵ects on either bride price or non-bride price females.

5.2

Evidence from Zambia
Like Indonesia, Zambia also implemented a large school construction program that built a to-

tal of 5,649 schools between 1994 and 2007. Although this construction program occurred over a
longer timespan and the process of choosing the location and timing of school construction was more
opaque than in Indonesia, the episode provides large-scale variation in school construction that can
be used to test Prediction 5 of the model in a di↵erent setting.46 We do this using data from the
Zambian Ministry of Education on the stock of primary schools by year and district. These data are
then combined with four rounds of the Zambia DHS: 1996, which is at the beginning of the school
construction episode; 2001, during the middle of the episode; 2007, near the end of the episode; and
2013, after the episode. To better illustrate the relationship between the DHS surveys and the school
construction episode, in Appendix Figure A1 we show the number of schools built by year in Zambia
between 1940 and 2013, and mark the timing of the four rounds of the DHS. We also report this
same information, but separately for each province in Appendix Figure A2. These graphs show that
there is significant heterogeneity across space in the timing of the school construction project. As
will become clear below, this fact is important given our estimating equation.
In contrast to Indonesia, school construction in Zambia occurred over a longer period of time
and the strategy for when and where schools were built is unclear. Therefore, rather than examining variation arising from the interaction of a pre-treatment versus post-treatment cohort indicator
variable with the spatial variation in treatment intensity across districts, we instead estimate the
relationship between the stock of schools in a district during a given survey year and the probability
of enrollment of children aged 5–12 living in that district during at that time. Thus, our baseline
estimating equation, which estimates an average e↵ect of school construction across all ethnic group,
irrespective of bride price practice, is given by:
yiedkt =

1 Schools dt /Area d

+ ↵kt + ↵et + ↵ed + "iedkt .

46

(11)

Within Africa, there are other school expansion episodes that one could potentially use to examine the impacts of
interest: Zimbabwe (Agüero and Bharadwaj, 2014), Sierra Leone (Mocan and Cannonier, 2012), and Nigeria (Osili and
Long, 2008). However, for Sierra Leone and Nigeria, there is insufficient variation in the practice of bride price. In both
countries, nearly all people belong to ethnic groups that practice bride price. In Zimbabwe, sufficiently fine-grained
data on ethnic affiliation are not available from the data sources that report education.

37

Our estimating equation which allows for a di↵erential e↵ect depending on bride price practice is:
yiedkt =

1 Schools dt /Area d

⇥ IeN oBrideP rice +

2 Schools dt /Area d

+↵kt IeN oBrideP rice + ↵kt IeBrideP rice + ↵et + ↵ed + "iedkt .

⇥ IeBrideP rice
(12)

In both equations, i indexes girls who are 5–12 years old, e indexes ethnic groups, d indexes districts,
k indexes their birth year, and t indexes the year of the survey (either 1996, 2001, 2007, or 2013).
Our outcome of interest, yiedkt , is an indicator variable that equals one if girl i is enrolled in school
in year t. Our measure of school construction, Schools dt /Area d , is the stock of schools in district d
and year t, normalized by the district area in square kilometers. As before, IeBrideP rice is an indicator
variable that equals one if ethnic group e traditionally practices bride price, while IeN oBrideP rice is an
indicator variable that equals one if the ethnic group does not.
The specification also includes cohort-by-survey year fixed e↵ects interacted with the bride price
indicator variables, ↵kt IeN oBrideP rice and ↵kt IeBrideP rice . These are the equivalent of the cohort fixed
e↵ects interacted with the bride price indicator variables in equation (9). We also include ethnicitytime period fixed e↵ects, ↵et , and ethnicity-district fixed e↵ects, ↵ed , which are the equivalent of the
ethnicity fixed e↵ects interacted with the post-treatment indicator variable, and the district fixed
e↵ects interacted with the bride price indicator variables in equation (9). We cluster our standard
errors at the district level and also report Conley standard errors that account for spatial correlation.47
Estimates are reported in Table 8. Column 1 reports estimates of equation (11). We see that in
Zambia, we find a similar pattern as in Indonesia: the estimates are small and close to zero. Column
2 reports estimates of equation (12), which allows for a di↵erential e↵ect depending on bride price
practice. As in Indonesia, positive e↵ects of school construction are concentrated among girls from
ethnic groups that traditionally practice bride price. For girls from ethnic groups that do not engage
in this practice, the estimated e↵ect is very close to zero. The estimated di↵erence between the two
groups is statistically significant. Results from a Wald test indicate that the hypothesis of the equality
of the e↵ects for the two groups can be rejected at a 5 percent significance level. The F -statistic is
5.22 and the p-value is 0.03.
Columns 3 and 4 report estimates of equation (11) separately for bride price and non-bride price
girls. For girls from bride price ethnic groups, we estimate a positive and significant relationship
between school construction and enrollment. For girls from non-bride price ethnic groups, we estimate
47
Balance statistics for the di↵erence between bride price and non-bride price groups for are reported in Appendix
Table A11.

38

a relationship that is not statistically di↵erent from zero.
The last two columns of Table 8 provide evidence that the results are robust to controlling for
potential sources of omitted variable bias. In column 5, we report estimates of equation (12) that
include controls for whether the girl lives in a polygynous household and whether the household head
is Muslim, and their interactions with the school construction program measure. Including these
controls appears to strengthens the results. The estimated e↵ect of the school construction program
for bride price girls increases noticeably, while the e↵ect for non-bride price girls continues to be
very close to zero. In column 6, we also include our set of ethnicity-level covariates (i.e., traditional
matrlineality and traditional female participation in agriculture), as well as their interactions with the
school construction program measure. We find that including these controls increases the estimated
treatment e↵ects for both bride price and non-bride price girls. However, we continue to find that
the school construction program had substantially larger e↵ects on education for bride price girls.
In terms of magnitudes, we find similar e↵ects in Zambia as in Indonesia. In Indonesia, for girls
from bride price ethnic groups, a one standard deviation increase in school construction (0.85) is
associated with an increase in primary school completion by 2.1 percentage points (0.85 ⇥ 0.025), and
the mean of female primary school completion is 61%. In Zambia, for girls from bride price ethnic
groups, a one-standard-deviation increase in the stock of elementary schools (0.271) is associated with
an increase in primary school attendance by 1.1 percentage points (0.271 ⇥ 0.042), and the mean of
female primary school enrollment is 51%.
As we did for the Indonesian sample, we test whether our Zambian estimates are robust to the
inclusion of district-specific linear time trends that are allowed to vary depending on whether an
ethnic group practices bride price. The estimates are reported in columns 1 and 2 of Appendix Table
A12. We find that the inclusion of the time trends leads to estimates that are larger in magnitude.
However, it does not change the qualitative pattern that the school construction had larger e↵ects
for bride price groups. The estimated e↵ect of school construction remains positive for bride price
girls and not statistically di↵erent from zero for non-bride price girls.
As a final sensitivity check, we also test whether our findings are potentially explained by pretrends in districts that received more schools. We estimate a version of equation (12) that includes a one survey-round forward lag of the treatment, Schools d,t+1 /Area d , and its interactions with
IeBrideP rice and IeN oBrideP rice . The estimates are reported in columns 3 and 4 of Appendix Table A12.
None of the forward-lag interactions positively predict enrollment. In fact, we estimate negative
coefficients for the forward lags, which suggests that, as in Indonesia, new schools may have been

39

Table 8: School construction and primary school enrollment in the pooled Zambia DHS (1996, 2001,
2007, and 2013)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Dep Var: Indicator for Primary School Enrollment
NonBride Price Bride Price
Females Females
Females
Females
Females Females
Schools dt /Area d
Schools dt /Area d ⇥ IeBrideP rice

0.009
(0.010)
{0.003}

Schools dt /Area d ⇥ IeN oBrideP rice
Age FE
Age FE ⇥IeBrideP rice
Ethnicity by Year FE
Ethnicity by District FE
Polygynous Household Controls
Muslim HH Head
Ethnicity Control Interactions
F -test (equality of coe↵)
Mean of dependent variable
SD of dependent variable
Number of observations
Clusters
Adjusted R2

Y
N
Y
Y
N
N
N
0.617
0.486
22,191
71
0.398

0.042***
(0.014)
{0.010}
-0.007
(0.014)
{0.002}
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N
5.22
0.617
0.486
22,191
71
0.398

0.042***
(0.014)
{0.010}

-0.007
(0.014)
{0.002}

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N

0.628
0.484
6,443
69
0.433

0.613
0.487
15,748
71
0.384

0.073***
(0.016)
{0.019}
0.003
(0.014)
{0.007}
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
8.84
0.607
0.488
17,068
71
0.408

0.266***
(0.066)
{0.072}
0.168***
(0.051)
{0.039}
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
14.01
0.607
0.488
17,068
71
0.408

Notes: This table reports estimates of the di↵erential impact of school building in Zambia on bride price and non-bride
price females. The sample consists of girls aged 5–12 at the time of the survey. Educational attainment data are taken
from the 1996, 2001, 2007, and 2013 rounds of the Demographic and Health Survey. The treatment variable, Schools dt is
the number of schools built in a district d by survey year t. This is normalized by the area of the district, Area d . The subscript d indexes districts, t survey years, and e ethnic groups. ‘Ethnicity Control Interactions’ consist of the interactions
between ethnicity-level indicators for traditional female dominated agriculture and matrilineal kinship with the treatment
variable, Schools dt /Area d . ‘Polygynous Household Controls’ consist of an indicator variable that equals one if the individual lives in a household that is polygynous and its interaction with the treatment variable, Schools dt /Area d . ‘Muslim HH
Head’ is an indicator variable that equals to one if the head of the household is Muslim (children do not report their religion
in the Zambian DHS). Standard errors clustered at the district level are reported in parentheses. Conley standard errors
that allow for correlation in errors of observations within 400 km are reported in curly brackets. *, **, and *** indicate
significance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels according to the clustered standard errors.

disproportionately allocated to districts with low school enrollment.

5.3

Testing alternative explanations for the di↵erential behavior of bride price
ethnic groups
We now turn to the possibility that the di↵erential e↵ects that we find are due to other factors that

are correlated with the bride price practice and also a↵ect female schooling decisions. For example,
it is possible that ethnic groups that engage in bride price payments may be systematically wealthier
and therefore, are in a better position to send their daughters to school and respond more strongly
to school construction. We check for this possibility by examining whether households that belong
40

Table 9: Bride price practice, wealth, sex ratio, and attitudes in Indonesia and Zambia
(1)
Wealth
Index, 0-1
IeBrideP rice

District FE
Age Controls
Muslim
Unit of observation
Mean of dependent variable
SD of dependent variable
Number of observations
Clusters
Adjusted R2
IeBrideP rice

District FE
Survey Year FE
Age Controls
Polygynous Household
Unit of observation
Mean of dependent variable
SD of dependent variable
Number of observations
Clusters
Adjusted R2

(2)
Number
of Children
Born

(3)
Fraction of
Surviving Children
that are Girls

(4)
Fract Reasons
Beating Wife
Not Justified

-0.014
(0.016)
[0.488]
Y
Y
Y
HH
0.391
0.252
137,503
41
0.289

Panel A. Indonesian Intercensus Sample
0.292*
-0.002
(0.078)
(0.005)
[0.054]
[0.650]
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Wife
Wife
3.020
0.489
1.930
0.338
82,399
77,519
40
40
0.279
0.001

0.005
(0.023)
[0.848]
Y
Y
Y
Y
HH
0.482
0.341
17,403
29
0.354

-0.014
(0.092)
[0.894]
Y
Y
Y
Y
Wife
4.712
2.530
15,893
29
0.377

Panel B. Zambian DHS Sample
0.008
0.012
(0.007)
(0.008)
[0.268]
[0.126]
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Wife
All
0.497
0.676
0.286
0.379
15,216
21,607
29
29
-0.001
0.195

(5)
Fract Reasons
Wife’s Refusing
Sex Justified

-0.006
(0.006)
[0.296]
Y
Y
Y
Y
All
0.757
0.313
21,600
29
0.056

Notes: This table reports estimates of the relationship between various individual- or household-level characteristics and bride price status within Indonesia and Zambia. In column 1, the unit of observation is a household, in columns 2 and 3 it is women aged 25–45, and in columns 4–6, it is men
and women aged 25–45. The dependent variable in column 1 is a wealth index. For Indonesia, the index is constructed using the first principle component using indicator variables for household assets. In Zambia, the DHS reports an assets variable. We normalize both variables to lie between zero
and one. In column 2, the dependent variable is the total number of children born. In column 3, it is the number of surviving female children over
the total number of surviving children born. In column 4, it is the fraction of reasons for which it was reported that a husband beating his wife is not
justified. In column 5, it is the fraction of reasons for which it was reported that a wife’s refusing to have sex was justified. For Indonesia, individualand household-level data are from the 1995 Intercensal data. For Zambia, individual- and household-level data are from the 1996, 2001, 2007, and 2013
DHS. ‘Age Controls’ consist of the respondent’s age and age squared (and the household head’s age and age squared in the case of column 1). ‘Muslim’
is an indicator variable equal to one if the household head (column 1) or respondent (columns 2 and 3) reports being Muslim. ‘Polygynous Household’
is an indicator variable equal to one if the household is polygynous. Standard errors, clustered at the ethnicity level, are reported in parentheses. pvalues obtained using the wild cluster bootstrap procedure appear in square brackets. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels
according to the wild cluster bootstrap p-values.

to bride price ethnic groups have greater wealth. In practice, we estimate a variant of equation (6),
but at the household-level and with household wealth as the dependent variable. We identify the
household’s ethnicity using the ethnicity of the household head. The estimates are reported in column
1 of Table 9. Panel A reports estimates from the Indonesian sample, which uses the Intercensal data,
and panel B reports estimates for the Zambian sample, which uses the DHS data. We find no evidence
of di↵erences in the wealth of bride price and non-bride price households in either country.
Even if household wealth is the same in both groups, it is still possible that bride price ethnic
groups have fewer children and therefore have more wealth per child.48 To test for this hypothesis,
we estimate equation (6) using a sample of women aged 25–45 and with the number of children born
48

Boomgaard (2003) argues that in Indonesia bride price has led to delayed marriage and lower rates of fertility.

41

at the time of the survey as the dependent variable. The estimates, which are reported in column
2 of Table 9, show no evidence that women from bride price ethnic groups have fewer children. In
Zambia, the coefficient is very close to zero and insignificant, while in Indonesia is actually positive,
although only marginally significant.
Another alternative explanation for our findings is that bride price households are more altruistic
toward daughters, leading them to educate their daughters more (and to respond more to the schoolconstruction program). Therefore, we test for the possibility that bride price families have di↵erent
attitudes towards girls relative to boys by estimating the relationship between bride price and the
fraction of surviving children that are girls. This reflects di↵erential preferences for boys relative to
girls that result in di↵erential mortality rates due to di↵erential access to family resources, such as
healthcare or nutrition, or even sex selective abortion or infanticide. The estimates are reported in
column 3 of table 9. In both Indonesia and Zambia, we find no evidence of di↵erences in daughter
preference as measured by the fraction of surviving children who are female.
We are able to further explore the evidence for a relationship between bride price and gender
attitudes in Zambia using the DHS, which collects information on respondents’ attitudes about the
rights of women in marriage.49 The first measure that we use is based on a question that asks
respondents whether a husband beating his wife in justified in five di↵erent scenarios. The measure
is the proportion of the five scenarios for which the respondent reports a beating is not justified. The
second measure is similar, but is based on the proportion of reasons for which the respondent feels it
is justified for women to refuse to have sex with her husband.50 Thus, both measures are increasing
in gender equality and female empowerment. The estimates are reported in columns 4–5 of the panel
B of Table 9. For both measures, we find no evidence of a relationship between bride price and gender
attitudes. Both coefficients are small in magnitude and statistically insignificant.51
A final alternative explanation for the di↵erential response of bride price ethnic groups to school
construction is that the returns to education are higher for this group. We test for this by checking
whether the relationship between a women’s level of education and either her employment status
or her income is stronger for women from bride price ethnic groups. Using our sample of women
from Indonesia and Zambia, we estimate the relationship between our three levels of schooling and
employment, wages, wealth, and (in Zambia) child health, allowing the e↵ect of education to di↵er
depending on whether a woman’s ethnic group practices bride price. The finer details of the estimation
49

The analysis does not include the 1996 DHS, which did not ask these questions.
In 2001, four reasons are asked about, and in 2007 and 2013, three reasons are asked about. The details of the
questions asked are reported in Appendix A.
51
Estimates are very similar if we restrict the sample to be only men, only women, or include a gender fixed e↵ect.
50

42

are summarized in Appendix B and the estimates are reported in Appendix Table A13. The estimates
provide no evidence of a di↵erential return to education for women belonging to bride price ethnic
groups.

5.4

Prediction 6. Evidence on bride price and male education
We next turn to prediction 6 of the model, which summarizes the predicted e↵ects of bride price

for males. We test the prediction by replicating the tests of predictions 3–5 using a sample of men
rather than women. The model predicts that we should not see the same relationships in the data
for men as we do for women.
We begin by studying whether men from bride price ethnic groups tend to have higher education
rates than men from non-bride price ethnic groups (prediction 3 for women). To do this, we reestimate equation (6) using the samples of men in the IFLS, the DHS and the ZFPS, thus replicating
the analysis reported in Table 6. As reported in columns 1–2 and 5–9 of Table 10, we do not find the
same patterns among men. Specifically, across the seven regressions, there is only a significant positive
association between bride price and male education in Indonesia (column 1), and this association is
no longer significant when we control for Islam (column 2). The point estimates for the coefficient on
the bride price indicator are small in magnitude and fluctuate between being positive and negative,
depending on the sample. Turning to the second part of prediction 6, we check for di↵erences in test
scores among men from bride price ethnic groups (prediction 4 for females). The estimates, which
are reported in columns 3 and 4 of Table 10, show no significant di↵erence between the two groups.
We test the final part of prediction 6 (prediction 5 for females) by estimating equation (9) for
Indonesia and equation (12) for Zambia. The estimates are reported in Table 11. Again, we do not
observe the same consistent patterns for males as we do for females. The estimated e↵ects of the
program are not systematically di↵erent for bride price and non-bride price boys.

6

Discussion
Our analysis of two developing countries, Indonesia and Zambia, has shown that the traditional

practice of bride price is associated with substantially larger investments in female primary education
and greater responsiveness to education policies. For both large-scale school-construction projects
that we examine, we find a positive and significant e↵ect of school construction on female education
only among groups that practice bride price. For those that do not, we find no evidence that female
education increased in response to the programs.
43

44

0.030***
(0.009)
[0.000]
Males 5-22
N
N
N/A
Y
Y
Y
N
N/A
0.617
0.486
108,540
0.381
39

0.027
(0.010)
[0.216]
Males 5-22
N
N
N/A
Y
Y
Y
Y
N/A
0.617
0.486
108,540
0.382
39

-0.061
(0.051)
[0.315]
All Males
N
Y
N/A
N
Y
N
N
N/A
-0.017
0.969
2,735
0.085
16

-0.095
(0.046)
[0.222]
All Males
Y
Y
N/A
N
Y
Y
Y
N/A
-0.017
0.969
2,734
0.088
16

0.003
(0.008)
[0.792]
Males 5-22
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Y
N/A
Y
0.609
0.488
40,164
0.353
30

Pooled DHS
Enrolled

Enrolled
0.008
(0.013)
[0.604]
Males 5-22
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Y
N/A
N
0.609
0.488
40,112
0.313
30

(6)

(5)

0.004
(0.008)
[0.716]
Males 5-22
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N/A
Y
0.604
0.489
28,935
0.374
29

Enrolled

(7)
Zambia

(9)

-0.015
(0.037)
[0.718]
All Males
Y
N
N/A
Y
Y
Y
N/A
N/A
0.875
0.331
681
-0.002
19

-0.059
(0.026)
[0.118]
All Males
Y
N
N/A
Y
Y
Y
N/A
N/A
0.875
0.331
681
0.012
19

ZFPS
Primary
Primary

(8)

Notes: This table reports estimates of the relationship between the traditional practice of bride price and school enrollment (columns 1–2 and 5–7), primary school completion
(columns 8–9), or standardized test scores (columns 3–4). In all specifications, the unit of observation is a male. The Indonesia data are from the 1995 Intercensus, and the Zambia
data are from either the pooled 1996, 2001, 2007, and 2013 DHS or the ZFPS. ‘Age Controls’ consist of age and age squared. ‘Ethnicity Controls’ consist of indicator variables for
an individual belonging to an ethnic group that is matrilineal and that traditionally had female dominated agriculture. ‘Muslim’ is an indicator variable equal to one if the man
self-reports being Muslim. ‘Polygynous Household’ is an indicator variable that equals one if the boy/man lives in a polygynous household. The ZFPS and Intercensus do not contain
any polygynous households. In the ZFPS, we do not control for district fixed e↵ects since the entire sample lives in Lusaka. Census cluster fixed e↵ects are finer than district fixed
e↵ects. Standard errors clustered at the ethnicity level are reported in parentheses, while wild cluster bootstrap p-values are reported in square brackets. *, **, and *** indicate
significance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels according to the wild cluster bootstrap p-values.

Sample
Survey Year FE
Year Tested by Province FE
Census Cluster by Survey Year FE
District FE
Age Controls
Ethnicity Controls
Muslim
Polygynous Household
Mean of dependent variable
SD of dependent variable
Number of observations
Adjusted R2
Clusters

IeBrideP rice

(2)

(3)
(4)
Indonesia
1995 Intercensal Data
IFLS
Enrolled
Enrolled
Test Scores Test Scores

(1)

Table 10: Relationship between bride price, male enrollment, and test scores in Indonesia and Zambia

Table 11: E↵ects of school construction on male schooling
(1)

(2)
(3)
Indonesia
Dep Var: Primary School
Completion
IkP ost ⇥ Intensityd ⇥ IeBrideP rice
IkP ost ⇥ Intensityd ⇥ IeN oBrideP rice
Schoolsdt /Aread ⇥ IeBrideP rice

0.010
(0.010)
{0.007}
0.020***
(0.007)
{0.004}

0.013
(0.010)
{0.003}
0.019**
(0.008)
{0.009}

0.011
(0.010)
{0.003}
0.017**
(0.008)
{0.009}

Y
N/A
N
N
0.62
0.724
0.447
63,717
0.129
247

Y
N/A
Y
N
0.29
0.724
0.447
63,717
0.132
247

Y
N/A
Y
Y
0.31
0.724
0.447
63,717
0.132
247

Schoolsdt /Aread ⇥ IeN oBrideP rice
Baseline Control Variables
Polygynous Household
Muslim
Ethnicity Controls
F -test for di↵erence in coefficients
Mean of dependent variable
SD of dependent variable
Number of observations
Adjusted R2
Clusters

(4)

(5)
(6)
Zambia
Dep Var: Primary School
Enrollment

0.034*
(0.017)
{0.017}
0.019
(0.014)
{0.012}
Y
N
N
N
0.56
0.595
0.491
21,779
0.396
71

0.015
(0.022)
{0.021}
0.008
(0.017)
{0.022}
Y
Y
Y
N
0.11
0.586
0.493
16,684
0.409
71

0.018
(0.055)
{0.065}
-0.010
(0.058)
{0.105}
Y
Y
Y
Y
1.24
0.586
0.493
16,684
0.409
71

Notes: This table estimates the specifications of columns 2, 5, and 6 of Tables 7 and 8 using a sample of males.
The data for Indonesia are from the 1995 Intercensus. The data for Zambia are from the pooled 1996, 2001, 2007,
and 2013 DHS. ‘Baseline Control Variables’ consist of the control variables that are included in all specifications
in the regressions of Tables 7 and 8. These are slightly di↵erent for the two samples and are described in detail in
the notes of the two tables. ‘Polygynous Household’ is an indicator variable that equals one if the boy/man lives
in a polygynous household. Since the Intercensus does not contain any households that report being polygynous,
this control drops out of the Indonesia regressions. ‘Muslim’ is an indicator variable equal to one if the man selfreports being Muslim. ‘Ethnicity Controls’ consist of indicator variables for an individual belonging to an ethnic
group that is matrilineal and that traditionally had female dominated agriculture. Standard errors clustered at
the ethnicity level are reported in parentheses, while Conley standard errors with a distance cut-o↵ of 400 km
are reported in curly brackets. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels according to the
clustered standard errors.

Our findings are particularly important given that greater female education is widely believed
to be the development outcome with one of the highest, if not the highest, economic and social
returns. For example, Sperling and Winthorp (2016, p. 4) write that “girls’ education is the world’s
best investment with the widest-ranging returns.” They cite returns to education for both incomes
and economic growth, as well as for infant mortality, maternal mortality, child marriage, health,
and agricultural productivity. Despite these benefits, in sub-Saharan Africa, only 66% of females
complete primary school, and completion rates are below 50% in many countries.52 In addition,
these enrollment rates, and their growth over recent decades, mask low school attendance and low
quality instruction (Pritchett, 2013). Therefore, better understanding what policies and mechanisms
52

The figures refer to 2014 and are from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators.

45

can contribute to raising female education in developing countries is important for economists and
policymakers alike.
Our theoretical model suggests a compelling economic interpretation of our findings. The custom
of bride price allows parents to enjoy (part of) the returns to education that their daughters accrue
in the marriage market, and thus it encourages parents to educate them. Indeed, we provide the first
empirical evidence that bride price payments are substantially larger for more educated women and
that parents are aware of this relationship and perceive it as causal.
To measure the magnitude of the association between female education and bride price in Indonesia, we use the IFLS data from Indonesia, which is our most comprehensive source of data on
bride price payment amounts, to normalize the bride price returns to female education. Combining
the IFLS data with data on per-capita consumption and Indonesia’s CPI from the World Bank, we
find that the bride price premium – that is, the extra payment parents receive if they educate their
daughter – for a daughter completing primary school is equal to 24% of per capita annual consumption.53 Assuming an 8% discount rate and an 8-year delay between the completion of primary school
and marriage, the net present value of the bride price premium at the time of educational investment
corresponds to

1
(1+0.08)8

· 0.24 =12.5% of annual per capita consumption. In the same IFLS sample,

bride price females are 2 percentage points more likely to complete primary school than non-bride
females. Thus, this premium is associated with 2 percentage points higher rate of primary school
completion for bride price ethnic groups compared to other groups.
Our findings suggest that customs and institutions that allow parents to partake in the returns
to their children’s education can promote investments in human capital by helping to complete the
intergenerational contract between parents and children. Gary Becker proposed just such a role for
the practice of bride price, writing, “Bride price then not only compensates parents for the transfer
of their property, but also induces them to invest optimally in daughters if girls with appropriate
accumulations of human capital command sufficiently high prices” (Becker, 1981, p. 129). Individual
and public educational investments in developing countries may, therefore, be hampered when parents
cannot capture the returns to these investments. This may be a particularly important obstacle for
female education. In many developing countries, including India and China, sons remain in their
parents’ lineage group and care for them later in life, giving parents an incentive to educate sons (e.g.,
Bau, 2016; Jayachandran and Pande, 2017). By contrast, daughters typically leave their parents’
household and join their husband’s lineage group, which exacerbates the incomplete contracting
53

This is based on the di↵erence in mean bride price amounts for those with and without primary schooling in the
IFLS data, after the data have normalized to be in terms of percent of consumption.

46

problem in intergenerational investment.
Our study also add new insights to the lively public debate that has ensued over the past decades
about the potentially negative consequences of the bride price custom. Critics of bride price traditions
suggest that they are equivalent to the buying and selling of women and lead wives to be poorly
treated. They argue that parents may have an incentive to “sell” their daughters early for bride
price, and women may feel that they cannot leave a marriage because their parents would have to
return the payment.54 In Indonesia, concerns have been raised about women continually needing
to “earn” their bride price through obedience to their husbands (Sitompul, 2009). Citing pervasive
anecdotes of domestic violence associated with the practice, activist groups around the world have
called for the abolishment of bride price (Eryenyu, 2014; IRIN News, 2006). In addition to these
potential negative consequences of bride price, our results indicate that bride price payments may
also provide significant incentives to invest in daughters’ human capital, working to raise aggregate
welfare.
In considering the e↵ects of bride price for women, it is important to understand that the net
e↵ects of the bride price on women’s welfare are ambiguous. As our model indicates, from a static,
ex post perspective, the practice grants property rights over the marital transfers to the bride’s
family rather than to the bride herself. However, from a dynamic perspective, bride price can also
raise women’s welfare if girls receive more education and accrue the benefits in the labor market for
themselves. These considerations may indeed become more important as women’s labor market and
marriage market returns to education increase. Hence, in the absence of o↵setting policies promoting
female education, proposed changes to this practice, such as an attempt to ban bride price in Kenya
in 2012 and in Uganda in 2015, may have unintended negative consequences for women and society.
Beyond improving our understanding of the relationship between female education, intergenerational transfers, and marriage markets, the findings in the paper also make a broader point. They
provide one concrete example of how the cultural context of a society can influence the efficacy of
development policies. Indeed, if policy makers in Indonesia or Zambia were evaluating the e↵ects of
their school construction programs on girls’ education, they would get dramatically di↵erent answers
depending on which groups they were examining. If they studied ethnic groups that do not have
bride price, they would conclude that the program was unsuccessful at improving female education.
If they studied bride price groups, they would conclude that it was instead e↵ective.
54

Corno and Voena (2016) document that, in the Kagera region of Tanzania, where bride price payments are customary, idiosyncratic negative rainfall shocks lead to increases in female child marriages. Corno et al. (2017) find large
positive e↵ects of (aggregate) droughts on female child marriages throughout Sub-Saharan Africa, and especially in
bride price countries. In India instead, where dowry is prevalent, droughts lead to a decline in female child marriages.

47

From an evaluation perspective, the exact nature of this relationship (including whether it is truly
a causal e↵ect of bride price) is not necessarily relevant. Even if the bride price is just a correlate
or a proxy for other more fundamental cultural traits, it provides an observable characteristic that
can be used when designing and evaluating the e↵ects of education policies. In developing countries
that also have variation in marriage customs, policy makers should be aware of the possibility that
bride price and non-bride price groups will likely respond very di↵erently to school construction.
For non-bride price groups, simply building schools may not be enough to educate girls. Instead,
school construction may have to be combined with conditional cash transfers or additional subsidies,
such as free school uniforms or scholarships, in order to have a discernible e↵ect on the educational
attainment of girls (Baird et al., 2011; Duflo et al., 2015, 2017).

7

Concluding remarks
Our analysis has documented a (perhaps surprising) economic consequence of bride price, which

is a payment made by the husband and/or his family to the wife’s parents at marriage. We began
our analysis by developing a model of educational choice with and without the practice of bride price.
The model developed a number of testable predictions that we tested using data for two countries,
Indonesia and Zambia, that were chosen because they had large-scale school construction projects
and because they have within-country variation in whether bride price is practiced.
Consistent with the predictions of our model, we found that more educated daughters command a
higher bride price. As a consequence of this added monetary benefit to education, girls belonging to
bride price ethnic groups are also more likely to be educated. We also find that, consistent with the
model, bride price ethnic groups are more responsive than non-bride price ethnic groups to policies
that are aimed at increasing female education. In Indonesia, we revisited the Sekolah Dasar INPRES
school construction program and found that, for bride price ethnic groups, the increased supply
of schools resulted in a significant increase in female education. However, for those without the
bride price custom, the program had no e↵ect on female education. We examined a similar schoolconstruction project in Zambia and found the same e↵ects. The project increased the educational
attainment of girls from bride price ethnic groups, but had no e↵ect on girls from non-bride price
ethnicities.
In addition to improving our understanding of the relationship between marriage customs, marriage markets, and education, our findings illustrate the importance of the cultural context of developing countries for the efficacy of development projects. They also show that the cultural factors
48

that are important for policy purposes are not always ex ante intuitive. In the context of educational
policies, it is not immediately obvious that marriage customs would play a role. Thus, our findings
highlight the importance of adopting a holistic approach when governments, policymakers, and NGOs
consider new interventions. In other words, it is important to consider all aspects of the culture of
a society when designing and evaluating policies, even those that are not obviously related to the
outcomes of interest.

References
Agüero, Jorge M. and Prashant Bharadwaj, “Do the More Educated Know More about Health? Evidence
from Schooling and HIV Knowledge in Zimbabwe,” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 2014, 62
(3), 489–517.
Algan, Yann and Pierre Cahuc, “Inherited Trust and Growth,” American Economic Review, 2010, 100
(5), 2060–2092.
Ambrus, Attila, Erica Field, and Maximo Torero, “Muslim Family Law, Prenuptial Agreements, and
the Emergence of Dowry in Bangladesh,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010, 125 (3), 1349–1397.
Anderson, Siwan, “Why Dowry Payments Declined with Modernization in Europe but are Rising in India,”
Journal of Political Economy, 2003, 111 (2), 269–310.
, “The Economics of Dowry and Brideprice,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2007, 21 (4), 151–174.
, “Why the Marriage Squeeze Cannot Cause Dowry Inflation,” Journal of Economic Theory, 2007, 137,
140–152.
and Chris Bidner, “Property Rights over Marital Transfers,” 2016. Quarterly Journal of Economcis,
forthcoming.
Arunachalam, Raj and Suresh Naidu, “The Price of Fertility: Marriage Markets and Family Planning in
Bangladesh,” 2015.
Ashraf, Nava, Erica Field, Giuditta Rusconi, Alessandra Voena, and Roberta Ziparo, “Traditional
beliefs and learning about maternal risk in Zambia,” American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (5), 511–515.
Atkin, David, “The Caloric Cost of Culture: Evidence from Indian Migrants,” American Economic Review,
2016, 106 (4), 1144–1181.
Baird, Sarah, Craig McIntosh, and Berk Özler, “Cash or condition? Evidence from a cash transfer
experiment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (4), 1709–1753.
Bau, Natalie, “Can Policy Crowd Out Culture?,” 2016. Mimeo, Harvard University.
Becker, Gary S., “A Theory of Marriage: Part I,” Journal of Political Economy, 1973, pp. 813–846.
, A Treatise on the Family, Cambridge, M.A.: Harvard University Press, 1981.
, “Nobel Lecture: The Economic Way of Looking at Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, 1993, 101 (3),
385–409.
, William H.J. Hubbard, and Kevin M. Murphy, “Explaining the Worldwide Boom in Higher Education of Women,” Journal of Human Capital, 2010, 4 (3), 203–241.

49

Behrman, Jere R, Andrew D Foster, Mark R Rosenweig, and Prem Vashishtha, “Women’s schooling, home teaching, and economic growth,” Journal of political Economy, 1999, 107 (4), 682–714.
Bishai, David and Shoshana Grossbard, “Far above Rubies: Bride Price and Extramarital Sexual Relations in Uganda,” Journal of Population Economics, 2010, 23 (4), 1177–1187.
Boomgaard, Peter, “Bridewealth and Birth Control: Low Fertility in the Indonesian Archipelago, 1500–
1900,” Population and Development Review, 2003, 29 (2), 197–214.
Boserup, Ester, Woman’s Role in Economic Development, London: George Allen and Unwin Ltd., 1970.
Botticini, Maristella and Aloysius Siow, “Why Dowries?,” American Economic Review, 2003, 93 (4),
1385–1398.
Breierova, Lucia and Esther Duflo, “The Impact of Education on Fertility and Child Mortality: Do
Fathers Really Matter Less than Mothers?,” 2002. Mimeo, M.I.T.
Card, David, “Earnings, Schooling, and Ability Revisited,” 1994. NBER Working Paper 4832.
Chiappori, Pierre-André, Bernard Salanié, and Yoram Weiss, “Partner Choice, Investment in Children, and the Marital College Premium,” American Economic Review, August 2017, 107 (9), 2109–67.
, Monica Costa Dias, and Costas Meghir, “The marriage market, labor supply and education choice,”
Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2016.
, Murat Iyigun, and Yoram Weiss, “Investment in Schooling and the Marriage Market,” American
Economic Review, 2009, 99 (5), 1689–1713.
Choo, Eugene and Aloysius Siow, “Who Marries Whom and Why,” Journal of Political Economy, 2006,
114 (1), 175–201.
Collier, Paul, “Culture, Politics, and Economic Development,” Annual Review of Economics, 2017, 20, 111–
125.
Corno, Lucia and Alessandra Voena, “Selling Daughters: Age of Marriage, Income Shocks and Bride
Price Tradition,” Unpublished Manuscript 2016.
, Nicole Hildebrandt, and Alessandra Voena, “Age of Marriage, Weather Shocks, and the Direction
of Marriage Payments,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2017.
Dalton, George, ““Bridewealth” vs.“Brideprice” 1,” American Anthropologist, 1966, 68 (3), 732–738.
Divale, William Tulio and Marvin Harris, “Population, Warfare, and the Male Supremacist Complex,”
American Anthropologist, 1976, 78 (3), 521–538.
Duflo, Esther, “Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of School Construction in Indonesia: Evidence
from an Unusual Policy Experiment,” American Economic Review, 2001, 91 (4), 795–813.
, Pascaline Dupas, and Michael Kremer, “Education, HIV, and early fertility: Experimental Evidence
from Kenya,” American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (9), 2757–2797.
, , and , “The Impact of Free Secondary Education: Experimental Evidence from Ghana,” Technical
Report, Working Paper 2017.
Eryenyu, Je↵, “Payment of Bride Price Turns Women into Commodities,” September 2014. Uganda Daily
Monitor. [Online; posted 10-September-2014].
Fabinger, Michal and E. Glen Weyl, “Pass-Through and Demand Forms,” Working Paper 2013.
Fernandez, Raquel, “Women, Work and Culture,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2007, 5
(2–3), 305–332.

50

, “Does Culture Matter?,” in Jess Benhabib, Matthew O. Jackson, and Alberto Bisin, eds., Handbook of
Social Economics, Vol. 1A, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2011, pp. 481–510.
and Alessandra Fogli, “Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs, Work, and Fertility,” American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2009, 1 (1), 146–177.
Gale, William G. and John Karl Scholz, “Intergenerational Transfers and the Accumulation of Wealth,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1994, 8 (4), 145–160.
Gaspart, Frederic and Jean-Philippe Platteau, “Strategic Behavior and Marriage Payments: Theory
and Evidence from Senegal,” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 2010, 59 (1), 149–185.
Goldin, Claudia, “The Quiet Revolution That Transformed Women’s Employment, Education, and Family,”
The American Economic Review, 2006, 96 (2), 1–21.
Goody, Jack and S.J. Tambiah, Bridewealth and Dowry, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973.
Griliches, Zvi, “Estimating the Returns to Schooling: Some Econometric Problems,” Econometrica, 1977,
45 (1), 1–22.
Grossbard, Amyra, “Towards a Marriage between Economics and Anthropology and a General Theory of
Marriage,” American Economic Review, 1978, 68 (2), 33–37.
Heckman, James J., Lance J. Lochner, and Petra E. Todd, “Earnings Functions, Rates of Return and
Treatment E↵ects: The Mincer Equation and Beyond,” Handbook of the Economics of Education, 2006, 1,
307–458.
Hertz, Tom and Tamara Jayasundera, “School Construction and Intergenerational Mobility in Indonesia,”
Working Paper, American University 2007.
IRIN News, “Study Links Payment of Bride Price to Abuse of Women,” May 2006. [Online; posted 16-May2006].
Iyigun, Murat and P. Randall Walsh, “Building the Family Nest: Premarital Investments, Marriage
Markets, and Spousal Allocations,” Review of Economic Studies, 2007, 74 (2), 507–535.
Jacoby, Hanan G., “The Economics of Polygyny in Sub-Saharan Africa: Female Productivity and the
Demand for Wives in Côte d’Ivoire,” Journal of Political Economy, 1995, 103 (5), 938–971.
Jayachandran, Seema and Rohini Pande, “Why are Indian Children So Short? The Role of Birth Order
and Son Preference,” American Economic Review, 2017, 107, 2600–2629.
La Ferrara, Eliana and Annamaria Milazzo, “Customary Norms, Inheritance and Human Capital: Evidence from a Reform of the Matrilineal System in Ghana,” 2011. Working paper.
Lavy, Victor, “School Supply Constraints and Children’s Educational Outcomes in Rural Ghana,” Journal
of Development Economics, 1996, 51 (2), 291–314.
LeBar, Frank M., Ethnic Groups of Insular Southeast Asia. Volume 1: Indonesia, Adaman Islands, and
Madagascar, New Haven: Human Relations Area Files Press, 1972.
Levine, David and Michael Kevane, “Are Investments in Daughters Lower when Daughters Move Away?
Evidence from Indonesia,” World Development, 2003, 31 (6), 1065–1084.
Lowes, Sara, “Matrilineal Kinship and Spousal Cooperation: Evidence from the Matrilineal Belt,” 2017.
Working paper.
and Nathan Nunn, “Bride Price and the Wellbeing of Women,” 2017. UN WIDER Working Paper
2017/131.

51

Mocan, Naci H. and Colin Cannonier, “Empowering Women Through Education: Evidence from Sierra
Leone,” 2012. NBER Working Paper 18016.
Moore, Erin, “Translating Girls’ Empowerment: Gender, Adolescence and Transnational NGOs in Urban
Uganda,” PhD Dissertation, University of Chicago 2016.
Mujuzi, Jamil Ddamulira, “Bride Wealth (Price) and Women’s Marriage – Related Rights in Uganda: A
Historical Constitutional Perspective and Current Developments,” International Journal of Law, Policy and
the Family, August 2010, 24 (3), 414–430.
Murdock, George Peter, Ethnographic Atlas, Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1967.
, Atlas of World Cultures, Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1981.
Osili, Una Okonkwo and Bridget Terry Long, “Does Female Schooling Reduce Fertility? Evidence from
Nigeria,” Journal of Development Economics, 2008, 87 (1), 57–75.
Pritchett, Lant, The Rebirth of Education: Schooling Ain’t Learning, Washington, D.C.: CGD Books, 2013.
Quale, G. Robina, A History of Marriage Systems, New York: Greenwood Press, 1988.
RAND, “Family Life Surveys Newsletter,” August 1999.
Rao, Vijayendra and Michael Walton, Culture and Public Action: A Cross-Disciplinary Dialogue on
Development Policy, Palo Alto: Stanford University Press, 2004.
Schapera, Isaac, The Tswana, London: International African Institute, 1953.
Shapley, Lloyd S. and Martin Shubik, “The Assignment Game I: The Core,” International Journal of
Game Theory, 1971, 1 (1), 111–130.
Sitompul, Lola Utama, “Tata Cara Penetapan Mahar Bagi Perempuan Nias (Studi Kasus Pada Perempuan
Nias Yang Bekerja di Sektor Informal di Padang Bulan),” 2009. Working paper.
Sperling, Gene B. and Rebecca Winthorp, What Works in Girls’ Education, Brookings Institution Press,
2016.
Tertilt, Michele, “Polygyny, Fertility, and Savings,” Journal of Political Economy, 2005, 113 (6), 1341–1371.
, “Polygyny, Women’s Rights, and Development,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2006, 4
(2-3), 523–530.
Vroklage, Bernh, “Bride Price or Dower,” Anthropos, 1952, Bd. 47, H. 1./2., 133–146.
Wendo, Charles, “African Women Denounce Bride Price,” The Lancet, February 2004, 363 (9410), 716.
Whiteley, Wilfred and J. Slaski, Bemba and Related Peoples of Northern Rhodesia, London: International
African Institute, 1950.
Willis, Roy, The Fipa and Related Peoples of South-West Tanzania and North-East Zambia, London: International African Institute, 1966.
World Bank, World Development Report 2015: Mind, Society, and Behavior, Washington, D.C.: World Bank
Publications, 2015.

52

Appendix for

Bride Price and Female Education
Nava Ashraf
London School of Economics and BREAD

Natalie Bau
University of Toronto

Nathan Nunn
Harvard University, NBER, and BREAD

Alessandra Voena
University of Chicago, NBER, and BREAD
February 26, 2018

1

Appendix A: Data description
Indonesian Data Sources
1995 Intercensal Survey
The Indonesia Intercensal Survey is a large-scale, nationally representative population survey of
Indonesia carried out between the 1990 and 2000 censuses. It is housed by the Minnesota Population
Center (1995). Importantly, it includes data on primary language spoken, which can be linked to
ethnicity and matched to an ethnic group’s bride price custom in the Ethnographic Atlas. It also
contains information on educational attainment, birth year, and birth district, which following
Duflo (2001), can be combined with data on the number of schools built in 1974 as part of the
large-scale school construction program.
Indonesian Family Life Survey (IFLS)
The Indonesian Family Life Survey (IFLS) is an ongoing longitudinal study of households in Indonesia covering over 30,000 individuals. Data is gathered from 13 of Indonesia’s 27 provinces, and
the study is considered representative of 83 percent of the Indonesian population. This paper uses
data from rounds 3 and 4 of the IFLS (Strauss et al., 2004, 2009), which unlike previous rounds of
the IFLS, includes questions about individuals’ ethnicities.
2010 Census
We use a 10 percent random extract of the 2010 Indonesia Census to replicate the results on the
e↵ects of the school construction program in a second, larger data set. This extract is also housed
by the Minnesota Population Center (1995). We use a concordance between the ethnic groups in
the census and the Ethnographic Atlas, to determine an individual’s ethnicity level customs. Our
sample of interest consists of the same cohorts analyzed in the Intercensal data (a treated group of
individuals who were 2–6 in 1974, at the time of school construction, and an un-treated group of
individuals who were 12–24 at the time of school construction).

2

Zambian Data Sources
Data from the Zambia Fertility Preferences Study (ZFPS)
Data on bride price amounts and beliefs about bride price and education are drawn from unique
survey data collected in Lusaka in Fall 2014 as part of an experimental study on family planning.
The study involves 715 couples (1,430 individuals) living in the catchment area of Chipata clinic, a
poor peri-urban segment of Lusaka. Each spouse was interviewed in private and was asked a series
of questions on the practice of lobola, leading to a total of 1,430 observations.
Demographic and Health Survey (DHS)
Our analysis pools the 1996, 2001, 2007, and 2013 rounds of the Zambia Demographic and Health
Survey. When we analyze how school construction impacts school enrollment, we limit the sample
to primary-school aged children (5–12) since most new schools are primary schools. The Appendix
Table A11 reports summary statistics by brice price status. Once we control for district and
cohort fixed e↵ects (column 7), there are no significant di↵erences in characteristics except for the
likelihood of being in a polygynous household.
Additionally, data from the pooled DHS surveys allow us to test whether bride price is correlated
with gender attitudes.1 To do so, we form two indices, pooling male and female respondents. The
first index is the portion of times a respondent replied that a husband was not justified in beating
his wife, and the second index is the portion of times a respondent said that a wife was justified in
refusing a husband sex.2

Ethnographic Data Sources
Information on bride price practices is taken from the Ethnographic Atlas (Murdock, 1967) and
LeBar (1972) for Indonesia and the Ethnographic Atlas (Murdock, 1967) and the Ethnographic
Survey of Africa (Willis, 1966; Whiteley and Slaski, 1950; Schapera, 1938) for Zambia.
1

The gender attitude questions were not asked in the 1996 DHS.
The questions for the first index take the form, “Wife beating justified if. . . ” The options were “if she goes out
without telling him,” “if she neglects the children,” “if she argues with him,” “if she refuses to have sex with him,”
and “if she burns the food.” The questions in the second index take the form, “reason for not having sex:”, and
the possible answers are “husband has STD,” “husband has other women,” “recent birth” (only asked in 2001) and
“tired, mood.”
2

3

Our primary analysis for Indonesia uses the 1995 Indonesia Intercensal Survey, which records
174 di↵erent spoken languages. These are matched to 44 ethnic groups from the Ethnographic Atlas
and LeBar (1972). To undertake the matching, we exploited the previous matching of ethnic groups
to languages undertaken by Alesina et al. (2013), where the 1,265 ethnic groups of the Ethnographic
Atlas were matched to one of 7,612 language groups in the Ethnologue: Languages of the World
(Gordon, 2005). All but 11 of the 172 language groups in the Indonesia Intercensal Survey could
be matched to an ethnicity from our sources. These comprise 0.43 percent of the observations with
non-missing language data.
Our baseline analysis for Zambia uses the four rounds of the Zambia Demographic and Health
Surveys (1996, 2001, 2007, and 2013). The Zambia DHS reports 65 distinct ethnic groups. Of these,
we are able to match 53 of them to 30 more-coarsely defined ethnic groups from the Ethnographic
Atlas and the Ethnographic Survey of Africa (Willis, 1966; Whiteley and Slaski, 1950; Schapera,
1938). The remaining unmatched groups are small and comprise less than 2.5 percent of the DHS
sample. The matching was done by hand, relying heavily on Murdock (1959).
The ethnicity-level control variables used in the analysis (female participation in agriculture
and matrilineal descent) are taken from the Ethnographic Atlas. We create a measure of female
participation in agriculture using variable v 54 (“sex di↵erences: agriculture”) from the Ethnographic
Atlas. The original variable records ethnic groups as belonging to one of the following categories:
(1) males only, (2) males appreciably more, (3) di↵erentiated but equal participation, (4) equal
participation, (5) female appreciably more, (6) females only, and (7) absent or unimportant activity.
Using this information, we create a measure of female participation in agriculture that takes on
the value of one for categories 5 and 6 and zero for all other categories. We also create a second
indicator variable that equals one if either agriculture was not present or was unimportant – i.e.,
category (7) – or if information was missing for the ethnicity. In both cases, we are not able to
observe female participation in agriculture.
A second control variable is a measure of the presence of matrilineal inheritance. This was
based on variable v 43 (“descent: major type”). The original variable groups ethnicities into one
of the following categories: (1) patrilineal, (2) duolateral, (3) matrilineal, (4) quasi-lineages, (5)
ambilineal, (6) bilateral, and (7) mixed. We construct a matrilineal indicator variable that takes
on the value of one if variable v 43 identifies an ethnic group as belonging to category 3, and zero

4

otherwise. Information on inheritance is never missing if bride price information is available.

Appendix B: Additional Analyses
Instrumental variables regression for the bride price education premium
This sections reports details of the specifications behind the estimates of the impact of education
on bride price amounts, using the same procedure as in Duflo (2001), where school construction
is used as an instrument for the educational attainment of women from bride price ethnic groups.
We restrict our sample to ethnic groups that practice bride price. As we have shown, for non-bride
price ethnic groups, there was no impact on female education and therefore no first-stage predictive
power. In line with Duflo (2001), we allow the e↵ect of school construction to vary by a child’s age
in 1974, restricting the e↵ect to be 0 if a child was older than 12 in 1974. Following Duflo (2001), we
also restrict the sample to those born between 1950 and 1972. Unfortunately, the resulting sample
of couples from bride price ethnicities who were asked questions about bride price is only 264.
The first-stage estimating equation is:

I(Completed P rimary)idkt = ↵d + ↵k + ↵t +

12
X

⇥ I(age1974 = a)k

a Intensityd

a=2

+

X

X0 d Ijk

j

+ ✏idkt ,

(A1)

j

where d denotes the district, i denotes the individual, t denotes the survey year, and k denotes the
cohort. ↵d denotes district fixed e↵ects, ↵k cohort fixed e↵ects, and ↵t survey-round fixed e↵ects.
P 0 j
j X d Ik j are the cohort-specific controls for the INPRES sanitation program, the enrollment rate
in 1971, and the total number of school-aged children in 1971. In addition, we include a quadratic
in age of marriage to account for the fact that bride prices are reported in nominal terms.
The second-stage equation is:
yidkt = ↵d + ↵k + ↵t + I(CompletedP rimary)i +

X

X0 d Ijk

j

+ µidkt ,

(A2)

j

where the outcome variable yidkt is the natural log of the bride price.
Appendix Table A5 reports the first stage for the 2SLS estimates. The instruments are jointly

5

significant, but are weak (F -statistic of 3.04). In the main text, Table 4 reports the second stage
estimate of the e↵ect of primary schooling on log bride price. The point estimate is imprecise, but
it corroborates the results from the OLS regressions. Completing elementary school increases bride
price payments by a statistically significant 233 percent.

Di↵erential returns to education
An alternative explanation for the di↵erential response of bride price ethnic groups to school
construction is that the returns to education are higher. We test for this by checking whether the
relationship between a women’s level of education and either her employment status or her income
is stronger for women from bride price cultures, relative to women from non-bride price cultures.
We estimate the following equation:
yiked = ↵d + ↵k +

P rimary
1 Ii

P rimary
2 Ii

+

⇥ IeBrideP rice

+

JuniorSecondary
3 Ii

+

JuniorSecondary
4 Ii

⇥ IeBrideP rice

+

SeniorSecondary
5 Ii

+

SeniorSecondary
6 Ii

⇥ IeBrideP rice + "kied

(A3)

where i indexes a woman between the ages of 25 and 45, e her ethnicity, d her district, and k her
year-of-birth. yiked is a proxy for income. We describe these in further detail below. IiP rimary is
an indicator variable that equals one if individual i has completed primary school and attended
junior secondary school, IiJuniorSecondary is an indicator variable equal to 1 if an individual has
completed junior secondary school and attended upper secondary school, and IiSeniorSecondary is
an indicator for having attended college. ↵d denotes district fixed e↵ects, which are intended to
capture district-level di↵erences in the labor market, and ↵k denotes year-of-birth fixed e↵ects. We
cluster our standard errors at the ethnicity-level and report wild cluster bootstrapped p-values in
the square brackets.
The estimates are reported in Appendix Table A13. For the Indonesian sample (columns 1–3),
our outcomes are an indicator variable that equals one if the individual is employed, the natural
log of the wage among those employed in the formal sector,3 and the wealth index of a woman’s
household.4 For the Zambian sample (columns 4–6), we also examine an employment indicator,
3
4

The Indonesia Intercensal data only report wages for formal sector employees.
The wealth index is constructed by a principal components analysis including indicator variables for owning an

6

as well as the wealth index that is calculated and reported directly in the Zambian DHS (now
normalized to lie between 0 and 1), and an indicator variable if a woman’s child (aged 0–5)5 is
categorized as being severely stunted.6 Unfortunately, the Zambian DHS does not report wages.
Overall, we find no evidence of a di↵erential return to education for women belonging to bride
price ethnic groups. Unsurprisingly, we find that more education is associated with a higher likelihood of employment, higher wages, and greater household wealth. However, we find no strong
evidence that these relationships are systematically di↵erent for women from bride price ethnicities.7 In Appendix Table A13, we also report the estimate of the predicted e↵ect of the bride price
indicator on the outcome of interest for a woman with the average value of education for the sample,
which is a 63% chance of graduating primary school in Indonesia and a 32% chance of attending
junior secondary school in Zambia. In all but one case (employment in Zambia), we cannot reject
a zero e↵ect of bride price for a woman with average education. In the case of employment in
Zambia, the point estimate is negative, which is consistent with the fact that our model suggests
that more educated bride price girls are negatively selected relative to more educated non-bride
price girls.

automobile, television, radio, stove, bu↵et, bicycle boat, and motorboat. The wealth index is the first principal
component of the factor analysis, and has then been normalized to lie between 0 and 1.
5
Thus, the sample in column 6 is children aged 0–5.
6
Severe stunting indicates that a child has a height more than three standard deviations below the mean of the
growth distribution for healthy children based on a study of six baseline countries chosen by the WHO – Brazil, India,
Oman, Ghana, Norway and the USA.
7
Although the coefficients of the interactions between educational attainment and bride price custom are not
statistically significant, the point estimates suggest that returns to education may in fact be lower for girls in bride
price groups. This pattern can be explained within our theoretical framework, where more lower-ability girls are
educated in bride price groups than in non-bride price groups. While, in our model, ability only a↵ects girls in the
first period of their life, allowing lower ability girls to have lower returns to education later in life would account for
these relationships in the data.

7

Appendix C: Appendix tables
Table A1: Ethnic groups in our Indonesian sample and whether bride price is practiced
Ethnicity

IeBrideP rice

Ethnicity

IeBrideP rice

BALINESE
CHAM
DANI
ENGGANO
IBAN
JAVANESE
KENYAH-KAYAN-KAJANG
KERAKI
KUBU
MARINDANI
MENTAWEIA
MIMIKA
MINANGKAB
REJANG
SASAK
SOROMADJA
SUMBANESE
SUMBAWANE
SUNDANESE
SUVANESE
WAROPEN

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

ALORESE
AMBONESE
BANGGAI
BATAK
BELU
BUNGKU
DAWAN
GORONTALO
ILI-MANDI
KEI
MACASSARE
MALAYS
MANOBO
MINAHASANS
MUJU
MUNA
NIASANS
PANTAR
ROTINESE
SUGBUHANO
TOBELORES
TOMINI
TORADJA

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Notes: The table reports the ethnic groups in our Indonesian sample (1995 Indonesia Intercensal data),
as well as the value of the bride price indicator variable for that ethnic group, whereby the indicator
equals 1 if they practice bride price and 0 if they do not.

8

Table A2: Ethnic groups in our Zambian sample and whether bride price is practiced
Ethnicity

IeBrideP rice

Ethnicity

IeBrideP rice

BEMBA
BISA
CHEWA
CHOKWE
KAONDE
KUNDA
LALA
LAMBA
LOZI
LUANO
LUCHAZI
LUNDA (LUA)
LUNDA (LW)
LUVALE
NYANJA
SHILA
SWAKA
TABWA
USHI

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

BWILE
ILA
IWA
LUNGU
MAMBWE
MBUNDA
PL.TONGA
SALA
SHONA
SOLI
TUMBUKA

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Notes: The table reports the ethnic groups in our Zambian sample (1996, 2001, 2007, and
2013 Zambia Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS)), as well as the value of the bride price
indicator variable for that ethnic group, whereby the indicator equals 1 if they practice bride
price and 0 if they do not.

9

Table A3: Correlations between bride price and other customs using a global sample
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Dep Var: Bride Price Indicator
Matrilineal

-0.118***
(0.042)

Female Agriculture

0.109***
(0.039)

Polygyny
constant
Number of observations

0.534***
(0.015)
1,246

0.489***
(0.023)
716

0.335***
(0.034)
0.233***
(0.031)
1,219

-0.153***
(0.051)
0.062
(0.038)
0.397***
(0.041)
0.199***
(0.036)
708

Notes: This table reports cross-ethnicity estimates of the relationship between the
listed customs and the practice of bride price. The global data on traditional practices are from the Ethnographic Atlas (Murdock, 1967). Each column reports estimates from one regression where the dependent variable is an indicator variable
that equals one if the ethnic group traditionally practices bride price. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the
10, 5, and 1% levels.

10

Table A4: Contemporary bride price payments and traditional customs in Indonesia and Zambia
Panel A. Indonesian Sample
IFLS (2000, 2007)
Number of observations
%(BP > 0)
Mean (payment / per capita GDP)
Median (payment / per capita GDP)

IeBrideP rice = 0

IeBrideP rice = 1

4,643
91%
37%
4%

1,877
92%
80%
8.7%

Panel B. Zambian Sample
ZFPS (2014)
Number of observations
%(BP > 0)
Mean (payment / per capita GDP)
Median (payment / per capita GDP)

IeBrideP rice = 0

IeBrideP rice = 1

524
77%
87%
45%

179
86%
205%
57%

Notes: This table reports summary statistics on the prevalence of bride price practices and the size of bride prices paid in Indonesia and Zambia. The table draws on
data from the 2001 and 2007 rounds of the Indonesia Family Life Survey and from
the ZFPS (Fall 2014). Bride price payments greater than 100 times GDP per capita
(4 observations in Zambia and 43 observations in Indonesia) are dropped as these extreme values are likely due to data entry error. Bride price data are from the Ethnographic Atlas (Murdock, 1967) and LeBar (1972) for Indonesia and from the Ethnographic Atlas (Murdock, 1967) and the Ethnographic Survey of Africa (Willis, 1966;
Whiteley and Slaski, 1950; Schapera, 1938) for Zambia.

11

Table A5: First stage regression for instrumented e↵ect of primary school completion on bride price
values
(1)
Dep Var: Indicator Variable for
Completion of Primary School
Intensityd ⇥ I(Age1974 = 2)i

0.091
(0.246)
0.028
(0.183)
-0.392
(0.266)
0.262
(0.335)
0.183
(0.648)
-0.256**
(0.120)
-0.578
(0.588)
-0.025
(0.307)
-0.024
(0.366)
0.206
(0.231)
-0.376
(0.427)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
3.04
264
93
0.259

Intensityd ⇥ I(Age1974 = 3)i
Intensityd ⇥ I(Age1974 = 4)i
Intensityd ⇥ I(Age1974 = 5)i
Intensityd ⇥ I(Age1974 = 6)i
Intensityd ⇥ I(Age1974 = 7)i
Intensityd ⇥ I(Age1974 = 8)i
Intensityd ⇥ I(Age1974 = 9)i
Intensityd ⇥ I(Age1974 = 10)i
Intensityd ⇥ I(Age1974 = 11)i
Intensityd ⇥ I(Age1974 = 12)i
Survey-Year FE
District FE
Cohort FE
Duflo Controls
Marriage Age Controls
Ethnicity FE
Marriage-Year Controls
F -stat
Number of observations
Clusters
Adjusted R2

Notes: This table reports the first stage estimates for the e↵ect of primary school completion on the bride price
payment received at marriage; the second stage estimate is reported in table 4 of the main text. Following the
specification used in Duflo (2001), we instrument for primary school completion with the interactions of treatment intensity and age in 1974 fixed e↵ects. The sample is restricted to ethnic groups that practice bride price.
Following Duflo (2001), we also restrict the sample to individuals born between 1950 and 1972, and allow the
e↵ect of school construction to vary by a child’s age in 1974, restricting the e↵ect to 0 if a child was older than
12 in 1974. d denotes a birth district. The Duflo controls consist of cohort fixed e↵ects interacted with the
number of school-aged children in the district in 1971, cohort fixed e↵ects interacted with the enrollment rate
in 1971, and cohort fixed e↵ects interacted with the regency-level implementation of a water and sanitation
program under INPRES. These are the same controls as used in Duflo (2001). Standard errors are clustered at
the district level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels.

12

Table A6: Perceived reasons for why bride price payments increase with education in Zambia
Reasons why bride price increases with education

Improves the bride’s skills in the house
Improves the bride’s knowledge and skills as a mother
Improves the woman’s earning potential
Improves the literacy of children
Bride’s parents should to be compensated for investments
Is associated with her parents being rich
Other reasons

(1)
Unprompted
reason

(2)
Prompted
reason

(3)
Prompted
not reason

212
15.1%
171
12.25%
207
14.91%
85
6.15%
777
55.34%
104
7.45%
25
3.73%

476
33.9%
600
42.98%
713
51.37%
725
52.42%
448
31.91%
507
36.32%
-

716
51%
625
44.77%
468
33.72%
573
41.43%
179
12.75%
785
56.23%
645
96.27%

Notes: This table reports respondents’ answers when asked why bride price increases with education. The data were
collected by the authors as part of a special module implemented in the first wave of the ZFPS (Fall 2014). The sample comprises 715 couples interviewed in peri-urban Lusaka. An observation is an individual, either male or female.
Respondents were first asked why bride price payments increase with education in Zambia unprompted and then were
asked about specific reasons and could either agree or disagree. The unprompted responses are reported in column 1
and the prompted responses in columns 2 and 3.

13

14

0.639
2.217
0.297
34.173
0.601
92,704
0.184
0.090
0.038

0.480
1.097
0.457
7.105
0.490
72,836
0.064
0.287
0.191

SD
0.605
1.989
0.301
34.176
0.900
178,860
.0.158
0.109
0.035

Mean
0.489
0.794
0.459
7.170
0.300
107,736
0.048
0.311
0.185

SD

(3)
(4)
Non-Bride Price

0.034***
0.228***
-0.004
-0.003
-0.299***
-86,156***
0.026***
-0.019***
0.003

0.005
0.009
0.005
0.077
0.004
1,114
0.001
0.003
0.002

0.048*
-0.004
-0.140***
-0.189***
-0.069**

0.026
0.010
0.050
0.050
0.034

(6)
(7)
(8)
Pooled Sample
With District &
Treat. Cohort FEs
Without FEs
Di↵erence
SE
Coefficient
SE

(5)

Notes: This table reports balance statistics for the 1995 Indonesia Intercensal data. The sample has 84,648 observations–
67,022 of which have known bride price status–and is used for the school construction analysis. It is composed of a
treated group of individuals who were born between 1968 and 1972 and were therefore 2–6 at the time of school construction (1974) and an untreated group of individuals who were born between 1950 and 1962 and therefore were 12–24
at the time of the school construction. IkP ost refers to the treated cohort, born from 1968–1972. Intensityd is the number of schools built in a district per 1,000 people in the school-aged population. Columns 1 and 2 present means and
standard deviations for ethnicities that traditionally practice bride price. Columns 3 and 4 present summary statistics
for non-bride price ethnicities. Column 5 reports the di↵erence in means and column 6 reports the standard error of the
di↵erence. Column 7 reports the coefficient on bride price in a regression of the row-name variables on bride price practice, district of birth fixed e↵ects, and treated or non-treated cohort fixed e↵ects. Column 8 reports the standard error of
the bride price coefficient, clustered at the district level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels.

Primary school completion
Intensity d
IkPost
Age
Muslim
Number school aged children in 1971
Water and sanitation program control
Matrilineal
Female Agriculture

Mean

(1)
(2)
Bride Price

Table A7: Balance statistics by bride price practice for the 1995 Indonesia Intercensus

Table A8: E↵ect of bride price by religion in Indonesia school construction sample
(1)
Dep Var: Indicator Variable for
Completion of Primary School
IkP ost ⇥ Intensityd ⇥ I(M uslim)i ⇥ IeBrideP rice
IkP ost ⇥ Intensityd ⇥ I(M uslim)i
IkP ost ⇥ Intensityd ⇥ I(N onM uslim)i ⇥ IeBrideP rice
IkP ost ⇥ Intensityd ⇥ I(N onM uslim)i
Ethnicity FE ⇥IkP ost
Ethnicity FE ⇥Intensityd
District FE ⇥IeBrideP rice
Duflo Controls ⇥IeBrideP rice
Muslim
Muslim ⇥IkBrideP rice
Muslim ⇥Intensityd ⇥ IkP ost
Duflo Controls
District FE
Cohort FE
F -test (joint significance of bride price e↵ects)
Number of observations
Clusters
Adjusted R2

0.023
(0.018)
-0.003
(0.012)
0.047***
(0.015)
-0.011
(0.010)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
7.26
65,403
240
0.187

Notes: This table reports estimates of the e↵ect of the INPRES school construction program on primary
school completion, allowing for di↵erences by religion (Muslim or not) and traditional bride price practice.
Data on religion and educational attainment come from the 1995 Indonesia Intercensal Survey. Bride price
data are from the Ethnographic Atlas (Murdock, 1967) and LeBar (1972). The F -test tests the joint significance of IkP ost ⇥Intensityd ⇥I(M uslim)i ⇥IeBrideP rice and IkP ost ⇥Intensityd ⇥I(N onM uslim)i ⇥IeBrideP rice .

The Duflo controls consist of cohort fixed e↵ects interacted with the number of school-aged children in the
district in 1971, cohort fixed e↵ects interacted with the enrollment rate in 1971, and cohort fixed e↵ects interacted with the regency-level implementation of a water and sanitation program under INPRES. These are

the same controls as used in Duflo (2001). Standard errors are clustered at the birth district level. *, **,
and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels.

15

Table A9: Bride price and the INPRES school expansion with e↵ects by age in 1974
(1)
Dep Var: Indicator Variable for
Completion of Primary School
IeBrideP rice ⇥ I(Age1974 = 22 to 24)i
IeBrideP rice ⇥ I(Age1974 = 19 to 21)i
IeBrideP rice ⇥ I(Age1974 = 16 to 18)i
IeBrideP rice ⇥ I(Age1974 = 10 to 12)i
IeBrideP rice ⇥ I(Age1974 = 7 to 9)i
IeBrideP rice ⇥ I(Age1974 = 4 to 6)i
IeBrideP rice ⇥ I(Age1974 = 1 to 3)i
IeBrideP rice ⇥ I(Age1974 =

2 to 0)i

IeBrideP rice ⇥ I(Age1974 =

5 to

3)i

IeN oBrideP rice ⇥ I(Age1974 = 22 to 24)i
IeN oBrideP rice ⇥ I(Age1974 = 19 to 21)i
IeN oBrideP rice ⇥ I(Age1974 = 16 to 18)i
IeN oBrideP rice ⇥ I(Age1974 = 10 to 12)i
IeN oBrideP rice ⇥ I(Age1974 = 7 to 9)i
IeN oBrideP rice ⇥ I(Age1974 = 4 to 6)i
IeN oBrideP rice ⇥ I(Age1974 = 1 to 3)i
IeN oBrideP rice ⇥ I(Age1974 =

2 to 0)i

IeN oBrideP rice ⇥ I(Age1974 =

5 to

3)i

F -test for Bride Price Coe↵.
F -test for Non-Bride Price Coe↵.
Number of observations
Clusters
Adjusted R2

0.004
(0.014)
0.009
(0.017)
0.013
(0.011)
0.004
(0.013)
0.007
(0.010)
0.029***
(0.010)
0.031*
(0.016)
0.026**
(0.011)
0.053***
(0.020)
-0.004
(0.011)
-0.011
(0.010)
-0.011
(0.010)
-0.010
(0.010)
-0.008
(0.010)
-0.015
(0.011)
-0.002
(0.012)
-0.004
(0.012)
0.011
(0.012)
3.37
1.12
117,191
253
0.193

This table reports the coefficients and standard errors from the regressions plotted in Figure 3
(the estimated relationships between school construction and primary school completion for different 3-year birth cohorts). Standard errors are clustered at the level of an individual’s district
of birth. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels.

16

17

⇥ Intensityd

1,700,856
263
0.175

N
N
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
N
N
N

0.011
(0.010)

Census 2010

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
6.01
1,700,436
263
0.193

0.017**
(0.008)
-0.015
(0.011)

76,959
255
0.183

N
N
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
N

0.009
(0.011)

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
0.41
65,403
240
0.188

0.018
(0.027)
-0.002
(0.016)

53,640
247
0.137

N
N
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
N
N
N

-0.006
(0.005)
0.015
(0.014)
-0.004
(0.007)
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
1.60
45,799
232
0.134

(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Dep Var: Indicator Variable for Completion of Primary School
Census 2010 District Trends District Trends Placebo Regressions Placebo Regressions

Notes: Columns 1 and 2 report estimates of the Indonesia school construction regressions using the Indonesia 2010 Census data. The education attainment data
come from a ten percent sample of the 2010 Indonesia Census. Columns 3–4 re-estimate the specification in columns 1 and 2 of table 7, controlling for linear time
trends, whose coefficients are allowed to vary either at the district level (column 3) or district by bride price level (column 4). Columns 5–6 report estimates of the
Indonesia school construction regressions using a placebo treatment status instead of the true treatment status. The education attainment data are taken from the
2010 Indonesia census (columns 1 and 2) or the 1995 Indonesia Intercensal Survey (columns 3–6). Bride price data are from the Ethnographic Atlas (Murdock, 1967)
and LeBar (1972). IkP ost refers to the treated cohort, born from 1968–1972. The untreated cohort is born between 1950 and 1962. Intensityd is the number of schools
built in a district per 1,000 people in the school-aged population. The Duflo controls consist of cohort fixed e↵ects interacted with the number of school-aged children
in the district in 1971, cohort fixed e↵ects interacted with the enrollment rate in 1971, and cohort fixed e↵ects interacted with the regency-level implementation of a
water and sanitation program under INPRES. These are the same controls as used in Duflo (2001). IkP laceboP ost refers to the placebo treated cohort, who are aged
12–17 in 1974. The placebo untreated cohort is aged 17–24 in 1974. The subscript d indexes birth districts, k indexes cohorts, and e indexes ethnic groups. ‘DistrictSpecific Time Trends’ denote district specific linear time trends. ‘District by Bride Price Time Trends’ denote district-specific linear time trends that are allowed to
vary depending on whether an ethnic group practices bride price. Standard errors are clustered at the birth-district level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the
10, 5, and 1% levels.

Ethnicity FE
Ethnicity FE ⇥IkP ost
Ethnicity FE ⇥Intensityd
District FE
District FE ⇥IeBrideP rice
Duflo Controls
Duflo Controls ⇥IeBrideP rice
Cohort FE
Cohort FE ⇥IeBrideP rice
District-Specific Time Trends
District by Bride Price Time Trends
F -test (equality of coe↵)
Number of observations
Clusters
Adjusted R2

IkP laceboP ost ⇥ Intensityd ⇥ IeN oBrideP rice

IkP laceboP ost ⇥ Intensityd ⇥ IeBrideP rice

IkP laceboP ost ⇥ Intensityd

IkP ost ⇥ Intensityd ⇥ IeN oBrideP rice

IkP ost ⇥ Intensityd ⇥ IeBrideP rice

IkP ost

(1)

Table A10: Robustness checks for the e↵ect of school construction on female education in Indonesia

18

0.628
8.350
0.094
0.245
0.003
0.578
0.891

0.483
2.256
0.283
0.430
0.051
0.494
0.312

0.613
8.349
0.093
0.122
0.003
0.544
0.904

0.487
2.255
0.272
0.327
0.058
0.498
0.295

0.015**
0.001
0.002
0.123***
-0.001
0.033***
-0.013***

0.007
0.033
0.004
0.006
0.001
0.007
0.005

0.007
-0.002
0.067***
0.000
-0.000
-0.033

0.012
0.002
0.012
0.001
0.075
0.027

(6)
(7)
(8)
Pooled Sample
With District &
Cohort FEs
Without FEs
Di↵erence
SE
Coefficient
SE

(5)

significance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels.

fixed e↵ects. Column 8 reports the standard error of this coefficient clustered at the district level. *, **, and *** indicate

the coefficient on bride price practice in a regression of the row-name variable on bride price practice and district and year

umn 5 reports the di↵erence in the means and column 6 reports the standard error of the di↵erence. Column 7 reports

errors for the bride price group, and columns 3 and 4 report means and standard errors for the non-bride price group. Col-

22,402 of which have known bride price status–and comprises girls aged 5–12. Columns 1 and 2 present means and standard

Zambia DHS. The sample, which is that used in the school construction analysis for Zambia, includes 24,707 observations–

Notes: This table reports balance statistics by bride price practice for the pooled 1996, 2001, 2007, and 2013 rounds of the

Primary School Enrollment
Age
Schoolsdt /Aread
Polygynous HH
Muslim HH Head
Matrilineal
Female Agriculture

SD

Mean

Mean

SD

(3)
(4)
Non-Bride Price

(1)
(2)
Bride Price

Table A11: Balance statistics by bride price practice for the pooled Zambia DHS

Table A12: Robustness checks for the e↵ect of school construction on female education in Zambia
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Dep Var: Indicator Variable for Completion of Primary School
District District
Placebo
Placebo
Trends
Trends
Regressions Regressions
Schoolsdt /Aread

0.022
(0.126)

Schoolsdt /Aread ⇥ IeBrideP rice

0.064
(0.074)
0.492***
(0.176)
-0.127
(0.173)

Schoolsdt /Aread ⇥ IeN oBrideP rice
Schoolsd,t+1 /Aread

0.294**
(0.118)
-0.014
(0.095)
-0.063
(0.083)

Schoolsd,t+1 /Aread ⇥ IeBrideP rice

Y
N
Y
Y
N
N
N

-0.227*
(0.116)
-0.012
(0.105)
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N

12,370
70
0.393

12,370
70
0.393

Schoolsd,t+1 /Aread ⇥ IeN oBrideP rice
Age FE
Age FE ⇥IeBrideP rice
Ethnicity by Year FE
Ethnicity by District FE
District-Specific Time Trends
District by Bride Price Time Trends
District FE ⇥IeBrideP rice
F -test (equality of coe↵)
Number of observations
Clusters
Adjusted R2

Y
N
Y
Y
Y
N
N
22,191
71
0.400

Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
5.69
22,191
71
0.402

Notes: Columns 1 and 2 re-estimate the e↵ects of school construction in Zambia controlling
for district-specific linear time trends, which are allowed to vary by bride price status. The regressions use girls aged 5–12 at the time of the survey in the pooled Zambia DHS surveys from
1996, 2001, 2007, and 2013. The subscript d indexes districts, k indexes cohorts, e indexes
ethnic groups, and t indexes survey rounds. Columns 3-4 report estimates of the di↵erential
impact of present and future school construction in Zambia on bride price and non-bride price
females. For these columns, we are unable to include the 2013 DHS, since we do not know how
many schools will be built in the future. The treatment variable, Schoolsdt , is the number of
schools built in a district d by year t (the survey round of the DHS). This is normalized by
the area of the district, Aread . Schoolsd,t+1 is the number of schools built by 2001 in 1996,
the number of schools built by 2007 in 2001, and the number of schools built by 2013 in 2007.
‘District-Specific Time Trends’ denote district specific linear time trends. ‘District by Bride
Price Time Trends’ denote district-specific linear time trends that are allowed to vary depending on whether an ethnic group practices bride price. Standard errors are clustered at the
district level. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels.

19

Table A13: Testing for di↵erential returns to education for bride price and non-bride price women
in Indonesia and Zambia
(1)
Employment
IiP rimary
IiJuniorSecondary
IiSeniorSecondary

IiP rimary ⇥ IeBrideP rice
IiJuniorSecondary ⇥ IeBrideP rice
IiSeniorSecondary ⇥ IeBrideP rice

IeBrideP rice

District by Year FE
Age Controls
E↵ect of BP for women with average
education for sample
F -test of bride price interact coe↵s
Number of observations
Clusters
Adjusted R2

(2)
(3)
Indonesia
ln (Wage) Wealth Index, 0-1

(4)
Employment

(5)
Zambia
Wealth Index, 0-1

(6)
Child Stunting

-0.059***
(0.004)
[0.002]
0.091***
(0.016)
[0.000]
0.177***
(0.019)
[0.000]

0.280***
(0.014)
[0.000]
0.827***
(0.028)
[0.000]
0.183***
(0.015)
[0.000]

0.121***
(0.004)
[0.000]
0.163***
(0.006)
[0.000]
0.053**
(0.012)
[0.022]

0.046***
(0.013)
[0.000]
0.024
(0.013)
[0.108]
0.217***
(0.018)
[0.000]

0.097***
(0.006)
[0.000]
0.234***
(0.005)
[0.000]
0.180***
(0.014)
[0.000]

-0.044***
(0.007)
[0.002]
-0.050***
(0.005)
[0.002]
-0.076***
(0.014)
[0.002]

-0.001
(0.017)
[0.952]
0.050
(0.031)
[0.348]
-0.026
(0.054)
[0.672]

0.157
(0.094)
[0.104]
-0.152
(0.082)
[0.073]
-0.026
(0.042)
[0.539]

-0.005
(0.008)
[0.600]
-0.023*
(0.009)
[0.062]
-0.025
(0.024)
[0.432]

0.007
(0.034)
[0.856]
0.023
(0.018)
[0.270]
0.018
(0.026)
[0.486]

-0.017
(0.013)
[0.298]
-0.013
(0.009)
[0.222]
-0.008
(0.026)
[0.758]

0.054
(0.026)
[0.140]
0.002
(0.019)
[0.994]
-0.015
(0.030)
[0.642]

-0.029
(0.027)
[0.289]
Y
Y
-0.030
(0.033)
4.96
88,049
40
0.106

-0.020
(0.032)
[0.542]
Y
Y
0.080
(0.059)
1.39
12,547
31
0.506

-0.014
(0.108)
[0.748]
Y
Y
-0.018
(0.020)
3.30
88,039
40
0.413

-0.051
(0.041)
[0.336]
Y
Y
-0.037***
(0.011)
1.10
19,671
30
0.099

0.020
(0.019)
[0.304]
Y
Y
-0.001
(0.018)
1.35
17,145
30
0.498

-0.045*
(0.021)
[0.054]
Y
Y
0.010
(0.008)
2.33
21,946
30
0.053

Notes: This table reports estimates of the relationship between education and other outcomes for bride price and non-bride price women in Indonesia and Zambia.
The samples consist of women aged 25–45, with the exception of column 6, which includes all children ages 0–5. Age controls consist of age and age squared. For Indonesia, educational attainment and labor market outcomes data are taken from the 1995 Intercensal data. For Zambia, educational attainment, labor market, and
child health outcomes data are taken from the 1996, 2001, 2007, and 2013 Demographic and Health Surveys. Wage data in Indonesia are only reported for formal sector employees. IiP rimary is an indicator variable that equals one if individual i has completed primary school and attended junior secondary school, IiJuniorSecondary
is an indicator variable equal to 1 if an individual has completed junior secondary school and attended upper secondary school. In Zambia, IiSeniorSecondary equals
one if the woman has any post-secondary education, which is not necessarily at the university level, while in Indonesia IiSeniorSecondary equals one if the person has
any college or university education. The row “E↵ect of BP for women with average education for sample” reports the estimated e↵ect of bride price on the outcome
of interest for a woman with the mean level of education for the sample. This is an 63.4% chance of primary school completion in Indonesia and a 31.7% chance of
attending junior secondary school in Zambia. i indexes a woman between the ages of 25 and 45, e her ethnicity. p-values obtained using the wild cluster bootstrap
procedure with 1000 draws are reported in square brackets. Standard errors, clustered at the ethnicity level, are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate
significance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels according to the wild cluster bootstrapped p-values.

20

Appendix E: Appendix Figures

Figure A1: Number of schools constructed each year in Zambia (Ministry of Education, Government
of Zambia). Vertical red lines indicate the years of the four rounds of the DHS.

21

22

Figure A2: Number of schools constructed each year for each province in Zambia (Ministry of Education, Government of Zambia).
Vertical red lines indicate the years of the four rounds of the DHS.

References
Alesina, Alberto, Paola Giuliano, and Nathan Nunn, “On the Origins of Gender Roles:
Women and the Plough,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128 (2), 155–194.
Duflo, Esther, “Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of School Construction in Indonesia:
Evidence from an Unusual Policy Experiment,” American Economic Review, 2001, 91 (4), 795–
813.
Gordon, Raymond G., Ethnologue: Languages of the World, 15th Edition, SIL International,
2005.
LeBar, Frank M., Ethnic Groups of Insular Southeast Asia. Volume 1: Indonesia, Adaman
Islands, and Madagascar, New Haven: Human Relations Area Files Press, 1972.
Minnesota Population Center, “Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, International: Version
6.1,” 1995.
Murdock, George Peter, Africa: Its Peoples and Their Cultural History, New York: McGrawHill Book Company, 1959.
, Ethnographic Atlas, Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1967.
Schapera, Isaac, A Handbook of Tswana: Law and Custom, Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1938.
Strauss, J., F. Witoelar, B. Sikoki, and A.M. Wattie, “The Fourth Wave of the Indonesian
Family Life Survey (IFLS4): Overview and Field Report,” 2009.
, K. Beegle, B. Sikoki, A. Dwiyanto, Y. Herawati, and F. Witoelar, “The Third Wave
of the Indonesian Family Life Survey (IFLS): Overview and Field Report,” 2004.
Whiteley, Wilfred and J. Slaski, Bemba and Related Peoples of Northern Rhodesia, London:
International African Institute, 1950.
Willis, Roy, The Fipa and Related Peoples of South-West Tanzania and North-East Zambia,
London: International African Institute, 1966.

23

