NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BUYOUT ACTIVITY:
THE IMPACT OF AGGREGATE DISCOUNT RATES
Valentin Haddad
Erik Loualiche
Matthew Plosser
Working Paper 22414
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22414

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2016

Valentin Haddad is with Princeton University and NBER, Erik Loualiche is with MIT Sloan
School of Management, and Matthew Plosser is with Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The
views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the position
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. For helpful comments,
the authors thank Bruno Biais (the editor), Olivier Darmouni, Douglas Diamond, Steven Kaplan,
Anil Kashyap, Ralph Koijen, Adair Morse, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Jonathan Parker, Pietro
Veronesi, anonymous referees, and seminar participants at the Chicago Booth Junior Finance
Symposium, SITE, the European Summer Symposium in Financial Markets, the Northwestern
Finance Conference, the Chicago Booth Finance Brownbag, the Economic Dynamics Working
Group at the University of Chicago, the Student Seminar and Macro Lunch at Northwestern
University, the Transatlantic Doctoral Conference, London Business School, and the CambridgePrinceton Finance Conference. They also appreciate research assistance from Tara Sullivan and
Meru Bhanot. The authors do not have any potential conflicts of interest. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Valentin Haddad, Erik Loualiche, and Matthew Plosser. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Buyout Activity: The Impact of Aggregate Discount Rates
Valentin Haddad, Erik Loualiche, and Matthew Plosser
NBER Working Paper No. 22414
July 2016
JEL No. G11,G23,G34
ABSTRACT
Buyout booms form in response to declines in the aggregate risk premium. We document that the
equity risk premium is the primary determinant of buyout activity rather than credit-specific
conditions. We articulate a simple explanation for this phenomenon: a low risk premium
increases the present value of performance gains and decreases the cost of holding an illiquid
investment. A panel of U.S. buyouts confirms this view. The risk premium shapes changes in
buyout characteristics over the cycle, including their riskiness, leverage, and performance. Our
results underscore the importance of the risk premium in corporate finance decisions.

Valentin Haddad
Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton University
26 Prospect Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
vhaddad@princeton.edu
Erik Loualiche
MIT Sloan
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02139
erikl@mit.edu

Matthew Plosser
Financial Intermediation Function
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
matthew.plosser@ny.frb.org

Since their emergence in the 1980s, buyouts have been a powerful means to alter firm incentives.
But the use of buyouts has varied widely over time. In the U.S., peak years experience close to 100
public-to-private buyout transactions while trough years experience as few as 10. We propose a
simple explanation for these fluctuations: buyout activity responds to changes in the aggregate risk
premium. The discount rate affects firm valuations and in turn the decision of whether to engage
in a buyout deal. We document that this integrated view of capital markets provides a detailed and
powerful account of the cycle of buyout activity. Our elementary explanation is in stark contrast to
existing literature that focuses on the role of credit-specific conditions.
Empirically, variation in buyout activity is better explained by changes in the risk premium than
by credit market conditions. Figure 1 illustrates how buyout activity decreases when the aggregate
risk premium is high and increases when it is low. This factor alone explains over 30% of the
total variation in buyout activity, more than three times the variation explained by credit market
conditions. To derive additional testable hypotheses at the firm level, we present a model linking
the buyout decision to a single time-varying cost of capital. We show that the characteristics of
buyout targets and their variation across high- and low-risk premium episodes uniquely reflect our
mechanism.
[Place Figure 1 about here]
We investigate the impact of the risk premium on buyout decisions through the central tradeoff of performance gains versus the cost of providing incentives. In particular, a buyout brings
better management to the firm at the cost of compensating the acquirer for holding skin in the
game. The risk premium affects both sides of this trade-off. On the performance side, the gains
are muted when the risk premium is high: following the Gordon growth model intuition, the gains
of a buyout increase with the difference between the firm’s growth rate and the discount rate.1 On
the other hand, providing incentives to the acquirer is costly: she has to bear excess risk to be duly
motivated to implement changes at the target. When the risk premium increases, that is, when the
marginal willingness to bear risk decreases, the willingness to bear this excess risk also decreases
and compensating the acquirer becomes more costly.
Using a panel of nonstrategic public-to-private deals from 1982 to 2011, we document a novel
set of facts regarding the quantity and nature of buyout activity. Our simple explanation, focused on
the risk premium, provides a unified explanation of these facts, whereas credit-centric hypotheses
are difficult to reconcile with our results. At the aggregate level, buyout activity is negatively
related to the market-wide risk premium. This relation is robust to the inclusion of market signals
corresponding to common hypotheses in the literature: credit market conditions (Axelson et al.
(2013)) or measures of debt-equity mispricing (Kaplan and Strömberg (2009)). The risk premium
1 The NPV of a cash flow stream starting at X,

growing exponentially at rate g, and discounted at rate r is X/(r − g).

1

explains as much as 30% of the variation in activity whereas credit factors alone explain only up
to 10%. Consistent with our emphasis on fundamental conditions, market expected growth is also
positively related to buyout activity. Finally, our theory rationalizes the correlation between buyout
activity, leverage, deal pricing, and subsequent returns, as documented, for instance, in Axelson
et al. (2013).
While these aggregate facts strongly suggest that the risk premium is the primary driver of
buyout activity, we also exploit the cross-section of firms to further distinguish the risk premium
from alternative hypotheses. First, riskier firms have a higher cost of capital and greater illiquidity
costs, making them undesirable buyout targets. Using panel data, we confirm the propensity of
a firm to be bought out is sensitive to risk characteristics. Firms with high market beta or high
idiosyncratic volatility are less likely targets.
Going further, the role of risk characteristics varies over time. The greater the systematic risk
of the firm (i.e., beta), the more sensitive the cost of capital to changes in the risk premium. In
addition, the illiquidity costs of high-beta firms are more sensitive to changes in the risk premium.
Hence, among buyout targets, we expect fewer high-beta firms when the risk premium is high.
Congruent with this prediction, we show that the distribution of buyout firms’ betas shifts towards
lower values during periods associated with a high risk premium. In contrast, the idiosyncratic
risk of buyout targets does not change with the risk premium—a fact consistent with our theory.
These results distinguish our thesis from an explanation premised on changes in debt capacity that
predicts that both systematic risk and idiosyncratic risk vary with the buyout cycle.
A second set of tests focuses on the impact of the risk premium in the cross-section of firms.
Firms with greater potential performance improvements should be more sensitive to the risk premium. We proxy for higher potential gains using three measures of agency problems—a corporate
governance index, a measure of industry competition, and a proxy for cash flows—and find supportive evidence. Firms with poor corporate governance are more sensitive to changes in the risk
premium, as are firms with more potential for a “free cash-flow” problem. In addition, our framework suggests that it is less costly to compensate the acquirer when it is easier to resell the firm,
and thus the buyout activity of more liquid firms should be less sensitive to changes in the risk
premium. We measure the ease of exit for acquirers using average industry-level M&A or IPO
transaction activity and find that more liquid industries are less sensitive to movements in the risk
premium. These results are robust to the inclusion of controls for credit market conditions. The
evidence confirms a unique role for the aggregate risk premium in shaping the costs and benefits
of buyout activity.
The fundamental trade-off that we emphasize for buyouts is standard in corporate finance and
can be generalized to other corporate transactions. We document the correlation between deal
activity and the risk premium for M&A and IPO activity. M&A activity responds negatively to
2

the risk premium, but less so than buyouts. This behavior is consistent with the view that the
performance channel matters for M&A deals but that buyouts are also subject to the illiquidity
channel, which increases their sensitivity. For IPOs, the model suggests that the two channels work
in opposite directions, and hence we do not find a strong response to the risk premium empirically.
Our paper’s emphasis on aggregate discount rates is unique in the buyout literature. Kaplan
and Strömberg (2009) outline the history of aggregate private equity activity, but a systematic
explanation for buyout waves has remained elusive. Closest in spirit to our paper, Martos-Vila,
Rhodes-Kropf, and Harford (2012) provide an explanation for the dynamics of financial versus
strategic acquisition activity. Their analysis focuses on mispricing in the debt market rather than
changes in aggregate prices. These explanations are not mutually exclusive, however. Both aggregate fundamentals and relative misvaluation can play a role. Motivated by our empirical findings,
Malenko and Malenko (2015) provide an alternative theoretical model for the role of variation in
the risk premium for buyout activity. Rather than our basic trade-off, they emphasize the ability of private-equity-owned firms to borrow against their sponsors’ reputation with creditors and
externalities in sponsor reputation due to club formation.
A number of papers isolate specific events that impact buyout activity. Using cross-sectional
evidence, Shivdasani and Wang (2011) argue that the advent of structured credit improved access
to capital for buyout investors. Similarly, the emergence of the high-yield market likely stimulated
activity, as Kaplan and Stein (1993) observe important changes in the structure of deals during this
period. Particular innovations in financial markets do indeed matter. For instance, discount rates
fail to capture the intensity of the boom in the 1980s. Nevertheless, aggregate forces are first-order
contributors to oscillations in activity and thus should be taken into account when quantifying other
hypotheses.
The literature on cross-sectional determinants of buyouts is more developed (Bharath and
Dittmar (2010), Opler and Titman (1993)), but few papers focus on risk measures. Ewens, Jones,
and Rhodes-Kropf (2013) emphasize the role of exposure to diversifiable risk in the private equity decision. Sorensen, Wang, and Yang (2013) consider the pricing of idiosyncratic risk by
limited partners (LPs) and build corresponding performance measures. In the context of this crosssectional literature, we highlight that the role of these characteristics, influenced by changes in the
aggregate risk premium, varies strongly over the cycle.
Our underlying theory of a buyout relies on an agency conflict between the LPs and general
partners of a fund. Our model is parsimonious and designed to emphasize the role of the aggregate
risk premium. Axelson, Strömberg, and Weisbach (2009) provide an in-depth analysis of the role
of agency frictions in shaping buyout contracts and investments. Others follow a similar approach
(Martos-Vila, Rhodes-Kropf, and Harford (2012), Ewens, Jones, and Rhodes-Kropf (2013), and
3

Malenko and Malenko (2015)), but their analysis does not consider aggregate discount rates.
More generally, we contribute to the broader literature emphasizing the role of time-varying
discount rates for corporate decisions. This literature is based on the insight that changes in
discount rates affect the cost of capital, which is an important parameter for evaluating investments. Time-variation in the discount rate has been shown to affect investment, as in Barro (1990),
Cochrane (1991), and Berk, Green, and Naik (1999), and other forms of financial activity (for a
survey, see Cochrane (2011)). For instance, Pastor and Veronesi (2005) consider the role of pricing
conditions for IPOs. This paper is the first to apply this idea to buyout activity. Furthermore, we
introduce a novel channel through which changes in the aggregate risk premium impact financial
decisions, namely, the illiquidity channel.
In Section I, we document a robust relation between buyout activity and the risk premium. We
present our model of buyout transactions in Section II. In Section III we test several additional
predictions on the timing and composition of buyout activity. We consider the implications of our
approach for other types of corporate transactions in Section IV. Finally, we conclude in Section
V.

I.

The Aggregate Dynamics of Buyout Activity

In this Section we first discuss our main hypothesis, which holds that buyout activity is determined by the aggregate cost of capital, and contrast it with the credit market view. We then describe
the behavior of buyout activity and examine its relation with capital market conditions. The results
show that a high aggregate risk premium is a strong negative predictor of buyout activity and has
greater explanatory power than the relative cost of debt.

A.

Potential Determinants of Buyout Activity
A.1.

Aggregate Discount Rates

An important empirical fact about capital markets is that the cost of risky capital, or the risk
premium, varies over time (Fama and French (1988), Campbell and Shiller (1988a)). Consistent
with integrated capital markets, this variation is coordinated across debt and equity financing (Fama
and French (1989)). Buyouts are a type of investment that lead to operational changes in firms
(e.g., Davis et al. (2014)). When the risk premium is large, future gains are discounted more and
as a consequence investments are less attractive (e.g., Barro (1990)). Also, concentrated, illiquid
positions—like those involved in buyout transactions—are particularly unattractive to investors

4

when the risk premium is high. These two forces predict a negative association between buyout
activity and prices on the one hand and the risk premium on the other.
Our central finding is that this hypothesis is empirically important. We develop further testable
hypotheses related to this mechanism in Section II.

A.2.

Credit Market Conditions

In contrast to this simple approach, a more commonly emphasized factor in the buyout decision
is the cost of debt rather than common changes in the cost of capital; see, for example, Axelson
et al. (2013). Underlying this view is the notion that buyout investors exploit mispricing in securities markets such that low borrowing costs facilitate a transfer to buyout investors (see Baker
and Wurgler (2002)). Another motivation is that, to mitigate overinvestment tendencies, buyout
investors can only raise debt once they have obtained initial funding from their limited partners
and hence, they are particularly sensitive to the cost of debt (Axelson, Strömberg, and Weisbach
(2009)). When debt is “cheap,” transforming equity-financed firms into debt-financed firms is more
profitable, thus buyouts are more attractive to investors. This view has implications for both the
intensive and the extensive margin of deals. On the intensive margin, conditional on a deal occurring, cheaper credit should coincide with greater deal leverage and higher takeout valuations. As
for the extensive margin, advantageous credit conditions should correspond to periods with more
buyout activity.
The extant literature on buyouts primarily tests implications on the intensive margin of this
theory. Most prominently, Axelson et al. (2013) relate the price and leverage of buyout deals to
yields on high-yield debt. While Kaplan and Strömberg (2009) hypothesize that booms and busts
in buyout activity are related to credit market conditions, we are the first to provide a systematic
analysis of extensive margin fluctuations with respect to credit conditions and the risk premium.

B.

Data
B.1.

Buyout Activity

Our sample of U.S. buyouts comes from Thomson Reuters SDC M&A data. We identify publicto-private buyout transactions as completed deals for public targets that are described as a “leveraged buyout” or “management buyout.” Because the SDC descriptor misses some notable buyout
deals, we screen for additional transactions by including firms purchased by private financial acquirers where the acquisition is made for “investment purposes.” We check each of these transactions to verify that the purchaser is indeed a private equity firm. Announcement dates determine
the timing of the transaction.
5

We begin our analysis in the fourth quarter of 1982, the starting point of consistent activity.
The resulting sample of buyouts includes 1,143 deals between 1982Q4 and 2011Q4. Table I summarises quarterly buyout activity in our sample. On average there are 9.8 deals per quarter. The
quarterly average asset value of targets is $8.7bn and the enterprise value (i.e., the transaction
value) is $5.4bn.2 Both measures of value—book assets and enterprise value—are skewed toward
higher values.
[Place Table I about here]
The discount rate channel that we have in mind is agnostic as to firm size, and thus the volume
of deals is our preferred measure of buyout activity. To account for the changing number of potential targets, we measure Volume using the number of deals scaled by the number of public firms
in COMPUSTAT in the prior quarter. On average 0.19% of public firms are taken private each
quarter in our sample period. We also construct a value-based measure of buyout activity, where
we focus on book assets as book assets are both consistently reported and independent of pricing.
We define Value as the logarithm of total target assets in 2010 dollars to reduce skewness. In the
Internet Appendix,3 we demonstrate that our findings are similar using many alternative measures
of activity.
[Place Figure 2 about here]
Figure 2 illustrates the fluctuations in our buyout activity measures. Following the initial boom
of the late 1980s with 20 to 30 deals a quarter (approximately 50bps of activity), the 1990s experienced little activity with less than five deals per quarter (10bps). Two spikes in activity occurred in
the following years, one in the 1997 to 2000 period, and another around 2005 to 2007. Following
a halt in activity aorund the financial crisis of 2008, 2010 saw a modest rebound. This variation
in number of deals are coincides with variation in the value of deals, with the two measures having a correlation of 74%. The average log value of activity is 8.3 or $4.1bn dollars, with Value
varying between 7.0 ($1.1bn) at the 25th percentile to 9.2 ($9.5bn) at the 75th percentile. While
not the focus of our study, other dimensions of the buyout transaction appear to experience cyclical variation. For instance, Axelson et al. (2013) document variation, albeit more modest, in the
composition of financing. In their sample the ratio of debt to enterprise value varies between 61%
and 78% between the 25th and 75th percentiles. They also show that deals originating in a boom
experience lower subsequent returns than those originating in periods of low activity. We revisit
these quantities and their relation to our main hypothesis in Section II.
2A

key reason enterprise value averages less than book assets is that enterprise values are less consistently reported
than asset values.
3 The Internet Appendix is available in the online version of the article on the Journal of Finance website.

6

B.2.

Capital Market Conditions

Aggregate Risk Premium. We measure the aggregate risk premium using an estimate of expected
excess equity returns. We employ three factors previously shown to predict excess returns: the
dividend-price ratio, cay, and the three-month T-bill yield.4 The dividend-price ratio is constructed using CRSP data on monthly returns. The variable cay is an empirical proxy for the
log consumption-wealth ratio.5 Interest rates are constant maturity rates according to the Federal
Reserve’s H.15 release.
The predictive regression is estimated quarterly from 1954Q1 to 2010Q3. The dependent variable is the annualized return of the value-weighted market portfolio over the next three years
(ReM,t+1 ) in excess of the current three-month T-bill yield. We use a three-year horizon to capture the longer-term nature of private equity investments.6 The regression yields the coefficients
E(ReM,t+1 ) = −.76 + (2.89)(D/P)t + (2.54)cayt + (−0.97)(T-Bill)t .
[1.03]

[0.59]

(1)

[0.38]

For the buyout sample period, we calculate the predicted market return as a measure of the
risk premium in the economy, rp
ˆ OLS . This measure is a projection of equity returns on predictive
factors and thus information in equity markets must explain the behavior of the predicted variable.
Credit Market Conditions. We compare the explanatory power of our aggregate measure of the risk
premium to several credit market factors that other researchers show are important to explaining
buyout activity. Axelson et al. (2013) find that the yield on the Merrill Lynch High Yield Index less
LIBOR is correlated with leveraged buyouts, EV/EBITDA ratios, and leverage. Using a composite
of the Merrill Lynch high-yield bond indices, we construct a similar measure less the yield on
the three-month T-bill (HY Spread). Kaplan and Strömberg (2009) suggest that firms’ ability to
finance profitably with high-yield debt is an important determinant of buyout activity. We construct
their proposed measure, EBITDA Spread, as the median EBITDA/EV ratio for COMPUSTAT firms
less the yield on our composite high-yield bond index. We also consider a measure of the excess
premium in corporate bonds (GZ Spread), which has been shown to predict future macroeconomic
activity (Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2012)). Statistics for these variables are summarized in Table I.
Not surprisingly, these measures are correlated with the equity risk premium, rp
ˆ OLS . In particular, HY Spread has a positive correlation with the risk premium of 55%, because the aggregate
discount factor is reflected in both debt and equity markets. This observation is consistent with
4 For

more details on D/P see Campbell and Shiller (1988b), Fama and French (1988), and Cochrane (2008), on
cay see Lettau and Ludvigson (2001), and on the term structure of interest rates see Campbell (1987), and Fama and
French (1989).
5 We construct cay as in Lettau and Ludvigson (2001). We download the data from Martin Lettau’s website (http:
//faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/lettau/data_cay.html).
6 Our primary findings are similar if we use a one-year or five-year horizon.

7

evidence that the same factors price excess returns for both stocks and bonds (see, for example,
Fama and French (1993)). Given this correlation, EBITDA Spread is negatively correlated with
the risk premium (-36%). Finally, GZ Spread is also negatively correlated with our risk premium
measure (-32%), although it is positively correlated with the spread on the high-yield index.7

C.

Risk Premium or Credit Factors?

Figure 1 illustrates the negative covariation between buyout activity and the risk premium over
time. The decline in activity in the early 1990s corresponds to a high risk premium while the
spikes in activity around 2000 and 2007 correspond to periods of lower expected returns. The
modest rebound in volume in 2010 also matches a subsiding risk premium. The one boom that
does not correspond as cleanly is that in the late 1980s.
To assess the importance of capital market factors, we compare the statistical significance and
explanatory power of the risk premium to those of credit market variables. We estimate the relation
between activity and discount rates using OLS, where activity is either the volume or value-based
measure:
Activityt = α + λrp rp
ˆ t + γ 0 (Credit Factors)t + ut .

(2)

We include quarterly dummy variables to account for seasonality. Given the persistence of independent variables, we estimate Newey-West standard errors lagged over the prior four quarters.8
The risk premium measure is negatively correlated with the volume of buyout activity and
explains significantly more variation than debt spread measures (Table II, Panel A). In column (1),
the univariate coefficient on the risk premium is negative and statistically significant at the 1% level,
consistent with the discount rate hypothesis. And as conjectured by credit-centric stories, EBITDA
Spread is positively correlated with buyout activity while HY Spread is negatively correlated with
buyout activity, as seen in columns (2) and (4), respectively. Both of these findings are significant
at the 10% level. We note, however, that comparing statistical significance of these coefficients is
not a test of their relative importance nor do these results account for the fact that the time-series
variation in spreads is correlated.
To better assess the relative importance of these factors we compare their R2 s and the impact of
a one-standard-deviation change in their value. We find that the risk premium accounts for 31.7%
of the variation in deal activity (column (1)) and the economic magnitude of the risk premium
coefficient is meaningful—a one-standard-deviation increase in the risk premium decreases the
7 Correlations

are detailed in Internet Appendix Table IAI.
the sample is censored at zero, though this only binds once in 1993. The coefficient estimates are
quantitatively similar in a Tobit specification, but this limits the ability to make straightforward R2 comparisons.
8 Technically

8

volume of activity by 34%. In contrast, no credit market factor alone accounts for more than 8%
of the variation in buyout activity (columns (2), (4), and (6)) and all three credit measures together
explain 10.7% of this variation (column (8)). Similarly, a one-standard-deviation change in any
single credit factor accounts for at most a 15% change in activity.9
To verify that the risk premium coefficient is robust to credit spreads, we consider the risk premium in the presence of each credit factor (columns (3), (5), and (7)). In each case, the coefficient
on the risk premium retains its magnitude and statistical significance whereas the coefficients on
the credit factors are attenuated when included in isolation with the risk premium. Column (9)
considers an even stronger challenge to the risk premium as we include all three credit factors at
once. Again, the risk premium retains its magnitude and is statistically significant at the 1% level.
We obtain similar results when we consider a value-based measure of buyout activity (Panel B).
The risk premium explains 31% of buyout activity whereas all three factors explain no more than
8.7% of such activity. One notable difference using the value-based measure is that the coefficient
on GZ Spread is statistically significant and negative conditional on the risk premium (column (7))
but not in isolation (column (6)). Hence, some specifications suggest a role for credit markets—not
as a substitute for the discount rate explanation but rather as a complement with a smaller role.
Across both the volume and the value specifications, the dominant factor in buyout activity is the
risk premium: the risk premium measure explains 2.5 to 10 times the variation that credit factors
explain, the risk premium is negative and statistically significant, and the coefficient estimates on
the risk premium are robust to the inclusion of credit measures as controls.
[Place Table II about here]
We find a similarly significant coefficient on the risk premium in the early buyout waves of
1982 to 1991 as in the later waves of 1992 to 2014. However, the R2 is lower in the earlier period
(16%) than in the later period (54%). The lower explanatory power in the 1980s is consistent
with an initial burst in activity facilitated by the development of the buyout investment technology
(Figure 1).
We use another method to link buyout activity and the risk premium. If buyout decisions do
indeed reflect agents’ expectations about the level of the risk premium, then buyout activity should
predict future stock returns. A monthly regression of annualized excess returns for the next three
years on the volume measure of buyout activity from July 1982 to September 2010 yields10
ReM,t+1 = 10.52 + (−0.65)(Volumet ) + εt+1 ,

(3)

[0.28]
9 We
10 The

say “at most” because each of the credit factors contains variation attributable to the aggregate risk premium.
standard errors are Newey-West with autocorrelation over the prior 36 months and the R2 is 0.11.

9

demonstrating that buyout activity has statistically significant predictive power for long-term stock
market returns.
Robustness. In the Internet Appendix, we find that the above conclusions are robust to other measures of buyout activity, additional credit metrics, and alternative estimates of the risk premium.
Table IAII considers six different measures of buyout activity. The first three are alternative value
measures namely, the log of enterprise value in a quarter, the log of buyout assets to total public assets, and the log share of buyout enterprise value to total public enterprise value. The latter
three are measures of activity based on a matched sample to account for time-variation in firm
composition. For example, if potential buyout targets vary over time, our results may proxy for
changes in firm type. Across all of these measures of buyout activity, the magnitude and statistical
significance of the risk premium holds and is not affected by the inclusion of credit variables. In
addition, the explanatory power of the risk premium is 1.5 to 5 times that of the credit factors.
We focus our analysis on public-to-private buyout activity for several reasons: there is more
information about transactions with public targets, it is possible to consider a counterfactual set of
similar firms, and the change in funding is particularly dramatic from public-to-private. However,
the discount rate may play a role in private-to-private buyout transactions as well. In Table IAIII
we repeat the analysis of Table II using the private-to-private buyout volume from Thomson SDC.
Again, the risk premium strongly forecasts activity, explains more variation than the credit factors
alone, and is robust to their inclusion. It is difficult to directly compare these results with publicto-private activity, however, because we have no way of controlling for the set of potential targets.
In Table IAIV, we consider three alternative measures of the risk premium, namely, a rolling
measure that eliminates look-ahead bias, a measure that excludes the T-bill yield as a factor to
eliminate any form of credit-specific predictor, and a risk premium estimate that assumes perfect
foresight by using actual future excess returns on the market portfolio. We test these alternative
risk premia for both the volume and the value measures of buyout activity. The risk premium is
always significant and explains between 11.3% and 23.7% of buyout activity. In five of the six
specifications the risk premium R2 exceeds that for the credit factors alone and in each of the six
specifications the risk premium coefficient is robust to the inclusion of the credit factors. Our
results are therefore robust to using alternative measures of the risk premium.
Finally, in Table IAVI we explore additional credit metrics, including the corporate bond
spread, aggregate market leverage, book leverage, and the change in credit standards as measured
by the Federal Reserve Senior Loan Officer Survey. For both volume- and value-based measures
of activity, the risk premium accounts for a sizable portion of the variation, and the R2 is well in
excess of that using the credit metrics alone. Again, the role of the risk premium is not attenuated
by the inclusion of alternative credit metrics.

10

D.

The Three Fundamental Components of Valuation

Our central argument is that aggregate changes in the valuation environment affect the decision
to enter a buyout. Thus far we have focused our analysis on the most important driver of prices,
the risk premium. However, the risk premium is not the only component of valuation. Following
Campbell and Shiller (1988a) and subsequent work, we decompose aggregate valuations into expected future returns and expected future earnings growth. Further, we separate expected future
returns into the risk premium and a risk-free component. We then study how fluctuations in buyout
activity can be ascribed to these three distinct components.
We follow the standard approach of representing the joint dynamics of these quantities by a
vector autoregression (VAR), which results in a simple representation of expectations. We include
the same variables as in Campbell and Ammer (1993), augmented by cay of Lettau and Ludvigson
(2001).11 We estimate the dynamics of the VAR on a long sample that runs from 1972Q1 to
2012Q4. We extract a time-series forecast for two components: stock market excess returns, rp
ˆ VAR ,
and earnings growth, ĝ, for the next three years. For the third component, the risk-free rate, we
directly observe the three-year Treasury yield.12
For each component we construct annualized rates; Table III summarizes the resulting estimates. The predicted risk premium from the VAR is remarkably similar to our OLS measure with
a correlation coefficient of 0.89. Future earnings growth is also positively correlated with the OLS
measure. A potential concern with time-series analysis is the persistence of the variables. While
the quarterly autocorrelations of the risk premium and earnings growth are below 0.4, that of the
risk-free rate is 0.96. This high persistence limits our ability to draw strong inferences about the
role of the risk-free rate.
[Place Table III about here]
Consistent with valuation predictions, Table IV shows that buyout activity is negatively related
to the risk premium component and positively related to expected earnings growth for both the
volume and the value of activity. Columns (1) and (4) consider the VAR risk premium alone and
find coefficients of similar magnitude as our OLS estimates in the prior section. In addition, the
explanatory power exceeds that of the credit factors by a factor of least 1.5 (see Table II). When
we add expected earnings growth to the specification in columns (2) and (5), we find a positive
and statistically significant relation between buyout activity and earnings growth. The impact of
11 Our

VAR specification includes the following seven variables: excess returns, risk-free rate, earnings growth,
(3m)
(3m)
dividend-price ratio, cay, the change in the three-month yield yt
− yt−1 , the slope between the 10-year and one(10y)

(1m)

(1m)

month yield yt
− yt , and the one-month yield minus its moving average over the previous 12 months yt
(1m)
t−1
1/12 ∑τ=t−12 yτ .
12 Constant-maturity three-year yields are obtained from the Federal Reserve Board FRB H.15 release.

11

−

earnings growth is smaller than that of the risk premium. A one-standard-deviation change in
expected growth has approximately half the impact of a similar change in risk premium (17% to
25% for volume, 6% to 9% for value).
The risk-free rate estimates are more difficult to interpret. The risk-free yield is positive but statistically indistinguishable from zero for Volume (3) and positive for Value (7). A simple discount
rate argument would predict a negative relation with activity. As discussed earlier, the persistence
of the risk-free rate makes statistical inference unreliable. In addition, to the extent that the riskfree rate proxies for economic conditions, this further complicates interpretation (e.g., Stock and
Watson (1999) show that periods of high risk-free rates coincide with economic growth). Augmenting these factors with the credit measures in columns (4) and (8) does little to alter the estimated
coefficients.
[Place Table IV about here]
Robustness. In Table IAVII we consider three alternative proxies for market expectations and
examine their relation with the volume of buyout activity. The first is an alternative VAR forecast
based on aggregate dividends rather than earnings. The second uses survey-based estimates of
earnings growth from Thomson Reuters IBES data in conjunction with the OLS risk premium
from Section I.C. The third assumes perfect foresight and replaces forecasts and surveys with
realized future growth and equity returns. The message is consistent across these specifications:
the aggregate risk premium is the largest explanatory factor, expected growth enters positively, and
the risk-free rate is generally positive but frequently indistinguishable from zero.
The evidence in this section strongly suggests that the risk premium is the most important driver
of buyout activity. To further test this explanation against alternative hypotheses, we introduce a
parsimonious theory of the buyout decision that provides a clear rationale for the role of aggregate
valuation conditions.

II.

A Simple Model of the Buyout Transaction

We develop a two-period model that relates the buyout decision to the aggregate risk premium.
Our theory relies on two key mechanisms. First, performance improvements generated by buyout
deals are valued using a net present value (NPV) rule.13 When the risk premium is large, the cost
of capital lowers valuations and fewer projects are undertaken. Second, because of an agency problem, the general partner (GP) has to bear excess risk to be duly motivated to implement changes in
13 The

private equity industry explicitly incorporates an NPV rule by relying on DCF models to assess potential
investments.

12

the firm. When the risk premium increases, that is, when the marginal willingness to bear risk decreases, the willingness to bear this excess risk also decreases and compensating the GP becomes
more costly.
The model not only provides a precise rationale for the results in Section I, but also allows us
to make additional empirical predictions. We rationalize the positive correlation of buyout activity
with deal leverage, as well as the positive correlation between pricing and subsequent returns.
Moreover, we develop further insights into the changing characteristics of buyout targets as the
risk premium fluctuates, providing additional predictions that we test in Section III.

A.

Setup

There are two periods. At time 0, an acquirer (the GP) considers a firm (the target) for a buyout
deal. The target’s output is realized at time 1 and is unknown as of time 0. The following describes
the distribution of firm output:
Ỹ = µ + β εm + εi ,

(4)

where µ is the average output, εm is an aggregate shock, and εi is an idiosyncratic shock. The
shock variables are independent from each other and are normally distributed with mean zero and
variances σm2 and σi2 , respectively. The loading β captures the target’s exposure to systematic risk.
The target’s outcome at time t = 1 is contingent upon the GP’s actions.
(i) If she decides not to acquire the target, output is Ỹ .
(ii) If she implements a buyout deal and improves management of the target, output is pH Ỹ with
pH > 1.
(iii) If she implements the deal without improving management, output is pLỸ , with ∆p = pH −
pL > 0. She receives a private benefit linear in output: bỸ .
The GP must find a contractual arrangement with outside investors, that is, financial markets,
to finance the deal. We assume that the GP’s action is not directly contractible. An agency friction
is therefore present: without a stake in the firm, the GP does not implement managerial changes
and instead chooses to collect her private benefit. We now introduce assumptions about how those
agents make decisions.
Preferences of the GP. The GP has initial wealth W0 . She can invest in public markets or pursue
a buyout. She has constant absolute risk aversion (CARA) preferences over consumption with
risk aversion γ: −E[− exp(−γC)]. If consumption is normally distributed, this utility function
corresponds to a mean-variance evaluation, U = E[C] − 2γ var[C].

13

Cost of Capital on Public Markets. We assume no-arbitrage on financial markets, hence there is a
stochastic discount factor. We also assume that the stochastic discount factor loads solely on the
aggregate risk factor, εm , and the risk premium for exposure to the market is R̄em = E0 [Rem ], which is
proportional to the market risk σm2 .14 Risk-free claims are discounted at the rate 1 + r f . Therefore,
the cost of capital is determined by the capital asset pricing model (CAPM). For instance, the price
of a payoff 1 + β εm + εi is NPV(1 + β εm + εi ) = (1 − β R̄em )/(1 + r f ). We detail the equivalence to
a standard discounted cash flow (DCF) analysis in Appendix A. Current owners of the target and
outside investors value their claims using this cost of capital because these claims are traded on
competitive markets.

B.

Solution

A buyout of the target occurs if the GP and outside investors find an arrangement that is valuable
to both. To determine whether such contracts exist, we first derive the minimum cost of providing
incentives to the GP. We then verify whether the net returns to outside investors of the buyout deal
are positive under such an arrangement.
GP’s Outside Option. If the GP does not engage in the buyout, she invests her wealth in public
markets. Without loss of generality, she chooses her portfolio investment between the risk-free rate
(θ0 ), a zero-cost portfolio that pays off the market excess return (θm ), and a zero-cost portfolio that
loads on idiosyncratic risk (θi ). Given her absolute risk aversion γ, her utility is
γ
Uoutside = max θ0 + θm R̄em − (θm2 σm2 + θi2 σ 2 ).
2
(θ0 ,θm ,θi )

(5)

1
+ θm · 0 + θi · 0 ≤ W0 , which gives θ0∗ . Her position in the market
Her budget constraint is θ0 · 1+r
f
is determined by the price of market risk and her risk aversion, θm∗ = R̄em /(γσm2 ). Idiosyncratic risk
is not compensated by a risk premium, and thus her optimal allocation is zero, θi∗ = 0. Given our
assumptions about pricing, investments in the outside option do not depend on market conditions.
Cost of Incentives. The GP will only invest in the deal and implement productive changes if she
is adequately incentivized to do so. Outside investors must design a contract such that the GP implements changes that exceed the value of private benefits—the incentive compatibility constraint
(IC). The contract must also incentivize the GP to partake in the buyout deal rather than invest in
her outside option—the individual rationality constraint (IR).
14 These

assumptions arise exactly if we assume that buyout transactions constitute an infinitesimal part of an economy where total output is exposed to εm and all investors have CARA preferences. Investors may have heterogeneous
risk aversions that are different from the GP. While we focus on variation in the risk premium that is driven by changes
in aggregate risk, all of our predictions also hold for a change in risk premium in response to a proportional change
in risk aversion in the economy. In other words, we are agnostic as to the source of variation in the risk premium:
quantity or price of risk.

14

For simplicity we restrict ourselves to linear contracts. A contract features a fixed component k0
and a variable component that is proportional to the target’s output, with coefficient k1 controlling
its riskiness. Outside investors minimize the cost of providing incentives to the GP, the agent.15 To
find the cheapest contract, outside investors solve
min NPV(k0 + k1 pH Ỹ ) −W0

(6)

= min (k0 + k1 pH (µ − β R̄em )) /(1 + r f ) −W0

(7)

{k0 ,k1 }

{k0 ,k1 }

under IC and IR constraints
U (k0 + k1 pH Ỹ ) ≥ U (k0 + k1 pLỸ + bỸ )

(IC)

(8)

U (k0 + k1 pH Ỹ ) ≥ Uoutside

(IR).

(9)

The IC constraint reduces to a lower bound on the slope of the incentive contract, k1 ≥ b/∆p.
Indeed, the GP must have a large enough stake in the firm that her returns from exerting action pH
rather than pL dominate her private benefit of not implementing the changes b.
To understand the IR constraint, it is helpful to represent the payoff as an equivalent portfolio
invested in the risk-free asset, market excess return, and idiosyncratic risk:



θ = k0 + k1 pH (µ − β R¯em )

 0
θm = k1 pH β



θ = k p .
i

(10)

1 H

Recall that the utility is linear in θ0 and quadratic in the two risky components θm and θi . Hence,
the IR constraint is equivalent to the difference with the optimal portfolio θ ∗ :16
1
1
1
θ0 − θ0∗ ≥ R̄em ∗ (θm − θm∗ )2 + γσi2 θi2 .
2 θm
2

(11)

Under this form, the left-hand side of the constraint coincides with the objective function and
the right-hand side with the cost to the GP for bearing risk that deviates from her outside option.
The first term is the cost of holding an excessive amount of aggregate risk (θm − θm∗ )2 , which is
proportional to the risk premium R̄em . The second term comes from bearing idiosyncratic risk.
We can now solve for the optimal contract. We assume that to incentivize proper management
15 For

most of our analysis we consider whether feasible deals exist, so bargaining power or the surplus sharing rule
is irrelevant.
16 We are using the observation that if f (x) = ax2 + bx + c with the extremum reached at x∗ , then f (x) − f (x∗ ) =
a(x − x∗ )2 .

15

of the firm, the agent must receive excessive amounts of risk relative to her outside option.17
Therefore, increasing the loading k1 on the firm’s output tightens the right-hand side. In turn, the
principal minimizes the slope of the contract such that the IC constraint binds: k1∗ = b/∆p. The
fixed payment k0 is then kept just high enough to ensure participation, that is, to satisfy the IR
constraint:
1
1
1
k0∗ + k1∗ pH (µ − β R¯em ) −W0 (1 + r f ) = R̄em ∗ (k1∗ pH β − θm∗ )2 + γσi2 k1∗2 p2H .
2 θm
2

C.

(12)

When Do Deals Occur?

PROPOSITION 1. A buyout deal occurs if it yields positive returns net of the GP’s compensation.
This translates into the following condition:

1
1
1
(pH − 1) (µ − β R̄em ) ≥ R̄em ∗ (k1∗ pH β − θm∗ )2 + γσi2 k1∗2 p2H .
{z
} 2 θm
|
2
|
{z
}
Performance channel

(13)

Illiquidity channel

The deal surplus is:
(i) decreasing in expected market return R̄em (via the performance and illiquidity channels),
(ii) decreasing in the market risk exposure β (via the performance and illiquidity channels if
k1∗ pH β > θm∗ ),18
(iii) decreasing in idiosyncratic volatility (via the illiquidity channel).
Performance channel. The left-hand side of condition (13) is the performance channel. It
corresponds to the net value of the cash flow gains from improving management. During periods
of a high risk premium, cash flows are discounted more and this value is lower, which decreases
the likelihood of a deal.
Illiquidity channel. The right-hand side of (13) is the illiquidity channel.19 It represents the
monetary cost of compensating the GP for taking excessive amounts of risk relative to her outside
the condition is σm2 pH β (k1 pH β − θm∗ ) + σi2 k1 > 0 at k1 = b/∆p. Two different sufficient conditions for
this relation to hold are that the agent bears excessive amounts of aggregate risk, k1 pH β > θm∗ , or that idiosyncratic
risk is large relative to aggregate risk, σi2  σm2 . Both assumptions are likely to hold empirically. We discuss the first
more precisely later in this section.
18 In other words, the illiquidity channel is impacted by market exposure if the GP has to bear more aggregate risk
than under her outside option. If we assume that her outside option is entirely invested in the equity market, and
leverage is 70% post-buyout and 35% pre-buyout (consistent with the evidence in Axelson et al. (2013)), then this
condition holds as long as the pre-buyout equity β is larger than 0.5, which holds for most firms.
19 We use the term illiquidity to mean the inability to trade out of a position. In our framework, illiquidity arises as
a contractual solution to the agency problem. It differs from the inability to find a buyer on short notice in the case of
an adverse shock.
17 Formally,

16

option. The greater the risk premium, the larger the cost of this deviation. Indeed, the equilibrium
risk premium corresponds to the marginal cost of bearing risk. Similarly, the illiquidity cost is the
total cost of deviating from the optimum. Both quantities are driven by the convexity of the utility
function—here determined by γ—and the risk facing the investor. In other words, periods in which
investors do not want to bear risk at the margin correspond to periods in which investors require
large compensation for bearing excessive risk.
The main restriction we imposed on the contracting space is the absence of benchmarking to
the market. While in practice buyout contracts (and compensation contracts more broadly) are not
typically benchmarked, we consider the impact of relaxing this assumption in Appendix B. Clearly,
this change has no impact on the performance channel. If the market exposure β is known at the
time of contracting, then the contract brings the GP back to her optimal loading on aggregate risk.
However, in the more realistic case where the target’s β is not known at the time of contracting,
we show that the GP always ends up with an inappropriate amount of aggregate risk, maintaining
an illiquidity cost that is increasing in the risk premium.20

D.

Predictions

Changes in aggregate conditions affect the surplus of each potential deal. We are able to derive
several empirical predictions related to the aggregate facts documented in Section I. We also focus
on how particular firms are impacted by aggregate conditions.
PREDICTION 1. Buyout activity is larger in times of a low risk premium.
The risk premium prediction is driven by the performance and illiquidity channels. Table IV
confirms this prediction by demonstrating a significant negative correlation between the risk premium and buyout activity. The combined impact of the two channels helps explain the observed
sensitivity.
The model also yields additional predictions about the composition of buyout waves. We show
that firms’ risk characteristics impact their likelihood of being a deal target.
PREDICTION 2. A firm is more likely to be a buyout target if it has (i) low market beta or (ii) low
idiosyncratic risk.
The negative impact of the market beta comes through both channels, whereas idiosyncratic
risk only affects the illiquidity channel. The distinct roles of these two types of risk, systematic
and idiosyncratic, are a novel prediction of our model.
20 Ewens,

Jones, and Rhodes-Kropf (2013) also assume that the target’s characteristics are unknown at the time of
contracting. However, they find empirical support for this assumption studying the role of idiosyncratic risk. We draw
novel implications for the role of the risk premium.

17

Beyond their unconditional impact, risk characteristics interact with aggregate conditions.
Changes in the risk premium affect not only the quantity but also the composition of buyouts.
PREDICTION 3. Over time, (i) firms with high market beta are more sensitive to fluctuations
in the risk premium, and (ii) firms with large potential performance gains (high pH ) are more
sensitive to the risk premium.
The first interaction comes from both channels, whereas the second is due to the performance
channel alone. Interestingly, such a result is not present for idiosyncratic risk. This difference
allows us to distinguish our approach from an explanation of buyout waves related to changes in
debt capacity. Section III.C considers the role of risk characteristics in the data, and Section III.D
examines the changing composition of buyouts.
The structure of outside financing between debt and equity is not pinned down in our theory:
all capital is provided at the public markets’ cost of capital. However, a natural way to implement
outside financing is to split between an equity claim proportional to the GP’s payoff and a safer
debt claim.21 In this case, leverage is determined by the slope of the contract k1∗ . To understand
variation in leverage, we extend the model in Appendix B to allow for heterogeneity across targets.
High-leverage deals are only feasible when it is relatively cheap to compensate the acquirer for her
levered position, that is, when the risk premium is low. Our framework therefore predicts that the
leverage of the average buyout is higher in times of a low risk premium and high deal activity.
PREDICTION 4 (Leverage). Buyouts are more levered in times of a low risk premium.
Axelson et al. (2013) study fluctuations in buyout leverage concomitant with variation in mispricing measures. More generally, they find that leverage covaries positively with fluctuations in
aggregate buyout activity. The above prediction demonstrates that this result can be explained in a
model in which there is no notion of mispricing between debt and equity.
The model further implies that the pricing of targets and the performance of private equity
investments vary over the buyout cycle. All investors, controlling and noncontrolling, receive the
standard compensation for risk in the public markets, which is larger, when the risk premium is
high. The GP receives additional compensation for her excess risk, which also positively varies
with the risk premium. These variations in returns are reflected in the transaction price: higher
future returns are related to a lower transaction price.
21 Such

an approach is similar to that in Axelson, Strömberg, and Weisbach (2009), who focus on a particular
contractual implementation in an environment where outside capital is also provided at an exogenous cost irrespective
of debt and equity.

18

Prediction 5 (Returns and deal pricing): (i) When the risk premium is low, outside investors and
the acquirer receive lower expected returns on their private equity investments. (ii) The acquirer
receives positive abnormal returns after adjusting for the market pricing of risk, and those abnormal returns are larger in times of a high risk premium. (iii) When the risk premium is low, the
transaction price is high.
Recent literature on private equity returns largely confirms these inferences (Kaplan and Schoar
(2005), Robinson and Sensoy (2013a), Harris, Jenkinson, and Kaplan (2014)). Buyout fund returns
exhibit cyclical patterns consistent with our first prediction: investments in “hot” deal markets
suffer from lower returns. These findings are in direct contradiction with a credit market view
whereby buyout investors optimally time credit market conditions to obtain high returns in booms,
as pointed out by Axelson et al. (2013). Given the GPs receive fees and carried interest in addition
to their ownership stake, their returns will be higher on average and covary with the fund (e.g.,
Metrick and Yasuda (2010), Robinson and Sensoy (2013b)). On deal pricing, Axelson et al. (2013)
document higher valuation ratios (EV/EBITDA) for buyout deals in periods of high activity.

III.

The Composition of Buyout Activity

Our theory provides a precise rationale for the link between the risk premium and buyout activity. It also delivers insights into the types of firms targeted by buyout investors across episodes of
high and low risk premiums. In this section we use a panel data set of public firms to document that
the composition of buyout activity reflects the forces of our model. Our results further emphasize
the role of the risk premium in the buyout decision and taken together cannot be reconciled with
alternative views of the buyout cycle.

A.

Data

We construct a quarterly panel of U.S. public companies using annual accounting data from
COMPUSTAT and quarterly share price information from CRSP. As we are looking to exploit accounting data, we exclude the financial industry as defined by the Fama-French 12 classification.
Once a firm announces a buyout, they exit our sample. Bias resulting from the exit of buyout
firms is small, given the low number of deals relative to the number of public firms. The resulting unbalanced panel of 501,176 firm-quarters tracks 14,386 unique firms over 117 quarters and
contains 1,043 deal firm-quarters, where a deal firm-quarter is defined as the quarter of a buyout
announcement.
We use this panel to consider cross-sectional predictions related to the risk characteristics of
firms. The model predicts that firms with greater volatility will be less attractive targets. We
19

proxy for volatility using the monthly return volatility over the past two years, σ (Re ), as well as
an accounting-based metric, the standard deviation of EBITDA, σ (EBIT DA/Assets). The model
ascribes different roles to systematic and idiosyncratic risk. We estimate the market regression to
calculate each firm’s market beta, β , and the volatility of residuals, σ (ε), as measures of systematic
and idiosyncratic risk. We unlever these equity-based measures of risk, as the model specifies total
firm risk.22 We trim the top and bottom 1% of accounting ratios and the top and bottom 5% of
market-based risk measures to reduce the impact of large outliers on our analysis.
Our theory is not meant to be comprehensive on the determinants of what makes a good buyout in the cross-section. Rather, our model focuses on the elements of a deal that relate to risk
and discount rates. Therefore, we consider several firm characteristics that Opler and Titman
(1993), and more recently, Bharath and Dittmar (2010), identify as empirically important to explaining which types of firms are bought out or go private: cash flow (EBITDA/Assets), capital
intensity (CapEx/Sales), costs of financial distress (R&D/Sales), liquidity (Turnover), payout policy (Dividend Dummy), and net leverage (Net Debt/Assets).23 In addition, we control for firm size
(log(Assets)). Table V provides sample summary statistics. The broad picture is consistent with
prior findings in the literature: deal firms are more profitable, spend less on capital expenditures
and research and development, are less liquid, and have higher net debt than the average public
firm. A comparison of deal firm-quarters to the full panel of firm-quarters demonstrates that the
average buyout has lower risk across the set of risk proxies.
[Place Table V about here]

B.

The Role of Aggregate Factors

Before analyzing cross-sectional heterogeneity in buyout propensity, we revisit the role of aggregate factors. The panel specification allows us to explicitly control for changes in firm composition. We cannot observe the surplus from going private, but the likelihood of a firm being a
target is increasing in the difference between their private and public valuation. We use a dummy
variable equal to one for the firm-quarter of a deal announcement and estimate the likelihood of
a firm going private via OLS conditional on the risk premium and credit-market conditions at the
beginning of the quarter:
Dealit = αi + λrp rp
ˆ t + γ 0 (Credit Factors)t + εit .
22 Both

β and σ (ε) are unlevered by rescaling by

1
Debt
1+(1−τ)∗ Mkt
Cap

23 We

(14)

, where we assume τ = 35%.

also note the book-to-market of firms, although this is not a factor in our analysis, as it is a pricing factor.
In unreported results we find that our conclusions are robust to this additional control, but this is not our preferred
specification.

20

Firm fixed effects capture heterogeneity across firms.24 Standard errors are two-way clustered, by
firm and quarter, and are robust to arbitrary serial correlation within a bandwidth of one year.25
The panel introduces significant additional variation to the exercise: we are predicting no only
when deals occur but also which firms are targeted. Consequently, R2 comparisons are not all
that informative, but we can verify the sign, statistical significance, and robustness of the discount
rate measures conditional on firm-level controls. Consistent with the aggregate results of Section
I, Table VI demonstrates that a higher risk premium lowers the probability of a deal even in the
presence of credit controls and firm fixed effects. This result is true for both the reduced-form
risk premium, rp
ˆ OLS , in columns (1) and (3), and the VAR estimates, in columns (4) and (5). The
latter also demonstrates a positive relation between earnings growth and deal likelihood. The risk
premium and growth rate results are consistent with Prediction 1. In contrast to the aggregate tests,
the risk-free rate is negatively correlated in this specification and statistically significant. However,
we reiterate that the risk-free rate coefficients are unreliable because the risk-free rate is highly
persistent.
Among credit controls, GZ Spread is positive and statistically significant at the 1% level in
columns (2) and (3), but it does not attenuate the risk premium. The positive correlation—the
higher the risk premium in bonds, the more buyout activity—is not consistent with the aggregate
results in Table IV nor is it easily reconciled with a simple credit story of buyout activity. We
confirm these results by considering credit factors in isolation and in a Probit specification (Table
IAVIII and IAIX).26
[Place Table VI about here]

C.

The Role of Risk Characteristics

The remaining columns of Table VII consider the role of risk characteristics in the cross-section
of firms. According to our framework, riskier firms are relatively more costly to acquirers and
therefore less likely to be targeted. Greater systematic risk decreases the surplus via both the
performance and illiquidity channels, while idiosyncratic risk increases the cost of a deal to private
investors via the illiquidity channel. We estimate the likelihood of a firm going private via OLS
24 In

unreported analysis, we verify that our results hold in a specification with firm characteristics instead of fixed
effects.
25 The estimator is intended to account for autocorrelation in common disturbances (like changes in the risk premium) across the panel.
26 The one exception is that the risk-free rate is positive in the Probit specification.

21

conditional on firm risk factors and controls:
Dealit = α + λβ βit + λσ σ (ε)it + γ 0 Controlsit + εit .

(15)

The risk characteristics exhibit time-variation, and this variation may be correlated with other factors, particularly discount rates. We therefore include time fixed effects to focus the analysis on
cross-sectional differences between firms rather than time-series differences in firm risk estimates.
We also consider specifications that control for firm-level characteristics using industry fixed effects and the firm variables discussed earlier (cash flow, capital intensity, etc.). Standard errors
are two-way clustered, by firm and quarter, and are robust to arbitrary serial correlation within a
bandwidth of one year.
Consistent with Prediction 2, Table VII shows that several proxies for risk are negatively correlated with deal likelihood. Columns (1) to (3) include quarter fixed effects and (4) to (6) include
firm-level controls. Both stock return volatility and cash flow volatility decrease the likelihood of
a deal (columns (1) and (2)), even when controlling for other factors (columns (4) and (5)) at the
1% significance level. Market beta and idiosyncratic risk decrease the likelihood of a deal in both
specifications (columns (3) and (6)) at the 1% significance level. Again, we verify our findings in
a nonlinear probability specification in the Internet Appendix (Table IAX).
[Place Table VII about here]
These results are consistent with our model. But they can also be explained by a credit-based
narrative whereby risk increases the probability of default, which limits debt capacity and reduces
the attractiveness of the firm to buyout investors. To further separate these explanations we turn to
cyclical variation in the role of firm risk and characteristics.

D.

The Composition of Buyouts over the Cycle

To directly test the channels outlined in the model, we consider whether the composition of
buyout firms varies with the risk premium in the manner outlined in Prediction 3. Firms with
high betas are particularly sensitive to changes in the risk premium, as a decline simultaneously
increases performance gains and lowers illiquidity costs. We go on to test each channel independently by exploring predictions constrained to only one channel. The performance channel
predicts that firms with greater potential for improvement are more sensitive to changes in the discount rate. The illiquidity channel predicts that more illiquid firms should be more sensitive to the
risk premium. We find empirical support for both mechanisms.

22

D.1.

The Riskiness of Buyout Targets

As the risk premium declines, firms with higher betas are more likely to satisfy the positive
surplus condition, equation (13). Indeed, if we compare the distribution of deal betas for lowand high-quartile risk premium observations, as shown in Figure 3, Panel A, the low-quartile distribution exhibits more mass above one, whereas the high-risk premium observations are more
concentrated below one. This pattern is consistent with a rising cutoff as buyout investors exhibit
an increased willingness to purchase higher-beta firms.
[Place Figure 3 about here]
The sensitivity of target betas to the risk premium could also be consistent with a credit market story in which credit investors are more willing to take risks in boom times and less willing
during busts. If “hot” credit markets drive this pattern we would expect to see a similar shift in
idiosyncratic risk. Our model predicts that deals are less likely the higher the idiosyncratic risk,
but that idiosyncratic risk does not directly interact with expected market returns. Hence, our characterization of the discount rate channel suggests that the standard deviation of the idiosyncratic
risk measure should be relatively insensitive to changes in the risk premium.27 Figure 3, Panel
B demonstrates that the peak density of our idiosyncratic risk measure is slightly higher during
periods of low risk, but the difference is markedly less pronounced than the shift in beta. Further,
the direction of this shift is not uniform over the distribution.
We formally test the correlation between target risk and the risk premium by regressing our
measures of risk for buyout firms (buyout firm-quarters) on measures of buyout activity or the risk
premium. On average, deal betas should be higher when activity is high because this is when the
risk premium is low. In fact, there is a statistically significant positive relation between target betas
and the level of buyout activity, as shown in Table VIII Column (1). We go a step further and verify
that our proxies for the risk premium are negatively related to the average deal beta in columns (2)
and (3).
The idiosyncratic risk of the target is negatively correlated with buyout activity (column (4)),
which is at odds with the “hot” credit markets hypothesis. Idiosyncratic risk is negatively related to
the risk premium measures but the coefficients are not statistically significant (columns (5) and (6)).
Taken together, the results demonstrate that targets have higher betas during periods of greater deal
activity or lower risk premia and that the idiosyncratic risk of buyout targets is relatively unchanged
in response to valuation conditions. As a whole this evidence favors our discount rate hypothesis
rather than the credit market story.
[Place Table VIII about here]
27 We

thank an anonymous referee for suggesting this comparison.

23

Another way to interpret Prediction 3 is that a firm’s propensity to be a buyout target varies
more with the risk premium the higher a firm’s beta. To test this and other predictions that interact
with the risk premium, we consider an alternative regression specification in which we estimate
how the elasticity of deal activity to the risk premium varies across firms and in response to the risk
premium. To do so, we form portfolios by sorting firms into quartiles based on the characteristic
of interest, in this case beta. Quartiles are calculated for each quarter t. We then calculate buyout
activity relative to the sample of firms in portfolio j, Activity jt . Finally, we scale this level of
activity by the average level of activity over time in the portfolio, Activity j and we regress rescaled
activity for the high- and low- quartile portfolios on time fixed effects, τt , a dummy indicating the
high quartile for the characteristic of interest, X jt , and an interaction with the risk premium:
Activity jt
= λX X jt + λX×rp (X jt × rp
ˆ t ) + τt + ε jt .
Activity j

(16)

The coefficient of interest, λX×rp , is the difference in sensitivity to the risk premium between the
high and low quartiles. Given that the unconditional relation between activity and the risk premium
is negative, a negative coefficient would suggest that the high quartile is more sensitive to changes
in the risk premium while a positive coefficient would suggest that the high quartile is less sensitive.
Since activity is rescaled, the coefficient on the dummy variable, λX , cannot be easily interpreted.
Standard errors are two-way clustered by portfolio and quarter.28 While a simple approach, we
believe it makes clear that we are comparing the differential response of firms to the risk premium
based on a characteristic.29
The model predicts that high-beta stocks will be more sensitive to changes in the risk premium.
We consider two portfolios, a portfolio of high-quartile betas and a portfolio of low-quartile betas,
where the characteristic is a dummy variable indicating a high-quartile beta. In Table IX, Panel
A column (1), the negative coefficient on the interaction term implies that high-beta stocks have
greater sensitivity to the risk premium; the difference is statistically significant at the 5% level.
[Place Table IX about here]
The specification in equation (16) helps alleviate some identification concerns regarding the
pure time-series approach of Section I. While we make an effort to control for the primary competing explanations of buyout activity, namely, credit-market-specific conditions, we cannot explicitly
address all possible alternative explanations. The inclusion of time fixed effects mitigates this is28 Time

fixed effects absorb aggregate time-series variation. An alternative formulation without time fixed effects
but with the risk premium as a regressor yields similar conclusions.
29 In Table IAXI we draw similar conclusions when we exploit the entire cross-section of firms by forming portfolios
based on the underlying characteristic and then regressing activity for these portfolios on an interaction with the
average value of the characteristic in the portfolio.

24

sue. The fixed effects absorb aggregate shocks that have a common impact across firm types. The
only alternative explanations left on the table are aggregate factors correlated with the risk premium that have a similar differential impact across firms with different characteristics X jt . Hence,
we believe the results of this section regarding beta, as well as the two sections hereafter, strongly
support the role of the risk premium in shaping buyout cycles.

D.2.

Performance Channel

We go one step further and consider evidence directly related to specific channels. Firms with
greater potential for improvement, higher values of pH in the model, should be more sensitive to
changes in the discount rate via the performance channel. The potential for earnings improvement
is difficult to directly observe, however, so we use two proxies for the potential benefits of a
firm, appealing to the agency literature for inspiration. The first proxy is the governance index of
Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2003), GIM. This index uses a firm’s governance rules to measure
shareholder rights. Unfortunately this metric is only available for a subset of larger firms beginning
in 1990.
The second proxy is based on the the free cash flow hypothesis of Jensen (1986), which states
that managers with more free cash flow will invest it in negative NPV projects. We measure firms’
exposure to the free cash flow problem (FCF) using FCF scaled by assets. A caveat in interpreting
these results as direct evidence of the performance channel is that we must assume that these
measures are uncorrelated with the illiquidity of the deal.30
The third proxy for performance is the competitiveness of a firm’s industry. Giroud and Mueller
(2010) find that firms in noncompetitive industries perform worse when laws are put in place
to limit takeovers while firms in competitive industries perform no differently under the same
circumstances. Hence, competition acts as a disciplining force that improves management and
limits the potential for improvement. Using data on public firms from COMPUSTAT, we construct
their measure of competition the Herfindahl Index (HHI) of sales at the three-digit SIC code level.
Estimates of the role of these proxies in Table IX are consistent with the model’s predictions.
The governance index is increasing in the weakness of shareholder rights; a higher GIM implies
greater potential for improvement. The interaction term in Column (2) indicates that higher GIM
firms are more sensitive to changes in the risk premium at the 5% significance level. Column
(3) considers the profitability measure, FCF/Assets, and finds that firms with more cash flow are
more sensitive to changes in the risk premium but the coefficient is statistically indistinguishable
from zero. In Column (4), we find that firms in less competitive industries (high HHI quartile) are
more sensitive to changes in the risk premium at the 1% significance level. These results, along
30 One

potential mechanism is that bigger improvements take more time to implement. We are not aware of any
evidence to this effect with respect to the particular measures we consider.

25

with the alternative specifications in the Internet Appendix (Table IAXI), are consistent with our
model predictions of the model and support the performance channel as a mechanism for variation
in buyout activity.

D.3.

Illiquidity Channel

We also test whether the role of the risk premium flows through the illiquidity channel by
considering heterogeneity in liquidity across firms. While the model assumes that the illiquidity
of the buyout contract lasts one period, we can relax this assumption and think about some firms
being easier to exit than others.31 The longer the acquirer has to hold onto the firm, the greater
the illiquidity costs. Periods of a high risk premium reduce the attractiveness of an illiquid firm
more so than a liquid firm. The time during which the firm’s ownership is illiquid has no impact
on the performance channel so long as we believe that the aggregate performance gains are independent from their ease of exit. We focus on measures that have no strong reason to exhibit such a
correlation.
We develop several proxies for the duration of investment using industry differences in the
liquidity of assets. We consider the volume and value of M&A and IPO activity to proxy for the
ease with which assets in a particular industry are traded. Using data from Thomson SDC, we
compile a list of all completed M&A transactions with reported values and a list of IPOs. We
organize this activity into Fama-French 48-industry classifications and scale the number of deals
by the number of public firms in the industry. Similarly, we scale the enterprise value of activity
by the enterprise value of public firms in the industry. We calculate three-year moving averages
of industry activity to reflect persistent liquidity conditions, and not the current level of liquidity,
which may also be driven by the risk premium.
Following the specification in equation (16), we regress the scaled activity measure for highand low-quartile portfolios on time fixed effects, the high-quartile dummy, and the interaction
between the risk premium and the high-quartile dummy. In Table IX, Panel B, the elasticity of
activity to the risk premium is decreasing in M&A measures of activity (columns (1) and (2)), the
former at the 1% significance level. The volume and value of IPO activity are positive (columns
(3) and (4)), at the 10% significance level. Overall, deal activity in more liquid industries is less
sensitive to variation in the risk premium. These predictions are distinct from the performance
channel above and speak directly to sensitivity of investors to liquidity concerns.
In the Internet Appendix (Table IAXII), we repeat this analysis using credit market controls
to ensure that these differences are not explained by changes in credit spreads. The sign and
significance of our coefficients are similar in the presence of these additional controls.
31 One can extend the model to account for this heterogeneity by changing the horizon at which the acquirer receives

his payoff as a function of firm value.

26

IV.

Other Corporate Transactions

The two channels of our model reflect a basic trade-off in corporate finance between productivity gains due to organizational changes and the funding structure necessary to implement these
changes. In this section, we consider the implications of this trade-off for other types of corporate
finance activity: mergers and IPOs. We document the relation between fluctuations in activity and
the risk premium and conclude that they broadly match the predictions of our theory.

A.

Mergers

M&A deals increase future earnings by exploiting synergies between the acquirer and the target, echoing the performance channel for buyouts. But unlike buyout deals, the typical M&A
transaction does not meaningfully change the liquidity of the acquirer. Thus, M&A activity should
respond negatively to the risk premium, though we predict the sensitivity to be lower than for
buyouts.
We consider M&A deals for public targets as reported by Thomson SDC beginning in 1981Q1.32
The resulting sample includes 5,913 deals. Like our core analysis, we standardize activity over time
by scaling the number of deals by the number of public firms and the asset value of deals by the
total value of public assets. To compare magnitudes across different left-hand-side variables, we
take the log of activity and estimate a time-series regression of activity on our base risk premium,
which reveals the (semi-)elasticity of activity to the risk premium.
The results in Table X, Panel A demonstrate that the volume of M&A activity (column (1)),
is negatively related to an increase in the risk premium at the 1% significance level. A onepercentage-point increase in the risk premium corresponds to a 5.4% decrease in M&A activity. A
similarly constructed measure for LBOs finds an elasticity of 8.5% on the risk premium.
We repeat the analysis controlling for two alternative explanations emphasized in the literature
on M&A activity. The first explanation emphasizes the availability of credit as the main driver of
activity in the time series; see, for instance, Harford (2005) or Maksimovic, Phillips, and Yang
(2013). We use various sets of controls for credit market conditions. In column (2), we consider
the measures we use for buyout activity: HY Spread, EBITDA Spread, and GZ Spread.33 Dittmar
and Dittmar (2008) argue that changes in economic growth drive a wedge between debt and equity.
Column (3) documents this effect by adding realized GDP growth to the analysis; again the role
for the risk premium is broadly unchanged.
32 We

focus on transactions where 100% of the equity in the firm is purchased and the deal value is disclosed by
Thomson. These two restrictions effectively minimize small transactions for minority interest or assets. We find similar
results when we consider M&A activity for private targets as well.
33 In unreported analysis we focus on other credit-specific measures emphasized in the aforementioned papers:
Tighter Standards and Corporate Spread. Neither of those controls affect the sensitivity to the risk premium.

27

The second explanation considers the role of investor sentiment; see, for instance, RhodesKropf and Viswanathan (2004), Rhodes-Kropf, Robinson, and Viswanathan (2005), and Lamont
and Stein (2006). Following this work, we control for sentiment using the discount on closed-end
funds (Lee, Shleifer, and Thaler (1991)) and the sentiment index of Baker and Wurgler (2006). As
shown in column (4), these measures capture some of the variation in activity but do not drive out
the predictive power of the risk premium. In column (5), we consider all six candidate variables
for M&A activity against our measure of the risk premium. Across each of these specifications,
the risk premium is a negative and statistically significant predictor of M&A activity.
The typical response of M&A to the risk premium is smaller than that of buyouts, consistent
with the lack of a liquidity channel. In columns (6) and (7) we consider the elasticity of the ratio
of buyouts to M&A activity to the risk premium. In line with the findings of Martos-Vila, RhodesKropf, and Harford (2012), buyout activity is 3.2% more responsive to the risk premium than M&A
activity. In column (7) we find that the differential response is robust to controlling for alternative
explanations of M&A activity.34 When we repeat this analysis on the asset value of M&A targets,
in Table X Panel B, we obtain similar conclusions and higher magnitudes.
[Place Table X about here]

B.

IPOs

Initially, IPOs appear to be the opposite of buyouts. A public offering moves a firm from
an illiquid private ownership to public capital markets. Moreover, dispersion of control in the
new structure exacerbates agency problems. A naive interpretation of our hypothesis for buyouts
would therefore predict a positive link between the risk premium and IPOs. We explore this idea
empirically. We consider IPO activity recorded in Thomson SDC since 1970Q1—again taking the
log of activity relative to the size of the public market. We find that IPO activity does not respond
to changes in the risk premium (Table X, column (9)).35 The lack of a strong relation is true for
both volume- and value-based measures of IPO activity, in Panels A and B.
Perhaps our empirical findings are unsurprising in light of a more acute interpretation of what
constitutes an IPO transaction. For instance, in a survey of IPOs Mikkelson, Partch, and Shah
(1997) note that 85% of firms cite financing growth as their main reason to go public.36 Thus, an
IPO often includes an investment component, suggesting a negative role for the risk premium rather
34 See

Internet Appendix Table IAXIII for specifications with individual controls.
concern is that IPO activity influences the size of public markets in future quarters. However, in unreported
robustness checks we find similar results when we consider the level of activity rather than the share.
36 They find that 85% of the firms intend to use the proceeds of the IPO to raise working capital, and 64% intend to
use the proceeds to finance capital expenditures.
35 One

28

than the positive link implied by “reverse-buyout” logic. IPOs not only face different investment
opportunities, but also have a direct impact on employees of the firm that have been paid with
equity, leading to another alternative channel for the risk premium.37 In contrast to our results,
Pastor and Veronesi (2005) find a role for the risk premium by using a more structural analysis to
account for variation in the risk premium and uncertainty.
Overall, fluctuations in merger activity negatively co-vary with the risk premium, but mergers
are less sensitive than buyouts, consistent with our framework. IPO activity does not fluctuate
with the risk premium. While outside the scope of this paper, these results suggest that there are
important differences between IPOs and buyouts. A more in-depth study of these differences using
the cross-section of deals could shed more light on the relevance of our approach in the context of
these transactions.

V.

Final Remarks

In this paper we show that changes in the aggregate risk premium explain buyout waves. Using
a simple model of a buyout transaction, we reproduce the salient features of buyout cycles. At
the aggregate level, total activity is high when the aggregate risk premium is low. Consistent with
the literature on buyouts, boom markets are characterized by high deal leverage and low returns
to private equity investors. We document a novel set of facts regarding the composition of buyout
targets over the cycle, further supporting the importance of the risk premium for buyout activity.
For instance, high-beta firms are more likely to enter a transaction in periods of a low risk premium.
Taken together, these facts are difficult to reconcile with a view of buyouts driven by debt market
conditions.
We believe our approach provides a backdrop against which to evaluate the choices of GPs and
LPs. In this paper, we take a simple view of the participants in a private equity deal. In practice,
there is significant cross-sectional heterogeneity in private equity funds. They vary in age, size, and
past success—characteristics that shape their investment style. These characteristics might impact
their response to changes in the risk premium. Similarly, private equity firms associate themselves
with different LPs (Lerner and Schoar (2004)), perhaps strategically, and we suspect that variation
in the risk premium could affect these choices as well.
More generally, the empirical success of our approach suggests that it be used to study other
types of corporate decisions. The importance of the risk premium for asset prices is well studied,
but the role of the risk premium in corporate decisions is less understood – in particular, corporate
financial decisions. Much like buyouts, other corporate decisions exhibit significant cyclicality.
Given the prominent role that the risk premium plays for the buyout cycle, the risk premium’s
37 Thanks

to an anonymous referee for suggesting the latter.

29

ability to coordinate corporate activity more broadly represents a promising avenue for further
research.

30

Appendix A.

Deriving the Cost of Capital

Pricing on public markets follows the CAPM.
1. Sure payoffs of one are discounted at the risk-free rate: NPV(1) = 1/(1 + r f ).
2. Risky market exposure of 1 + Rm = 1 + r f + R̄em + εm is discounted using the risk premium:
NPV(1 + Rm ) = 1.
3. Idiosyncratic risk εi is not priced: NPV(εi ) = 0.
Pricing is additive, and the Law of One Price holds: NPV(aX + bY ) = aNPV(X) + bNPV(Y ) for
any constants a and b and payoffs X and Y .
To understand the equivalence with the standard discounted cash flow valuation, consider a
cash flow that pays one on average and loads on the aggregate risk factor, εm . The payoff at time
1 is P1 = 1 + β CF εm , where β CF represents the cash flow exposure of the claim to aggregate risk.
Our model of pricing gives the initial price
P0 =

1 − β CF R̄em
.
1+rf

(A1)

Alternatively, one can focus on returns. The return on that claim given the initial price P0 is
Ra =

P1
1 β CF
1
−1 = +
εm − 1 = + β R εm − 1,
P0
P0
P0
P0

(A2)

where β R = β CF /P0 is the return exposure of the claim to aggregate risk. Expected returns are
given by E(Ra ) = P10 − 1. According to the CAPM, we estimate the expected return from its
covariance with the market excess return Rem :
E(Ra ) = r f +

Cov (Ra , Rem ) e
R̄m = r f + β R R̄em .
Var (Rem )

(A3)

Using this cost of capital to discount expected cash flow, following DCF valuation, we obtain
P0DCF =

1
.
1 + r f + β R Rem

(A4)

It is immediate to verify that P0 = P0DCF . Hence, valuations follow the classic DCF formula with
risk adjustment.

31

Appendix B.
A.

Model Extensions

Allowing for Benchmarking

We extend the contracting space to allow for the benchmarking of contracts. To do so we allow
contracts to have a component depending on the market structure parameterized by k2 . The payout
to the private equity investor becomes k0 + k1 pH Ỹ + k2 (R̄em + εm ). Following equation (10), we
represent the payoff as a portfolio:




θ = k0 + k1 pH (µ − β R¯em )

 0
θm = k1 pH β + k2



θ = k p .
i

(B1)

1 H

This market loading k2 is costless to provide to outside investors because (R̄em + εm ) is a zerocost portfolio. It does not affect the IC constraint as the GP receives it independent of its management decision. The only effect is in the IR constraint through the first term of the right-hand
side of equation (13), the cost of bearing an inadequate amount of market risk. The optimal choice
of k2 is then clearly to cancel out this term, so that the net exposure θm coincides with θ ∗ . This
corresponds to k2 = 1 − k1 pH .
Once the illiquidity cost of excess market risk disappears, the condition for the feasibility of a
deal becomes
1
(pH − 1) (µ − β R̄em ) ≥ γσi2 k1∗2 p2H σi2 .
2

(B2)

Benchmarking with Pre-Contracting. While benchmarking of contracts is useful, it is not always possible given the timing of private equity contracting. Similarly to Ewens, Jones, and
Rhodes-Kropf (2013), we assume that the contract has to be specified before the target is known.
There are two equally likely targets with market exposure β and β̄ that are otherwise identical.
We look for a pre-specified contract where both outside investors and the GP benefit by partic-

32

ipating. The problem is
min k0 + k1 pH (µ − β R̄em ) −W0 (1 + r f )

(B3)

(k0 ,k1 )

s.t. k1 ≥ b/∆p
k0 + k1 pH

µ−

β + β̄
2

(IC)

(B4)

(IR)

(B5)

!
R̄em −W0 (1 + r f ) ≥

i 1
1 2h
γσm (k1 pH β + k2 − θm∗ )2 + (k1 pH β̄ + k2 − θm∗ )2 + γσi2 k12 p2H σi2 .
4
2

The optimal choice of k2 minimizes the illiquidity cost but does not reach zero. The condition for
such an arrangement to be feasible is

(pH − 1) µ −

β + β̄
2

!
R̄em

1
≥ γσm2 (k1∗ pH )2
2

β + β̄
2

!2

1
+ γσi2 k1∗2 p2H σi2 .
2

(B6)

We see that the illiquidity channel is still present through inadequate amounts of aggregate risk, and
that this cost increases with the risk premium. The reason for this effect is that while benchmarking
is optimal, it cannot simultaneously eliminate the illiquidity costs for the two potential deals. One
might argue that if the risk premium becomes large enough, it is preferable to pursue contracts
whereby only some of the deals are undertaken. While we do not explicitly consider this case, it is
consistent with our main argument: a larger risk premium lowers the number of deals undertaken
through the illiquidity channel.

B.

Variation in Deal Leverage

To consider variation in deal leverage, we allow for heterogeneity across deals. The GP now
has various possibilities for diversion across buyout deals, parameterized by b: some firms offer
more private benefits than others. For a type b deal, the GP receives private benefit b, keeping
all other parameters constant across deals. From the IR constraint, the leverage needed to provide
incentives increases with the level of diversion b: the slope of the buyout contract is k1 = b/∆p.
We show that deals with higher private benefits b need a lower risk premium to generate positive
returns net of fees. We define the surplus of deal F(·), of type b, as
1
1
F(b, R̄em ) = (pH − 1)(µ − β R̄em ) − γσm2 (k1 (b)∗ pH β − 1)2 − γσi2 k1 (b)∗2 p2H .
2
2

(B7)

Since F is smooth, by the implicit function theorem it is enough to show that at break-even
e∗
e∗
point R̄e∗
m , where F(0, R̄m ) = 0, we have ∂b F(0, R̄m ) < 0. Taking the derivative of F with respect
33

to b, we have
∂b F(0, R̄e∗
m ) = −γ





pH
b
2
2 b
− 1 + σi
β σm β pH
≤ 0.
∆p
∆p
∆p

(B8)

Since the derivative is negative this concludes the proof. We have shown that deals that require
higher leverage will only be realized in times of lower risk premium. In other words, some deals
will have higher leverage in times of a lower risk premium.

REFERENCES
Axelson, Ulf, Tim Jenkinson, Per Strömberg, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2013, Borrow cheap, buy
high? The determinants of leverage and pricing in buyouts, Journal of Finance 68, 2223–2267.
Axelson, Ulf, Per Strömberg, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2009, Why are buyouts levered? The
financial structure of private equity funds, Journal of Finance 64, 1549–1582.
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2002, Market timing and capital structure, Journal of Finance 57, 1–32.
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2006, Investor sentiment and the cross-section of stock
returns, Journal of Finance 61, 1645–1680.
Barro, Robert J., 1990, The stock market and investment, Review of Financial Studies 3, 115–131.
Berk, Jonathan B., Richard C. Green, and Vasant Naik, 1999, Optimal investment, growth options,
and security returns, Journal of Finance 54, 1553–1607.
Bharath, Sreedhar T., and Amy K. Dittmar, 2010, Why do firms use private equity to opt out of
public markets? Review of Financial Studies 23, 1771–1818.
Campbell, John Y., 1987, Stock returns and the term structure, Journal of Financial Economics 18,
373–399.
Campbell, John Y., and John Ammer, 1993, What moves the stock and bond markets? A variance
decomposition for long-term asset returns, Journal of Finance 48, 3–37.
Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller, 1988a, The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future
dividends and discount factors, Review of Financial Studies 1, 195–228.
Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller, 1988b, Stock prices, earnings and expected dividends,
Journal of Finance 43, 661–676.
Cochrane, John H., 1991, Production-based asset pricing and the link between stock returns and
economic fluctuations, Journal of Finance 46, 209–237.

34

Cochrane, John H., 2008, The dog that did not bark: A defense of return predictability, Review of
Financial Studies 21, 1533–1575.
Cochrane, John H., 2011, Presidential address: Discount rates, Journal of Finance 66, 1047–1108.
Davis, Steven J., John Haltiwanger, Kyle Handley, Ron Jarmin, Josh Lerner, and Javier Miranda,
2014, Private equity, jobs, and productivity, American Economic Review 104, 3956–3990.
Dittmar, Amy K., and Robert F. Dittmar, 2008, The timing of financing decisions: An examination
of the correlation in financing waves, Journal of Financial Economics 90, 59–83.
Ewens, Michael, Charles M. Jones, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, 2013, The price of diversifiable
risk in venture capital and private equity, Review of Financial Studies 26, 1853–1889.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1988, Dividend yields and expected stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 22, 3–25.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1989, Business conditions and expected returns on
stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 25, 23–49.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and
bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.
Gilchrist, Simon, and Egon Zakrajšek, 2012, Credit spreads and business cycle fluctuations, American Economic Review 102, 1692–1720.
Giroud, Xavier, and Holger M. Mueller, 2010, Does corporate governance matter in competitive
industries? Journal of Financial Economics 95, 312–331.
Gompers, Paul, Joy Ishii, and Andrew Metrick, 2003, Corporate governance and equity prices,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 107–156.
Harford, Jarrad, 2005, What drives merger waves? Journal of Financial Economics 77, 529–560.
Harris, Robert S., Tim Jenkinson, and Steven N. Kaplan, 2014, Private equity performance: What
do we know? Journal of Finance 69, 1851–1882.
Jensen, Michael C., 1986, Agency costs of free cashflow, corporate finance, and takeovers, American Economic Review 76, 323–329.
Kaplan, Steven N., and Antoinette Schoar, 2005, Private equity performance: Returns, persistence,
and capital flows, Journal of Finance 60, 1791–1823.
Kaplan, Steven N., and Jeremy C. Stein, 1993, The evolution of buyout pricing and financial
structure in the 1980s, Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 313–357.
Kaplan, Steven N., and Per Strömberg, 2009, Leveraged buyouts and private equity, Journal of
Economic Perspectives 23, 121–146.
Lamont, Owen A., and Jeremy C. Stein, 2006, Investor sentiment and corporate finance: Micro
and macro, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 96, 147–151.
35

Lee, Charles M. C., Andrei Shleifer, and Richard H. Thaler, 1991, Investor sentiment and the
closed-end fund puzzle, Journal of Finance 46, 75–109.
Lerner, Josh, and Antoinette Schoar, 2004, The illiquidity puzzle: Theory and evidence from
private equity, Journal of Financial Economics 72, 3–40.
Lettau, Martin, and Sydney Ludvigson, 2001, Consumption, aggregate wealth, and expected stock
returns, Journal of Finance 56, 815–849.
Maksimovic, Vojislav, Gordon Phillips, and Liu Yang, 2013, Private and public merger waves,
Journal of Finance 68, 2177–2217.
Malenko, Andrey, and Nadya Malenko, 2015, A theory of LBO activity based on repeated debtequity conflicts, Journal of Financial Economics 117, 607–627.
Martos-Vila, Marc, Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, and Jarrad Harford, 2012, Financial vs. strategic buyers, Working paper, Harvard Business School .
Metrick, Andrew, and Ayako Yasuda, 2010, The economics of private equity funds, Review of
Financial Studies 23, 2303–2341.
Mikkelson, Wayne H., Megan Partch, and Kshitij Shah, 1997, Ownership and operating performance of companies that go public, Journal of Financial Economics 44, 281–307.
Opler, Tim, and Sheridan Titman, 1993, The determinants of leveraged buyout activity: Free cash
flow vs. financial distress costs, Journal of Finance 48, 1985–1999.
Pastor, Lubos, and Pietro Veronesi, 2005, Rational IPO waves, Journal of Finance 60, 1713–1757.
Rhodes-Kropf, Matthew, David T. Robinson, and S. Viswanathan, 2005, Valuation waves and
merger activity: The empirical evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 77, 561–603.
Rhodes-Kropf, Matthew, and S. Viswanathan, 2004, Market valuation and merger waves, Journal
of Finance 59, 2685–2718.
Robinson, David T., and Berk A. Sensoy, 2013a, Cyclicality, performance measurement, and cash
flow liquidity in private equity, Working paper, NBER .
Robinson, David T., and Berk A. Sensoy, 2013b, Do private equity fund managers earn their fees?
Compensation, ownership, and cash flow performance, Review of Financial Studies 26, 2760–
2797.
Shivdasani, Anil, and Yihui Wang, 2011, Did structured credit fuel the LBO boom? Journal of
Finance 66, 1291–1328.
Sorensen, Morten, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang, 2013, Valuing private equity, Working paper,
Columbia University .
Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson, 1999, Business cycle fluctuations in U.S. macroeconomic
time series, in John B Taylor, and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics,
volume 1.
36

15

Deal Volume
Equity Risk Premium

30

20
5

Volume

Risk Premium %

10

0
10
−5

−10

0
1985q1

1990q1

1995q1

2000q1

2005q1

2010q1

Quarter

Figure 1. Time series of buyout volume and aggregate risk premium. Figure 1 plots quarterly
deal volume of buyout transactions. The equity risk premium is predicted using annual returns for
a three-year period using D/P, cay, and the three-month T-bill as factors.

37

50

Volume Share
log(Asset)

10

30
5
20

Value Measure

Volume Measure

40

10

0

0
1985q1

1990q1

1995q1

2000q1

2005q1

2010q1

Quarter

Figure 2. Time series of buyout activity measures. Figure 2 plots time-series variation in buyout
activity. The volume-based measure is quarterly deal volume as a fraction of public firms (in bps).
The value-based measure is the log of target assets (in 2010 millions of dollars).

38

.8

Low RP Quartile
High RP Quartile

Low RP Quartile
High RP Quartile

.1

Density

Density

.6

.4

.05

.2

0

0
0

1

2

3

5

Unlevered Beta

10

15

20

25

Unlevered Residual SD

Panel A. Betas

Panel B. Idiosyncratic Risk

Figure 3. Density of LBO risk measures in low and high risk premium periods. Panel A
plots the kernel density of unlevered beta for buyout transactions in the top and bottom quartiles
of the risk premium. Panel B plots the kernel density of idiosyncratic risk (the s.d. of unlevered
residuals from the market regression) for buyout transactions in the top and bottom quartiles of
the risk premium. Unlevered betas and residuals are trimmed at the top and bottom 5% to remove
extreme outliers. The risk premium is predicted using annual returns for a three-year period using
D/P, cay, and the three-month T-bill as factors.

39

Table I
Aggregate Summary Statistics
Table I presents quarterly summary statistics for buyout activity and aggregate factors for 117 quarters from 1982Q4
to 2011Q4. The value of deals is in 2010 dollars. Volume / Public Firms (bps) is the volume of buyouts scaled by the
number of public firms in bps. rp
ˆ OLS is the predicted market excess return using D/P, cay, and the three-month T-bill
as factors. EBITDA Spread is the difference between the median public firm EBITDA/EV and the yield on a composite
index of high-yield bonds. HY Spread is the yield on a composite index of high-yield bonds less the three-month T-bill.
GZ Spread is the excess bond premium as measured by Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2012).

Obs.

Mean

Buyout Activity
Volume (No. of Deals)
Volume / Public Firms (bps)
Asset Value ($ mm)
Enterprise Value ($ mm)
Log Assets

117
117
117
107
117

Aggregate Factors
rp
ˆ OLS (%)
EBITDA Spread
HY Spread
GZ Spread

117
117
117
117

Max

Std. Dev.

9.8
18.7
8,717
5,396
7.93

9.0
27.0
17.3
51.1
4,189 78,533
1,119 74,098
8.34
11.27

6.1
11.8
13,298
11,369
1.96

4.82
-2.20
11.54
1.90

5.82
-2.02
11.14
1.58

40

Median

14.75
1.73
19.51
7.82

5.53
1.86
2.69
1.10

Table II
Explaining Buyout Activity: Aggregate Risk Premium versus Credit Market Factors
Table II presents coefficient estimates from regressing quarterly buyout activity on estimates of the aggregate risk premium, credit spreads, and credit market factors
from 1982Q4 to 2011Q4. The dependent variable in Panel A is the volume of activity (the number of deals scaled by the number of public firms in bps) and in
Panel B is the value of activity (the log asset value of deals). rp
ˆ is the predicted market excess return using D/P, cay, and the three-month T-bill as factors. EBITDA
Spread is the difference between the median public firm EBITDA/EV and the yield on a composite index of high-yield bonds. HY Spread is the yield on a composite
index of high-yield bonds less the three-month T-bill. GZ Spread is the excess bond premium as measured by Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2012). Quarter dummies are
included to account for seasonality. Standard errors in parentheses are calculated using Newey-West (four lags). * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
Panel A: Volume of Activity
(1)
rp
ˆ

(2)

(3)

1.50*
(0.81)

-1.14***
(0.25)
0.27
(0.48)

-1.17***
(0.25)

EBITDA Spread

41

HY Spread

(4)

(5)
-1.26***
(0.24)

-1.07*
(0.63)

117
0.317

117
0.074

117
0.319

117
0.077

(7)

117
0.322

(8)

(9)
-1.50***
(0.24)
2.10*
(1.09)
1.92**
(0.97)
-1.17
(0.95)

-1.22***
(0.25)

1.21
(1.34)

-0.76
(0.72)

1.01
(0.99)
-0.59
(0.93)
1.82*
(1.08)

117
0.031

117
0.322

117
0.107

117
0.360

(7)

(8)

(9)
-0.23***
(0.038)
0.16
(0.13)
0.13
(0.12)
-0.26*
(0.15)
117
0.353

0.34
(0.42)

GZ Spread
Observations
R2

(6)

Panel B: Value of Activity
(1)
rp
ˆ

(2)

(3)

0.28*
(0.16)

-0.19***
(0.038)
0.077
(0.11)

-0.20***
(0.039)

EBITDA Spread
HY Spread

(4)

(5)
-0.19***
(0.041)

-0.24**
(0.11)

117
0.330

117
0.091

117
0.335

117
0.126

-0.21***
(0.036)

0.10
(0.21)

-0.24**
(0.12)

-0.0066
(0.16)
-0.25*
(0.13)
0.20
(0.19)

117
0.024

117
0.346

117
0.138

-0.022
(0.088)

GZ Spread
Observations
R2

(6)

117
0.331

Table III
VAR Summary Statistics
Table III contains quarterly summary statistics for the 117 quarters from 1982Q4 to 2011Q4. r f is the annual risk-free
yield at a three-year horizon. rp
ˆ VAR is the annual expected market excess return for the next three years based on a
VAR. ĝVAR is annual expected S&P earnings growth for the next three years based on a VAR.

rf
rp
ˆ VAR (%)
ĝVAR (%)

Mean
5.6
5.2
6.3

Median
5.6
6.4
8.5

42

Max
13.5
14.4
58.6

Std. Dev.
2.9
5.3
15.8

Table IV
OLS: Buyout Activity on Discount Rates and Growth
Table IV contains coefficient estimates from regressing quarterly buyout activity on the components of a CampbellShiller decomposition at a three-year horizon from 1982Q4 to 2011Q4. The dependent variable in Columns (1) to
(4) is the volume of activity (the number of deals scaled by the number of public firms in bps) and in Columns (5) to
(8) is the value of activity (the log asset value of deals). rp
ˆ is the annual expected market excess return for the next
three years based on a VAR. ĝ is annual expected S&P earnings growth for the next three years based on a VAR. r f
is the annual risk-free yield at a three-year horizon. EBITDA Spread is the difference between the median public firm
EBITDA/EV and the yield on a composite index of high-yield bonds. HY Spread is the yield on a composite index
of high-yield bonds less the three-month T-bill. GZ Spread is the excess bond premium as measured by Gilchrist
and Zakrajšek (2012). Quarter dummies are included to account for seasonality. Standard errors in parentheses are
calculated using Newey-West (four lags). * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
Volume

rp
ˆ

Value

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.88***
(0.33)

-1.20***
(0.33)
0.23***
(0.072)

-1.41***
(0.32)
0.30***
(0.095)
0.82
(0.57)

-1.09***
(0.37)
0.25**
(0.10)
2.65**
(1.14)
1.46
(1.19)
-0.83
(1.26)
5.43***
(1.97)

-0.18***
(0.053)

-0.22***
(0.051)
0.031***
(0.010)

-0.26***
(0.054)
0.047***
(0.012)
0.17**
(0.068)

-0.14**
(0.060)
0.035***
(0.010)
0.66***
(0.12)
0.041
(0.15)
-0.51***
(0.17)
1.26***
(0.24)

117
0.176

117
0.247

117
0.277

117
0.348

117
0.247

117
0.296

117
0.345

117
0.457

ĝ
rf
EBITDA Spread
HY Spread
GZ Spread
Observations
R2

43

Table V
Summary of Firm-Quarters: Full Sample and LBO Firm-Quarters
Table V contains summary statistics for the sample of firm-quarters from 1982Q4 to 2011Q4. Assets are book assets
in 2010 dollars. Accounting ratios are trimmed at the 99% level. Dividend Dummy is equal to one if the firm pays a
dividend. σ (R) is the standard deviation of the prior two years of monthly returns. σ (EBIT DA/Assets) is the standard
deviation of the EBITDA-to-assets ratio over the observable life of a firm. β is the unlevered market beta of the firm
based on the lagged two years of monthly returns. σ (ε) is the standard deviation of the unlevered residuals from the
market regression. Unlevered betas and residuals are trimmed at the top and bottom 5% to remove extreme outliers.
Deal Dummy is equal to one if a firm announces a deal in the upcoming quarter.

All Firm-Quarters

Deal Dummy
Firm Characteristics
Assets (mm)
log(Assets)
EBITDA/Assets
CapEx/Sales
R&D/Sales
Net Debt/Assets
Turnover
Dividend Dummy
Book/Market
Risk Proxies
σ (R)
β
σ (ε)
σ (EBIT DA/Assets)

LBO Firm-Quarters

N

Mean

Median

Std. Dev.

N

Mean

Median

Std. Dev.

501,176

0.002

0.000

0.046

1,043

1.000

1.000

0.000

501,176
501,176
487,597
485,577
485,195
494,072
488,367
501,176
484,578

$2,027
5.19
0.05
0.14
0.16
0.07
1.15
0.32
0.74

$155
5.04
0.11
0.04
0.00
0.11
0.63
0.00
0.55

$12,728
2.13
0.22
0.39
0.84
0.36
1.89
0.46
0.71

1,043
1,043
1,031
1,030
1,030
1,035
1,036
1,043
998

$978
5.48
0.11
0.07
0.03
0.14
1.05
0.31
0.94

$211
5.35
0.13
0.03
0.00
0.18
0.59
0.00
0.74

$2,960
1.59
0.15
0.17
0.18
0.35
3.73
0.46
0.79

431,467
387,071
430,077
488,410

15.83
0.88
11.65
0.12

13.44
0.78
9.24
0.08

10.69
0.65
9.61
0.14

963
899
959
992

14.26
0.78
9.44
0.08

12.25
0.69
8.01
0.05

8.22
0.59
6.72
0.08

44

Table VI
Deal Likelihood and Discount Rates
Table VI contains coefficient estimates from regressing quarterly deal indicator (Deal) on the risk premium, credit
market factors, and firm fixed effects from 1982Q4 to 2011Q4. rp
ˆ OLS is the predicted market excess return using
D/P, cay, and the three-month T-bill as factors. rp
ˆ VAR is the annual expected market excess return for the next three
years based on a VAR. ĝVAR is annual expected S&P earnings growth for the next three years based on a VAR. r f is
the annual risk-free yield at a three-year horizon. EBITDA Spread is the difference between the median public firm
EBITDA/EV and the yield on a composite index of high-yield bonds. HY Spread is the yield on a a composite index
of high-yield bonds less the three-month T-bill. GZ Spread is the excess bond premium as measured by Gilchrist
and Zakrajšek (2012). Quarter dummies are included to account for seasonality. Standard errors in parentheses are
two-way clustered by firm and quarter. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

(1)
rp
ˆ OLS

(2)

-2.39***
(0.28)

(3)

ĝVAR
rf
0.36
(2.36)
-2.63
(1.72)
7.83***
(1.35)

X

X

X

X

X

501,176
0.064

501,176
0.064

501,176
0.064

501,176
0.064

501,176
0.064

GZ Spread

Observations
R2

-0.61*** -0.57***
(0.11)
(0.13)
0.11*** 0.12***
(0.031)
(0.032)
-4.16*** -2.98***
(0.47)
(1.01)
-0.088
(2.26)
-0.90
(1.93)
3.65
(2.41)

-1.11
(1.98)
-5.24***
(1.37)
10.4***
(1.42)

HY Spread

Firm FE

(5)

-1.59***
(0.35)

rp
ˆ VAR

EBITDA Spread

(4)

45

Table VII
Deal Likelihood and Firm Risk Characteristics
Table VII contains coefficient estimates from regressing quarterly deal indicator (Deal) on firm risk characteristics,
cross-sectional controls, and time fixed effects from 1982Q4 to 2011Q4. σ (R) is the s.d. of the monthly stock price
DA
over the past two years. σ ( EBIT
Assets ) is the s.d. of the firm’s EBITDA/Assets ratio. β is the unlevered market beta of
the firm based on the lagged two years of monthly returns. σ (ε) is the s.d. of the unlevered residuals from the market
regression. Unlevered betas and residuals are trimmed at the top and bottom 5% to remove extreme outliers. Columns
(1) to (3) contain time fixed effects, and columns (4) to (6) contain firm-level controls (log(Assets), EBITDA/Assets,
CapEx/Sales, R&D/Sales, Net Debt/Assets, Turnover, Dividend Dummy), industry fixed effects (Fama-French 12), and
time fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered by firm and quarter. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05,
*** p < 0.01.

(1)
σ (R)

(2)

-0.31***
(0.11)

DA
σ ( EBIT
Assets )

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.28***
(0.088)
-49.2***
(8.20)

-45.3***
(7.66)

X

X

-5.14***
(1.34)
-0.47***
(0.15)
X

431,467
0.001

488,410
0.001

387,071
0.001

β
σ (ε)
Time FE
Firm Controls
Industry FE
Observations
R2

(3)

46

X
X
X
402,189
0.001

X
X
X
451,080
0.001

-5.16***
(1.38)
-0.56***
(0.11)
X
X
X
362,885
0.002

Table VIII
Beta on LBO Activity, Discount Rates, and Growth
Table VIII contains coefficient estimates from regressing risk measures for LBO firm-quarters on LBO activity, discount rates, and growth measures from 1982Q4 to 2011Q4. In columns (1) to (3) unlevered beta is the dependent
variable. In column (4), the dependent variable is the s.d. of the unlevered residuals from the market regression, σ (ε).
Volume % is the volume of buyouts scaled by the number of public firms. rp
ˆ OLS is the predicted market excess return
using D/P, cay, and the three-month T-bill as factors. rp
ˆ VAR is the annual expected market excess return for the next
three years based on a VAR. ĝVAR is annual expected S&P earnings growth for the next three years based on a VAR. r f
is the annual risk-free yield at a three-year horizon. Unlevered betas and residuals are trimmed at the top and bottom
5% to remove extreme outliers. Standard errors in parentheses are calculated over time using Newey-West (four lags).
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

σ (ε)

β
(1)
Volume %

(2)

0.0070***
(0.0025)

rp
ˆ OLS

(4)

(5)

-0.018***
(0.0064)

-0.017
(0.067)
-0.0056*
(0.0029)
0.0022***
(0.00054)
0.0023
(0.0076)

ĝVAR
rf
899
0.019

(6)

-0.032*
(0.019)

rp
ˆ VAR

Observations
R2

(3)

899
0.026

899
0.024

47

-0.0050
(0.022)
0.0050
(0.0084)
-0.28***
(0.087)
898
0.007

898
0.000

898
0.043

Table IX
Elasticity of Buyout Activity to the Risk Premium – High-Low Comparisons
Table IX contains coefficient estimates estimating the differential sensitivity of high- and low-quartile portfolios to
changes in the risk premium. Specifically, we regress deal activity scaled by its average on a dummy variable indicating
the high quartile for a given characteristic, and interaction of the dummy with the risk premium, and time fixed effects
from 1982Q4 to 2011Q4. rp
ˆ is the predicted market excess return using D/P, cay, and the three-month T-bill as
factors. In Panel A the portfolios and top-quartile dummies are based on the following: β , the unlevered market beta
of the firm, GIM, the governance index of the firm (Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick, 2003), FCF/Assets, FCF/Assets, and
HHI, the HHI of sales for public firms in the three-digit SIC code. In Panel B the portfolios and top-quartile dummies
are based on M&A and IPO activity in a Fama-French 48 industry. Activity is based on a three-year moving average.
Volumes are scaled by the number of public firms in the industry, with values scaled by the value of public firms in the
industry. Standard errors in parentheses are two-way clustered by portfolio and quarter. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, ***
p < 0.01.

Panel A: Performance proxies

Characteristic (X):
(X)rp
ˆ
Time FE
Observations
R2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

β

GIM

FCF/Assets

Industry HHI

-0.026*
(0.014)

-0.058**
(0.025)

-0.0085
(0.017)

-0.044***
(0.015)

X

X

X

X

234
0.015

174
0.030

234
0.001

234
0.028

Panel B: Illiquidity proxies
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Characteristic (X):

M&A Vol.

M&A Val.

IPO Vol.

IPO Val.

(X)rp
ˆ

0.060***
(0.014)

0.015
(0.013)

0.021*
(0.013)

0.024*
(0.013)

X

X

X

X

234
0.085

234
0.006

234
0.012

234
0.015

Time FE
Observations
R2

48

Table X
Elasticity of Corporate Transaction Activity to the Risk Premium
Table X contains coefficient estimates from regressing quarterly M&A activity involving public targets on the risk premium. In Panel A, the
dependent variable in columns (1) to (5) use the log of the ratio of M&A deals to the number of public firms. Columns (6) and (7) use the log of
the ratio of LBO volume to M&A volume. Column (9) considers the log of the ratio of IPO deals to the number of public firms. Panel B repeats
these measures using asset values. In Panel B, Columns (1) to (5) use the log of the ratio of total assets for M&A targets to the assets of public
firms. (6) and (7) use the log of the ratio of LBO assets to M&A assets. Columns (9) considers the log of the equity value of the IPO to total
public market capitalization. rp
ˆ OLS is the predicted market excess return using D/P, cay, and the three-month T-bill as factors. EBITDA Spread is
the difference between the median public firm EBITDA/EV and the yield on a composite index of high-yield bonds. HY Spread is the yield on a
composite index of high-yield bonds less the three-month T-bill. GZ Spread is the excess bond premium as measured by Gilchrist and Zakrajšek
(2012). GDP Growth is the year-on-year growth rate of U.S. real GDP. CE Fund Discount is the discount on a closed-end fund. Sentiment is a
measure of sentiment from Baker and Wurgler (2006). The M&A sample ranges from 1981Q2 to 2011Q4. The LBO sample ranges from 1982Q4
to 2011Q4. IPO activity ranges from 1981Q2-2011Q4. Each regression also includes quarter dummy variables to account for seasonality. Standard
errors in parentheses are calculated over time using Newey-West (four lags). * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
Panel A: Volume
M&A

rp
ˆ OLS

LBO / M&A

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.054***
(0.0062)

-0.052***
(0.0065)
0.058*
(0.033)
0.027*
(0.015)
0.00024
(0.047)

-0.054***
(0.0061)

-0.054***
(0.0078)

-0.032**
(0.015)

-0.054***
(0.018)
0.14**
(0.070)
0.15**
(0.061)
0.13
(0.082)
13.9***
(3.96)
0.010
(0.020)
-0.12
(0.097)

0.0087
(0.026)

0.015*
(0.0083)
0.059
(0.081)

-0.052***
(0.0071)
0.033
(0.038)
0.0040
(0.025)
-0.015
(0.040)
-0.82
(2.75)
0.014
(0.0100)
0.064
(0.073)

120
0.475

120
0.491

116
0.079

113
0.242

164
0.007

EBITDA Spread
HY Spread
GZ Spread
GDP Growth

-0.55
(2.44)

CE Fund Discount
Sentiment
Observations
R2

IPO

123
0.456

123
0.488

123
0.457

Panel B: Value
M&A

rp
ˆ OLS

LBO / M&A

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.048**
(0.021)

-0.11***
(0.023)
0.097
(0.080)
0.19***
(0.053)
-0.40***
(0.11)

-0.049**
(0.021)

-0.056***
(0.021)

-0.10***
(0.030)

-0.080***
(0.028)
0.12
(0.099)
-0.011
(0.10)
0.18
(0.15)
16.7**
(7.80)
0.028
(0.032)
0.050
(0.21)

0.041
(0.033)

0.039
(0.032)
0.46*
(0.27)

-0.11***
(0.028)
0.14*
(0.086)
0.19***
(0.066)
-0.23*
(0.14)
13.6**
(6.10)
0.045*
(0.026)
0.18
(0.20)

114
0.143

114
0.297

116
0.174

113
0.230

164
0.032

EBITDA Spread
HY Spread
GZ Spread
GDP Growth

18.4***
(5.15)

CE Fund Discount
Sentiment
Observations
R2

IPO

117
0.062

117
0.207

117
0.187

49

