                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       ESTIMATING LOCAL FISCAL MULTIPLIERS

                                   Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
                                      Philippe Wingender

                                      Working Paper 22425
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22425


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2016




We are very grateful for guidance and support from our advisors Alan Auerbach, Patrick Kline
and Emmanuel Saez. We are also indebted to David Albouy, Peter Arcidiacono, Pat Bayer,
Charles Becker, Mattias Cattaneo, David Card, Allan Collard-Wexler, Raj Chetty, Gabriel
Chodorow-Reich, Rebecca Diamond, Colleen Donovan, Daniel Egel, Fred Finan, Dan Garrett,
Chelsea Garber, Charles Gibbons, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Ashley Hodgson, Erik Hurst, Shachar
Kariv, Yolanda Kodrzycki, Zach Liscow, Day Manoli, Suresh Naidu, Matthew Panhans, Steve
Raphael, Ricardo Reis, David Romer, Jesse Rothstein, John Karl Scholz, Dean Scrimgeour and
Daniel Wilson for comments and suggestions. Stephanie Karol, Matthew Panhans, and Irina
Titova provided excellent research assistance. All errors remain our own. We are grateful for
financial support from the Center for Equitable Growth, the Robert D. Burch Center for Tax
Policy and Public Finance, IGERT, IBER, the John Carter Endowment at UC Berkeley and the
NBER Summer Institute. Suárez Serrato gratefully acknowledges support from the Kauffman
Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato and Philippe Wingender. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Estimating Local Fiscal Multipliers
Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato and Philippe Wingender
NBER Working Paper No. 22425
July 2016
JEL No. E62,H5

                                          ABSTRACT

We propose a new source of cross-sectional variation that may identify causal impacts of
government spending on the economy. We use the fact that a large number of federal spending
programs depend on local population levels. Every ten years, the Census provides a count of local
populations. Since a different method is used to estimate non-Census year populations, this
change in methodology leads to variation in the allocation of billions of dollars in federal
spending. Our baseline results follow a treatment-effects framework where we estimate the effect
of a Census Shock on federal spending, income, and employment growth by re-weighting the
data based on an estimated propensity score that depends on lagged economic outcomes and
observed economic shocks. Our estimates imply a local income multiplier of government
spending between 1.7 and 2, and a cost per job of $30,000 per year. A complementary IV
estimation strategy yields similar estimates. We also explore the potential for spillover effects
across neighboring counties but we do not find evidence of sizable spillovers. Finally, we test for
heterogeneous effects of government spending and find that federal spending has larger impacts
in low-growth areas.


Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato
Department of Economics
Duke University
213 Social Sciences Building
Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
jc@jcsuarez.com

Philippe Wingender
IMF
pwingender@imf.org
    The impact of government spending on the economy is the object of a critical policy debate.
In the midst of the worst recession since the 1930s, the federal government passed the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) in February 2009 at a cost of more than $780 billion in
the hopes of stimulating a faltering US economy. The bill contained more than $500 billion in direct
federal spending with a stated objective to “... save or create at least 3 million jobs by the end of
2010”(Romer and Bernstein, 2009). Despite the importance of this debate, economists disagree on
the effectiveness of government spending at stimulating the economy. The endogeneity of government
spending makes it difficult to draw a causal interpretation from empirical evidence as redistributive
or counter-cyclical spending policies, and automatic stabilizers likely bias naı̈ve estimates towards
zero. We contribute to this important discussion by proposing a new empirical strategy to identify
the impacts of government spending on income and employment growth.
    In this paper we propose a new shock that may be used to estimate causal effects of government
spending at the local level. We use the fact that a large number of direct federal spending and transfer
programs to local areas depend on population estimates. These estimates exhibit large variation
during Census years due to a change in the method used to produce local population levels. Whereas
the decennial Census of Population and Housing (henceforth “Census”) relies on a physical count, the
annual population estimates use administrative data to measure incremental changes in population.
The difference between the Census counts and the concurrent population estimates therefore contains
measurement error that accumulated over the previous decade. We use the population revisions which
occurred following the 1980, 1990 and 2000 Censuses to estimate causal effects of changes in federal
spending across counties.1 While we use this identification strategy to estimate local fiscal multipliers,
one of the contributions of this study is the careful documentation of a shock that can be used to
analyze the impact of government spending on other outcomes as well.
    We begin by documenting several desirable properties of the Census Shock that make it an inter-
esting source of variation. We show that, in many cases, the errors in population measurement are
large and lead to economically significant changes in federal spending. This variation leads to a strong
statistical relationship between federal spending and the Census Shock. This is consistent with the
fact that a large number of federal spending programs use local population levels to allocate spending
across areas.2 We also document the fact that it takes two years after the Census is conducted for the
Census Shock to affect spending and that it takes several years for different agencies in the federal
government to update the population levels used for determining spending. These dynamics generate
the testable prediction that spending and economic growth should not respond to the Census Shock
until two years after the Census is conducted. In addition, they imply the Census Shock may affect
spending growth over several years, even though the Census Shock occurs once every decade. Finally,
we also show that the shock is not geographically or serially correlated.
    While these properties motivate the Census Shock as a source of identifying variation for govern-
    1
      Similar identifications strategies can be found in the literature. Gordon (2004) uses the changes in local poverty
estimates following the release of the 1990 Census counts to study the flypaper effect in the context of Title I transfers to
school districts. In contrast to Gordon (2004), our identifying variation emanates from measurement error rather than
from changes in population between Censuses. In a paper looking at political representation in India, Pande (2003) uses
the difference between annual changes in minorities’ population shares and their fixed statutory shares as determined
by the previous Census.
    2
      This dependence operates either through formula-based grants using population as an input or through eligibility
thresholds in transfers to individuals and families. A review by the Government Accountability Office (GAO, 1990)
in 1990 found 100 programs that used population levels to apportion federal spending at the state and local level.
Blumerman and Vidal (2009) found 140 programs for fiscal year 2007 that accounted for over $440 billion in federal
spending, over 15% of total federal outlays for that year.


                                                             1
ment spending, a key concern is that the errors in population measurement may be correlated with
trends in economic growth that may confound the effect of changes in government spending. We deal
with this concern by adopting a treatment-effects framework following in the steps of Angrist and
Kuersteiner (2010) and Acemoglu et al. (2014). The identifying assumption behind this approach is
one of selection on observables which, in our case, correspond to lagged economic outcomes. This
approach amounts to semi-parametrically adjusting the data to recover the treatment effect of a
dichotomous version of the Census Shock on spending, income, and employment growth.3 We im-
plement this approach by estimating a propensity score that relates lagged economic outcomes and
observable economic shocks to the likelihood of a Census Shock. This approach is semi-parametric
since only the model for the propensity score needs to be specified. One benefit of this approach
is that it places no restrictions on the growth dynamics following a Census Shock and thus retains
testable implications of the identification strategy. In particular, we test and confirm the predictions
that the Census Shock should have no effect on growth in years prior to Census which are not used
to generate the propensity score, as well as on years after the Census but before the release of the
Census counts.
     We use this semi-parametric approach to produce causal estimates of a Census Shock on spending,
income, and employment growth over the three years following the release of a Census Shock. We
first use the inverse propensity score weights (IPW) of Hirano et al. (2003) to estimate statistically
and economically significant effects of a Census Shock that imply a local income multiplier between
1.7 and 2. We find that an additional $1 million of federal spending increases employment by close to
33 jobs, which implies a cost per job created of close to $30,000. As in Acemoglu et al. (2014), we also
employ a hybrid model that combines IPW with regression adjustment (IPWRA). This estimator has
the “doubly-robust” property and results in consistent estimates of treatment effects when either the
propensity score or the regression adjustment is properly specified (Wooldridge, 2010, §21.3.4). Our
estimates of the reduced-form effects of a Census Shock as well as the implied local fiscal multipliers
are robust to using IPW and IPWRA estimators across a range of specifications that control for
different levels of fixed effects, lagged economic outcomes, and other observable shocks.
     We also explore the dynamics of the Census Shock by estimating event studies for several years
before and after a given Census year. These event studies show that a Census Shock is not predictive
of past economic growth, but is predictive of future economic growth and has stable predictions
across IPW and IPWRA versions of these specifications. We compare our treatment-effects estimates
with IV estimates of fiscal multipliers that instrument federal spending with the continuous Census
Shock. The IV strategy yields similar estimates to the treatment effects strategy. It is also robust to
controlling for lagged economic growth or the propensity score used in our main specification. Both
the treatment-effect estimates and the IV estimates imply a return to government spending at the
local level that is more than ten times larger than the corresponding OLS estimates. This shows
that failing to account for the endogeneity of federal spending leads to a large downward bias due to
obvious concerns about endogeneity and reverse causality.4
     Our paper is related to several recent papers using cross-sectional identification strategies to
estimate government spending multipliers. Shoag (2010) uses differences in returns to state pension
   3
      For the remaining of the paper we refer to a Census Shock both as an increase in population estimates, in the
case of the continuous shock, as well as a positive shock, in the case of the dichotomous shock. See Sections 3.1 for the
definition of the continuous shock and Section 3.5 for the case of the binary shock.
    4
      For example, some categories of government spending are automatic stabilizers so that spending increases when
the local economy experiences a slowdown. An alternative interpretation of this bias could be attenuation due to
measurement error in government spending.


                                                           2
funds as windfall shocks to state finances that predict subsequent spending patterns. He estimates
a state-level spending multiplier above 2 and a cost per job created of around $35,000. Chodorow-
Reich et al. (2012) use formula-driven variation in federal transfers to states in 2009 associated with
state-level Medicaid spending patterns before the Great Recession. They find a cost per job created
of around $25,000 and an implied local spending multiplier of about 2. Wilson (2010) also uses state-
level spending from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) of 2009 instrumented
with allocation formulas and pre-determined factors such as the number of highway lane-miles in a
state or the share of youth in total population. He finds a cost per job created of around $125,000.
Fishback and Kachanovskaya (2010) study the effect of federal spending on aggregate state income,
consumption and employment during the Great Depression. They instrument for federal spending at
the state level using the interaction between a measure of swing voting in prior presidential elections
and federal spending outside of the state. They find an income multiplier at the state level of around
1.1, with a higher impact on personal consumption but no significant impact on private employment.
Nakamura and Steinsson (2014) use regional variation in US military spending to estimate a state-
level multiplier of 1.5. Their identifying assumption requires that changes in military buildup are not
correlated with relative regional economic conditions. A contribution of their paper is to develop a
New Keynesian open-economy model to describes how their regional multiplier estimates relate to the
traditional government spending multiplier at the national level. Finally, Clemens and Miran (2012)
use state government spending cuts attributable to institutional rules on budget deficits to estimate
a spending multiplier. Unlike the other studies mentioned here where spending changes come from
windfall shocks that do not lead to changes in tax liabilities for recipient states or regions, their
reduced-form estimates also reflect changes in tax liabilities. Consequently, their multiplier estimate
for income growth is lower and around 0.8 at the annual level.5
     We see our paper as a complement to these other contemporaneous approaches to estimating local
fiscal multipliers. In particular, our use of county-level data as opposed to state-level data allows us to
analyze a broader set of issues relating to spillover effects and to characterize heterogeneneous effects
of government spending using quantile regression methods. In addition, our larger sample size has
the potential to generate more precise estimates of these important policy parameters. Nonetheless,
it is worth pointing out the striking similarity between our local fiscal multipliers estimates and those
found in several of these studies, especially considering the differences in the sources of variation,
samples, and estimation models.
     The new cross-sectional literature on fiscal multipliers differs from the traditional empirical macroe-
conomics literature which relies on time-series variation (e.g. Ramey and Shapiro (1997), Fatás and
Mihov (2001), Blanchard and Perotti (2002), Barro and Redlick (2011), and Ramey (2011)). This
approach has many advantages. Foremost, it allows us to clearly identify the source of variation
in government spending. Exploiting cross-sectional variation also allows for research designs with
potentially much larger sample sizes. This can increase statistical power and the precision of our
estimates. We show that a cross-sectional approach is particularly amenable to the study of the ef-
fects of government spending on local outcomes and can yield new results and insights. In particular,
we measure the spillover effects of federal spending across counties. Our strategy also enables us to
characterize the heterogeneity in the impact of government spending using a new method that uses
instrumental variables in a quantile regression framework (Chernozhukov and Hansen, 2008). We

    5
      Nakamura and Steinsson (2014) and Werning and Farhi (2012) examine how the source of financing, whether federal
or local, affects the multiplier.


                                                         3
show that government spending decreases income growth inequality across counties suggesting that
automatic stabilizers play an important role in insuring counties from idiosyncratic shocks.
    Another key difference with time-series analysis is in the interpretation of our results. This is cru-
cial because nation-wide effects of policy changes cannot be identified in cross-sectional regressions.6
Nevertheless, the estimates generated by this new literature are informative in their own right as they
shed light on intermediate mechanisms and provide answers to important regional policy questions.
In particular, estimates of local fiscal multipliers can inform policy makers on the tradeoffs of using
federal transfers to smooth regional business cycles.
    We also extend the analysis by directly measuring spillovers in federal spending. Positive spillovers
across counties would lead us to underestimate the total regional effect of federal spending. On the
other hand, if government spending crowds out private demand for labor and this effect operates
differently in the recipient and neighboring counties, our estimates at the local level could be overesti-
mating the larger regional impact of government spending. While we find negative spillover estimates,
these effects are small and we cannot reject the null of no spillovers.7
    The following section describes institutional details including the statutory link between spending
and population estimates, as well as the challenges inherent in measuring population at the local level.
Section 2 describes the data used in the study. Section 3 defines the Census Shock, discusses several
statistical properties, and introduces a treatment-effects framework for estimating causal effects of a
Census Shock. Sections 4 presents semi-parametric treatment effects of a Census Shock, an event-
study analysis that explores the dynamics of the Census Shock, and a complementary IV strategy
to estimating local fiscal multipliers. Section 5 measures the spillovers of federal spending across
neighboring counties while Section 6 analyzes heterogeneity in the impact of government spending.
Finally, we conclude in Section 7.


1       Measurement of Population Levels and Federal Spending
As mandated by the Constitution, the federal government conducts a census of the population every
ten years. These population counts are used to allocate billions of dollars in federal spending at the
state and local levels. The increased reliance on population figures has also led to the development of
annual estimates that provide a more accurate and timely picture of the geographical distribution of
the population. For the last thirty years, the U.S. Census Bureau has relied on administrative data
sources to track the different components of population changes from year to year. These components
are broadly defined as natural growth from births and deaths as well as internal and international
migration. Natural growth is estimated from Vital Statistics data and migration flows are estimated
using among other sources tax return data from the IRS, Medicare, school enrollment, and automobile
registration data (Long, 1993).
    A crucial feature of these estimates is that they are “reset” to Census counts once these data be-
come available after a new Census is conducted. The difference between the two population measures
in Census years is called the “error of closure.” The Census Bureau’s objective is obviously to pro-
duce population estimates that are consistent over time. However, the use of two different methods
for producing population figures necessarily leads to some discrepancy due to systematic biases and
measurement errors in both the annual estimates and the decennial Census counts.
    6
    See Nakamura and Steinsson (2014) and Werning and Farhi (2012) for detailed discussions.
    7
    Davis et al. (1997) find positive spillovers of demand shocks across states. Glaeser et al. (2003) develop a model in
which the presence of positive spillovers leads to larger social multipliers than those implied by lower level estimates.


                                                           4
     The error of closure has been substantial in recent Censuses. In 1980, the Census counted 5
million more people than the concurrent population estimate that had been derived by using the
total population level from the 1970 Census and adding population growth throughout the decade.
The 1990 Census counted 1.5 million fewer people than the national estimate. This was due to
systematic undercounting of certain demographic groups. In 2000, the Census counted 6.8 million
more people than the estimated population level based on the 1990 Census (U.S. Census Bureau,
2010c). These errors of closure are even more important in relative terms at the local level due to the
difficulty of tracking internal migration.
     A few notable examples include Clark County, Nevada where Las Vegas is located. From an
initial population of 756,170 people in 1990, the county grew by almost 85% over the following decade
to reach 1,393,909 people in 2000. This growth rate was the 14th highest during the decade. The
Census Shock for Clark county in 2000 was also high at 8.8%, slightly above the 95th percentile in
our sample for 2000. The counties of New York City also experienced a large Census Shock in 2000
of 7.5% even though the city’s population only grew by 8.5% over the previous ten years. Dade
County, Florida, where Miami is located, also had large Census Shocks of close to 6%, compared to
our sample average of 0.2%. San Diego County, on the other hand, had smaller shocks, averaging
0.6% across all three Censuses. Census Shocks in urban counties were positive and larger than
those experienced by rural counties, due to the fact that rural counties experienced more negative
population shocks. For example, Census enumerations consistently found fewer people than the
contemporaneous administrative estimates. However, in absolute values, rural counties had larger
shocks in every Census. Counties in the South experienced the largest shocks, on average, while those
in the Northeast listed the smallest shocks. Midwestern counties’ Census Shocks were consistently
below the sample average.
     Figure 1 illustrates the average county population growth rate across all counties by year. The
series shows clear breaks in 1980, 1990 and 2000. Figure 2 presents the full distribution of county
population growth rates for 1999 and 2000 separately. The figure demonstrates that the Census
revisions affect the whole distribution of growth rates. The variance is also larger as more counties
experience very high positive and negative growth in 2000 than in 1999. These figures show that
updating population estimates with new Census counts generates a large amount of cross-sectional
variation.
     The shock we use in the paper is the Census Bureau’s error of closure at the local level. It is
the difference between two concurrent estimates of the population in the same year: the Census
counts and the administrative estimates derived by adding population growth to the population
levels as determined by the previous Census.8 To evaluate the suitability of the error of closure as
a shock to federal spending, it is necessary to determine to what extent the variation is driven by
mismeasurement of population growth between Censuses or mismeasurement of population stocks
during Census enumerations. If the variation is due primarily to the bias in the administrative
estimates and the underestimation of growth, then high values of the Census Shock would identify
counties that have grown more than expected in the past decade and are likely to keep growing
relatively more in the future. As we argue below, the variation in the Census Shock is likely to
come not only from the mismeasurement of population flows, but also from the mismeasurement of
population stocks during Census enumerations.

    8
      These administrative estimates are called postcensal estimates. See Appendix A for a definition of all variables
used in the analysis.


                                                          5
1.1   Challenges of Counting the Population
The coverage of the Census enumeration has been a topic of intense research and debate among statis-
ticians, demographers, and policy makers in the last thirty years (see Brown et al. (1999) for a broad
overview of this literature, and Brunell (2002), Rosenthal (2000), Belin and Rolph (1994), Robinson
et al. (1993), Fay et al. (1988), West and Fein (1990), Ericksen and Kadane (1985), Freedman (1993),
Swanson and McKibben (2010)). It is widely acknowledged that due to the many technical challenges
associated with a physical enumeration, Census counts do not constitute an a priori better measure
of true population than other statistical and administrative methods. For example, in addition to
clerical errors it is believed that linking enumerators’ pay to the number of households interviewed
may have contributed to duplicated enumerations in 1980 (Lavin, 1996). In comparing postcensal
estimates and population counts following the 1990 Census, Davis (1994) noted that “. . . ultimately
we do not really know if the estimates are in error, or if it is the Census which is off the mark.” De-
spite recommendations by the National Academy of Sciences and the Census Bureau to use statistical
techniques to adjust Census counts for known misreporting, the Supreme Court in 1999 sided with
the United States House of Representatives against the Department of Commerce to ban their use in
calculating the population for purposes of apportionment (Rosenthal, 2000).
    Conducting the U.S. Census is a relatively rare, technically challenging, and costly endeavor.
Unlike other Anglophone countries (Australia, Canada, England, Ireland and New Zealand) which
conduct population censuses every 5 years, the American Census occurs only every 10 years. The
United States also lacks universal population registration and health care systems such as those
found in Scandinavian countries that facilitate the construction of national address lists. The Census
Bureau only started using a comprehensive electronic mapping system in 1990. A continuously
updated master address file was only introduced following the Census 2000. Such a master file is a
critical source of information to ensure that every household receives a questionnaire and is eventually
counted (Swanson and McKibben (2010), National Research Council (1995)). Incomplete or out-of-
date master address files increase the likelihood that at-risk populations such as low-income households
and movers will be missed.
    Despite extensive follow-up work evaluating Census coverage over the last three decades, the
Census Bureau has never used adjusted counts as the basis for congressional apportionment, federal
spending allocation or administrative population estimates. This implies that the differential coverage
of groups or regions between two consecutive Censuses has generated sizable variation in the error
of closure. Research conducted by the Census Bureau established that for the Census of 2000, 60%
of the error of closure was due to the differential coverage between Census 1990 and Census 2000,
the remaining difference being due to under-estimation of national population growth (Robinson and
West, 2005). Other studies have found that the error of closure at the state level can be cut by
more than half when administrative estimates are adjusted for under-coverage of Census counts (e.g.
Mohammed Shahidullah (2005), Starsinic (1983)), although others have also found mixed evidence
(Murdock and Hoque (1995)).
    Factors that make it hard to measure population changes through administrative data sources also
make it hard to measure population stocks during Census enumerations. Several risk factors that are
associated with the under-coverage of administrative data have also been related to the under-coverage
of the Census: college students enumerated at their family home and their college address, home-
schooled children and children in joint custody, individuals with more than one residence, renters,
multi-unit housing, population in rural areas, racial and ethnic minorities, foreign-born migration,


                                                   6
legal emigration, Medicare under-enrollment, political views of respondents that might make them
reluctant to be included in a Census enumeration, etc. (Robinson et al. (2002), Rosenthal (2000),
Boscoe and Miller (2004), Judson et al. (2001), Word (1997), Robinson (2001)). Of particular concern
for the measurement of population growth is the migration of low-income households. Since one of the
main sources of information on internal migration comes from IRS tax records, low income households
who do not have to file tax returns are more likely to be missed by administrative estimates. These
groups however are also much more likely to be missed in Census enumerations than less mobile
groups (Steffey and Bradburn, 1994).

1.2    Population and Federal Spending
Local population levels are used in the allocation of federal funds mainly through formula grants
that use population as an input and through eligibility thresholds for direct payments to individuals
(e.g. Blumerman and Vidal (2009), GAO (1987), Louis et al. (2003), Zaslavsky and Schirm (2002),
Larcinese et al. (2013)). Federal agencies use annual population estimates or Census counts depending
on the availability and timeliness of the latter. The release of new Census counts therefore leads to a
change in the population levels used for allocating spending that we exploit in our empirical design.
However, this change does not occur in the year of the Census since it usually takes two years for the
Census Bureau to release the final population reports (U.S. Census Bureau (2010a,b) and U.S. Census
Bureau (2001)). The specific timing of the release of the final Census counts allows for a powerful
test of our identification strategy, as the Census Shock should be uncorrelated with economic growth
and federal spending at the local level before the release of the final Census counts.
    Federal agencies also have some discretion in updating the population levels used to allocate
spending. Variation in the year of adoption of Census counts across agencies suggests that the Census
Shock influences federal spending several years after the release of the final counts. One example is
the Federal Medical Assistance Percentage (FMAP) used for Medicaid and Temporary Assistance for
Needy Families (TANF) transfers to states. This percentage is a function of a three year moving
average of the ratio of states’ personal income per capita to the national personal income per capita.9
The three-year moving average is also lagged three years so that the 2009 FMAP, the last year in our
dataset, relies on population estimates dating back to 2004 (Congressional Research Service, 2008).
We therefore would not expect the Census Shock to affect FMAP spending until three years after the
Census is conducted. The moving average used in the FMAP implies that the population revision
will be correlated with changes in the FMAP up until five years after the Census year. We illustrate
a simplified timeline for the 1980 Census in Figure 3.
    Given the interest in the under-coverage of the Census, several attempts have been made to
determine the effects of adjusting Census counts on the allocation of federal funds at the state level
(e.g., GAO (1999), GAO (2006), GAO (2009), and Louis et al. (2003)). For instance, GAO (2006)
finds that relatively small differences (about 0.5%) in the national error of closure in 2000 led 22
states to obtain additional $200 million dollars of funding and 17 states to obtain a deficit of $368
million. Similarly, GAO (2009) simulated changes in population of about 3.2 percent and found that
states where population was underestimated would lose $363.2 million, while states with overestimates
would gain $377.0 million in federal funding. Other studies have also found similar estimates (Murray
   9
     Per capita income depends on population estimates only through the denominator. Zaslavsky and Schirm (2002)
explore the role of non-linearities in interactions between population estimates and federal spending. They also note that
formulae features, including thresholds or hold-harmless clauses, may amplify the noise of estimated formulae inputs,
such as population, and lead to large effects on the allocation of spending.


                                                            7
(1992),GAO (1999)). This issue was also addressed by a National Research Council panel in Louis
et al. (2003) that focused on statistical problems in implementing the allocation of various formula
programs. The panel of experts concluded that, indeed, the statistical measurement and differential
adoption of population estimates across agencies would generate mismatches in the funding across
localities. These studies, along with the evidence of population mis-measurement in the previous
section, show that errors in population measurement may induce a substantial amount of variation
in federal spending.


2        Data
Counties are a natural starting point for our analysis because of their large number and stable bound-
aries for the period under study. There are over 3,000 counties when excluding Hawaii and Alaska,
which we do throughout the analysis.10
    We use contemporaneous county population estimates published by the Census Bureau from 1970
to 2009. These are called postcensal estimates.11 There were no postcensal estimates released in
1980, 1990 and 2000 because of the upcoming Censuses. Since our empirical strategy requires the
comparison of administrative estimates and Census counts, we produce these postcensal estimates for
census years using publicly-available data in an attempt to replicate the Census Bureau’s methodology.
We use annual county-level births and deaths from the Vital Statistics of the U.S. to generate our own
estimates of county natural growth. The data used to estimate internal and international migration
are from the County-to-County Migration Data Files published by the IRS’s Statistics of Income.
    Data on federal spending come from the Consolidated Federal Funds Reports (CFFR) published
annually by the Census Bureau.12 This dataset contains detailed information on the geographic
distribution of federal spending down to the city level. In cases where federal transfers are passed
through state governments, the CFFR estimates the sub-state allocation by city and county. Spending
is also disaggregated by agency (from 129 agencies in 1980 to 680 in 2009) and by spending program
(from 800 programs in 1980 to over 1500 in 2009). The specific programs are classified into nine
broad categories based on purpose and type of recipient. We restrict our analysis to the following
categories: Direct Payments to Individuals, Direct Payments for Retirement and Disability, Grants
(Medicaid transfers to states, Highway Planning and Construction, Social Services Block Grants,
etc.), Procurement and Contracts (both Defense and non-Defense), Salaries and Wages of federal
employees and Direct Loans. From these we exclude Medicare spending, because federal transfers are
based on reimbursements of health care costs incurred, as well as Social Security transfers, which are
direct transfer to individuals and do not depend on local population estimates. We exclude Direct
Payments Other than for Individuals which consist mainly of insurance payments such as crop and
natural disaster insurance since these are not relevant in the context of our natural experiment and
decrease the statistical power of our first stage. Finally, we exclude the Insurance and Guaranteed
Loans categories because they represent contingent liabilities and not actual spending. Given the
high variance of spending across years at the county level and the fact that some of the data represent
obligations for multi-year disbursements, we use a three year moving average of total spending in
    10
      We exclude Hawaii and Alaska since the county governments play an outsized role, in the case of the former, and
since county boundaries are not stable during our sample period, in the case of the latter.
   11
      The Census Bureau also releases intercensal estimates, which are revised after new Census counts are available.
See U.S. Census Bureau (2010a) for details on the revision procedure.
   12
      The CFFR was first published by the Census Bureau in 1983. Predecessors to the CFFR are the Federal Outlays
series from 1968 to 1980 and the Geographic Distribution of Federal Funds in 1981 and 1982.


                                                         8
these categories.13 Panel (a) in Figure 5 shows how our measure of federal spending at the national
level compares to federal spending in the National Accounts. On average, we capture between 40 and
60% of total spending and between 50 and 70% of total domestic spending (total spending minus debt
servicing and international payments). The decreasing coverage of our CFFR measure of spending
compared to NIPA figures is mainly due to the exclusion of Medicare and Social Security spending,
two of the largest and fastest growing federal spending programs. Panel (b) breaks down total federal
spending by the broad categories used in the analysis for the three Census years.
    Data on county personal income and employment are taken from the Bureau of Economic Analysis’
Regional Economic Information System (REIS). These data are compiled from a variety of adminis-
trative sources. Employment and earnings mainly come from the Quarterly Census of Employment
and Wages (QCEW) produced by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). The QCEW contains the
universe of jobs covered by state unemployment insurance systems and accounts for more than 94%
of total wages reported by the BEA. Personal income (which also includes proprietors’ and capital
income, as well as supplements to salaries and wages) uses IRS, Social Security Administration and
state unemployment agencies data among other sources.
    While these data come mainly from administrative data sources, certain sub-items are allocated
at the county level using information from surveys and Census data (Bureau of Economic Analysis
(2010)). This could potentially lead to a mechanical correlation between the Census Shock and the
dependent variables. To minimize this concern, we focus only on the components of personal income
that are the least dependent on these adjustments. Our measure of personal income therefore includes
only private non-farm earnings and dividends, interest, and rent.14 Similarly, for employment, we
only consider private non-farm jobs. Across the county-year observations in our sample, we find
that farm jobs and income constitute 1% of all private jobs and 4% of all private income. Similarly,
public-sector jobs and income represent 10% of all jobs and 15% of total income. We explore the
robustness of our results on alternative data sources directly from the QCEW and the IRS Statistics
of Income. The employment measure in the QCEW comes from unemployment insurance programs.
We use the number of tax filers as a proxy for local employment in the case of the IRS data.
    All dollar values are expressed in 2009 dollars using the national Consumer Price Index published
by the BLS. Finally, in order to make these data comparable across counties, we normalize income and
employment changes by constant population in 1980, the beginning of our sample. Since our source
of variation uses changes in population estimates, this normalization ensures that the identifying
variation only comes from changes in economic growth.15 Appendix A contains additional details on
data sources and variable definitions.


3        The Census Shock
This section formally defines the Census Shock, explores its statistical properties, documents the
lack of a relation between the Census Shock and state spending, and describes a treatment-effects
approach to analyzing the variation from the shock.

    13
      We discuss the robustness of our results to restricting spending categories to exclude salaries and wages, and
procurements and contracts, as well as to different approaches to dealing with outliers in spending data in Section 4.
   14
      Our personal income measure also excludes personal transfers, place-of-residence adjustment, and contributions for
government social insurance.
   15
      An earlier, working paper version of this paper, analyzed outcomes normalized by concurrent population and
obtained similar estimates (Suárez Serrato and Wingender, 2014a, Version: March 30).


                                                           9
3.1     Defining the Census Shock
To implement our empirical strategy, we need both Census counts and concurrent population esti-
mates. The Census Bureau does not publish postcensal population estimates for years in which it
conducts the Census. We therefore produce population estimates for Census years using publicly-
available data on the components of change of population. Because we do not have access to all the
data used by the Census Bureau, we estimate the following regression with the aim of approximating
the methodology used to produce the estimates:

                       ∆P opPc,tC = φ1 Birthsc,t + φ2 Deathsc,t + φ3 M igrationc,t + uc,t .

This calibration equation ensures that we can adequately replicate the Census Bureau’s administra-
tive estimates of the year-to-year population change using publicly-available data. The regression
is estimated separately by decade on years for which population estimates are available (which ex-
cludes Census years).The components of population change are taken from the Vital Statistics and
IRS migration data. The R-squared of these calibration regressions are 0.91 for years 1991 to 1999
and 0.78 for 1981 to 1988.16 The correlation between estimated population growth and our predicted
population growth is over 0.90. All the coefficients also have the expected signs and magnitudes.
    This procedure gives us estimated population growth rates from which we can extrapolate popu-
lation levels in Census years. For the 2000 Census, we calibrate the components of population change
identity across counties using population growth during the 1990s. We then use the estimated level
of population for 1999 and the predicted population growth from actual births, deaths and migration
in that year to produce population estimates for April 1st, 2000. The estimates are used to produce
the counterfactual postcensal population levels P op\PC                                            17
                                                     c,Census . We then define the Census Shock as:


                                CSc,Census = log(P opC                   \PC
                                                     c,Census ) − log(P opc,Census ).


3.2     Properties of the Census Shock
We now document some statistical properties of the Census Shock that make it an interesting source
of variation for measuring the effects of government spending on local economic growth.
    First, we note that the Census Shock may lead to large changes in local population estimates.
Figure 1 shows that, even at the national level, the error of closure can be substantial. The problem of
population counting and updating is exacerbated in smaller geographic areas. While most counties see
small revisions, we find that counties in the 25th percentile of the distribution see a downwards revision
of 2.5%, while counties in the 75th percentile see an upward revision of 3.3% percent. Similarly, moving
a county from a 10th percentile to the 90th percentile implies a change in estimated population of
11.8%.
    Second, we analyze whether the Census Shock is geographically correlated. If the Census Shock is
strongly correlated across nearby counties in a given region, this might be evidence that the Census
   16
      Population growth is prorated in the year of the Census to account for the difference in end dates between population
estimates (July 1st) and Census day (April 1st). Results are not materially affected by this transformation. The Census
Bureau did not publish postcensal estimates for 1979 and 1989. The results of the calibration regressions by decade are
reported in Table E.1.
   17
      Tables E.2-E.4 report the counties with the largest Census Shocks in every decade. Alternative methods of es-
timating the counterfactual postcensal population estimates, including a raw sum of the components of change (i.e.
∆P opP   C
       c,t = Birthsc,t − Deathsc,t + M igrationc,t ) and using an AR(3) time series model, produce similar estimates
and do not alter our main results.


                                                            10
Shock is related to a region-wide shock that might also explain the outcomes of interest. An analysis of
variance (ANOVA) shows that only 8% of the variation can be explained by MSA and state indicators.
We also find on average a correlation of around 0.2 in values of the Census Shock across counties
in the same MSA. Therefore most of the variation in the shock appears to be at the county level or
below and not driven by region-wide economic shocks.18
    A third potential concern is that time-invariant characteristics of particular counties might lead
to large measurement errors in population and might also be determinants of economic development.
For example, geographic, cultural, or political characteristics of a given region might set counties on
different growth paths and might also affect the likelihood that Census enumerators make errors in
counting population or might affect how individuals respond to Census surveys. A similar concern is
that counties might be subject to serially correlated shocks, such as the inflow of immigrant workers,
that could be at the source of both our Census Shock and the increase in economic activity. To explore
the validity of these potential concerns, we consider whether the Census Shock is serially correlated.
Figure 4 presents the scatter plots of the Census Shocks across decades. These plots demonstrate
that there is no serial correlation in the shocks across Censuses. In both graphs, the slopes of the
correlation are flat and not statistically different from zero. This feature of the Census Shocks is
consistent with measurement error being the source of the variation in the shock. Importantly, it is
evidence against confounding factors that could be driving the variation across areas and that are
known to be strongly serially correlated such as illegal immigration in border states, for example.

3.3    Census Shock and State Spending
The statutory formulas described in Section 1.2 motivate the Census Shock as a driver of federal
spending. However, a potential concern in analyzing the effects of a Census Shock is that other levels
of government spending might also respond to the Census Shock in a way that would confound the
effects of changes in federal spending. Unfortunately, analyzing the effect of the Census Shock on state
spending is complicated by the lack of state-level spending data that is comparable to the CFFR.
    In Appendix B, however, we perform two sets of analyses that explore whether state spending
responds to the Census Shock. First, we consider the effects of the Census Shock on government
wages for different levels of government as measured by the BEA. We find that, while the Census
Shock leads to increases in federal wages, state and local wages are not affected by the Census Shock.
In a second indirect test, we use data from the Annual Survey of Governments to analyze whether
intergovernmental transfers respond to the Census Shock. We again find that state transfers to local
governments are not responsive to the shock. These analyses suggest that our analysis on federal
spending is not likely to be confounded by reaction of state spending to the Census Shock.

3.4    A Treatment Effects Strategy to Analyzing the Census Shock
Despite the properties described above, a crucial concern is that the Census Shock is correlated with
underlying growth trends or previous local shocks that might directly affect the subsequent economic
outcomes of interest. For example, if the postcensal population figures systematically underestimate
economic growth or undercount true population levels, counties with previously higher-growth trends
would realize a large Census Shock and would likely maintain higher-growth rates in the future.

   18
      In Section 5 we analyze the spillover effects of shocks to nearby counties on local economic growth. The goal of
that analysis is to explore the mechanisms through which additional spending leads to increased growth.


                                                         11
These local shocks could therefore confound our interpretation of the results as the “true” effect of
government spending on local growth.
    We address this concern by casting the Census Shock in a treatment-effects framework where
potential correlations between the Census Shock and lagged economic outcomes are indicative of
a problem of selection on observables.19 We then use variants of the propensity score methods of
Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983) to estimate causal effects of the Census Shock. In particular, we use
the semi-parametric approach of Angrist and Kuersteiner (2010) and Angrist et al. (2013) to estimate
causal effects of the Census Shock on spending, income, and employment growth.
    We first cast our setting in the potential outcomes framework of Rubin (1974), following the
notation in Acemoglu et al. (2014). Consider a binary version of the Census Shock where CSc,t = 1
implies an upward revision in population estimates.20 For a given value of the Census Shock d ∈ {0, 1}
and a given outcome variable Yc,t , define the potential outcomes Yc,ts (d) for year t + s in county c.

Similarly, define the potential growth in Yc,t between years t + s and t as:
                                                s          s
                                             ∆Yc,t (d) = Yc,t (d) − Yc,t .

The causal effect of a Census Shock on the growth of a given outcome Yc,t is given by

                                         βYs = E[∆Yc,t
                                                    s              s
                                                       (1)] − E[∆Yc,t (0)].

If the Census Shock were a perfectly randomized shock, we may recover estimates of the causal effect
by comparing the means of counties with and without a Census Shock.21
    In practice, however, the Census Shock may not be perfectly randomized, raising the concern
that a simple comparison of means will not yield a causal effect due to the potential of selection
bias. We address this concern with two complementary approaches. First, we follow the semi-
parametric framework of Angrist and Kuersteiner (2010) and Angrist et al. (2013) and estimate
a propensity score model where the Census Shock may depend on lagged growth in income and
employment. We then weight the data by the inverse of the propensity score (IPW) and estimate
treatment effects as the mean difference of the suitably-reweighted data. This strategy has the benefit
that the relation between lagged outcomes and the causal effects is left unspecified. This approach
shifts the modeling from focusing on outcomes to focusing on the variation in the Census Shock. As
a second strategy, we follow Acemoglu et al. (2014) in employing a “doubly-robust” estimator that
combines regression adjustment (RA) with inverse-propensity score weighting (IPW) by implementing
the estimator described in Wooldridge (2010, IPWRA, §21.3.4). This approach has the benefit that,
as long as either the regression adjustment model or the propensity score model are correctly specified,
the IPWRA model will deliver consistent estimates of causal treatment effects.
    Before presenting the implementation details of each of these models, we discuss the assumptions
that are common to both models. As our analysis focuses on three outcomes—Federal Spending
  19
      A previous version of this paper (Suárez Serrato and Wingender, 2014a, Version March 30) discusses identification
of the Census Shock in a model where the measurement error results in a perfectly randomized shock. We now discuss
that model in Appendix C.
   20
      We simplify our analysis by analyzing the binary version of the Census Shock. Hirano and Imbens (2004) study
continuous treatments and Imbens (2000) and Cattaneo (2010) study multi-valued treatment effects. We follow the
methodology in Cattaneo et al. (2013) to explore the potential for spillover effects in Section 5.
   21
      This follows since:
     s                  s                   s                     s                      s           s
                                                                                                  
E ∆Yc,t |Dc,t = 1 −E ∆Yc,t |Dc,t = 0 = E ∆Yc,t (1)|Dc,t = 1 −E ∆Yc,t (0)|Dc,t = 0 = E ∆Yc,t (1) − ∆Yc,t (0) .




                                                          12
(Fc,t ), Employment (Empc,t ), and Income (Incc,t )—our selection on observables assumption takes
the following form:
                                          s (d) ⊥ D |χ , I{State} , I{Year}
Assumption 1 Selection on observables: ∆Yc,t       c,t c,t       c,t       c,t ∀s ≥ 2 and

                       t+1
    • where χc,t ⊆ {∆Yc,t−1 , ∆Yc,t−3 , Industry Shifterc,t , Migration Shifterc,t },

    • for Yc,t = Fc,t , Empc,t , and Incc,t ,

    • for t = 1980, 1990, 2000, and ∀ c.

    Our assumption of conditional independence applies to each of our three outcomes and any year
s ≥ 2 following the release of the Census Shock. t is restricted to the three Census years in our sample.
The set of observables includes state and year effects, lagged values of our outcomes at two points in
time prior to the release of the Census Shock, an observable industry share-shift variable proposed by
Bartik (1991), and a migration share-shift variable due to Card (2001).22 Our preferred specification
includes year and state fixed effects but we also present results showing that state-by-year fixed effects
result in similar estimates. This assumption allows for the Census Shock to be correlated with past
economic growth but presumes that, conditional on the observables χc,t , the Census Shock is “as good
as randomly assigned.”
    We also make a second assumption that is standard in the analysis of treatment effects:

Assumption 2 Overlap: 0 < P[dc,t = 1|χc,t ] < 1 .

Intuitively, this assumption states that, for any value of χc,t , there is a non-zero probability that we
may observe counties with and without a Census Shock. We discuss the plausibility of this assumption
in the next section as we describe the estimated propensity scores.
    We now discuss our implementation of the IPW and IPWRA estimators. In a first step, we
estimate the probability of having a Census Shock conditional on χc,t and year fixed effects, which
results in an estimated propensity score P̂c,t .23 As in Acemoglu et al. (2014), we focus on the treatment
effect on the treated, and we use P̂c,t to compute the efficient weights of Hirano et al. (2003):24
                                                                                !
                                   1                                     P̂c,t
                         ŵc,t =           I{Dc,t = 1} − I{Dc,t = 0}              .
                                 b c,t ]
                                 E[D                                  1 − P̂c,t

Finally, we obtain IPW estimates of the treatment effects of a Census Shock by comparing the means
of reweighted data:
                                        β̂Ys = E[
                                               b ŵc,t · ∆Y s ].
                                                           c,t
   22
      The industry share-shift variable calculates the county-level annual percentage growth in employment predicted
by national employment growth at the 3-digit industry level and the base year industry composition of employment
in each county. The migration share-shift variable has an analogous construction and is meant to capture a specific
source of population growth due to a supply shock from immigration. The variable is constructed by using levels of
immigrant populations across Censuses by country of origin instead of industry employment levels. If, for example,
there was a large influx of Eastern European immigrants in the US between 1990 and 2000, counties with larger Eastern
European-born populations in 1990 would be likely to experience a larger influx of immigrants, everything else equal.
   23
      In practice, we use a logit model to estimate the propensity score. Section 3.5 discusses the estimation results and
Section 4.1 discusses robustness of our main results to using a probit model for the propensity score.
   24
      We focus on estimating the average treatment effect on the treated as it relies on less restrictive assumptions for
identification. In addition, the resulting estimates are a more relevant policy guide for counties that are affected by this
source of variation. Nonetheless, Section 4 discusses estimates of average treatment effects and shows that we obtain a
similar pattern of results.


                                                            13
    To implement the IPWRA model, we use ŵc,t to estimate a weighted linear regression of ∆Yc,t         s

on covariates Xc,t , including year and state fixed effects. We estimate this regression separately by
treatment status to recover parameters (α̂is , Γ̂si ), where α̂is is the weighted mean for treatment group
i, and where Γ̂si are the coefficients on Xc,t .25 The IPWRA estimate of the causal effect of a Census
Shock on a given outcome is now:26
                                                        b s + X 0 Γ̂s ) − (α̂s + X 0 Γ̂s )].
                                                 β̂Ys = E[(α̂1 c,t 1         0    c,t 0

It follows from this expression that the IPWRA model recovers the IPW estimate in the case where
Xc,t is empty.
    We interpret the causal estimate of a Census Shock on federal spending, βFs , as a “first stage,”
                                            s
and the effects on employment and income, βEmp        s , respectively, as reduced-form effects. We
                                                 and βInc
                                                                                   βs                                       βs
                                                        s , and the cost per job created, β s
also report estimates of the local income multiplier, βInc                                    F
                                                                                                , in order
                                                        F                                  Emp
to normalize the reduced-form effects by a dollar unit. This interpretation belies an assumption that
other policies are not directly affected by the Census Shock, which we formalize below.

Assumption 3 Policy Exclusion: A Census Shock does not directly affect policies other than
federal spending.

    Assumption 3 is testable whenever such policies are observable. As discussed in Section 3.3, and
in more detail in Appendix B, we find no direct effects of a Census Shock on state spending. We also
find this assumption plausible for other policies that may vary at the county or city level. To the best
of our knowledge, there has been no evidence of the effects of population mis-measurement on other
such policies. In particular, a National Research Council panel reviewed statistical issues related to
population mis-measurement and found no such links (Louis et al., 2003). In contrast, as discussed
in Section 1.2, errors in population measurement have received considerable attention in debates over
federal spending. Note that the interpretation of our results as local fiscal multipliers would not be
confounded by changes in state and local policies that respond to changes in federal spending.

3.5       Estimated Propensity Scores and Diagnostic Tests
This section implements the treatment-effects framework described in the previous section, presents
evidence of balance with respect to past economic growth, and shows evidence that the overlap
assumption is not violated.
    We first generate a binary version of the Census Shock in order to implement the treatment-effects
framework of Section 3.4. We begin by normalizing the Census Shock by the mean shock for every
state in a given decade. This normalization is justified by statutory rules that rely on changes in both
state and county-level population estimates (Louis et al., 2003). We then assign treatment status to
county-year observations where the Census Shock is in the top 50% of the distribution, and we assign
the bottom 50% of the observations to the control group.27
  25                                                                                           0
       That is, (α̂is , Γ̂si ) = arg min                                           s
                                                                                      − αis − Xc,t Γsi )2 , for i = 0, 1.
                                           P
                                     s s       c,t (dc,t   − (1 − dc,t ))ŵc,t (∆Yc,t
                                  αi ,Γi
  26
       See Wooldridge (2010, §21.3.4) for the proof that the estimator following this procedure possesses the “doubly-
robust” property. The IPW and IPWRA estimates may be implemented with the command teffects in Stata. In
practice, we use a custom command to implement these estimators in order to jointly bootstrap the propensity score
and the treatment effects of a Census Shock on multiple outcomes in order to perform inference on ratio of treatment
effects, which we interpret as multipliers. We confirm that our command produces numerically identical estimates to
those computed via teffects.
    27
       Our results are robust to the choice of discretization, as we discuss below and in Section 4.


                                                                              14
    We then estimate propensity score models of the binary Census Shock. Tables E.5 and E.6 present
results of logit parameters and marginal effects, respectively. We find that the lagged measures of
income and employment growth are statistically significant predictors of having a Census Shock,
raising the concern of selection bias. Following Angrist and Kuersteiner (2010), Angrist et al. (2013),
and Acemoglu et al. (2014), we generate a propensity score, as the probability of having a Census
Shock, that depends on these measures of past economic growth. Figure E.13 shows evidence that the
overlap assumption (Assumption 2) is likely to hold as the estimated propensity scores have similar
distributions and there are no values close to zero or unity.
    We now show that the IPW and IPWRA models successfully balance the measures of past growth
with respect to the Census Shock. Table 1 presents estimates of a Census Shock on six measures
of past growth. Standard errors are obtained via 2000 bootstrap repetitions and allow for arbitrary
correlations at the state level.28 Column (1) presents estimates from a model without IPW that only
controls for year and state fixed effects. This column shows that, as mentioned in Section 3.4, the
Census Shock is not perfectly randomized with respect to measures of past economic growth. Columns
(2)-(5) introduce the IPW and IPWRA estimators with different models of regression adjustment.
As can be seen, even the simplest IPW estimator in column (2) results in economically small and
statistically insignificant relations between a Census Shock and past measures of economic growth.
The fact that the Census Shock is not related to income or employment growth in years (−1, 1) and
(−3, 0) is a meaningful diagnostic result, illustrating that the IPW and IPWRA models are able to
produce balance with respect to the information used in estimation. Moreover, the fact that Table
1 shows balance of the Census Shock with respect to economic growth starting five years before
a Census is conducted (and seven years before the release of the Census Shock), is evidence that
selection on observables (Assumption 1) is a valid working assumption, as this variable was not used
in the construction of the propensity score or as part of the regression adjustment. We show further
evidence that the IPW and IPWRA models balance past growth with respect to the Census Shock
in Section 4.2, where we discuss the results of event-study analyses.


4     Estimates of Local Fiscal Multipliers
This section presents our main estimates. We first report treatment effects of a Census Shock on
spending, income, and employment growth, and use these effects to construct estimates of fiscal
multipliers. We then explore the dynamics of these effects in an event-study framework. Finally, we
present a complementary analysis where we use the continuous version of the Census Shock as an
instrument for federal spending.

4.1    Semi-parametric Treatment Effects and Implied Local Fiscal Multipliers
Our first set of results reports semi-parametric estimates of the causal effect of a Census Shock on
spending, income, and employment growth over a three year period following the release of the Census



   28
      We follow the procedure in Andrews and Buchinsky (2000) as implemented by Poi (2004) in selecting the number
of bootstrap repetitions. This procedure indicates that 1550 repetitions are sufficient for there to be a 99% chance that
the estimated standard errors will be within 5% of the standard errors when the number of repetitions is infinity. At
2000 repetitions, this probability is 99.7% and the chance that the estimated standard errors will be within 2.5% of the
standard errors at infinity replications is 85.7%.


                                                           15
Shock.29 Table 2 presents IPW and IPWRA estimates of these effects. Our preferred specification
in column (3) suggests that having a Census Shock increases employment by about 1(SE = 0.4)
job per 1000 people. We also find that income per person increases by $56(SE = 26). When we
compare these estimates to the estimated increase in spending of $30(SE = 13) per person, we
find an implied estimate of the income multiplier of 1.86(SE = 1.12) and a cost per job created of
$30, 785(SE = 16, 694). The estimates of local fiscal multipliers are stable across the specifications in
columns (1)-(4) that vary the degree of regression adjustment, including state-by-year fixed effects. We
perform inference on the implied multipliers using two complementary approaches. First, we report
standard-errors from a delta-method calculation. Second, we report the 90% confidence interval of
the bootstrapped samples using the percentile method. We also use the bootstrapped samples to
calculate the p-value of a one-sided test that the multipliers is not positive, which we reject at the
5%-level across all specifications. Both inference approaches allow for arbitrary correlation at the
state level.
    Notice that combining the income multiplier and the cost per job leads to an implied income for
the marginal worker that is close to the national median income. In particular, using estimates from
column (3), we could posit that a job created would have a total remuneration of 1.86 ∗ $30, 785 ≈
$57, 250, which is slightly above the national median income. This calculation implies that the
cost per job created is the share of the total remuneration that accrues to the federal government.
The remaining share is paid by employers as a result of increased economic activity generated by
government spending through direct and indirect channels.
    We obtain a better grasp of the variation behind these estimates by considering the total spending
growth for an average county. Given an average population of 62,183 in the beginning of our sample,
the estimate on spending growth implies a total increase of $5.6 million over a three year period.
This suggests that the Census Shock may elicit economically substantial variation in spending that
may precisely estimate local fiscal multipliers. Additionally, if we consider that the average county
in the control group saw an under-estimate of 2.7% and the average county in the treatment group
saw on over-estimate of 3.6%, we find that an additional estimated person results in about $476 in
additional federal spending per year.30 This calculation is surprisingly close to that of a GAO report
that reviewed the 15 largest formula grant programs for fiscal year 1997, and which found that federal
spending would increase by $480 per additional person (GAO (1999)). While the GAO estimate does
not encompass all of our estimation period, it is reassuring that our estimates are of the same order
of magnitude as this analysis of the largest statutory formulas.
    We explore the robustness of these results in several dimensions. First, Table E.7 shows that
these results are robust to using a probit model for the propensity score. Second, we explore the
robustness to the discretization of the shock. In Table E.8, we present estimates similar to Table 2
but where a Census Shock is defined as being in the top 40% of the distribution of shocks, relative to
counties in the bottom 40% of the distribution of shocks. As these shocks represent larger differences
between treatment and control groups, we find larger treatment effects on employment, income, and
spending growth. However, these effects are stable across specifications and result in very similar
implied multipliers. Third, Table E.9 shows that the analysis of average treatment effects results in
similar estimates of both treatment effects and implied multipliers. Fourth, we explore the robustness

  29
      That is, we estimate βY5−2 /3, for a given outcome Y . In the case of employment, we normalize the coefficient to
represent the increase in jobs per 1000 people.
   30
      This calculation comes from taking ratio of the total dollar increase in spending ($29.984 × 62, 183) to the change
in estimated number of people for the average county (62, 183 × (3.6% − (−2.7%))).


                                                           16
of these results to using different data sources for economic outcomes. Table E.10 shows that using
data from tax returns aggregated at the county level results in similar estimates.31 We also report
employment effects and the implied cost per job created using employment measures based on data
from unemployment insurance systems as reported in the QCEW series of the BLS in Table E.11,
which result in similar estimates of employment effects and the cost per job created.32 Fifth, we
explore the robustness of our estimates with respect to outliers at the state-by-year level. We first
conduct a jackknife analysis where we re-estimate Table 2 by iteratively removing counties in each
state-year group and analyze which state-year groups have large effects on our estimates. We exclude
counties in state-year groups that lead to an average percentage change of more than 10% in the
estimation (14 state-year groups in total). Table E.12 reports estimates on this subsample and finds
very similar implied multipliers. Finally, we also explore the robustness of these results to various
definitions of spending. Table E.13 shows that alternative definitions of the spending variable result
in similar, though slightly less precise, estimates. Similarly, Table E.14 shows that most of the “first-
stage” effect is driven by increases in grants, while salaries and wages and procurement contracts
contribute a relatively small fraction of the effect.

4.2     Dynamic Effects of a Census Shock
We now explore the dynamic effects of a Census Shock and test whether they are consistent with
statutory information on the publication of new Census population counts and their adoption by
federal agencies. Specifically, since it takes around two years for the Census Bureau to compile
and publish the Census counts at the local level, we should not see any correlation between federal
spending growth and the Census Shock in years 0 and 1 following a Census. Moreover, there is a
delay in the adoption of new population levels since federal agencies have some discretion in the way
new population figures are used to allocate federal funds (GAO 1990). This suggests that the change
in population due to the Census Shock should affect spending for several years after the new Census
counts are released.
    Figure 6 presents the results of two event studies where we plot the cumulative effects of a Census
Shock on spending growth and shows that the dynamics effects of the Census Shock align with
the expected timing from statutory formulas. Specifically, this figure reports estimates of βFs for
s = −6, · · · , 6 along with 90% confidence intervals. Panel (a) of Figure 6 plots estimates of an IPW
model that does not control for lagged economic outcomes, similar to the estimates of column (1) of
Table 2.33 This plot confirms the prediction that a Census Shock should not affect spending growth
prior to the release of the shock. In particular, we see that the estimates prior to year 3 show no trend
and are all statistically insignificant. In contrast, we see a marked increase starting in year 3. Panel
(b) plots estimates from an IPWRA model that also controls for spending growth between years -2
and 2 and shows a similar pattern of results. The point estimates used to construct Panel (a) are
presented in Table 3, column (1) and those for Panel (b) are reported in Table 4, column (1). Figure
6 provides strong evidence in favor of the specific timing of our natural experiment, which supports

   31
       These data are only available starting 1989. When using the IRS data, our measure of employment is the number
of tax filers. We use our main BEA data for the first decade of our sample and combine the IRS data by analyzing
fitted values of a regression of IRS data on income and employment changes on BEA data.
    32
       This table also reports estimates of the earnings multiplier, which center around 1(.9). Note that our main measure
of income also includes capital income.
    33
       Note that data on federal spending are only available starting in 1977. The estimate for years -6 to -4 are estimated
from the 1990 and 2000 Censuses, which explains the anomalous pattern in the confidence intervals during these years.


                                                            17
the notion that the effects of a Census Shock on employment and income are a consequence of the
increase in federal spending.
    Figures 7 and 8 present the results of a similar set of analyses for our two measures of economic
growth. In both cases, we see that, prior to the release of the Census Shock, employment and
income growth have flat trends that are statistically insignificant. We also see that both income and
employment start growing following the release of the Census Shock, which matches the pattern of
the dynamic effects on federal spending reported in Figure 6. These results hold for both sets of
panels, suggesting that controlling for lagged outcomes does not significantly alter the effects of a
Census Shock on economic growth. Columns (2) and (3) in Tables 3 and 4 report the estimates used
to produce these figures. We note that, while the figures plot 90% confidence intervals, the cumulative
effects on income and employment growth are statistically significant at the 5%-level by year 5.
    These event studies imply local fiscal multipliers that are similar to those reported in Section
4.1. Since we only observe an increase in spending after year 3, we divide the cumulative increase in
employment and income by the average increase in federal spending in years 2-5.34 Figure 9 presents
estimates of the income multiplier and Figure 10 presents estimates of the number of jobs created
per $1 million. We first note that the implied income multiplier and job effect are very close to zero
and are statistically insignificant prior to year 2. Starting in year 3, the income multiplier varies for
different years and centers around our previous estimate of 2. Similarly, the employment effect hovers
around 25-35 jobs per $1 million, which implies a cost per job that is close to our central estimate of
$30,000.
    We also explore the robustness of these event-studies. We note that the same pattern of results
holds for a wider window of years. Figures E.1-E.5 and Tables E.15-E.16 report results of similar
analyses where we estimate effects for years s = −9, · · · , 9. These results suggest that our semi-
parametric treatment-effect approach yields a balanced Census Shock with respect to lagged spending
growth as well as economic outcomes. We also find that there are long-term effects of changes in federal
spending, which we analyze in Suárez Serrato and Wingender (2014b). Additionally, Figures E.6-E.10
and Tables E.17-E.18 show that we obtain similar results when we estimate average treatment effects.

4.3      IV Estimates
This section presents a complementary analysis where we use the continuous version of the Census
Shock as an instrument for changes in federal spending. This approach is relatively simpler than
the treatment-effects framework and results in very similar estimates of local fiscal multipliers. The
congruence between these results is reassuring and suggests that the Census Shock may be used in
other estimation approaches to analyze spillover and heterogeneous effects of federal spending.
   As in Section 4.1, we restrict our analysis to reference years 2 through 5. We estimate linear
models of the form:
                                                            0
                             ∆Yc,t = αs + γt + β∆Fc,t + Xc,t  Γ + εc,t ,
where ∆Yc,t is the average annual growth in income and employment over years 2 to 5 as a function
of ∆Fc,t , the average growth in federal spending over the same period.

                                                         s
  34                                                   β̂Y
       That is, for a given year s, we compute:           5−2      , where the average effect on spending growth is estimated
                                                  |s−2|×β̂F   /3
jointly with the dynamic effects on employment and income. Note that since the event-studies on spending, income,
and employment growth are not jointly estimated, we do not compare the coefficients across the columns of Tables 3
and 4.


                                                              18
    As discussed in Section 3.5, the Census Shock is not perfectly randomized. For this reason, Xc,t
includes lagged values of income and employment growth, the observed local demand and supply
shocks, and the propensity score estimated in Section 3.5. There is a long tradition of controlling
for the propensity score (see, e.g., Angrist (1997) and Wooldridge (2010, §21.3.3)) and, as we show
below, we obtain very similar estimates when we control for the propensity score or its determinants.
We also include state and year fixed effects and explore the robustness of our results to allowing for
state-by-year fixed effects. Finally, we allow for arbitrary correlation of the error term εc,t at the state
level across counties and decades. When Y is personal income, we interpret the coefficient on federal
spending β as the local income multiplier. In the case of employment, β is normalized to represent
the number of jobs per $1 million. We also report the implied cost per job created.
    The exclusion restriction for our IV analysis is:

Assumption 4 IV Exclusion Restriction: E[εc,t |CSc,t , Xc,t , P̂c,t , I{State}c,t , I{Year}c,t ] = 0 ∀ c
and for t = 1982, 1992, 2002.

This assumption is not unlike Assumption 1. Assumption 4 also allows for a correlation between
the Census Shock and lagged economic growth but places the restriction that conditional on these
measures, the shock should not be related to unobservable factors that may also affect the outcome.
However, in contrast to the treatment-effects approach, this strategy has the drawback that it places
a linearity restriction on the relation between lagged economic growth and future economic growth.
    We now turn to our instrumental variables results. Table 5 shows the first stage results. Column
(1) only includes the Census Shock and the fixed effects. The coefficient implies that a 1% Census
Shock increases federal spending by $511. A concern in instrumental variables estimation is that
weak instruments can lead to large biases in the estimand whenever the errors are correlated with
the instrument (e.g. Bound et al. (1995)). To address this issue, we provide the F-statistic of the
test that the instrument has a zero coefficient in the first stage equation. The F-statistics are above
conventional levels, suggesting that our instrument is not subject to a weak instrument problem.35
Adding past income growth and the share shift variables has a relatively small impact on both the
estimated coefficient and its standard error. We also obtain similar estimates when we control for the
propensity score in column (4) or when we include state-by-year fixed effects in the estimation.
    Table 6 presents estimates of the local income multiplier. As would be expected from the results
in Section 4.1, controlling for lagged outcomes or for the propensity score results in slightly smaller
estimates than those without controls. Our preferred estimates in columns (3)-(5) present estimates
between 1.9 and 2.2. We present the IV estimates for employment in Table 7. We again focus on
the estimates in columns (3)-(5), where we find an employment response of 27-33 new jobs per $1
million, corresponding to a cost per job in the range of $30,000-$36,000. Both of these results are
robust to including state-by-year fixed effects.36 We explore the robustness of these results in Tables
E.22 and E.23, where we control for longer lags and include interactions between the propensity score
and variables in Xc,t , as suggested in (Wooldridge, 2010, Eqn. 21.52), and find very similar estimates.
    It is reassuring to note that the IV estimates are similar to the implied multipliers from Section
4.1. In contrast, these estimates are more than ten times larger than the corresponding OLS estimates


  35
      Notice that while our instrument has been generated in an estimation step prior to the main estimations, it is not
necessary to adjust the standard errors of our instrumental variable estimates (see e.g. Wooldridge (2010)).
   36
      We also report reduced-form effects of the Census Shock on income and employment growth in Tables E.20 and
E.21. These tables show that the reduced-form effects are also quite stable across the different specifications.


                                                          19
and are statistically different from them in all cases.37 The direction of the bias in the OLS estimates
suggests that federal spending is directed to counties experiencing low growth.


5        Spillovers
This section explores the degree to which fiscal shocks have externalities across local areas. Depending
on the sign of these spillovers, one could under- or over-estimate the total effect of government spending
at a local or regional level. For example, if federal spending goes to building a road in a county and
some of the workers are hired from other areas or materials are purchased elsewhere, the increased
demand for inputs and labor could have positive effects outside the targeted county. The county-level
results would then be underestimating the total impact of federal spending in a given local area. If,
however, the increase in federal spending leads to in-migration from neighboring areas and higher
wages due to a decrease in labor supply, this could potentially reduce the number of firms in other
counties. Such a negative spillover effect might lead to an overestimate of the total impact of federal
spending at a regional level.38
    In order to characterize spillover effects, we analyze pairs of neighboring counties and ask whether
a Census Shock leads to similar effects whenever the neighboring county also has a Census Shock.
We first conduct this analysis within a treatment-effects framework, by generalizing the approach
from Section 3.4 to a multivalued setting where the treatment values correspond to combinations of
a county’s own treatment status and a given neighbor’s treatment status. In a second set of analyses,
we generalize the linear IV model from Section 4.3 by including the covariates of a given neighbor.
This is equivalent to a spatial average that gives equal weight to neighboring counties and zero weight
to other counties.39
    In both cases, we duplicate our sample to include each pairwise combination between a county
and its neighbors and we use two different definitions of neighbors. For every individual county, we
define neighbors as: (1) the 10 closest counties based on highway miles between county centroids and
(2) all the other counties within the same MSA (and grouping all counties not included in an MSA
in the same rest-of-state area).40
    We now generalize our treatment-effects framework to the multivalued case. We follow Cattaneo
et al. (2013) in the implementation of the estimator in Cattaneo (2010). First, define the multivalued



    37
       Tables 6-7 show that the p-values of Hausman tests of equality between the OLS and IV estimates are always
below 0.05. Tables E.24-E.25 report the results from the OLS regressions for income and employment growth. The
OLS estimates are statistically significant but of small economic magnitude. For instance, they imply that an additional
dollar increases income by 15 cents for every additional federal dollar spent in the county. In the case of employment,
the OLS estimates imply that an additional job would cost around $400,000 dollars, an implausibly large magnitude.
    38
       Note that our cross-sectional estimation methodology will not allow us to recover the national-level multiplier since
the inclusion of year effects will absorb any national variation in growth that is common to all areas.
    39
       We discuss the connection between the repeated-pairs approach and this spatial average in Appendix D. We present
Monte Carlo evidence showing that these approaches result in similar estimates but that the repeated-pairs approach
is less likely to be subject to weak instrument concerns. We also present results using a spatial-average approach that
weights other counties’ shocks by the inverse distance between the counties and that results in similar estimates.
    40
       For closest geographic neighbors, this approach generates a sample size ten times larger than the original sample.
For MSA neighbors, each observation is duplicated (nm − 1) times where nm is the number of counties in MSA m.
We make a degrees-of-freedom correction to the variance matrix and we weight the IV regressions by the inverse of the
number of times the observation was duplicated. This allows us to recover the same baseline estimate and standard
errors as in the original sample.


                                                            20
treatment indicator:
                                       
                                       
                                        0        No Census Shocks
                                         1        Only Neighbor has Census Shock
                                       
                              Dc,t   =                                           .
                                        2
                                                 Only Own Census Shock
                                         3        Both Census Shocks
                                       

As in Section 3.4, for a treatment group d ∈ 0, 1, 2, 3, the potential outcome for a given outcome is
  s (d) for year t + s, and the potential growth is ∆s Y (d). Define as P the generalized propensity
Yc,t                                                        c,t              j
score of Imbens (2000) for a given treatment level j. Intuitively, given an estimate P̂j , we may estimate
the mean potential outcome for treatment level status j, µsY,j , by IPW:41
                                               "                      #
                                                 I{D     =  j}∆ sY
                                       s             c,t          c,t
                                     µ̂Y,j = E
                                             b                          .
                                                          P̂j

We may then estimate the effect of treatment level j relative to 0, µ̂sY,i − µ̂sY,0 , and compare these
effects across treatment levels. In particular, we estimate the causal effect of treatment levels 2 and
3, relative to the baseline level 0 of no Census Shocks, and ask whether these two effects are different.
In the case of positive spillovers, we would expect to see a larger treatment effect of level 3 but in the
case of negative spillovers, we would expect to see a larger effect for level 2.
    We first estimate the generalized propensity scores using a multinomial logit model and report
the estimates and marginal effects in Tables E.26 and E.27 for the case of the nearest 10 neighbors,
and in Tables E.28 and E.29 for counties in the same MSA. Figures E.14 and E.15 plot the estimated
propensity scores and provide evidence in favor of the overlap assumption.
    Table 8 reports estimates of treatment effects of level j relative to level 0.42 Comparing the effects
on income and employment growth, we see that, while the closest 10 specification finds larger effects
in treatment level 3, the MSA specification finds larger effects in treatment level 2. Table 9 reports
implied multipliers and cost per job created. We find slightly larger income multipliers and jobs per
$1 million in treatment level 3 for the case of the closest 10 counties and almost identical effects for
the case of the MSA specification. While this evidence is suggestive of negative spillovers in the case
of the closest 10 counties, we note that the difference between these two estimates is economically
small, and not statistically significant.
    Consider now the IV approach where we estimate the following spillover equation via 2SLS:

                         ∆Yc̃,t = αs + γt + β∆Fc̃,t + β n ∆Fc̃,t
                                                             n
                                                                 + ΓXc̃,t + Γn Xc̃,t
                                                                                n
                                                                                     + εc̃,t ,

where annual federal spending change per capita in own and neighboring counties ∆Fc̃,t and ∆Fc̃,t      n
                                                                                           n
are instrumented with own and neighboring counties’ Census Shocks CSc̃,Census and CSc̃,Census     .
     Table 10 reports the first-stage coefficients for the Census Shock variable from the spillover esti-
mating equation. The first two columns show the estimated coefficients for the instruments in both
first-stage equations when defining neighbors as the 10 closest counties by highway miles. The Census
Shock in own-county remains a strong predictor of own federal spending growth, unlike the Census
Shock of neighboring counties. The magnitudes and significance levels are inverted in the second
equation using federal spending changes in neighboring counties as the dependent variable. In the
   41
      For brevity, we only define the estimator below and refer the reader to Cattaneo et al. (2013) for the generalizations
of Assumptions 1 and 2. In practice, we use an efficient influence function (EIF) estimator that also possesses the
“doubly-robust” property (Cattaneo et al., 2013).
   42
      We report the estimated means of potential outcomes in Table E.30.


                                                            21
last two columns, we define as neighbors all other counties in the same MSA. Since many MSAs and
rest-of-state areas have a large number of counties, the duplicated sample is much larger. The coef-
ficients for own Census Shock on own spending and neighbors’ Census Shock on neighbors’ federal
spending are of very similar magnitude. Once again, the Census Shocks do not explain spending
changes across neighboring counties.
     We present the IV estimates for income growth in Table 11. The estimated local multipliers for
own federal spending across the two specifications are very close to those estimated in our baseline
IV with the full set of covariates. We also find in both columns that federal spending in neighboring
counties has a small and statistically insignificant effect. Combining both effects, we find a sum of
multipliers around 1.8, which is within the range of our previous estimates. Table 12 presents the
estimates for employment. We once again find a similar although slightly smaller own employment
multiplier to the one estimated in our baseline IV regressions. The impact of federal spending changes
in neighboring counties on employment is also negative and statistically insignificant. The cost per
job created (calculated as the inverse of the sum of the two local employment multipliers) is now
slightly larger.
     We explore the robustness of these regressions to using a spatial-average approach that weights
spending in other counties by the inverse of the distance between the counties. We report these
results in Tables D.2 and D.3, which also present small and statistically insignificant spillovers. While
we consistently find evidence of negative spillover effects, these effects are small and statistically
insignificant. These results inform the mechanism behind the local effects of government spending, as
we do not find evidence that local fiscal multipliers are a consequence of shifting of economic activity
across neighboring counties.


6        Heterogeneity
Our main estimates from Section 4 show that government spending has large impacts on the con-
ditional means of income and employment growth across counties. This section characterizes the
heterogeneity of outcomes using a quantile regression framework that describes how the impact of
government spending differs throughout the distribution of county growth rates. We employ the con-
tinuous version of the Census Shock to estimate heterogeneous impacts of government spending using
the instrumental variable quantile regression (IVQR) approach of Chernozhukov and Hansen (2008).
This approach can reveal whether government spending is more impactful in faster- or slower-growing
counties. Additionally, it may answer the question of whether such spending may reduce inequality
in economic outcomes across counties.43
    The IVQR we implement acknowledges the endogeneity of government spending and leverages the
Census Shock to provide consistent estimates of the β q ’s that are not subject to endogeneity bias.
For a given quantile q of the outcome distribution of ∆Yc,t , consider the quantile function

                               Qq (∆Yc,t ) = αtq + β q ∆Fc,t + γ q CSc,t + Γq Xc,t ,

with αtq decade fixed effects, ∆Fc,t the per capita change in federal spending and county covariates
Xc,t . As in Section 4.3, we focus on growth between years 2 and 5. We do not include state fixed effects
as we are interested in comparing counties relative to the national distribution. Including state fixed
    43
     We also consider an alternative quantile treatment-effects approach with the discretized Census Shock. These
results show that a Census Shock has the largest effects on employment and income growth in lower growth counties.
However, in contrast to the IVQR approach, it is not possible to compute income and job multipliers by quantile.


                                                        22
effects would change the interpretation of the results by limiting the comparison to counties within
the same state.
    If ∆Fc,t varied exogenously, we could estimate β q with a standard quantile regression by setting
γ q = 0. The IVQR framework uses the insight that, at the true value of the structural parameter β q ,
the Census Shock will not influence the conditional quantile, so that γ q = 0. To compute estimates
of β q , the IVQR framework finds values of β q such that γ q is as close to zero as possible. Distance
from zero, in this context, is measured using the F-statistic for the test that γ q = 0.44
    Figure 11 presents the results of these estimations for income and employment growth and for
seven values of q. These graphs show that counties with lower income and employment growth are
more impacted by changes in government spending. This differential effect can be interpreted either
as a “redistributional effect,” i.e. poor areas benefit more from federal spending, or as a “stabilizing
effect.” The latter highlights the view of fiscal federalism as providing insurance against local shocks.
Because federal spending has such a large impact in low-growth counties, it could be an effective
way to help areas experiencing temporary negative shocks. Since we do not include dynamics in
our analysis, we cannot differentiate between counties which are experiencing temporary shocks and
those which are permanently better off. Regardless of these interpretations, the downward-sloping
profiles in Figure 11 show that increasing government spending not only raises income but also
decreases inequality of economic growth across counties. Figure E.16 shows that this result is robust
to including state fixed effects and to controlling for the propensity score of the binary Census Shock.
By way of comparison, Figure E.17 presents quantile regression estimates that do not account for
the endogeneity of government spending and finds much smaller effects. These estimates also have
a reversed pattern with larger effects on the higher quantiles. However, the difference in patterns is
swamped by the level of the effects.45


7         Conclusion
Now several years into a slow recovery from the Great Recession, whether government spending
stimulated the economy is one of the most important policy questions we face. The federal government
spent vast amounts of money with the intention of stimulating the economy, but many economists

    44
         For a given quantile q, the algorithm used in the estimation is as follows

    1. Use a grid search method to find the value of β̃ q that minimizes the F-statistic for testing γ q = 0. The F-statistic
       is computed by first fixing a value of β̃ q , estimating the quantile regression

                                            Qq (∆Yc,t ) = αtq + β̃ q ∆Fc,t + γ q CSc,t + Γq Xc,t ,

          and testing γ q = 0.
    2. Confidence intervals and standard errors are computed using a paired-bootstrap of step 1 to account for intra-
       cluster correlation at the state level. We also implemented the dual inference approach of Chernozhukov and
       Hansen (2008), which yielded similar conclusions.

  Note that the inference procedure for the IVQR is robust to weak instruments. An important caveat, however, is that
the results we estimate are consistent estimates of the structural parameters only if the model is correctly specified.
Alternative methods that are robust to model misspecification have been proposed by Chen and Pouzo (2009).
   45
      As an alternative approach, we also estimate quantile treatment effects of the binary Census Shock following
Cattaneo et al. (2013). Table E.31 estimates quantiles of the potential outcomes distribution for counties with and
without a Census Shock and Table E.32 presents quantile treatment effects, where we make the assumption of rank-
preservation. These estimates show that a Census Shock has the largest effect on income and employment growth in
low quantiles. This result is consistent with the conclusion of the IVQR analysis, however, this approach is unable to
deliver estimates of local multipliers.


                                                                 23
and policy analysts claim fiscal policy has a limited impact in the short term and cripples long term
growth prospects. In this paper, we propose a new methodology to estimate local fiscal multipliers.
We rely on cross-sectional instead of time-series variation and propose a new shock to identify the
causal impact of federal spending. This new approach is a powerful yet transparent way to measure
several important parameters including the income multiplier, the cost per job created, and the
inequality-reducing effect of government spending.
    We find a large effect of government spending on local economic outcomes. The timing of the
impact on both economic growth and federal spending is consistent with the release of the new Census
counts. We do not find large spillover effects and we find that government spending provides higher
returns in depressed areas, which has contributed to reducing inequality in income and employment
growth across counties.
    Future work could focus on the interaction of federal spending with local business cycles, since
recent papers have shown that the income multiplier might be larger during recessions (Auerbach and
Gorodnichenko, 2012; Christiano et al., 2011; Woodford, 2010). The Census Shock is also relevant
for the field of urban and regional economics. The variation in government spending we propose
constitutes a shock to local labor and housing markets that can be used to test general spatial
equilibrium models where agents move across locations to benefit from higher wages or cheaper
amenities (Roback, 1982; Kline, 2010). The empirical strategy we proposed can be used to further
our understanding of agglomeration effects as well as migration, wages, and housing price responses
to government spending shocks. Such models can also be used to estimate the deadweight loss of
federal spending as a place-based policy due to the potential distortions in the locational decisions
of individuals (Glaeser and Gottlieb, 2009; Glaeser, 2008; Moretti, 2011). We address some of these
questions in a follow-up paper on the incidence of federal government spending (Suárez Serrato and
Wingender, 2014b).




                                                 24
References
Acemoglu, D., S. Naidu, P. Restrepo, and J. A. Robinson (2014): “Democracy Does Cause
 Growth,” Working Paper 20004, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Andrews, D. W. K. and M. Buchinsky (2000): “A Three-Step Method for Choosing the Number
 of Bootstrap Repetitions,” Econometrica, 68, 23–51.
Angrist, J. D. (1997): “Conditional independence in sample selection models,” Economics Letters,
 54, 103 – 112.

Angrist, J. D., Ò. Jordà, and G. Kuersteiner (2013): “Semiparametric estimates of monetary
 policy effects: string theory revisited,” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Angrist, J. D. and G. M. Kuersteiner (2010): “Causal Effects of Monetary Shocks: Semipara-
 metric Conditional Independence Tests with a Multinomial Propensity Score,” Review of Economics
 and Statistics, 93, 725–747.
Auerbach, A. J. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2012): “Measuring the Output Responses to Fiscal
 Policy,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4, 1–27.
Barro, R. J. and C. J. Redlick (2011): “Macroeconomic Effects From Government Purchases
 and Taxes,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126, 51–102.
Bartik, T. J. (1991): “Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?” Books
 from Upjohn Press, W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Belin, T. R. and J. E. Rolph (1994): “Can We Reach Consensus on Census Adjustment?”
 Statistical Science, 9, 486–508.
Blanchard, O. J. and R. Perotti (2002): “An Empirical Characterization of the Dynamic Effects
 of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 117, 1329–1368.
Blumerman, L. M. and P. Vidal (2009): “Uses of Population and Income Statistics in Federal
 Funds Distribution - With a Focus on Census Bureau Data,” Government Division Report Series,
 Research Report #2009-1, U.S. Census Bureau, Washington, D.C.
Boscoe, F. P. and B. A. Miller (2004): “Population Estimation Error and Its Impact on 1991-
 1999 Cancer Rates,” The Professional Geographer, 56, 516–529.
Bound, J., D. A. Jaeger, and R. M. Baker (1995): “Problems with Instrumental Variables
 Estimation When the Correlation Between the Instruments and the Endogeneous Explanatory
 Variable is Weak,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 90, 443–450.
Brown, L. D., M. L. Eaton, D. A. Freedman, S. P. Klein, R. A. Olshen, K. W. Wachter,
 M. T. Wells, and D. Ylvisaker (1999): “Statistical Controversies in Census 2000,” Jurimetrics,
 39, 347–375.
Brunell, T. L. (2002): “Why There is Still a Controversy About Adjusting the Census,” PS:
 Political Science & Politics, 35, 85.
Bureau of Economic Analysis (2010): “State Personal Income and Employment: Methodology,”
 Tech. rep., Washington, D.C.
Card, D. (2001): “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts of
 Higher Immigration,” Journal of Labor Economics, 19, 22–64.
Cattaneo, M. D. (2010): “Efficient semiparametric estimation of multi-valued treatment effects
 under ignorability,” Journal of Econometrics, 155, 138–154.
Cattaneo, M. D., D. M. Drukker, and A. D. Holland (2013): “Estimation of multivalued
 treatment effects under conditional independence,” Stata Journal, 13, 407–450.



                                              25
Chen, X. and D. Pouzo (2009): “Efficient estimation of semiparametric conditional moment models
 with possibly nonsmooth residuals,” Journal of Econometrics, 152, 46–60.
Chernozhukov, V. and C. Hansen (2008): “Instrumental variable quantile regression: A robust
 inference approach,” Journal of Econometrics, 142, 379–398.
Chodorow-Reich, G., L. Feiveson, Z. Liscow, and W. G. Woolston (2012): “Does State
 Fiscal Relief during Recessions Increase Employment? Evidence from the American Recovery and
 Reinvestment Act,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4, 118–145.
Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2011): “When Is the Government Spending
 Multiplier Large?” Journal of Political Economy, 119, 78 – 121.
Clemens, J. and S. Miran (2012): “Fiscal Policy Multipliers on Subnational Government Spend-
 ing,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4, 46–68.
Congressional Research Service (2008): “Medicaid: The Federal Medical Assistance Percentage
 (FMAP),” CRS Report for Congress #RL32950, Washington, D.C.
Davis, S. (1994): “Evaluation of Postcensal County Estimates for the 1980s,”   U.S. Bureau of the
 Census, Population Division Working Paper No. 5.
Davis, S. J., P. Loungani, and R. Mahidhara (1997): “Regional Labor Fluctuations: Oil Shocks,
 Military Spending, and Other Driving Forces,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
 International Finance Disc. Papers #578, Rochester, NY.
Ericksen, E. P. and J. B. Kadane (1985): “Estimating the Population in a Census Year: 1980
 and Beyond,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 80, 98–109.
Fatás, A. and I. Mihov (2001): “The Effects of Fiscal Policy on Consumption and Employment:
  Theory and Evidence,” CEPR Discussion Paper 2760, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.
Fay, R., J. Passel, and J. Robinson (1988): “The Coverage of the Population in the 1980 Census,”
  1980 Census of Population and Housing Evaluation and Research Reports PHC80-E4, U.S. Bureau
  of the Census.
Fishback, P. V. and V. Kachanovskaya (2010): “In Search of the Multiplier for Federal Spending
  in the States During the Great Depression,” Working Paper 16561, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Freedman, D. A. (1993): “Adjusting the Census of 1990,” Jurimetrics Journal, 34, 99–106.
Glaeser, E. L. (2008): Cities, Agglomeration, and Spatial Equilibrium, Oxford: Oxford University
 Press, 1 edition ed.
Glaeser, E. L. and J. D. Gottlieb (2009): “The Wealth of Cities: Agglomeration Economies and
 Spatial Equilibrium in the United States,” Working Paper 14806, National Bureau of Economic
 Research.
Glaeser, E. L., B. I. Sacerdote, and J. A. Scheinkman (2003): “The Social Multiplier,”
 Journal of the European Economic Association, 1, 345–353.
Gordon, N. (2004): “Do federal grants boost school spending? Evidence from Title I,” Journal of
 Public Economics, 88, 1771–1792.
Government Accountability Office (1987): “A Catalog of Federal Aid to States and Localities,”
 GAO/HRD-87-28, Washington, D.C.
——— (1990): “Federal Formula Programs: Outdated Population Data Used to Allocate Most
 Funds,” GAO/HRD-90-145, Washington, D.C.
——— (1999): “Effects of Adjusted Population Counts on Federal Funding to States,” GAO/HEHS-
 99-69, Washington, D.C.


                                               26
——— (2006): “Illustrative Simulations of Using Statistical Population Estimates for Reallocating
 Certain Federal Funding,” GAO-06-567, Washington, D.C.
——— (2009): “FORMULA GRANTS Census Data Are among Several Factors That Can Affect
 Funding Allocations,” Tech. Rep. GAO-09-832T, Washington, D.C.
Hirano, K. and G. W. Imbens (2004): The Propensity Score with Continuous Treatments, John
  Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 73–84.
Hirano, K., G. W. Imbens, and G. Ridder (2003): “Efficient Estimation of Average Treatment
  Effects Using the Estimated Propensity Score,” Econometrica, 71, 1161–1189.
Imbens, G. W. (2000): “The role of the propensity score in estimating dose-response functions,”
  Biometrika, 87, 706–710.
Judson, D. H., C. L. Popoff, and M. J. Batutis (2001): “An evaluation of the accuracy of U.S.
  census bureau county population estimation,” Statistics in transition, 5.
Kline, P. (2010): “Place Based Policies, Heterogeneity, and Agglomeration,” American Economic
 Review, 100, 383–387.
Knight, B. (2002): “Endogenous federal grants and crowd-out of state government spending: Theory
 and evidence from the federal highway aid program,” American Economic Review, 71–92.
Larcinese, V., L. Rizzo, and C. Testa (2013): “Changing needs, sticky budget: Evidence from
  the Geographic Distribution of U.S. Federal Grants,” National Tax Journal, 66, 311–342.
Lavin, M. R. (1996): Understanding the census: a guide for marketers, planners, grant writers and
  other data users, Kenmore, New York, Epoch Books.
Long, J. F. (1993): “Postcensal Population Estimates: States, Counties, and Places,” Population
 Division Working Paper No. 3, U.S. Bureau of the Census.
Louis, T. A., T. B. Jabine, and M. A. Gerstein, eds. (2003): Statistical Issues in Allocating
 Funds by Formula, National Research Counci.
Mohammed Shahidullah, M. F. (2005): “Criteria for Selecting a Suitable Method for Produc-
 ing Post-2000 County Population Estimates: A Case Study of Population Estimates in Illinois,”
 Population Research and Policy Review, 24, 215–229.
Moretti, E. (2011): “Chapter 14 - Local Labor Markets,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, ed. by
 O. Ashenfelter and D. Card, Elsevier, vol. 4, Part B, 1237–1313.
Murdock, S. H. and M. N. Hoque (1995): “The effect of undercount on the accuracy of small-
 area population estimates: Implications for the use of administrative data for improving population
 enumeration,” Population Research and Policy Review, 14, 251–271.
Murray, M. P. (1992): “Census adjustment and the distribution of federal spending,” Demography,
 29, 319–332.
Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2014): “Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence from
 US Regions,” American Economic Review, 104, 753–792.
National Research Council (1995): Modernizing the U.S. Census, Washington, D.C.: National
 Academies Press.
Pande, R. (2003): “Can Mandated Political Representation Increase Policy Influence for Disadvan-
  taged Minorities? Theory and Evidence from India,” American Economic Review, 93, 1132–1151.
Poi, B. P. (2004): “From the help desk: Some bootstrapping techniques,” Stata Journal, 4, 312–
 328(17).
Ramey, V. and M. Shapiro (1997): “Costly Capital Reallocation and the Effects of Government
 Spending,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy.


                                                27
Ramey, V. A. (2011): “Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It’s all in the Timing,” The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1–50.
Roback, J. (1982): “Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life,” Journal of Political Economy, 90,
 1257–1278.
Robinson, J. (2001): “Accuracy and Coverage Evaluation: Demographic Analysis Results,” DSSD
 Census 2000 Procedures and Operations Memorandum Series B-4, U.S. Census Bureau.
Robinson, J. and K. K. West (2005): “Understanding Factors that Contributed to the Large
 Error of Closure in Census 2000,” Paper presented at the 2005 annual meeting of the population
 association of america, Philadelphia, PA.
Robinson, J. G., B. Ahmed, P. D. Gupta, and K. A. Woodrow (1993): “Estimation of
 Population Coverage in the 1990 United States Census Based on Demographic Analysis,” Journal
 of the American Statistical Association, 88, 1061–1071.
Robinson, J. G., K. K. West, and A. Adlakha (2002): “Coverage of the Population in Census
 2000: Results from Demographic Analysis,” Population Research and Policy Review, 21, 19–38.
Romer, C. and J. Bernstein (2009): “The Job Impact of the American Recovery and Reinvestment
 Plan,” , [Accessed October 25, 2010] http://www.ampo.org/assets/library/184_obama.pdf.
Rosenbaum, Paul, R. and B. Rubin, Donanld (1983): “The central role of the propensity score
 in observational studies for causal effects,” Biometrika, 70, 41–55.
Rosenthal, M. D. (2000): “Striving for perfection: a brief history of advances and undercounts in
 the U.S. Census,” Government Information Quarterly, 17, 193–208.
Rubin, D. B. (1974): “Estimating causal effects of treatments in randomized and nonrandomized
 studies.” Journal of educational Psychology, 66, 688.
Shoag, D. (2010): “The Impact of Government Spending Shocks: Evidence on the Multiplier from
  State Pension Plan Returns,” Working Paper.
Starsinic, D. (1983): “Evaluation of Population Estimate Procedures for States, 1980: An Interim
  Report,” Current Population Reports, P25-933, U.S. Census Bureau, Washington, D.C.
Steffey, D. L. and N. M. Bradburn (1994): Counting people in the information age, National
  Academy Press.
Suárez Serrato, J. and P. Wingender (2014a): “Estimating Local Fiscal Multipliers,” Working
  paper (version: March 30).
——— (2014b): “Estimating the Incidence of Government Spending,” Working paper.
Swanson, D. A. and J. N. McKibben (2010): “New Directions in the Development of Population
  Estimates in the United States?” Population Research and Policy Review, 29, 797–818.
U.S. Census Bureau (2001): “Census 2000 Summary File 1: Technical Documentation,” , Wash-
  ington, D.C.
——— (2010a): “1980 Census of Population and Housing: History,” Tech. rep., [Accessed October
 25, 2010] http://www2.census.gov/prod2/decennial/documents/1980/proceduralHistory/
 1980CPH_TOC.pdf.
——— (2010b): “1990 Census of Population and Housing: History,” Tech. rep., [Accessed
 October 25, 2010] http://www2.census.gov/prod2/decennial/documents/1990/history/
 Chapter1-14_TOC.pdf.
——— (2010c): “National Intercensal Estimates (1990-2000),” Tech. rep., [Accessed October 25,
 2010] http://www.census.gov/popest/archives/methodology/intercensal_nat_meth.html.
Werning, I. and E. Farhi (2012): “Fiscal Unions,” Working Paper 18280, National Bureau of
 Economic Research.

                                               28
West, K. K. and D. J. Fein (1990): “Census Undercount: An Historical and Contemporary
 Sociological Issue,” Sociological Inquiry, 60, 127–141.
Wilson, D. (2010): “Fiscal Spending Multipliers: Evidence from the 2009 American Recovery and
 Reinvestment Act,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2010-17.
Woodford, M. (2010): “Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multiplier,” Working
 Paper 15714, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Wooldridge, J. M. (2010): Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, Cambridge,
 Mass: The MIT Press, second edition edition ed.
Word, D. (1997): “Who Responds/Who Doesn’t? Analyzing Variation in Mail Response Rates
 During the 1990 Census,” Population Division Working Paper No. 19, U.S. Bureau of the Census.
Zaslavsky, A. M. and A. L. Schirm (2002): “Interactions Between Survey Estimates and Federal
  Funding Formulas,” Journal of Official Statistics, 18, 371–391.




                                             29
   Table 1: Semi-parametric Estimates of the Effect of a Census Shock on Past Growth
                                  (1)         (2)       (3)             (4)               (5)
Income Growth (-1,1)           54.671∗∗     17.832     19.698
                               (23.188)    (21.131)   (20.291)

Employment Growth (-1,1)       1.347∗∗∗      0.326      0.366
                                (0.336)     (0.230)    (0.227)

Income Growth (-3,0)          140.511∗∗∗    -11.116    -10.568        -20.622            -1.773
                               (24.477)    (32.405)   (32.136)       (31.212)           (26.118)

Employment Growth (-3,0)       2.332∗∗∗      -0.083     -0.086         -0.247            -0.047
                                (0.370)     (0.418)    (0.421)        (0.402)           (0.346)

Income Growth (-5,0)          127.341∗∗∗    0.084      0.219          -6.743             10.578
                               (21.293)    (29.687)   (29.251)       (26.900)           (23.101)

Employment Growth (-5,0)       2.238∗∗∗      0.276      0.281        0.158              0.371
                                (0.301)     (0.399)    (0.400)      (0.365)            (0.333)
Observations                     9,173       9,173      9,173        9,173              9,173
IPW                                            Y          Y            Y                  Y
RA                                                        Y            Y                  Y
RA Controls                                            Shocks    Shocks, Lagged     Shocks, Lagged
                                                                   Outcomes           Outcomes
State Fixed Effects                 Y           Y          Y           Y
Year Fixed Effects                  Y           Y          Y           Y
State-Year Fixed Effects                                                                    Y
Notes: This table presents semi-parametric estimates of the effect of a Census Shock on past
economic growth. See Section 3.5 for details and Appendix A for data sources. The propensity
score model corresponds to column (4) of Table E.5. The shocks used as RA controls include the
Migration and Industry Share Shifters. The lagged outcomes used as RA controls include, income,
employment, and spending growth between years (-1,1). Bootstrapped standard errors that allow
for arbitrary correlation at the state level are reported in parentheses. Bootstrap statistics based
on 2000 bootstrap samples. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                                 30
         Table 2: Semi-parametric Estimates of the Effect of a Census Shock:
                    Reduced-form Effects and Implied Multipliers
                                  (1)             (2)              (3)               (4)
Employment Growth              1.064∗∗∗        1.100∗∗∗         0.974∗∗∗           0.936∗∗
                                (0.395)         (0.412)          (0.371)           (0.406)

Income Growth                  61.610∗∗       63.298∗∗          55.681∗∗          51.252∗
                               (27.251)       (28.605)          (26.322)          (28.429)

Federal Spending Growth        31.319∗∗       31.374∗∗          29.984∗∗          30.148∗∗
                               (13.211)       (12.497)          (13.156)          (12.760)

Implied Multipliers
Income Multiplier                1.967∗         2.018∗           1.857∗               1.7
                                (1.124)         (1.16)           (1.119)           (1.104)
 90% CI (percentile)           [.42,5.96]     [.38,6.14]        [.35,5.7]         [.13,5.49]
 Bootstrap p-value                .025           .029              .024              .039

Cost per Job                    29442∗         28534∗            30785∗            32202∗
                               (15230)        (14563)           (16694)            (18284)
 90% CI (percentile)         [7601,73169]   [8873,74722]      [9004,77600]      [8513,91924]
 Bootstrap p-value               .015           .011              .012               .015

Observations                     9,173          9,173           9,173              9,173
IPW                                Y              Y               Y                  Y
RA                                                Y               Y                  Y
RA Controls                                    Shocks       Shocks, Lagged     Shocks, Lagged
                                                              Outcomes           Outcomes
State Fixed Effects              Y               Y                Y
Year Fixed Effects               Y               Y                Y
State-Year Fixed Effects                                                              Y
Notes: This table presents semi-parametric estimates of the effect of a Census Shock on
outcomes from year 2 to year 5. See Section 4.1 for details and Section A for data sources.
The propensity score model corresponds to column (4) of Table E.5. The shocks used
as RA controls include the Migration and Industry Share Shifters. The lagged outcomes
used as RA controls include, income, employment, and spending growth between years
(-1,1). Bootstrapped standard errors that allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level
are reported in parentheses. Standard errors for multipliers are calculated using delta
method. We also report a bootstrapped confidence interval using the percentile method
and the p-value of a one-sided test that the multiplier is negative. Bootstrap statistics
based on 2000 bootstrap samples. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                               31
                     Table 3: Event Study of Census Shock and Implied Multipliers
                               (1)                     (2)                 (3)                      (4)               (5)
                    Federal Spending Growth      Income Growth      Employment Growth       Income Multiplier    Jobs per $1M
Census Shockt+6               9.474                   6.925               0.500                   -0.046             2.686
                            (112.050)               (139.289)            (1.333)                 (0.624)            (5.883)

Census Shockt+5               9.203                   -9.118                -0.133                 -0.127               0.022
                            (116.956)               (119.703)              (1.145)                (0.622)              (5.513)

Census Shockt+4              24.965                   7.259                 -0.077                 -0.059               0.343
                            (146.093)               (106.550)              (0.990)                (0.650)              (5.803)

Census Shockt+3               -23.570                 44.191                0.284                  0.169                2.844
                             (16.300)                (85.274)              (0.744)                (0.660)              (6.076)

Census Shockt+2              -11.898                  25.727                0.111                  0.062                2.097
                             (9.485)                 (44.030)              (0.391)                (0.481)              (5.161)

Census Shockt+1               1.028                   13.145                -0.146                 -0.054               -0.091
                             (5.848)                 (12.531)              (0.209)                (0.331)              (4.638)

Census Shockt                 0.000                   0.000                 0.000                  -0.295               2.323
                             (0.000)                 (0.000)               (0.000)                (0.572)              (8.847)

Census Shockt−1               6.129                   11.581                -0.166                 -0.213               -0.954
                             (6.683)                 (13.920)              (0.250)                (1.052)              (13.657)

Census Shockt−2               -8.224                  18.151                -0.138                 0.000                0.000
                             (20.646)                (34.912)              (0.503)                  (.)                  (.)

Census Shockt−3               42.938                  70.533                0.974                 1.702∗               37.451∗∗
                             (41.028)                (49.821)              (0.788)                (1.000)              (17.417)

Census Shockt−4               71.907               159.985∗∗∗              1.783∗                 2.304∗∗              32.333∗
                             (47.799)               (56.791)               (1.036)                (1.155)              (17.393)

Census Shockt−5             113.739∗∗               199.890∗∗              2.357∗                 1.968∗               27.995∗
                             (48.155)                (85.154)              (1.261)                (1.121)              (16.741)

Census Shockt−6            115.030∗∗∗               234.418∗∗              2.535∗                  1.756                22.502
                            (44.137)                (113.934)              (1.500)                (1.099)              (14.804)
Observations                  9,173                   9,173                 9,173                  9,173                9,173
Notes: This table presents semi-parametric estimates of dynamic effect of a Census Shock. This table reports average
treatment effects on the treated. See Table E.17 for estimates of average treatment effects. See Section 4.2 for details and
Appendix A for data sources. Columns (1)-(3) report treatment effects on spending, income, and employment growth. The
models in columns (2) and (3) also estimate treatment effects on average spending growth between years 2 and 5, which
                                                                                                                   s
                                                                                                                 β̂Y
we use to compute the implied multipliers in columns (4) and (5). That is, columns (4) and (5) report               5−2      for a
                                                                                                            |s−2|×β̂F   /3
given year s. Bootstrapped standard errors that allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level are reported in parentheses.
Bootstrap statistics based on 2000 bootstrap samples. The base specification uses the propensity score model in column (4)
of Table E.5 and includes RA for variables in column (4) of Table 2. The propensity score models in columns (1)-(3) also
control for the corresponding ∆Yc,t−1 and the model in column (3) also controls for ∆Empc,t−6 . Table E.19 shows that not
including ∆Empc,t−6 in column (3) results in substantively similar estimates. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                                         32
                     Table 4: Event Study of Census Shock and Implied Multipliers
                                   Controlling for Lagged Outcomes
                                (1)                      (2)                (3)                       (4)                (5)
                    Federal Spending Growth       Income Growth      Employment Growth        Income Multiplier     Jobs per $1M
Census Shockt+6               39.064                   -38.238             0.017                    -0.153              0.071
                             (77.870)                 (59.482)            (0.740)                  (0.254)             (3.042)

Census Shockt+5               39.288                   -50.329                -0.568                 -0.231              -2.676
                             (72.111)                 (53.507)               (0.707)                (0.281)             (3.961)

Census Shockt+4               41.513                   -29.258                -0.411                 -0.156              -2.258
                             (63.327)                 (36.510)               (0.556)                (0.212)             (3.529)

Census Shockt+3               -13.047                  11.279                 0.028                  0.072               0.185
                              (8.665)                 (20.881)               (0.313)                (0.137)             (2.033)

Census Shockt+2                0.000                   0.000                  0.000                  0.000               0.000
                              (0.000)                 (0.000)                (0.000)                  (.)                 (.)

Census Shockt+1                0.000                   0.000                  0.000                  0.000               0.000
                              (0.000)                 (0.000)                (0.000)                  (.)                 (.)

Census Shockt                  0.000                   0.000                  0.000                  0.000               0.000
                              (0.000)                 (0.000)                (0.000)                  (.)                 (.)

Census Shockt−1                0.000                   0.000                  0.000                  0.000               0.000
                              (0.000)                 (0.000)                (0.000)                  (.)                 (.)

Census Shockt−2                0.000                   0.000                  0.000                  0.000               0.000
                              (0.000)                 (0.000)                (0.000)                  (.)                 (.)

Census Shockt−3              60.534∗∗                 51.712∗               1.187∗∗∗                1.659∗             39.143∗∗
                             (29.316)                 (26.901)               (0.455)                (0.971)            (18.106)

Census Shockt−4              100.183∗∗               143.231∗∗              2.063∗∗                 2.297∗             34.017∗
                              (41.213)                (57.122)              (0.859)                 (1.227)            (18.170)

Census Shockt−5             143.042∗∗∗               187.252∗∗              2.691∗∗                 2.002∗             29.573∗
                             (47.118)                 (84.666)              (1.165)                 (1.172)            (17.486)

Census Shockt−6             147.356∗∗∗               222.785∗∗              2.927∗∗                  1.787              24.126
                             (43.804)                (109.815)              (1.417)                 (1.131)            (15.627)
Observations                   9,173                   9,173                 9,173                   9,173              9,173
Notes: This table presents semi-parametric estimates of dynamic effect of a Census Shock. This table reports average
treatment effects on the treated. See Table E.18 for estimates of average treatment effects. See Section 4.2 for details and
Appendix A for data sources. This table expands the models in Table 3 with RA for the following lagged outcomes in
                     s
columns (1)-(3): ∆Yc,t for s = −2, · · · , 2. Bootstrapped standard errors that allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level
are reported in parentheses. Bootstrap statistics based on 2000 bootstrap samples. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                                           33
                   Table 5: First Stage Effect of Census Shock on Federal Spending
                                 (1)           (2)               (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
Census Shock                 511.426∗∗∗    547.821∗∗∗        460.406∗∗∗   486.245∗∗∗   514.855∗∗∗   589.600∗∗∗
                              (114.675)     (119.653)         (114.660)    (120.504)    (119.830)    (104.781)

Migration Shifter                            -0.318                         -0.263                  23.310∗∗∗
                                            (0.564)                        (0.556)                   (4.430)

Industry Shifter                             7.044                           2.065                  -138.640∗∗∗
                                            (11.041)                       (11.395)                   (28.010)

Employment Growth (-1,1)                                      1.536∗       2.157∗∗∗                 65.215∗∗∗
                                                              (0.783)       (0.653)                  (11.770)

Income Growth (-1,1)                                           0.009        0.001                    -0.211∗∗∗
                                                              (0.017)      (0.017)                    (0.048)
Observations                   9,177         9,103             9,177        9,103       9,103          9,103
First-Stage F Stat             19.890        20.962           16.123       16.282       18.460        31.663
P-score Control                                                                           Y              Y
State Fixed Effects               Y            Y                 Y            Y           Y
Year Fixed Effects                Y            Y                 Y            Y           Y
State-Year Fixed Effects                                                                                Y
Notes: This table reports results from OLS regressions of federal spending growth between years 2 and
5. See Section 4.3 for details and Appendix A for data sources. Standard errors that allow for arbitrary
correlation at the state level are reported in parentheses. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                                        34
                           Table 6: IV Estimates of Income Multiplier
                                  (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
Federal Spending Growth        2.663∗∗∗   2.570∗∗∗      2.092∗∗     1.981∗∗     1.893∗∗    2.165∗∗∗
                                (0.901)    (0.870)      (0.832)     (0.802)     (0.792)     (0.663)

Migration Shifter                          -2.303                    -2.096               -59.712∗∗∗
                                          (2.150)                   (1.988)                (18.735)

Industry Shifter                           -25.212                 -55.623∗∗∗             317.481∗∗∗
                                          (19.369)                  (14.898)               (110.514)

Employment Growth (-1,1)                                7.119∗∗∗   6.645∗∗∗               -152.856∗∗∗
                                                         (2.426)    (2.332)                 (50.133)

Income Growth (-1,1)                                     0.097      0.125∗∗                0.687∗∗∗
                                                        (0.064)     (0.059)                 (0.188)
Observations                    9,177     9,103          9,177       9,103      9,103        9,103
First-Stage F Stat              19.890    20.962        16.123      16.282      18.460      31.663
P-Value Hausman Test            0.003     0.003          0.015       0.017      0.025        0.002
P-score Control                                                                   Y            Y
State Fixed Effects               Y          Y             Y           Y          Y
Year Fixed Effects                Y          Y             Y           Y          Y
State-Year Fixed Effects                                                                      Y
Notes: This table reports results from IV regressions of income growth between years 2 and
5. See Section 4.3 for details and Appendix A for data sources. Standard errors that allow for
arbitrary correlation at the state level are reported in parentheses. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗
p < .01




                                                   35
                    Table 7: IV Estimates of Jobs per $1M and Cost per Job
                                 (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)
Federal Spending Growth       41.275∗∗∗    39.529∗∗∗    30.103∗∗      28.301∗∗    27.460∗∗    32.731∗∗∗
                               (14.304)     (13.517)    (13.207)      (12.475)    (12.044)     (9.510)

Migration Shifter                            -0.056                   -0.054∗                 -0.924∗∗∗
                                            (0.035)                   (0.031)                  (0.255)

Industry Shifter                             -0.314                   -0.724∗∗∗               4.811∗∗∗
                                            (0.279)                    (0.204)                 (1.514)

Employment Growth (-1,1)                                0.221∗∗∗      0.220∗∗∗                -2.172∗∗∗
                                                         (0.037)       (0.037)                 (0.680)

Income Growth (-1,1)                                         -0.000    -0.000                 0.008∗∗∗
                                                            (0.001)   (0.001)                  (0.002)

Cost per Job                  24227∗∗∗     25298∗∗∗     33219∗∗       35335∗∗     36417∗∗     30552∗∗∗
                               (8396)       (8651)      (14575)       (15575)     (15972)      (8877)

Observations                    9,177       9,103           9,177      9,103      9,103        9,103
First-Stage F Stat              19.890      20.962          16.123     16.282     18.460       31.663
P-Value Hausman Test            0.003       0.003           0.027      0.030      0.036        0.001
P-score Control                                                                     Y            Y
State Fixed Effects               Y            Y              Y          Y          Y
Year Fixed Effects                Y            Y              Y          Y          Y
State-Year Fixed Effects                                                                         Y
Notes: This table reports results from IV regressions of income growth between years 2 and 5. The
coefficient on Federal Spending is multiplied by 1000 to represent the number of jobs from an additional
$1M in spending. See Section 4.3 for details and Appendix A for data sources. Standard errors that allow
for arbitrary correlation at the state level are reported in parentheses. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                                       36
                        Table 8: Semi-parametric Estimates of Treatment Effects
                                   of a Census Shock with Spillovers
                                               (1)                                                  (2)
                                       Closest 10 Counties                                         MSA
Treatment Level           Federal Spending Employment            Income      Federal Spending     Employment        Income
1- Only Neighbor                7.800             0.256           12.346           -2.937             -0.283        -13.484
has Census Shock               (5.336)           (0.134)         (9.027)          (2.105)            (0.053)        (3.133)

2- Only Own Census            32.235∗∗          1.373∗∗∗        83.358∗∗∗         27.672∗           1.365∗∗∗       68.849∗∗∗
Shock                          (5.062)           (0.136)         (9.091)          (1.901)            (0.050)        (3.082)

3- Both Census Shocks         34.424∗∗          1.685∗∗∗        90.005∗∗∗          23.585           1.181∗∗∗       58.587∗∗
                               (4.935)           (0.128)         (8.571)           (1.907)           (0.050)        (3.066)
N                               91428                                              547986
Notes: This table reports treatment effects from a multivalued treatment effects approach to analyzing spillover effects. Each
row reports the estimate of a given treatment level relative to a 0-level treatment of No Census Shocks. All variables report
growth between years 2 and 5. Table E.30 reports the means of potential outcomes. See Section 5 for details and Appendix
A for data sources. Bootstrapped standard errors that allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level are reported in
parentheses. Bootstrap statistics based on 2000 bootstrap samples. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                                           37
Table 9: Implied Multipliers of Treatment Effects Estimates with Spillovers
                                            (1)                       (2)
                                    Closest 10 Counties              MSA

    Income Multiplier
    2- Only Own Census Shock              2.586∗                    2.488∗
                                          (1.475)                   (1.503)

    3- Both Census Shocks                 2.615∗                     2.484
                                          (1.334)                   (1.746)
    Jobs per $1 M
    2- Only Own Census Shock                43∗                       49∗
                                            (24)                      (28)

    3- Both Census Shocks                   49∗∗                       50
                                            (24)                      (34)

    Cost-per-job
    2- Only Own Census Shock               23473∗                   20271∗
                                          (13.181)                  (11689)

    3- Both Census Shocks                 20435∗∗                    19966
                                           (9942)                   (13512)

    Observations                           91,428                   547,986
    Notes: This table reports implied multipliers from a multivalued treatment
    effects approach to analyzing spillover effects. Table E.30 reports the means
    of potential outcomes and Table 8 presents treatment effects for treatments
    1-3 relative to treatment 0. This table reports ratios of these coefficients. See
    Section 5 for details and Appendix A for data sources. Bootstrapped standard
    errors that allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level are reported in
    parentheses. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                            38
                   Table 10: First Stage Spillover Estimates
                              (1) 10 Closest Counties             (2) Same MSA
                                 Own       Neighbors             Own      Neighbors
Census Shock
 Own                          444.539∗∗∗         112.031     456.861∗∗∗        -26.929
                              (107.263)          (79.211)    (111.779)        (69.347)
  Neighbors                     82.365          350.653∗∗∗     -44.673       480.150∗∗∗
                               (81.751)         (116.840)     (67.422)       (168.559)
Observations                    91,428            91,428      547,986         547,986
R-squared                        0.04              0.04          0.04            0.04
Angrist-Pischke F-Stat           17.59             8.86         16.30            8.01
Notes: The table reports the results of OLS regressions of growth in federal spending
between years 2 and 5. Column (1) defines neighbors as the 10 geographically clos-
est counties. Column (2) uses all other counties in own MSA. All regressions include
state and year fixed effects and all the covariates included in Table 5 for both own and
neighboring counties. See Section 5 and Appendix A for data sources. Standard errors
clustered at the state level with degrees-of-freedom adjustment to account for duplicated
observations in parentheses. ∗ p<0.1, ∗∗ p<0.05, ∗∗∗ p<0.01




                                           39
        Table 11: Spillover Estimates for Local Income
                                 (1)                        (2)
                         10 Closest Counties             Same MSA
Federal Spending
 Own                             1.986∗∗                   1.986∗∗
                                 (0.880)                   (0.833)
  Neighbors                       -0.214                    -0.183
                                 (0.700)                   (0.425)

Sum of Multipliers               1.772**                    1.803*
                                 (0.886)                   (1.049)
Observations                     91,428                    547,986
Notes: This table reports the estimated coefficients of IV regressions. The
dependent variable is the average annual growth in local personal income
between years 2 and 5. Column (1) defines neighbors as the 10 geograph-
ically closest counties. Column (2) uses all other counties in own MSA.
All regressions include state and year fixed effects and all the covariates
included in Table 6 for both own and neighboring counties. See Section 5
and Appendix A for data sources. Standard errors clustered at the state
level with degrees-of-freedom adjustment to account for duplicated obser-
vations in parentheses. ∗ p<0.1, ∗∗ p<0.05, ∗∗∗ p<0.01




                                    40
         Table 12: Spillover Estimates for Employment
                                (1)                        (2)
                        10 Closest Counties             Same MSA
Federal Spending
 Own                           28.652∗                    28.861∗
                               (13.312)                   (13.104)
  Neighbors                      -3.551                     -3.994
                                (9.810)                    (5.587)

Cost per Job                    39,839                     40,214
                               (22,535)                   (26,120)
Observations                    91,428                    547,986
Notes: This table reports the estimated coefficients of IV regressions. The
dependent variable is the average annual growth in local employment be-
tween years 2 and 5. The coefficient on federal spending is multiplied by
1000 in order to interpret it as the number of job per additional $1M of
spending. Column (1) defines neighbors as the 10 geographically closest
counties. Column (2) uses all other counties in own MSA. All regres-
sions include state and year fixed effects and all the covariates included
in Table 7 for both own and neighboring counties. See Section 5 and Ap-
pendix A for data sources. Standard errors clustered at the state level with
degrees-of-freedom adjustment to account for duplicated observations in
parentheses.




                                    41
           Figure 1: Average County Population Growth Rate by Year




                                    3
            Population Growth (%)
                                    2
                                    1
                                    0
                                    −1




                                         1970   1980          1990      2000        2010
                                                           Year

Notes: This figure plots the unweighted average population growth in percent across all counties
by year using postcensal population estimates. See Appendix A for data sources.



     Figure 2: Distribution of County Population Growth Rates 1999-2000
                                    .3
                                    .2
            Density
                                    .1
                                    0




                                         −15                  0                15
                                                Annual Population Growth (%)

                                                        1999         2000

Notes: This figure plots the kernel density function of county population growth rates across
all counties in 1999 and 2000 using postcensal population estimates. A half-width of 0.5 is used
for the kernel. See Appendix A for data sources.




                                                         42
                                                                 Figure 3: Timeline




                           Notes: This figure plots a stylized timeline of events surrounding a Census enumeration. See
                           Section 1.2 for details and Appendix A for data sources.



                                             Figure 4: Serial Correlation of the Census Shock
                                      (a) 1980−1990                                                             (b) 1990−2000
                    .25




                                                                                                 .25
Census Shock 1990




                                                                             Census Shock 2000
                    0




                                                                                                 0
                    −.25




                                                                                                 −.25




                           −.25             0              .25                                          −.25          0            .25
                                     Census Shock 1980                                                         Census Shock 1990



                           Notes: The figure shows the scatter plots and estimated linear relation between each county’s
                           Census Shocks across two consecutive Censuses after controlling for state fixed effects. See
                           Section 3 for details and Appendix A for data sources..




                                                                        43
                                                                           Figure 5: Federal Spending in the CFFR
                                                       (a) CFFR and NIPA                                                                                                              (b) Spending by Category
                            70
                                                                                                                                                                         1980                  1990
                                                                          Share of Domestic Spending                                                                     2000
                                                                          Share of Total Spending




                                                                                                                                             30
Percent of NIPA Spending




                                                                                                                 Percent of Total Spending
                            60




                                                                                                                                             20
                            50




                                                                                                                                             10
                            40




                                                                                                                                             0
                                   1980                1990                      2000                2010                                                        Loans        Individuals Retirement       Grants   Procurements Salaries

                                                                   Year                                                                                                                      Spending Category

                                          Notes: Panel (a) plots the share of domestic and total federal expenditure reported in the NIPA
                                          that is captured by the CFFR federal spending measure used in the estimations. Panel (b)
                                          plots the share of CFFR federal spending by major category and year for 1980, 1990 and 2000.
                                          Federal expenditures in NIPA Table 3.2 are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. CFFR
                                          data is from the U.S. Census Bureau (2010d).



                                            Figure 6: Semi-Parametric Reduced-Form Effects on Federal Spending from
                                                                   Doubly-Robust Estimation
                                       (a) No RA for Lagged Outcomes                                                                                                   (b) Controlling for Lagged Outcomes
                           300




                                                                                                                                                      300
                           200




                                                                                                                                                      200
                    100




                                                                                                                                                           100
       Federal Spending




                                                                                                                                              Federal Spending
               0




                                                                                                                                                      0
      -100




                                                                                                                                             -100
                           -200




                                                                                                                                                      -200
                           -300




                                                                                                                                                      -300




                                  -6   -5    -4   -3    -2    -1     0       1     2      3      4   5      6                                                     -6     -5      -4     -3     -2     -1    0       1    2     3      4     5   6
                                                                    Year                                                                                                                                   Year

                                                  Reduced-Form Effect                   90% CI                                                                                          Reduced-Form Effect                  90% CI



                                          Notes: These figures plot estimated reduced-form effects of a Census Shock on federal spending
                                          with a 90% confidence interval. Panel (a) reports estimates that do not control for lagged
                                          outcomes. Panel (b) reports estimates that control for outcomes in years -2 to 2. Standard
                                          errors are bootstrapped and allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level. The plots are
                                          based on estimates reported in column (1) of Tables 3 and 4. Note that, since federal spending
                                          data is available starting in 1977, the the estimates for years -6 to -4 have a smaller estimation
                                          sample, which explains the change in the size of the confidence interval. See Section 4.2 for
                                          more details and Appendix A for data sources.




                                                                                                            44
                                Figure 7: Semi-Parametric Reduced-Form Effects on Income from Doubly-Robust
                                                                Estimation
                                (a) No RA for Lagged Outcomes                                                                  (b) Controlling for Lagged Outcomes
             500




                                                                                                            500
             400




                                                                                                            400
             300




                                                                                                            300
100 200




                                                                                               100 200
Income




                                                                                                Income
             0




                                                                                                            0
             -200 -100




                                                                                                            -200 -100
                           -6   -5   -4   -3    -2   -1    0     1   2     3      4   5   6                               -6     -5   -4   -3    -2   -1    0     1   2     3      4   5   6
                                                          Year                                                                                             Year

                                          Reduced-Form Effect            90% CI                                                            Reduced-Form Effect            90% CI



                                 Notes: These figures plot estimated reduced-form effects of a Census Shock on income with a
                                 90% confidence interval. Panel (a) reports estimates that do not control for lagged outcomes.
                                 Panel (b) reports estimates that control for outcomes in years -2 to 2. Standard errors are
                                 bootstrapped and allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level. The plots are based on
                                 estimates reported in column (2) of Tables 3 and 4. See Section 4.2 for more details and
                                 Appendix A for data sources.



                           Figure 8: Semi-Parametric Reduced-Form Effects on Employment from Doubly-Robust
                                                              Estimation
                                (a) No RA for Lagged Outcomes                                                                  (b) Controlling for Lagged Outcomes
             7




                                                                                                            7
             6




                                                                                                            6
             5




                                                                                                            5
             4




                                                                                                            4
-5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3




                                                                                               -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3
              Employment




                                                                                                             Employment




                           -6   -5   -4   -3    -2   -1    0     1   2     3      4   5   6                               -6     -5   -4   -3    -2   -1    0     1   2     3      4   5   6
                                                          Year                                                                                             Year

                                          Reduced-Form Effect            90% CI                                                            Reduced-Form Effect            90% CI



                                 Notes: These figures plot estimated reduced-form effects of a Census Shock on employment
                                 with a 90% confidence interval. Panel (a) reports estimates that do not control for lagged
                                 outcomes. Panel (b) reports estimates that control for outcomes in years -2 to 2. Standard
                                 errors are bootstrapped and allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level. The plots are
                                 based on estimates reported in column (3) of Tables 3 and 4. See Section 4.2 for more details
                                 and Appendix A for data sources.




                                                                                          45
                               Figure 9: Semi-parametric Estimates of the Income Multiplier from Doubly-robust
                                                                Estimation
                               (a) No RA for Lagged Outcomes                                                                   (b) Controlling for Lagged Outcomes
            4




                                                                                                            4
            3




                                                                                                            3
Income Multiplier




                                                                                                Income Multiplier
              2




                                                                                                             2
      1




                                                                                                     1
0




                                                                                                0
            -1




                                                                                                            -1
            -2




                                                                                                            -2
                          -6    -5   -4   -3     -2   -1       0     1   2    3    4   5   6                              -6     -5   -4   -3     -2   -1       0     1   2    3    4   5   6
                                                              Year                                                                                             Year

                                           Income Multiplier              90% CI                                                            Income Multiplier              90% CI



                                Notes: These figures plot estimated local income multiplier of federal spending with a 90% con-
                                fidence interval. Panel (a) reports estimates that do not control for lagged outcomes. Panel (b)
                                reports estimates that control for outcomes in years -2 to 2. Standard errors are bootstrapped
                                and allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level. The plots are based on estimates reported
                                in column (4) of Tables 3 and 4. See Section 4.2 for more details and Appendix A for data
                                sources.




                          Figure 10: Semi-parametric Estimates of Jobs per $1M from Doubly-robust Estimation
                               (a) No RA for Lagged Outcomes                                                                   (b) Controlling for Lagged Outcomes
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80




                                                                                                10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
  Jobs per $1M




                                                                                                  Jobs per $1M
            -20 -10 0




                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                            -20 -10




                          -6    -5   -4   -3     -2   -1       0     1   2    3    4   5   6                              -6     -5   -4   -3     -2   -1       0     1   2    3    4   5   6
                                                              Year                                                                                             Year

                                               Jobs per $1M              90% CI                                                                 Jobs per $1M              90% CI



                                Notes: These figures plot estimated employment effects per an additional million dollars of
                                federal spending with a 90% confidence interval. Panel (a) reports estimates that do not
                                control for lagged outcomes. Panel (b) reports estimates that control for outcomes in years -2
                                to 2. Standard errors are bootstrapped and allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level.
                                The plots are based on estimates reported in column (5) of Tables 3 and 4. See Section 4.2 for
                                more details and Appendix A for data sources.




                                                                                           46
                                       Figure 11: IVQR Estimates of Spending Multipliers
                                 (a) Income                                                                          (b) Employment




                                                                                                                                                                   40
                                                                                                  300
             6




                                                                                                  200
                                                                       Jobs per Million Dollars




                                                                                                                                                                   30

                                                                                                                                                                        Thousand Dollars
             4
Multiplier




                                                                                                  100




                                                                                                                                                                   20
             2




                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                   10
             0




                                                                                                  -100
             -2




                                                                                                                                                                   0
                  0    20        40          60   80       100                                           0   20        40           60           80          100
                                  Quantiles                                                                                 Quantiles

                         Income Multiplier        90% CI                                                     Jobs per $1M               Cost per Job (RHS)



                      Notes: The figure plots the estimated multipliers from the IVQR analysis along with a 90%
                      confidence interval for 7 quantiles of the distribution of the dependent variable. See Section 6
                      for details and Appendix A for data sources. Panel (a) uses the average annual growth in local
                      personal income from 1982 to 1985, 1992 to 1995 and 2002 to 2005. Panel (b) uses the average
                      annual growth in employment. Panel (b) also reports the cost per job created in dollars of 2009
                      on the right hand side axis at the corresponding quantiles. Standard errors are computed via
                      bootstrap. See Figure E.17 for the corresponding quantile regression estimates.




                                                                    47
Online Appendix Not For Publication

A     Data Sources
In order to construct the panel of county population and the instrument, we use postcensal population
estimates published by the Census Bureau from 1971 to 2009. This distinction between postcensal
and intercensal is important. The latter are retrospectively revised to account for the error of closure
in Census years whereas the former are the contemporaneous estimates produced every year to tract
population growth. Intercensal population estimates are not relevant for our study since federal
spending only depends on the contemporaneous estimates. Most of the earlier data are archived
at the Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR) (http://www.icpsr.
umich.edu/). For the years 1971 to 1974, we use the Population Estimates of Counties in the United
States (ICPSR 7500). For years 1975 to 1978, we use the data from the Federal-State Cooperative
Program: Population Estimates study (ICPSR 7841 and 7843). No postcensal population estimates
were published for 1979, 1980, 1989, 1990 and 2000. For 1981 to 1988, we use population data from the
County Statistics File 4 (CO-STAT 4) (ICPSR 9806). Data for Census years and from 1991 onward
were taken directly from the Census Bureau’s website (http://www.census.gov/popest/estimates.
html) since the postcensal estimates are still available. Local and state population estimates are
produced jointly by the Census Bureau and state agencies. The Federal-State Cooperative Program
has produced the population estimates used for federal funds allocation and other official uses since
1972.
    Birth data from Vital Statistics are taken from the micro data files available at the NBER
(http://www.nber.org/data/) for the years 1970 to 1978. We use the Centers for Disease Con-
trol and Prevention’s (CDC) Compressed Mortality Files (http://wonder.cdc.gov/) for years 1979
to 1988 and tables published in the Vital Statistics, Live births by county of occurrence and place of
residence for years 1989 and 1990. Data for 1991 to 2009 are taken directly from the Census Bureau’s
components of growth data files available on the Census website. Data on county level deaths are
taken from the NBER’s Compressed Mortality micro data files from 1970 to 1988 and from the CDC’s
Compressed Mortality tabulated files from 1989 to 2006. County level deaths for 2007 to 2009 were
taken directly from the Census Bureau’s components of growth files.
    Migration data come from the IRS Statistics of Income. Years 1978 to 1992 were taken from
the County-to-County, State-to-State, and County Income Study Files, 1978–1992 (ICPSR 2937)
and Population Migration Between Counties Based on Individual Income Tax Returns, 1982-1983
(ICPSR 8477). The most recent years are available directly from the IRS SOI’s website (http:
//www.irs.gov/taxstats/).
    Data on Federal spending were taken from the Census Bureau’s Consolidated Federal Funds Re-
ports. These reports have been produced annually since 1983 and provide a detailed account of the
geographic distribution of federal expenditures. 1983 and 1984 data are available on CD-ROM from
the Census Bureau and for downloading from the SUDOC Virtualization Project at the University
of Indiana (http://www.cs.indiana.edu/svp/). Data from 1985 to 1992 are available for down-
load individually by year at the ICPSR. The Census Bureau’s website has CFFR releases from 1993
onwards. Data on federal spending prior to 1983 is available from the Geographic Distribution of
Federal Funds for fiscal years 1981 and 1982 (ICPSR 6043 and 6064) and from the Federal Outlays
dataset from 1976 to 1980 (ICPSR 6029). Note that debt servicing, international payments and secu-
rity and intelligence spending are not covered in the CFFR. Note that CFFR data cover the federal
government fiscal year, which starts in October 1st of the previous calendar year. See Census Bureau
(2010d) for further details.
    The Industry share shifter variable was calculated using the Quarterly Census of Employment and
Wages database produced by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The Migration share shifter variable


                                                  48
was calculated using Census tabulations from 1970 to 2000 on foreign-born population by country of
birth. The tables were downloaded from the National Historical Geographic Information System at
the University of Minnesota (http://www.nhgis.org/).
    County-to-County Distance information was downloaded from the Oak Ridge National Laboratory
(http://cta.ornl.gov/transnet/SkimTree.htm).

Variable Definitions

     Census Shock                Log-difference between the Census count and the postcensal
                                 county population estimate in the year of the Census.
     Postcensal   population     Annual population estimate derived by using the last Census
     estimate                    count available and updated with annual administrative data
                                 to account for population growth such as number of births,
                                 deaths and migration from IRS tax return data.
     Intercensal population      Revised population estimate that is obtained by redistribut-
     estimate                    ing the error of closure (i.e. difference between the Census
                                 count and the postcensal estimate) across all years of the pre-
                                 vious decade. This variable is produced by the Census Bureau
                                 for the previous decade only once the final census counts are
                                 published. See Census Bureau for formula and details.
     Federal Spending            Total annual federal spending by county as recorded by the
                                 Consolidated Federal Funds Report. This measure excludes
                                 Direct Payments Other than for Individuals and Insurance
                                 and Guaranteed Loans. Debt servicing, international pay-
                                 ments and security and intelligence spending are also not cov-
                                 ered in the CFFR. We also exclude Medicare and Social Se-
                                 curity transfers. See main text for details. All variables are
                                 normalized by constant population level from 1980.
     Personal Income             Total personal income minus place-of-residence adjustment
                                 (BEA Table CA5 line 42), personal current transfer receipts
                                 (line 47), farm earnings (line 81) and government employee
                                 earnings (line 2000) plus contributions for government social
                                 insurance (line 36). Alternatively, this can be calculated as
                                 the sum of gross private nonfarm labor earnings (line 90) and
                                 dividends, interests and rental income (line 46).
     Employment                  Total private nonfarm employment (line 90). Total employ-
                                 ment as reported by the BEA is the sum of full-time and part-
                                 time employment for both employees and sole proprietors.
     SOI Measures of In-         We use earnings from tax returns aggregated at the county-
     come and Employment         year level from the IRS Statistics of Income Division. We
                                 also use the number of tax filers as an alternative measure of
                                 employment.
     QCEW Measures of            We use earnings and employment from all private industries
     Employment and Earn-        as alternative measures of earnings and employment.
     ings




                                                49
Industry Share-Shifter   Predicted annual employment growth by county using the
                         weighted sum of national employment growth rates by indus-
                         try (74 2-digit SIC categories until 1999 and 95 3-digit NAICS
                         categories for 2000 to 2009). The county-specific weights are
                         determined by the employment share of each industry by
                         county in the base year. We include use as controls in our
                         main regression the Industry Share Shifter in the Census year
                         and the two previous years.
Migration       Share-   Predicted immigrant population growth computed in a simi-
Shifter                  lar way as the Industry Share-Shifter. The migration variable
                         uses national changes in population levels by country (or re-
                         gion) of birth across Censuses with the county-specific weights
                         given by the share of immigrant populations by country of ori-
                         gin measured in the base Census year. This variable only has
                         one distinct observation per decade.




                                        50
B     State Government Spending
A potential concern with our results is that we only use variation in federal spending following the
Census Shock to estimate local spending multipliers. State and local government spending could
also respond in a similar way to new information about local population levels and omitting it could
potentially lead us to overestimate the effect of federal spending on local economic outcomes. However,
it could also be the case that federal spending crowds-out spending by other levels of government,
which would then lead us to underestimate the impact of government spending at the local level.46
    The main reason we limit the analysis to federal spending is that, to our knowledge, there does
not exist a comprehensive dataset that tracks state spending by local areas similar to the federal
CFFR data. It is worth noting that the CFFR actually captures a significant share of state spending
that consists of federal transfers passed through state governments. In the aggregate, this amounts
to roughly one quarter of total state spending over the time period. Even though we don’t have a
comprehensive measure of state spending at the local level, we use below two sources of data to see
whether partial measures of state spending do in fact respond to the Census Shock.
    In Table B.1, we look at the response of one particular type of government spending that is
available for state and local governments at the county level. We use data on government salaries and
wages from the BEA to see if we can detect a response in state spending to variation in the Census
Shock. Column (1) presents for reference the first-stage coefficient for our Census Shock variable in
the regression using federal spending from the CFFR. The second column reports the coefficient for
the Census Shock in the regression using federal wages instead of total federal spending. The size of
the point estimate is smaller and less precisely estimated than column (1). In column (3) we report
the coefficient of the regression using salaries and wages from state governments. State wages do not
appear to respond to the Census Shock as the coefficient is very small and not statistically different
from zero. The negative sign would also suggest some crowding out. Finally, column (4) shows the
responses of local government wages. The point estimate is also close to zero and not statistically
significant. Interestingly, the last two point estimates are much smaller than the response of federal
wages to the Census Shock even though state and local wages are higher on aggregate and in the
average county than federal wages.

                  Table B.1: OLS Estimates of Census Shock on Spending and Wages
                                      (1)                  (2)                 (3)              (4)
                               Federal Spending       Federal Wages       State Wages       Local Wages
           Census Shock           280.67∗∗∗              61.00∗∗             -12.84            -7.36
                                    (88.94)              (23.08)            (12.58)           (17.74)
           Observations              9,204                9,196               8,789            8,789
           R-squared                  0.05                 0.05                0.07             0.13
           Notes: The table reports the estimated coefficients from a regression on the Census Shock
           using average annual growth in federal spending per capita from the CFFR in column (1),
           federal wages only from the BEA in column (2), state wages from the BEA in column (3) and
           local government wages from the BEA in column (4). Data for the dependent variables are
           from 1982 to 1985, 1992 to 1995 and 2002 to 2005. All regressions include state-decade fixed
           effects. Standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses. ∗ p<0.1, ∗∗ p<0.05, ∗∗∗
           p<0.01


    Our second indirect test uses data from the Annual Survey of Governments (ASG). The ASG
collects data annually from a sample of governments from all levels on various financial items. We
use information on intergovernmental revenues of county and city governments to see if federal and
   46
      There is no consensus in the fiscal federalism literature on the crowding out effect of federal spending on state
spending. Recent examples include Gordon (2004) and Knight (2002).


                                                          51
state transfers to local governments vary in response to the Census Shock. Column (1) in Table B.2
reports the coefficient on the Census Shock using data from the CFFR as the dependent variable. In
columns (2) and (3), we use respectively federal and state transfers to local governments. The point
estimates become very small and insignificant. These results suggest that intergovernmental transfers
to local governments do not respond to the Census Shock and therefore should not play a large role in
identifying the total marginal impact of government spending changes in our estimation framework.

              Table B.2: OLS Estimates of Census Shock on Spending and Transfers
                                         (1)                     (2)                    (3)
                                  Federal Spending        Federal Transfers       State Transfers
              Census Shock           280.67∗∗∗                  3.89                    2.31
                                       (88.94)                 (5.25)                 (9.49)
              Observations              9,204                  8,065                   8,065
              R-squared                  0.05                   0.07                   0.28
              Notes: The table reports the estimated coefficients from a regression on the
              Census Shock using average annual growth in federal spending per capita from
              the CFFR in column (1), federal transfers from the ASG in column (2) and state
              transfers from the ASG in column (3). Data for the dependent variables are from
              1982 to 1985, 1992 to 1995 and 2002 to 2005. All regressions include state-decade
              fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses. ∗ p<0.1,
              ∗∗
                 p<0.05, ∗∗∗ p<0.01


   We conclude from these results that we cannot find evidence that state and local government
spending changes in any systematic way in response to the Census Shock.




                                                        52
C        A Measurement Error Model for the Census Shock
In this section, we present a simple framework that formalizes the source of variation in the Census
Shock. This model relates the shock to specific factors that could potentially challenge the exclusion
restriction underlying an IV approach, namely, that the Census Shock only affects local economic
growth through its impact on subsequent federal spending. A general model of the administrative or
postcensal (PC) and Census (C) estimates of population can be written as follows:

                                    P opic,t = g i (P op∗c,t , uic,t ) for i = C, P C,

for county c and year t where P op∗c,t is actual population and uic,t are measurement errors. A specific
yet flexible model of the population estimates is obtained by the following log-linear model

                           log(P opic,t ) = αi + λi log(P op∗c,t ) + uic,t for i = C, P C,

where the measurement error uic,t is independent of log(P op∗c,t ). In this model neither estimate gives
the true population level P op∗c,t but both contain an error term and might be biased to different
degrees. These biases are characterized by the parameters αi and λi .
   The Census Shock, or error of closure, is defined as the difference between these estimates in the
year of a Census.

               CSc,t = log(P opC               PC             C
                               c,t ) − log(P opc,t ) = ∆α + (λ − λ
                                                                   PC
                                                                      ) log(P op∗c,t ) + ∆µc,t ,                 (C.1)

where ∆α = αC − αP C and ∆uc = uC      P C 47 We can then express the exclusion restriction in the
                                c,t − uc,t .
context of an IV regression as

                           0 = Cov(CSc,t , εc,t )
                             = Cov(∆α + (λC − λP C ) log(P op∗c,t ) + ∆uc,t , εc,t )
                             = (λC − λP C )Cov(log(P op∗c,t ), εc,t ) + Cov(∆uc,t , εc,t )
                             = (λC − λP C )Cov(log(P op∗c,t ), εc,t ),

where εc,t is the structural error term from a given outcome equation on income or employment.
The third line assumes ∆α is constant. The fourth line uses the fact that ∆uc,t is the difference
between measurement errors that are uncorrelated with the true population and the IV error term.
The exclusion restriction is then satisfied when λC − λP C = 0 or when Cov(log(P op∗c,t ), εc,t ) = 0.
    If both measurement methods approximate true population with added classical measurement
error, we would have αi = 0 and λi = 1 for i = C, P C. In such a world, the Census Shock would
be the combination of two classical measurement errors and would be unrelated to any other factors
that could confound the identification strategy. The model in Equation (C.1) suggests that the
classical measurement error model, while sufficient, is overly restrictive. A sufficient yet less restrictive
condition for the Census Shock to be unrelated to true population and any other confounding factors
is that λC = λP C . This condition states that both measurement methods may be biased but what
is relevant for the instrument is the degree to which their correlation with true population differs.
If this condition for our instrument is satisfied, i.e. the degree of bias in the Census counts and the
administrative estimates are of the same magnitude, then the Census Shock is plausibly exogenous.


    47
     Note that the source of variation is coming from differences in population estimates and not from changes in actual
population. This is important as population can be endogenous to economic factors that might confound the estimation
strategy.


                                                           53
D     Spillover Analysis
Section 5 presents estimates of spillovers by analyzing repeated pairs of counties with each of their
neighboring counties. This approach is similar to a spatial average that gives equal weight to neigh-
boring counties and zero weight to other counties. This spatial average, however, may result in a
weak first-stage relationship whenever the Census Shock is not geographically correlated. This ap-
pendix presents the results of two analyses. First, we show using a Monte Carlo experiment, that
the repeated-pairs and the spatial-average approaches result in similar estimates but that the spatial-
average approach is less robust to weak instrument concerns. Second, we show that an alternative
spatial average approach that weights spending in other counties but the inverse of the distance
between each county results in similar estimates of spillover effects.

Monte Carlo Experiment of Repeated-Pairs and Spatial-Average Estimates
Consider the following data generating process:
                                            X                   X
                       ∆y = α + β1 ∆F + β2      ∆Fn + γ1 W + γ2   Wn + u,
                                                  n                      n

where ∆y is the outcome of interest, ∆F is the change in federal spending, and ∆Fn is the change in
federal spending for a neighboring county. W and Wn are shocks unobservable to the econometrician
such that
                              corr(∆F, W ) = corr(∆Fn , Wn ) = δ ≥ 0.
Assume that an instrument exists, labeled CS, such that

                                corr(∆F, CS) = corr(∆Fn , CSn ) = ρ > 0,

and E[CS|W, Wn , u] = 0. Importantly, assume that CS is not geographically correlated. This implies
that an instrumental variables estimation of all pairs of the form:

                                      ∆y = α + β1 ∆F + β2 ∆Fn + u,

that is instrumented by CS and CSn , and where we weight each county the inverse of the number of
total pairs, will result in consistent estimates of β1 and β2 .
    An alternative approach would be to construct a spatial average of the neighboring counties CSn
and ∆Fn for each county and run the following spatial-average regression:
                                                          ¯ n + u,
                                      ∆y = α + β1 ∆F + β2 ∆F

where we now instrument the average change in spending for the neighbors ∆F          ¯ n with the average
instrument C̄Sn . In cases where this first-stage relationship is statistically strong, this will also provide
consistent estimates of β1 and β2 . However, since the instrument is not geographically correlated and
has mean zero, this strategy may reduce the power of the instrument in the first stage and invite
concerns of weak instruments.
    We illustrate this possibility by generating 1000 datasets of 1000 counties each with 10 neighboring
counties and where we have set β1 = 2 and β2 = −.1. Consider first the case where δ = 0 and ρ is
large. This case implies that there is no omitted variable and the instrument is strong; such that both
OLS and IV approaches will result in consistent estimates. Table D.1 presents the results from the
case where δ = 0 and ρ = 0.5. Note that the OLS and IV estimators perform well in both approaches.
The standard errors of the estimated coefficients in the spatial-average approach have a similar order
of magnitude as in the paired approach. However, the F-stats from the first stage are smaller in the


                                                      54
                              Table D.1: Results of Monte Carlo Simulation
                                                                       Spatial Average        Repeated Pairs
    Case                  Estimate                         Statistic    OLS       IV        OLS         IV
    1: δ = 0, ρ = 0.5     Own Federal Spending             Mean        1.995    1.992      1.995      1.991
                                                           Std. Dev.    .119     .222       .118       .222

                          Neighbor Federal Spending        Mean          -.1     -.102      -.1       -.102
                                                           Std. Dev.    .038      .07      .038        .069

                          First-Stage F-Stat (Own)         Mean                 224.616             2264.351
                          First-Stage F-Stat (Neighbor)    Mean                 224.645             2228.958

    2: δ = 0.5, ρ = 0.5   Own Federal Spending             Mean        1.538     2.001     1.536         2
                                                           Std. Dev.    .11       .215      .125       .222

                          Neighbor Federal Spending        Mean         -.562    -.097     -.56       -.098
                                                           Std. Dev.     .036    .071      .043        .072

                          First-Stage F-Stat (Own)         Mean                 223.784             2252.239
                          First-Stage F-Stat (Neighbor)    Mean                 223.515              2230.26

    3: δ = 0.5, ρ = 0.1   Own Federal Spending             Mean        1.502     2.017     1.504      2.096
                                                           Std. Dev.    .097     3.877      .107       1.63

                          Neighbor Federal Spending        Mean         -.598     .01      -.597      -.084
                                                           Std. Dev.     .031     1.07      .039        .4

                          First-Stage F-Stat (Own)         Mean                  5.999               56.121
                          First-Stage F-Stat (Neighbor)    Mean                  6.035               52.261
    Notes: This table reports results from a Monte Carlo experiment. For each model and each case, we
    estimate the relevant model 1000 times and report the means and standard deviations of selected statistics.


spatial-average approach.
   Now consider the case where δ > 0 and ρ is large. In this case, OLS will not be unbiased but
both IV approaches might still yield consistent estimates. Case 2 in Table D.1 presents this case
where we have set δ = ρ = 0.5. As expected, both OLS approaches result in biased estimates. While
the F-stats in the spatial-average approach are smaller than for the case of repeated pairs, both IV
approaches have a strong first stage and result in unbiased estimates of β1 and β2 .
   Finally, consider the case where δ > 0 and ρ is small. Case 3 in Table D.1 presents this case where
we have set δ = 0.5, ρ = 0.1. As in the previous case, OLS will not be unbiased. In this case we see
that the IV spatial-average approach results in significantly larger standard errors, smaller First-Stage
F-stats, and an estimate of β2 that is not close to the true value. In contrast, the repeated pairs case
provides consistent estimates and robust First-Stage F-stats.

Spatial Average Estimates of Spillover Effects
We now implement the spatial average estimation discussed in the previous section. We explore three
sets of spatial averages. The first two give constant weight to neighbors and zero weight to other
counties. The third approach weights all counties by the inverse of the distance between the counties.
Table D.2 estimates of income multipliers and Table D.3 reports estimates of employment effects and
cost per job created. The first-stage F-stats are smaller than those in our repeated-pairs estimates
in Table 10. This is particularly true for the MSA specification. The inverse distance specification,
however, has first-stage F-stats that are slightly larger. From these estimates, columns (2) and (6)
provide similar results to those discussed in Section 5.


                                                          55
           Table D.2: Spillover Estimates for Local Income Multipliers (Spatial Average)
                                            (1)       (2)                (3)     (4)              (5)          (6)
                                          10 Closest Counties             Same MSA                      Distance
Federal Spending
 Own                                      2.025∗        2.084∗         1.659        2.063∗      2.085∗         2.105∗
                                          (1.052)       (1.084)       (5.244)       (1.245)     (1.144)        (1.160)
  Neighbors                                0.167         -0.261       13.350         3.736       0.014          -0.283
                                          (1.710)       (2.075)      (113.656)     (10.526)     (1.389)        (1.503)

Income Growth (-1,1)
  Own                                      0.097          0.089        0.157         0.132       0.097           0.102
                                          (0.064)       (0.068)       (0.578)       (0.172)     (0.065)        (0.071)
  Neighbors                                              -0.025                      0.032                      -0.117
                                                        (0.141)                     (0.254)                    (0.161)

Employment Growth (-1,1)
 Own                                       0.097          0.089        0.157         0.132       0.097           0.102
                                          (0.064)       (0.068)       (0.578)       (0.172)     (0.065)        (0.071)
  Neighbors                                              -0.025                      0.032                      -0.117
                                                        (0.141)                     (0.254)                    (0.161)

Sum of Multipliers                         2.193         1.823        15.008         5.798     2.098**         1.823*
                                          (1.355)       (1.643)      (108.866)      (9.858)    (1.023)         (1.094)
Observations                               9,177         9,177         9,177         9,177      9,177           9,177
Angrist-Pishke F-Stat (Own)                11.42         10.93         6.50          13.52       9.33            9.04
Angrist-Pishke F-Stat (Neighbor)           6.94           4.05          0.01         0.21       13.53           10.21
Notes: The table reports the estimated coefficients for own and neighbor’s Federal Spending on average income growth
between years 2 and 5. Columns (1) and (2) give uniform weights to the 10 closest counties, columns (3) and (4) give
uniform weights to the counties in the same MSA, and columns (5) and (6) give an inverse-distance weight to all other
counties. All regressions include state and decade fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the state level. ∗ p<0.1, ∗∗
p<0.05, ∗∗∗ p<0.01




                                                        56
        Table D.3: Spillover Estimates for Local Employment Multipliers (Spatial Average)
                                             (1)        (2)               (3)       (4)                (5)           (6)
                                           10 Closest Counties              Same MSA                         Distance
Federal Spending
 Own                                       28.630∗       29.823∗        23.405          28.983      30.844∗       31.265∗
                                           (15.142)      (15.435)      (81.899)        (20.426)     (16.730)      (17.040)
  Neighbors                                  3.699        -6.500       206.402          65.779       -1.443        -7.703
                                           (24.691)      (28.374)     (1749.972)      (175.929)     (18.602)      (19.896)

Income Growth (-1,1)
  Own                                        -0.000       -0.000         0.001           0.000       -0.000         -0.000
                                            (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.009)        (0.003)      (0.001)        (0.001)
  Neighbors                                               -0.002                        -0.001                      -0.003
                                                         (0.002)                       (0.004)                     (0.002)

Employment Growth (-1,1)
 Own                                         0.097         0.089         0.157          0.132        0.097          0.102
                                            (0.064)      (0.068)        (0.578)        (0.172)      (0.065)        (0.071)
  Neighbors                                               -0.025                        0.032                       -0.117
                                                         (0.141)                       (0.254)                     (0.161)

Cost per Job                                 30932        42878           4351          10553       34013*         42442
                                            (20608)      (44387)        (31710)        (18182)      (18036)       (28249)
Observations                                 9,177        9,177          9,177          9,177        9,177         9,177
Angrist-Pishke F-Stat (Own)                  11.42        10.93           6.50          13.52         9.33          9.04
Angrist-Pishke F-Stat (Neighbor)              6.94         4.05           0.01           0.21        13.53         10.21
Notes: The table reports the estimated coefficients for own and neighbor’s Federal Spending on average income growth
between years 2 and 5. The coefficients on spending are multiplied by 1000 to represent jobs per $1M. The Cost per Job
is the inverse of the sum of the federal spending employment multipliers in own and neighboring counties and is expressed
in 2009 dollars. Columns (1) and (2) give uniform weights to the 10 closest counties, columns (3) and (4) give uniform
weights to the counties in the same MSA, and columns (5) and (6) give an inverse-distance weight to all other counties.
All regressions include state and decade fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the state level. ∗ p<0.1, ∗∗ p<0.05, ∗∗∗
p<0.01




                                                         57
E   Additional Tables and Graphs

             Table E.1: Components of Population Growth Calibration
                                         (1)                 (2)
                                     1982-1988           1991-1999
                  Births              1.83∗∗∗              1.45∗∗∗
                                       (0.16)              (0.08)
                  Deaths              -2.03∗∗∗            -1.23∗∗∗
                                       (0.37)              (0.20)
                  Net Migration       0.76∗∗∗              1.03∗∗∗
                                       (0.13)              (0.06)
                  Observations         12,312              27,684
                  R-squared             0.78                0.91
                  Notes: The table reports the estimated coefficients from
                  the calibration regression. See Section 3.1 for details
                  and Appendix A for data sources. Column (1) regresses
                  biennial county population growth from 1982 to 1988
                  on the number of births, deaths and net migration in
                  the previous two years. Column (2) regresses annual
                  population growth on annual number births and deaths,
                  and net migration from 1991 to 1999. Standard errors
                  clustered at the state level in parentheses. ∗ p<0.1, ∗∗
                  p<0.05, ∗∗∗ p<0.01




                                            58
                  Table E.2: Largest Census Shock - 1980
              State          County Population                       Census shock
                                  Positive Shocks
 1        Maryland       St. Mary’s         60,176                           0.904
 2    South Dakota           Jackson         3,399                           0.794
 3         Georgia    Chattahoochee         21,379                           0.427
 4          Nevada       White Pine          8,289                           0.355
 5           Texas      Shackelford          3,939                           0.345
 6           Texas         Hemphill          5,387                           0.337
 7          Oregon           Harney          8,232                           0.328
 8        Colorado        Gunnison          10,713                           0.328
 9      Washington         San Juan          7,899                           0.325
10        Colorado             Ouray         1,944                           0.316
11          Nevada            Eureka         1,219                           0.288
12           Texas              Starr       27,666                           0.278
13          Florida       Hernando          45,715                           0.270
14       Oklahoma          Johnston         10,395                           0.270
15        Colorado       Rio Blanco          6,349                           0.237
16       Oklahoma          Wagoner          42,146                           0.235
17          Florida          Monroe         63,721                           0.229
18   North Carolina             Dare        13,523                           0.224
19           Texas             Hood         17,859                           0.223
20           Idaho            Elmore        21,685                           0.221
21          Oregon         Sherman           2,171                           0.215
22        Colorado          Summit           8,960                           0.213
23           Texas         Live Oak          9,666                           0.211
24           Texas         Maverick         31,738                           0.207
25           Texas               Frio       13,791                           0.204
                                  Negative Shocks
 1        Maryland         Somerset         19,131                          -1.030
 2     New Mexico           Valencia        61,128                          -0.646
 3        Colorado          Hinsdale           414                          -0.360
 4         Georgia             Peach        18,989                          -0.317
 5          Oregon          Wheeler          1,502                          -0.279
 6          Kansas             Geary        30,083                          -0.273
 7        Colorado              Park         5,419                          -0.271
 8           Idaho             Clark           798                          -0.270
 9        Nebraska            Gosper         2,136                          -0.258
10            Utah          Daggett            777                          -0.244
11        Montana           Treasure           987                          -0.234
12           Texas        Culberson          3,333                          -0.233
13    North Dakota            Divide         3,472                          -0.225
14    South Dakota            Dewey          5,371                          -0.210
15    South Dakota              Sully        1,978                          -0.195
16        Colorado           Jackson         1,862                          -0.190
17        Colorado           Mineral           819                          -0.190
18           Texas          Oldham           2,287                          -0.189
19        Nebraska             Hayes         1,348                          -0.187
20    North Dakota             Steele        3,081                          -0.186
21     New Mexico           De Baca          2,433                          -0.185
22          Kansas         Hamilton          2,501                          -0.184
23        Montana      Judith Basin          2,662                          -0.184
24            Utah            Wayne          1,924                          -0.176
25    South Dakota            Moody          6,681                          -0.172
Notes: The table reports the top and bottom 25 Census Shocks for 1980. See Section
3.1 for details and Appendix A for data sources.
                   Table E.3: Largest Census Shock - 1990
               State           County Population                     Census shock
                                     Positive Shocks
 1          Nevada              Storey          2,535                        0.254
 2        Colorado            Crowley           3,946                        0.210
 3         Missouri           De Kalb           9,975                        0.202
 4   South Carolina       McCormick             8,876                        0.196
 5        Maryland           Somerset          23,469                        0.189
 6          Florida          Gilchrist          9,751                        0.187
 7            Texas            Kinney           3,130                        0.170
 8            Texas         Glasscock           1,443                        0.163
 9        Colorado               Eagle         22,297                        0.163
10            Idaho            Camas              739                        0.161
11          Georgia         Crawford            9,071                        0.159
12           Illinois           Brown           5,851                        0.158
13            Texas            Concho           3,084                        0.156
14          Georgia            Liberty         52,906                        0.155
15            Texas         Hudspeth            2,905                        0.155
16          Florida            Liberty          5,594                        0.150
17        Colorado            Douglas          61,670                        0.149
18          Nevada             Lander           6,291                        0.136
19          Arizona       Santa Cruz           29,854                        0.133
20         Montana                Park         14,643                        0.130
21   North Carolina            Onslow         150,098                        0.126
22          Kansas               Riley         67,212                        0.125
23            Idaho              Boise          3,568                        0.125
24          Georgia           Camden           30,734                        0.116
25        Kentucky            Carlisle          5,218                        0.114
                                     Negative Shocks
 1    North Dakota             Mercer           9,754                       -0.304
 2    South Dakota           Shannon            9,937                       -0.222
 3        Nebraska             Hooker             799                       -0.209
 4    North Dakota               Slope            894                       -0.196
 5        Nebraska             Banner             860                       -0.194
 6           Texas          Mcmullen              816                       -0.192
 7        Colorado          San Juan              749                       -0.191
 8        Montana          Petroleum              519                       -0.190
 9       Oklahoma           Cimarron            3,294                       -0.190
10           Texas            Oldham            2,273                       -0.188
11       Oklahoma         Roger Mills           4,113                       -0.182
12        Louisiana             Sabine         22,487                       -0.173
13    North Dakota               Sioux          3,777                       -0.169
14    North Dakota             Billings         1,090                       -0.168
15    North Dakota           Mckenzie           6,348                       -0.168
16        Louisiana           La Salle         13,621                       -0.167
17        Montana       Golden Valley             911                       -0.167
18            Utah                Rich          1,731                       -0.166
19        Wyoming              Lincoln         12,710                       -0.163
20          Kansas              Geary          30,558                       -0.160
21     New Mexico           McKinley           61,414                       -0.160
22    South Dakota            Jackson           2,796                       -0.160
23    North Dakota           Sheridan           2,131                       -0.158
24        Montana            Rosebud           10,473                       -0.157
25      Mississippi         Issaquena           1,923                       -0.155
Notes: The table reports the top and bottom 25 Census Shocks for 1990. See Section
3.1 for details and Appendix A for data sources.




                                           60
                  Table E.4: Largest Census Shock - 2000
              State            County Population                     Census shock
                                    Positive Shocks
 1         Georgia              Echols         3,782                         0.376
 2       Mississippi        Issaquena          2,258                         0.344
 3          Nevada           Pershing          6,672                         0.342
 4            Texas            Concho          3,963                         0.285
 5            Texas           Dickens          2,724                         0.277
 6          Florida           De Soto         32,196                         0.265
 7          Florida            Hardee         26,769                         0.248
 8         Georgia            Wheeler          6,174                         0.244
 9         Georgia            Calhoun          6,325                         0.240
10        Wyoming               Teton         18,381                         0.211
11             Utah           Daggett            926                         0.204
12        Colorado            Crowley          5,509                         0.203
13   South Carolina          Edgefield        24,586                         0.201
14            Texas              Llano        17,077                         0.201
15            Texas          Live Oak         12,233                         0.200
16          Florida            Hendry         36,255                         0.199
17        Colorado                Lake         7,815                         0.198
18        California             Mono         12,921                         0.196
19     New Mexico              Catron          3,567                         0.195
20          Florida            Sumter         53,738                         0.193
21     New Mexico               Sierra        13,209                         0.190
22            Idaho              Boise         6,702                         0.186
23          Florida            Glades         10,579                         0.185
24         Georgia          Crawford          12,408                         0.182
25        Colorado        San Miguel           6,609                         0.174
                                    Negative Shocks
 1           Texas           Edwards           2,143                        -0.530
 2           Texas             Loving             65                        -0.523
 3           Texas                Polk        41,539                        -0.269
 4           Texas            Presidio         7,355                        -0.210
 5    North Dakota             Billings          876                        -0.182
 6    North Dakota               Slope           760                        -0.153
 7          Nevada         Esmeralda             978                        -0.149
 8        Nebraska              Logan            773                        -0.147
 9       Tennessee             Fayette        29,083                        -0.133
10           Texas             Reagan          3,290                        -0.129
11         Georgia     Chattahoochee          15,047                        -0.129
12        Nebraska            Thomas             733                        -0.126
13        Kentucky              Meade         28,189                        -0.119
14          Nevada             Lander          5,702                        -0.111
15        Montana              Prairie         1,179                        -0.109
16         Missouri            Wright         17,926                        -0.109
17           Texas         Jeff Davis          2,233                        -0.105
18           Idaho              Power          7,484                        -0.105
19        Kentucky             Owsley          4,852                        -0.102
20          Nevada             Eureka          1,632                        -0.098
21        Michigan               Ionia        61,712                        -0.097
22        Wyoming            Niobrara          2,396                        -0.096
23         Virginia    Rappahannock            6,980                        -0.096
24    West Virginia             Mingo         28,007                        -0.094
25          Illinois             Pope          4,411                        -0.093
Notes: The table reports the top and bottom 25 Census Shocks for 2000. See Section
3.1 for details and Appendix A for data sources.




                                         61
            Table E.5: Estimates of Logit Model of Propensity Score
                                           (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)
Income Growth (-1,1)                     -0.021        -0.089∗∗                    -0.088∗∗
                                        (0.031)         (0.037)                     (0.041)

Employment Growth (-1,1)               5.281∗∗∗         1.734                        2.053
                                       (1.531)         (1.521)                      (1.587)

Federal Spending Growth (-1,1)           0.024          -0.028                       -0.040
                                        (0.046)        (0.053)                      (0.056)

Income Growth (-3,0)                                   0.085∗                       0.082∗
                                                       (0.047)                      (0.046)

Employment Growth (-3,0)                               9.269∗∗∗                    9.356∗∗∗
                                                        (3.349)                     (3.224)

Federal Spending Growth (-3,0)                          0.098                        0.108
                                                       (0.069)                      (0.075)

Migration Share Shifter                                                2.299         2.086
                                                                      (2.063)       (1.794)

Industry Share Shifter                                                -2.162        -8.146
                                                                     (18.477)      (19.084)

FE for 1990                             -42.401         -46.647       -65.378       -80.680
                                       (43.184)        (45.791)      (62.290)      (69.673)

FE for 2000                           -133.667∗∗∗    -168.752∗∗∗    -132.922∗     -166.314∗∗
                                        (42.809)       (48.723)      (68.058)      (67.064)

Constant                                38.860          -30.083       29.018        -46.707
                                       (27.267)        (30.645)      (36.975)      (39.798)
Observations                             9,173           9,173        9,099          9,099
Notes: The table reports estimates from propensity score models of the Census Shock.
All coefficients are multiplied by 1000. See Section 3.5 for details and Appendix A for
data sources. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01
‘




                                             62
Table E.6: Estimates of Marginal Effects in Logit Model of Propensity Score
                                           (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)
High Census Shock
Income Growth (-1,1)                     -0.021        -0.089∗∗                     -0.088∗∗
                                        (0.031)         (0.037)                      (0.041)

Employment Growth (-1,1)                5.281∗∗∗         1.734                        2.053
                                        (1.531)         (1.521)                      (1.587)

Federal Spending Growth (-1,1)           0.024           -0.028                       -0.040
                                        (0.046)         (0.053)                      (0.056)

Income Growth (-3,0)                                    0.085∗                       0.082∗
                                                        (0.047)                      (0.046)

Employment Growth (-3,0)                               9.269∗∗∗                     9.356∗∗∗
                                                        (3.349)                      (3.224)

Federal Spending Growth (-3,0)                           0.098                        0.108
                                                        (0.069)                      (0.075)

Migration Share Shifter                                                 2.299         2.086
                                                                       (2.063)       (1.794)

Industry Share Shifter                                                 -2.162        -8.146
                                                                      (18.477)      (19.084)

FE for 1990                              -42.401        -46.647        -65.378       -80.680
                                        (43.184)       (45.791)       (62.290)      (69.673)

FE for 2000                           -133.667∗∗∗     -168.752∗∗∗    -132.922∗     -166.314∗∗
                                        (42.809)        (48.723)      (68.058)      (67.064)

Constant                                 38.860         -30.083        29.018        -46.707
                                        (27.267)       (30.645)       (36.975)      (39.798)
Observations                              9,173          9,173         9,099          9,099
Notes: The table reports marginal effects from propensity score models of the Census
Shock. All coefficients are multiplied by 1000. See Section 3.5 for details and Appendix
A for data sources. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                              63
 Table E.7: Robustness of Semi-parametric Estimates of the Effect of a Census Shock:
  Reduced-form Effects and Implied Multipliers using Probit Estimates of Propensity
                                      Score
                                 (1)             (2)             (3)                (4)
Employment Growth             1.099∗∗∗        1.135∗∗∗        0.988∗∗∗            0.950∗∗
                               (0.398)         (0.414)         (0.372)            (0.407)

Income Growth                 63.986∗∗       65.695∗∗         56.634∗∗            52.141∗
                              (27.431)       (28.725)         (26.364)            (28.461)

Federal Spending Growth       31.342∗∗       31.389∗∗         29.813∗∗            30.036∗∗
                              (13.221)       (12.497)         (13.160)            (12.748)

Implied Multipliers
Income Multiplier               2.042∗         2.093∗            1.9∗               1.736
                               (1.141)        (1.176)          (1.135)             (1.117)
 90% CI (percentile)          [.46,6.15]     [.45,6.29]       [.37,5.79]         [.17,5.59]
 Bootstrap p-value               .024           .028             .024                .037

Cost per Job                  28525∗∗        27663∗∗           30166∗              31626∗
                              (14527)        (13900)          (16332)             (17885)
 90% CI (percentile)        [7647,70989]   [8593,72090]     [8456,76202]        [8487,89747]
 Bootstrap p-value              .014           .011             .012                .015

Observations                    9,173          9,173           9,173              9,173
IPW                               Y              Y               Y                  Y
RA                                               Y               Y                  Y
RA Controls                                   Shocks       Shocks, Lagged     Shocks, Lagged
                                                             Outcomes           Outcomes
State Fixed Effects                Y               Y             Y
Year Fixed Effects                 Y               Y             Y
State-Year Fixed Effects                                                              Y
Notes: This table presents semi-parametric estimates of the effect of a Census Shock on out-
comes from year 2 to year 5. This table reports estimates using a probit for the propensity
score. See Section 4.1 for details and Appendix A for data sources. Bootstrapped standard
errors that allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level are reported in parentheses. The
controls for the propensity score model corresponds to those in column (4) of Table E.5. The
shocks used as RA controls include the Migration and Industry Share Shifters. The lagged
outcomes used as RA controls include, income, employment, and spending growth between
years (-1,1). Standard errors for multipliers are calculated using delta method. We also report
a bootstrapped confidence interval using the percentile method and the p-value of a one-sided
test that the multiplier is negative. Bootstrap statistics based on 2000 bootstrap samples. ∗
p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                               64
 Table E.8: Robustness of Semi-parametric Estimates of the Effect of a Census Shock:
   Reduced-form Effects and Implied Multipliers using Alternative Discretization of
                                   Census Shock
                                 (1)             (2)             (3)                (4)
Employment Growth             1.345∗∗∗        1.409∗∗∗        1.284∗∗∗            1.172∗∗
                               (0.500)         (0.525)         (0.463)            (0.504)

Income Growth                 85.029∗∗∗      88.457∗∗∗        80.076∗∗            70.695∗∗
                               (32.452)       (34.106)        (31.189)            (34.183)

Federal Spending Growth       41.054∗∗       41.538∗∗         39.979∗∗           44.285∗∗∗
                              (17.181)       (16.409)         (17.158)            (17.074)

Implied Multipliers
Income Multiplier               2.071∗          2.13∗           2.003∗             1.596∗
                               (1.148)        (1.161)          (1.136)             (.961)
 90% CI (percentile)          [.48,6.48]     [.54,6.19]       [.59,6.06]         [.34,4.78]
 Bootstrap p-value               .024           .023             .017               .022

Cost per Job                   30521∗         29472∗           31127∗             37799∗
                              (16432)        (15441)          (17071)            (21259)
 90% CI (percentile)        [7366,86018]   [8035,82994]     [8393,78577]      [10622,107715]
 Bootstrap p-value              .018           .016             .014               .014

Observations                    7,337          7,337           7,337              7,337
IPW                               Y              Y               Y                  Y
RA                                               Y               Y                  Y
RA Controls                                   Shocks       Shocks, Lagged     Shocks, Lagged
                                                             Outcomes           Outcomes
State Fixed Effects                Y               Y             Y
Year Fixed Effects                 Y               Y             Y
State-Year Fixed Effects                                                             Y
Notes: This table presents semi-parametric estimates of the effect of a Census Shock on out-
comes from year 2 to year 5. This table explores an alternative discretization of the Census
Shock where counties with a continuous Census Shock in the top 40% of the distribution is
placed in the treatment group and counties in the bottom 40% are placed in the control group.
See Section 4.1 for details and Appendix A for data sources. The propensity score model
corresponds to column (4) of Table E.5. The shocks used as RA controls include the Migra-
tion and Industry Share Shifters. The lagged outcomes used as RA controls include, income,
employment, and spending growth between years (-1,1). Bootstrapped standard errors that
allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level are reported in parentheses. Standard errors
for multipliers are calculated using delta method. We also report a bootstrapped confidence
interval using the percentile method and the p-value of a one-sided test that the multiplier
is negative. Bootstrap statistics based on 2000 bootstrap samples. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗
p < .01




                                               65
 Table E.9: Robustness of Semi-parametric Estimates of the Effect of a Census Shock:
                Reduced-form Effects and Implied Multipliers (ATE)
                                  (1)             (2)              (3)                (4)
Employment Growth              1.129∗∗∗        1.146∗∗∗         1.043∗∗∗           1.072∗∗∗
                                (0.347)         (0.356)          (0.327)            (0.343)

Income Growth                  65.025∗∗∗       65.852∗∗         59.280∗∗           60.478∗∗
                                (24.539)       (25.633)         (23.769)           (24.425)

Federal Spending Growth        32.612∗∗        32.582∗∗∗        31.986∗∗          32.419∗∗∗
                               (13.020)         (12.555)        (12.934)           (12.230)

Implied Multipliers
Income Multiplier                1.994∗          2.021∗           1.853∗             1.866∗
                                (1.035)         (1.062)           (.995)             (.972)
 90% CI (percentile)           [.61,5.63]      [.58,5.79]       [.54,4.81]         [.59,4.84]
 Bootstrap p-value                .013            .013             .014               .013

Cost per Job                    28887∗∗        28431∗∗          30676∗∗            30240∗∗
                                (13200)        (12914)          (14234)            (13777)
 90% CI (percentile)         [10131,61502]   [9983,65826]    [11350,66340]      [11433,66741]
 Bootstrap p-value                .009           .005             .007               .009

Observations                     9,173           9,173          9,173              9,173
IPW                                Y               Y              Y                  Y
RA                                                 Y              Y                  Y
RA Controls                                     Shocks      Shocks, Lagged     Shocks, Lagged
                                                              Outcomes           Outcomes
State Fixed Effects                 Y              Y              Y
Year Fixed Effects                  Y              Y              Y
State-Year Fixed Effects                                                                Y
Notes: This table presents semi-parametric estimates of the effect of a Census Shock on out-
comes from year 2 to year 5. This table reports the average treatment effect. See Section
4.1 for details and Appendix A for data sources. The propensity score model corresponds to
column (4) of Table E.5. The shocks used as RA controls include the Migration and Industry
Share Shifters. The lagged outcomes used as RA controls include, income, employment, and
spending growth between years (-1,1). Bootstrapped standard errors that allow for arbitrary
correlation at the state level are reported in parentheses. Standard errors for multipliers are
calculated using delta method. We also report a bootstrapped confidence interval using the
percentile method and the p-value of a one-sided test that the multiplier is negative. Bootstrap
statistics based on 2000 bootstrap samples. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                               66
Table E.10: Robustness of Semi-parametric Estimates of the Effect of a Census Shock:
   Reduced-form Effects and Implied Multipliers using IRS Data Tax Return Data
                                  (1)             (2)               (3)               (4)
Employment Growth              1.249∗∗∗        1.261∗∗∗          1.248∗∗∗          1.105∗∗∗
                               (0.225)          (0.219)           (0.219)           (0.242)

Income Growth                 80.972∗∗∗        82.102∗∗∗        75.760∗∗∗         64.310∗∗∗
                               (21.699)         (21.511)         (21.203)          (23.286)

Federal Spending Growth       39.005∗∗∗        39.030∗∗∗        39.017∗∗∗         38.215∗∗∗
                               (13.579)         (12.859)         (13.529)          (13.347)

Implied Multipliers
Income Multiplier              2.076∗∗          2.104∗∗          1.942∗∗            1.683∗∗
                                (.893)           (.897)           (.852)             (.855)
 90% CI (percentile)           [1,5.12]       [1.01,5.11]       [.87,4.77]         [.59,4.44]
 Bootstrap p-value               .004             .002             .003               .008

Cost per Job                  31222∗∗∗         30946∗∗∗         31255∗∗∗           34595∗∗
                               (11407)          (11010)          (11406)           (13506)
 90% CI (percentile)        [12723,52608]    [12947,51785]    [13229,52817]     [13550,61580]
 Bootstrap p-value               .004             .002             .003              .005

Observations                    9,173            9,173           9,173             9,173
IPW                               Y                Y               Y                 Y
RA                                                 Y               Y                 Y
RA Controls                                     Shocks       Shocks, Lagged    Shocks, Lagged
                                                               Outcomes          Outcomes
State Fixed Effects               Y               Y                Y
Year Fixed Effects                Y               Y                Y
State-Year Fixed Effects                                                               Y
Notes: This table presents semi-parametric estimates of the effect of a Census Shock on out-
comes from year 2 to year 5. Outcome data come from IRS Statistics Of Income and from
BEA. The employment measure is tax files, when available. See Section 4.1 for details and
Appendix A for data sources. The propensity score model corresponds to column (4) of Ta-
ble E.5. The shocks used as RA controls include the Migration and Industry Share Shifters.
The lagged outcomes used as RA controls include, income, employment, and spending growth
between years (-1,1). Bootstrapped standard errors that allow for arbitrary correlation at the
state level are reported in parentheses. Standard errors for multipliers are calculated using
delta method. We also report a bootstrapped confidence interval using the percentile method
and the p-value of a one-sided test that the multiplier is negative. Bootstrap statistics based
on 2000 bootstrap samples. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                              67
Table E.11: Robustness of Semi-parametric Estimates of the Effect of a Census Shock:
          Reduced-form Effects and Implied Multipliers using QCEW Data
                                  (1)             (2)               (3)               (4)
Employment Growth               1.143∗∗         1.148∗∗          1.151∗∗∗           1.094∗∗
                                (0.453)         (0.465)           (0.422)           (0.439)

Earnings Growth                 39.848           40.426           40.623             36.734
                               (33.350)         (34.333)         (31.105)           (32.471)

Federal Spending Growth        36.956∗∗∗       36.945∗∗∗         36.112∗∗∗         36.496∗∗∗
                                (13.180)        (12.390)          (12.898)          (12.846)

Implied Multipliers
Earnings Multiplier              1.078            1.094             1.125             1.007
                                 (.942)           (.957)            (.907)            (.916)
 90% CI (percentile)          [-.73,3.33]       [-.79,3.2]       [-.43,3.48]       [-.62,3.48]
 Bootstrap p-value                .147             .148              .103              .134

Cost per Job                    32321∗∗         32180∗∗           31366∗∗           33370∗∗
                                (15551)         (15151)           (14372)           (15643)
 90% CI (percentile)         [10546,97770]   [12662,96213]     [12615,74259]     [12061,83573]
 Bootstrap p-value                .018            .013              .008              .012

Observations                     9,173            9,173           9,173             9,173
IPW                                Y                Y               Y                 Y
RA                                                  Y               Y                 Y
RA Controls                                      Shocks       Shocks, Lagged    Shocks, Lagged
                                                                Outcomes          Outcomes
State Fixed Effects                 Y               Y               Y
Year Fixed Effects                  Y               Y               Y
State-Year Fixed Effects                                                                Y
Notes: This table presents semi-parametric estimates of the effect of a Census Shock on out-
comes from year 2 to year 5. Outcome data come from QCEW. Note that this table only
reports earning and not total income. See Section 4.1 for details and Appendix A for data
sources. The propensity score model corresponds to column (4) of Table E.5. The shocks used
as RA controls include the Migration and Industry Share Shifters. The lagged outcomes used
as RA controls include, income, employment, and spending growth between years (-1,1). Boot-
strapped standard errors that allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level are reported in
parentheses. Standard errors for multipliers are calculated using delta method. We also report
a bootstrapped confidence interval using the percentile method and the p-value of a one-sided
test that the multiplier is negative. Bootstrap statistics based on 2000 bootstrap samples.
∗
  p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                                68
Table E.12: Robustness of Semi-parametric Estimates of the Effect of a Census Shock:
  Reduced-form Effects and Implied Multipliers Eliminating Outliers Identivied via
                                    Jackknife
                                  (1)              (2)              (3)                (4)
Employment Growth              1.456∗∗∗         1.480∗∗∗         1.385∗∗∗           1.469∗∗∗
                                (0.459)          (0.460)          (0.449)            (0.492)

Income Growth                  75.979∗∗         76.984∗∗         72.833∗∗           76.616∗∗
                               (29.629)         (30.257)         (29.910)           (33.573)

Federal Spending Growth        35.133∗∗∗       35.520∗∗∗         36.254∗∗∗         37.255∗∗∗
                                (11.869)        (11.829)          (11.944)          (11.032)

Implied Multipliers
Income Multiplier               2.163∗∗         2.167∗∗           2.009∗∗           2.057∗∗
                                 (.952)          (.979)            (.907)            (.897)
 90% CI (percentile)           [.75,4.34]      [.72,4.45]        [.66,4.03]        [.63,3.93]
 Bootstrap p-value                .009            .008              .008               .01

Cost per Job                   24123∗∗∗        24008∗∗∗          26177∗∗∗          25362∗∗∗
                                (8228)          (8306)            (8887)            (8352)
 90% CI (percentile)         [13251,47417]   [12842,46274]     [14475,49180]     [14560,49596]
 Bootstrap p-value                .001           .002              .002               .001

Observations                     8,184           8,184            8,184             8,184
IPW                                Y               Y                Y                 Y
RA                                                 Y                Y                 Y
RA Controls                                     Shocks        Shocks, Lagged    Shocks, Lagged
                                                                Outcomes          Outcomes
State Fixed Effects                  Y               Y              Y
Year Fixed Effects                   Y               Y              Y
State-Year Fixed Effects                                                                Y
Notes: This table presents semi-parametric estimates of the effect of a Census Shock on out-
comes from year 2 to year 5. See Section 4.1 for details and Appendix A for data sources.
The propensity score model corresponds to column (4) of Table E.5. The shocks used as RA
controls include the Migration and Industry Share Shifters. The lagged outcomes used as
RA controls include, income, employment, and spending growth between years (-1,1). Boot-
strapped standard errors that allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level are reported in
parentheses. Standard errors for multipliers are calculated using delta method. We also report
a bootstrapped confidence interval using the percentile method and the p-value of a one-sided
test that the multiplier is negative. Bootstrap statistics based on 2000 bootstrap samples. This
table excludes outlier observations. We first run a jackknife procedure at the State-Year level
and identify the State-Years that have large effects on the main estimate. This table excludes
counties in State-Years that lead to an average percentage change of more than 10% in the
estimation. In total, 14 State-Years are omitted from the estimation. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗
p < .01 ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                                69
Table E.13: Robustness of Semi-parametric Estimates of the Effect of a Census Shock:
 Reduced-form Effects and Implied Multipliers using Alternate Definition of Spending
                                  (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)
Employment Growth              1.059∗∗∗         1.092∗∗∗         0.970∗∗∗           0.938∗∗
                                (0.391)          (0.406)          (0.369)           (0.409)

Income Growth                  59.815∗∗         61.394∗∗         54.176∗∗           50.151∗
                               (26.710)         (27.743)         (26.068)           (28.464)

Federal Spending Growth        22.560∗∗∗       22.600∗∗∗         22.033∗∗∗         24.061∗∗∗
                                (6.405)         (6.281)           (6.387)           (6.447)

Implied Multipliers
Income Multiplier                2.651∗          2.717∗            2.459∗            2.084
                                 (1.38)         (1.443)           (1.384)           (1.282)
 90% CI (percentile)           [.62,5.59]      [.54,5.84]        [.56,5.78]        [.27,5.33]
 Bootstrap p-value                .019            .025              .019              .032

Cost per Job                    21307∗∗         20698∗∗           22708∗∗           25648∗∗
                                 (9277)          (9267)           (10387)           (12646)
 90% CI (percentile)         [10250,53629]   [10076,56119]     [10275,56068]     [10760,72100]
 Bootstrap p-value                .003            .004              .003              .004

Observations                     9,173           9,173            9,173             9,173
IPW                                Y               Y                Y                 Y
RA                                                 Y                Y                 Y
RA Controls                                     Shocks        Shocks, Lagged    Shocks, Lagged
                                                                Outcomes          Outcomes
State Fixed Effects                 Y              Y                Y
Year Fixed Effects                  Y              Y                Y
State-Year Fixed Effects                                                                Y
Notes: This table presents semi-parametric estimates of the effect of a Census Shock on out-
comes from year 2 to year 5. The definition of spending in this tables does not use a 3-year
moving average but instead winsorizes the top 1% of changes in federal spending. See Section
4.1 for details and Appendix A for data sources. The propensity score model corresponds to
column (4) of Table E.5. The shocks used as RA controls include the Migration and Industry
Share Shifters. The lagged outcomes used as RA controls include, income, employment, and
spending growth between years (-1,1). Bootstrapped standard errors that allow for arbitrary
correlation at the state level are reported in parentheses. Standard errors for multipliers are
calculated using delta method. We also report a bootstrapped confidence interval using the
percentile method and the p-value of a one-sided test that the multiplier is negative. Bootstrap
statistics based on 2000 bootstrap samples. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                                70
      Table E.14: Robustness of Semi-parametric Estimates of the Effect of a Census Shock:
                          First Stage Results and Types of Spending
                                                               (1)         (2)            (3)              (4)
Growth in Federal Spending                                  34.487∗∗∗   34.307∗∗∗     34.738∗∗∗         36.440∗∗∗
                                                             (13.225)    (12.673)      (13.007)          (12.553)

Growth in Federal Spending Less Salaries and Wages          33.710∗∗∗   33.592∗∗∗     34.053∗∗∗         35.229∗∗∗
                                                             (12.955)    (12.390)      (12.767)          (12.386)

Growth in Federal Spending Less Procurement Contracts       34.547∗∗∗   34.476∗∗∗     34.941∗∗∗         35.550∗∗∗
                                                             (11.209)    (10.794)      (11.076)          (10.750)

Growth in Procurement Contracts                               -0.060      -0.169        -0.203            0.890
                                                             (5.103)     (4.854)       (5.017)           (5.135)

Growth in Salaries and Wages                                  0.777       0.715         0.685             1.210
                                                             (1.666)     (1.676)       (1.667)           (1.620)

Observations                                                  9,173       9,173         9,173            9,173
IPW                                                             Y           Y             Y                Y
RA                                                                          Y             Y                Y
RA Controls                                                              Shocks     Shocks, Lagged   Shocks, Lagged
                                                                                      Outcomes         Outcomes
State Fixed Effects                                            Y           Y              Y
Year Fixed Effects                                             Y           Y              Y
State-Year Fixed Effects                                                                                    Y
Notes: This table presents semi-parametric estimates of the effect of a Census Shock on spending growth from year
2 to year 5. See Section 4.1 for details and Appendix A for data sources. The propensity score model corresponds
to column (4) of Table E.5. The shocks used as RA controls include the Migration and Industry Share Shifters.
The lagged outcomes used as RA controls include, income, employment, and spending growth between years (-1,1).
Bootstrapped standard errors that allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level are reported in parentheses.
Bootstrap statistics based on 2000 bootstrap samples. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                                       71
                   Table E.15: Event Study of Census Shock and Implied Multipliers
                               (1)                      (2)                  (3)                      (4)                 (5)
                    Federal Spending Growth       Income Growth       Employment Growth        Income Multiplier     Jobs per $1M
Census Shockt+9              55.709                   27.838                0.636                    0.018               2.368
                            (142.291)                (129.253)             (1.767)                  (0.418)             (6.449)

Census Shockt+8                0.781                    0.100                 0.176                   -0.069              1.056
                             (122.793)                (122.944)              (1.614)                 (0.439)             (6.461)

Census Shockt+7               -31.506                  -20.664                0.436                   -0.151              2.148
                             (105.674)                (110.748)              (1.406)                 (0.445)             (6.508)

Census Shockt+6                9.474                   -18.219                0.500                   -0.160              2.686
                              (96.247)                (95.717)               (1.217)                 (0.445)             (6.589)

Census Shockt+5                9.203                   -33.751                -0.133                  -0.254              0.022
                             (110.255)                (80.635)               (1.074)                 (0.452)             (6.674)

Census Shockt+4               24.965                   -13.388                -0.077                  -0.187              0.343
                             (139.647)                (64.751)               (0.868)                 (0.438)             (6.769)

Census Shockt+3               -23.570∗                 28.222                 0.284                   0.043               2.844
                              (12.473)                (51.106)               (0.687)                 (0.438)             (7.220)

Census Shockt+2               -11.898∗                 23.086                 0.111                   0.012               2.097
                               (7.197)                (34.314)               (0.316)                 (0.368)             (5.873)

Census Shockt+1                1.028                   11.697                 -0.146                  -0.106              -0.091
                              (6.395)                 (15.007)               (0.206)                 (0.394)             (5.542)

Census Shockt                  0.000                    0.000                 0.000                   -0.346              2.323
                              (0.000)                  (0.000)               (0.000)                 (0.698)             (9.621)

Census Shockt−1                6.129                   9.625                  -0.166                  -0.383             -0.954
                              (6.948)                 (16.538)               (0.217)                 (1.212)            (17.397)

Census Shockt−2                -8.224                  21.547                 -0.138                  0.000              0.000
                              (17.320)                (42.144)               (0.563)                   (.)                (.)

Census Shockt−3                42.938                  77.628                 0.974                   1.803             37.451∗
                              (30.587)                (55.831)               (0.834)                 (1.125)            (20.277)

Census Shockt−4               71.907∗                 162.277∗∗              1.783∗                  2.262∗∗            32.333∗
                              (38.416)                 (63.690)              (0.995)                 (1.130)            (16.857)

Census Shockt−5             113.739∗∗∗               204.833∗∗∗              2.357∗                  1.964∗∗            27.995∗
                             (42.031)                 (78.616)               (1.254)                 (0.993)            (15.135)

Census Shockt−6              115.030∗∗                248.589∗∗               2.535                  1.825∗             22.502∗
                              (46.651)                (100.386)              (1.583)                 (0.939)            (13.459)

Census Shockt−7             134.454∗∗∗                274.359∗∗               2.984                  1.626∗              21.022
                             (49.805)                 (133.261)              (1.948)                 (0.924)            (13.286)

Census Shockt−8             153.243∗∗∗               400.697∗∗∗              3.743∗                  2.032∗∗            21.776∗
                             (51.084)                 (153.466)              (2.235)                 (1.032)            (13.158)

Census Shockt−9             171.330∗∗∗               452.853∗∗∗              5.269∗∗                 1.981∗∗            26.007∗
                             (54.163)                 (160.142)              (2.388)                 (0.979)            (13.664)
Observations                   9,173                    9,173                 9,173                   9,173              9,173
Notes: This table presents semi-parametric estimates of dynamic effect of a Census Shock. This table reports average
treatment effects on the treated. See Section 4.2 for details and Appendix A for data sources. This table reports similar
models to Table 3 for years s = −9, · · · , 9. Bootstrapped standard errors that allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level
are reported in parentheses. Bootstrap statistics based on 2000 bootstrap samples. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01
                                                           72
         Table E.16: Event Study of Census Shock and Implied Multipliers Controlling for
                                       Lagged Outcomes
                               (1)                       (2)                 (3)                       (4)                (5)
                    Federal Spending Growth       Income Growth       Employment Growth        Income Multiplier     Jobs per $1M
Census Shockt+9              -21.296                   -1.441               0.097                    -0.004              0.290
                            (109.551)                 (85.444)             (1.066)                  (0.249)             (3.206)

Census Shockt+8                -39.547                 -28.231                -0.362                  -0.091              -1.194
                              (89.622)                (81.245)               (0.940)                 (0.260)             (3.097)

Census Shockt+7                -31.568                 -46.148                -0.073                  -0.164              -0.266
                              (78.220)                (70.485)               (0.761)                 (0.255)             (2.781)

Census Shockt+6                44.932                  -38.238                0.017                   -0.153              0.071
                              (69.721)                (59.589)               (0.629)                 (0.243)             (2.596)

Census Shockt+5                -5.861                  -50.329                -0.568                  -0.231              -2.676
                              (66.768)                (49.086)               (0.596)                 (0.237)             (2.969)

Census Shockt+4                -26.956                 -29.258                -0.411                  -0.156              -2.258
                              (58.864)                (34.757)               (0.466)                 (0.191)             (2.684)

Census Shockt+3               -14.365                  11.279                 0.028                   0.072               0.185
                              (9.339)                 (23.014)               (0.309)                 (0.153)             (2.045)

Census Shockt+2                0.000                    0.000                 0.000                   0.000              0.000
                              (0.000)                  (0.000)               (0.000)                   (.)                (.)

Census Shockt+1                0.000                    0.000                 0.000                   0.000              0.000
                              (0.000)                  (0.000)               (0.000)                   (.)                (.)

Census Shockt                  0.000                    0.000                 0.000                   0.000              0.000
                              (0.000)                  (0.000)               (0.000)                   (.)                (.)

Census Shockt−1                0.000                    0.000                 0.000                   0.000              0.000
                              (0.000)                  (0.000)               (0.000)                   (.)                (.)

Census Shockt−2                0.000                    0.000                 0.000                   0.000              0.000
                              (0.000)                  (0.000)               (0.000)                   (.)                (.)

Census Shockt−3              55.443∗∗                 51.712∗                1.187∗∗∗                 1.659             39.143∗
                             (22.075)                 (28.972)                (0.423)                (1.088)            (20.085)

Census Shockt−4              90.760∗∗∗               143.231∗∗∗              2.063∗∗∗                2.297∗             34.017∗
                              (32.143)                (53.872)                (0.732)                (1.188)            (17.497)

Census Shockt−5             129.807∗∗∗               187.252∗∗∗              2.691∗∗∗                2.002∗             29.573∗
                             (41.161)                 (71.565)                (0.991)                (1.030)            (15.483)

Census Shockt−6             131.143∗∗∗                222.785∗∗              2.927∗∗                 1.787∗             24.126∗
                             (47.495)                  (88.551)              (1.228)                 (0.928)            (13.362)

Census Shockt−7             152.989∗∗∗                236.794∗∗              3.452∗∗                 1.519∗             22.762∗
                             (50.520)                 (109.941)              (1.500)                 (0.851)            (12.795)

Census Shockt−8             168.426∗∗∗               355.208∗∗∗              4.260∗∗                 1.899∗∗            23.410∗
                             (51.755)                 (129.870)              (1.724)                 (0.953)            (12.513)

Census Shockt−9             184.535∗∗∗               406.611∗∗∗              5.779∗∗∗                1.863∗∗            27.221∗∗
                             (55.533)                 (134.508)               (1.886)                (0.903)            (13.110)
Observations                   9,173                    9,173                  9,173                  9,173              9,173
Notes: This table presents semi-parametric estimates of dynamic effect of a Census Shock. This table reports average
treatment effects on the treated. See Section 4.2 for details and Appendix A for data sources. This table reports similar
models to Table 4 for years s = −9, · · · , 9. Bootstrapped standard errors that allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level
                                                                                       ∗         ∗∗          ∗∗∗
are reported in parentheses. Bootstrap statistics based on 732000 bootstrap samples. p < .1, p < .05,            p < .01
      Table E.17: Event Study of Census Shock and Implied Multipliers: Average Treatment
                                            Effects
                               (1)                      (2)                 (3)                     (4)                (5)
                    Federal Spending Growth      Income Growth      Employment Growth       Income Multiplier    Jobs per $1M
Census Shockt+6              -24.348                  -84.377             -0.666                  -0.414             -3.194
                            (115.182)                (84.534)            (0.807)                 (0.388)            (3.542)

Census Shockt+5              -83.213                  -87.498               -1.100                 -0.486             -5.594
                            (134.167)                (73.256)              (0.717)                (0.407)            (4.192)

Census Shockt+4              -150.144                 -61.343               -0.849                 -0.434             -5.215
                            (168.319)                (64.527)              (0.646)                (0.390)            (4.230)

Census Shockt+3               -20.713                 -13.110               -0.267                 -0.226             -2.607
                             (14.382)                (46.725)              (0.423)                (0.336)            (3.668)

Census Shockt+2              -11.823                  -3.912                -0.146                 -0.212             -2.307
                             (7.816)                 (23.721)              (0.211)                (0.266)            (3.670)

Census Shockt+1               1.584                   11.286                -0.133                 -0.128             -2.938
                             (5.703)                 (10.652)              (0.190)                (0.279)            (4.359)

Census Shockt                 0.000                   0.000                 0.000                  -0.364             -2.325
                             (0.000)                 (0.000)               (0.000)                (0.444)            (7.320)

Census Shockt−1               6.063                   13.449                -0.110                 -0.317            -8.097
                             (6.805)                 (11.454)              (0.222)                (0.807)           (11.115)

Census Shockt−2               -7.775                  23.811                0.148                  0.000              0.000
                             (18.689)                (27.574)              (0.475)                  (.)                (.)

Census Shockt−3               43.008                 73.456∗               1.354∗∗                1.519∗            37.846∗∗∗
                             (38.877)                (38.184)              (0.688)                (0.805)            (13.924)

Census Shockt−4               73.344               154.544∗∗∗              2.103∗∗                1.999∗∗           30.679∗∗
                             (45.673)               (49.413)               (0.901)                (0.935)           (13.593)

Census Shockt−5             113.263∗∗              206.393∗∗∗             2.831∗∗∗                1.862∗            28.068∗∗
                             (46.464)               (75.568)               (1.092)                (0.980)           (13.692)

Census Shockt−6            115.333∗∗∗               253.692∗∗              3.135∗∗                1.758∗            23.434∗
                            (41.391)                 (98.985)              (1.295)                (0.973)           (12.274)
Observations                  9,173                   9,173                 9,173                  9,173             9,173
Notes: This table presents semi-parametric estimates of dynamic effect of a Census Shock. See Section 4.2 for details and
Appendix A for data sources. This table reports average treatment effects using the same models as in Table 3. Bootstrapped
standard errors that allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level are reported in parentheses. Bootstrap statistics based
on 2000 bootstrap samples. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                                         74
         Table E.18: Event Study of Census Shock and Implied Multipliers Controlling for
                          Lagged Outcomes: Average Treatment Effects
                                (1)                     (2)                (3)                      (4)               (5)
                    Federal Spending Growth      Income Growth      Employment Growth       Income Multiplier    Jobs per $1M
Census Shockt+6               11.365                  -38.238             0.017                   -0.153             0.071
                             (69.941)                (59.482)            (0.740)                 (0.254)            (3.042)

Census Shockt+5               -10.431                 -50.329               -0.568                 -0.231             -2.676
                             (76.124)                (53.507)              (0.707)                (0.281)            (3.961)

Census Shockt+4               -20.323                 -29.258               -0.411                 -0.156             -2.258
                             (71.140)                (36.510)              (0.556)                (0.212)            (3.529)

Census Shockt+3               -8.734                  11.279                0.028                  0.072              0.185
                             (5.667)                 (20.881)              (0.313)                (0.137)            (2.033)

Census Shockt+2               0.000                   0.000                 0.000                  0.000              0.000
                             (0.000)                 (0.000)               (0.000)                  (.)                (.)

Census Shockt+1               0.000                   0.000                 0.000                  0.000              0.000
                             (0.000)                 (0.000)               (0.000)                  (.)                (.)

Census Shockt                 0.000                   0.000                 0.000                  0.000              0.000
                             (0.000)                 (0.000)               (0.000)                  (.)                (.)

Census Shockt−1               0.000                   0.000                 0.000                  0.000              0.000
                             (0.000)                 (0.000)               (0.000)                  (.)                (.)

Census Shockt−2               0.000                   0.000                 0.000                  0.000              0.000
                             (0.000)                 (0.000)               (0.000)                  (.)                (.)

Census Shockt−3             58.745∗∗                 51.712∗              1.187∗∗∗                1.659∗            39.143∗∗
                            (23.942)                 (26.901)              (0.455)                (0.971)           (18.106)

Census Shockt−4             96.986∗∗∗               143.231∗∗              2.063∗∗                2.297∗            34.017∗
                             (34.419)                (57.122)              (0.859)                (1.227)           (18.170)

Census Shockt−5            136.058∗∗∗               187.252∗∗              2.691∗∗                2.002∗            29.573∗
                            (40.503)                 (84.666)              (1.165)                (1.172)           (17.486)

Census Shockt−6            139.100∗∗∗               222.785∗∗              2.927∗∗                 1.787             24.126
                            (37.172)                (109.815)              (1.417)                (1.131)           (15.627)
Observations                 9,173                    9,173                 9,173                  9,173             9,173
Notes: This table presents semi-parametric estimates of dynamic effect of a Census Shock. See Section 4.2 for details and
Appendix A for data sources. This table reports average treatment effects using the same models as in Table 4. Bootstrapped
standard errors that allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level are reported in parentheses. Bootstrap statistics based
on 2000 bootstrap samples. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                                         75
Table E.19: Event Study of Census Shock on Employment: Alternative Propensity
                                 Score Model
                           (1)                  (2)               (3)                  (4)
                   Employment Growth      Jobs per $1M    Employment Growth      Jobs per $1M
Census Shockt+6          -1.836               -7.775            -0.584               -2.446
                        (1.572)              (6.994)           (1.434)              (6.330)

Census Shockt+5            -1.808             -8.761              -0.686              -3.284
                          (1.292)            (7.011)             (1.156)             (6.174)

Census Shockt+4            -0.927             -5.499              0.083               0.462
                          (1.031)            (5.926)             (0.849)             (4.680)

Census Shockt+3            0.067              -0.205              0.885               5.930
                          (0.728)            (5.163)             (0.559)             (3.907)

Census Shockt+2            0.033              -0.527              0.000               0.000
                          (0.409)            (4.352)             (0.000)               (.)

Census Shockt+1            -0.111             -2.253              0.000               0.000
                          (0.217)            (4.169)             (0.000)               (.)

Census Shockt              0.000              -1.591              0.000               0.000
                          (0.000)            (7.581)             (0.000)               (.)

Census Shockt−1            -0.110             -6.722              0.000               0.000
                          (0.253)            (12.000)            (0.000)               (.)

Census Shockt−2            0.099              0.000               0.000               0.000
                          (0.484)              (.)               (0.000)               (.)

Census Shockt−3           1.428∗             42.725∗∗            1.212∗∗            40.601∗∗
                          (0.759)            (17.769)            (0.473)            (19.764)

Census Shockt−4          2.398∗∗             36.956∗∗            2.181∗∗            36.551∗
                         (1.039)             (17.669)            (0.899)            (19.872)

Census Shockt−5          3.161∗∗             32.815∗             2.806∗∗            31.342∗
                         (1.279)             (17.116)            (1.226)            (18.823)

Census Shockt−6          3.582∗∗             27.997∗             2.925∗              24.508
                         (1.557)             (15.667)            (1.518)            (16.523)
Observations              9,173               9,173               9,173              9,173
Notes: This table presents semi-parametric estimates of dynamic effect of a Census Shock. See
Section 4.2 for details and Appendix A for data sources. Columns (1) and (3) of this table
correspond to columns (3) in Tables 3 and 4, respectively, except that the propensity score
model does not include ∆Empc,t−6 . Columns (2) and (4) report the corresponding estimates of
jobs per $1M. Bootstrap statistics based on 2000 bootstrap samples. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗
p < .01




                                               76
           Table E.20: OLS Reduced Form Effects of Census Shock on Income Growth
                                 (1)            (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)           (6)
Census Shock                 1362.077∗∗∗    1407.829∗∗∗   963.102∗∗∗   963.292∗∗   974.625∗∗    1276.660∗∗∗
                              (404.962)      (416.797)     (355.326)   (362.794)   (388.625)     (361.855)

Migration Shifter                              -3.121                    -2.618                   -9.239∗∗
                                              (2.374)                   (2.140)                    (3.780)

Industry Shifter                              -7.110                   -51.533∗∗                  17.285
                                             (19.931)                   (19.977)                 (28.333)

Employment Growth (-1,1)                                   10.333∗∗∗   10.917∗∗∗                  -11.646
                                                            (1.980)     (2.094)                   (9.099)

Income Growth (-1,1)                                        0.115∗      0.127∗                   0.230∗∗∗
                                                            (0.068)     (0.066)                   (0.084)
Observations                      9,177          9,103       9,177       9,103       9,103         9,103
P-score Control                                                                        Y             Y
State Fixed Effects                 Y              Y              Y        Y           Y
Year Fixed Effects                  Y              Y              Y        Y           Y
State-Year Fixed Effects                                                                             Y
Notes: This table reports results from OLS regressions of income growth between years 2 and 5. See Section
4.3 for details and Appendix A for data sources. Standard errors that allow for arbitrary correlation at the
state level are reported in parentheses. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                                    77
    Table E.21: OLS Reduced Form Effects of Census Shock on Employment Growth
                                  (1)          (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)
Census Shock                   21.109∗∗∗    21.655∗∗∗    13.860∗∗   13.761∗∗    14.138∗∗    19.298∗∗∗
                                (6.342)      (6.545)      (5.629)    (5.720)     (6.006)     (5.347)

Migration Shifter                            -0.069∗                 -0.062∗                -0.161∗∗∗
                                             (0.039)                 (0.034)                 (0.056)

Industry Shifter                              -0.036                 -0.666∗∗                 0.273
                                             (0.303)                  (0.304)                (0.343)

Employment Growth (-1,1)                                 0.267∗∗∗    0.281∗∗∗                 -0.037
                                                          (0.032)     (0.033)                (0.118)

Income Growth (-1,1)                                      -0.000      0.000                   0.001
                                                         (0.001)     (0.001)                 (0.001)
Observations                      9,177        9,103      9,177       9,103       9,103       9,103
P-score Control                                                                     Y           Y
State Fixed Effects                 Y            Y           Y          Y           Y
Year Fixed Effects                  Y            Y           Y          Y           Y
State-Year Fixed Effects                                                                        Y
Notes: This table reports results from OLS regressions of employment growth between years 2
and 5. See Section 4.3 for details and Appendix A for data sources. Standard errors that allow
for arbitrary correlation at the state level are reported in parentheses. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗
p < .01




                                                  78
                           Table E.22: IV Estimates of Income Multiplier
                                   (1)        (2)              (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
Federal Spending                 1.973∗∗    2.054∗∗         2.377∗∗∗     1.719∗∗∗     2.106∗∗∗    2.086∗∗∗
                                 (0.856)    (0.876)          (0.851)      (0.618)      (0.709)     (0.683)

Migration Shifter                            -4.286                                    84.600      59.387
                                            (38.774)                                  (59.183)    (51.638)

Industry Shifter                            -72.669                                    -401.884    -506.146
                                           (483.908)                                  (412.874)   (351.981)

Employment Growth (−1, 1)                                   -96.199∗∗   -101.613∗∗∗    -191.087    -170.852
                                                             (39.659)     (35.209)    (127.023)   (121.517)

Income Growth (−1, 1)                                       1.606∗∗        0.537        1.160       0.746
                                                            (0.802)       (0.710)      (0.905)     (0.799)

Employment Growth (−3, 0)                                                  2.904       29.950      20.680
                                                                         (51.190)     (55.016)    (47.242)

Income Growth (−3, 0)                                                    2.643∗∗∗      2.403∗∗    2.540∗∗∗
                                                                          (1.025)      (0.997)     (0.947)
Observations                      9,103       9,103       9,103            9,103        9,103       9,103
First-Stage F Stat               16.019      14.466      17.819           14.757       14.718      16.210
P-Value Hausman Test              0.029       0.021       0.003            0.012        0.002       0.001
P-score Control                     Y           Y           Y                Y            Y           Y
State Fixed Effects                 Y           Y           Y                Y            Y
Year Fixed Effects                  Y           Y           Y                Y            Y
State-Year Fixed Effects                                                                             Y
Notes: This table reports results from IV regressions of income growth between years 2 and 5.
The coefficient on Federal Spending is multiplied by 1000 to represent the number of jobs from
an additional $1M in spending. All regressions include propensity score and interactions with
explanatory variables as in Wooldridge (2010, Eqn. 21.52). See Section 4.3 for details and Section
A for data sources. Standard errors that allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level are reported
in parentheses. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                                       79
                   Table E.23: IV Estimates of Jobs per $1M and Cost per Job
                                   (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)
Federal Spending                28.071∗∗   28.298∗∗    33.171∗∗∗   22.961∗∗    27.980∗∗∗    29.018∗∗∗
                                (13.092)   (13.413)     (12.667)    (9.072)     (10.421)     (8.712)

Migration Shifter                            -0.033                              1.170       1.128∗
                                            (0.686)                             (0.762)      (0.626)

Industry Shifter                             -0.738                              -3.447       -4.589
                                            (7.248)                             (6.215)      (5.540)

Employment Growth (−1, 1)                                -0.466      -0.776      -2.337       -1.860
                                                        (0.545)     (0.493)     (1.933)      (1.826)

Income Growth (−1, 1)                                    0.010       -0.001      0.010        0.006
                                                        (0.011)     (0.009)     (0.013)      (0.012)

Employment Growth (−3, 0)                                            0.925      1.273∗       1.110∗
                                                                    (0.711)     (0.720)      (0.633)

Income Growth (−3, 0)                                               0.022∗        0.018       0.021∗∗
                                                                    (0.012)      (0.012)      (0.010)
Cost per Job                    35.625∗∗   35.339∗∗    30.147∗∗∗   43.553∗∗     35.74∗∗∗    34.461∗∗∗
                                (16.615)    (16.75)     (11.512)   (17.209)     (13.311)     (10.345)
Observations                      9,103      9,103        9,103      9,103        9,103        9,103
First-Stage F Stat               16.019     14.466       17.819     14.757       14.718       16.210
P-Value Hausman Test              0.045      0.044        0.006      0.022        0.005        0.001
P-score Control                     Y          Y            Y          Y            Y            Y
State Fixed Effects                 Y          Y            Y          Y            Y
Year Fixed Effects                  Y          Y            Y          Y            Y
State-Year Fixed Effects                                                                         Y
Notes: This table reports results from IV regressions of employment growth between years 2 and
5. The coefficient on Federal Spending is multiplied by 1000 to represent the number of jobs
from an additional $1M in spending. All regressions include propensity score and interactions with
explanatory variables as in Wooldridge (2010, Eqn. 21.52). See Section 4.3 for details and Section A
for data sources. Standard errors that allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level are reported
in parentheses. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                                  80
                       Table E.24: OLS Estimates of Income Multiplier
                                (1)        (2)             (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)
Federal Spending Growth      0.188∗∗∗   0.187∗∗∗        0.158∗∗∗   0.153∗∗∗     0.172∗∗∗   0.159∗∗∗
                              (0.038)    (0.038)         (0.032)    (0.031)      (0.035)    (0.033)

Migration Shifter                        -2.958                      -2.502                -13.133∗∗∗
                                        (2.334)                     (2.108)                  (4.045)

Industry Shifter                         -8.963                    -52.702∗∗∗               39.170
                                        (18.300)                    (18.589)               (28.557)

Employment Growth (-1,1)                            10.420∗∗∗      10.907∗∗∗               -22.125∗∗
                                                     (2.030)        (2.133)                 (10.042)

Income Growth (-1,1)                                    0.112∗      0.125∗                 0.264∗∗∗
                                                        (0.067)     (0.065)                 (0.086)
Observations                  9,177      9,103           9,177       9,103       9,103       9,103
P-score Control                                                                    Y           Y
State Fixed Effects             Y          Y               Y           Y           Y
Year Fixed Effects              Y          Y               Y           Y           Y
State-Year Fixed Effects                                                                       Y
Notes: This table reports results from OLS regressions of income growth between years 2 and 5. See
Section 4.3 for details and Appendix A for data sources. Standard errors that allow for arbitrary
correlation at the state level are reported in parentheses. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                                   81
                   Table E.25: OLS Estimates of Jobs per $1M and Cost per Job
                                   (1)          (2)            (3)         (4)         (5)           (6)
Federal Spending Growth         2.836∗∗∗     2.820∗∗∗       2.350∗∗∗    2.255∗∗∗    2.572∗∗∗      2.362∗∗∗
                                 (0.544)      (0.540)        (0.500)     (0.464)     (0.503)       (0.470)

Migration Shifter                            -0.066∗                     -0.060∗                 -0.219∗∗∗
                                             (0.039)                     (0.034)                  (0.059)

Industry Shifter                              -0.064                    -0.682∗∗                  0.599∗
                                             (0.277)                     (0.282)                  (0.341)

Employment Growth (-1,1)                                    0.268∗∗∗    0.281∗∗∗                   -0.193
                                                             (0.033)     (0.034)                  (0.128)

Income Growth (-1,1)                                          -0.000      -0.000                  0.002∗∗
                                                             (0.001)     (0.001)                  (0.001)

Cost per Job                   352605∗∗∗    354604∗∗∗       425569∗∗∗   443547∗∗∗   388760∗∗∗    423298∗∗∗
                                (67665)      (67924)         (90546)     (91202)     (75965)      (84282)
Observations                     9,177        9,103           9,177       9,103       9,103        9,103
P-score Control                                                                         Y            Y
State Fixed Effects                Y            Y              Y           Y            Y
Year Fixed Effects                 Y            Y              Y           Y            Y
State-Year Fixed Effects                                                                             Y
Notes: This table reports results from OLS regressions of employment growth between years 2 and
5. The coefficient on Federal Spending is multiplied by 1000 to represent the number of jobs from an
additional $1M in spending. See Section 4.3 for details and Appendix A for data sources. Standard
errors that allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level are reported in parentheses. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗
p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                                       82
Table E.26: Multinomial Logit for Propensity Scores with Spillovers:
                      Closest 10 Neighbors
                                                           (1)
                                                     Treatment Level
                                             1             2             3
 Own Lagged Income Growth                -0.059∗∗∗      -0.029∗      -0.038∗∗
                                          (0.017)       (0.017)       (0.016)

 Own Lagged Employment Growth            4.512∗∗∗       6.450∗∗∗     7.488∗∗∗
                                          (0.980)        (0.972)      (0.945)

 Own Industry Shifter                   -57.044∗∗∗       -0.684     -42.814∗∗∗
                                          (7.545)       (7.352)       (7.073)

 Own Migration Shifter                   -4.568∗∗∗      3.460∗∗∗       0.896
                                          (0.695)        (0.690)      (0.660)

 Other Lagged Income Growth                -0.015      -0.058∗∗∗     -0.050∗∗∗
                                          (0.017)       (0.017)       (0.016)

 Other Lagged Employment Growth          5.839∗∗∗       3.437∗∗∗     8.298∗∗∗
                                          (0.981)        (0.999)      (0.955)

 Other Industry Shifter                    1.341       -44.866∗∗∗   -31.883∗∗∗
                                          (7.652)        (7.818)      (7.329)

 Other Migration Shifter                 4.191∗∗∗      -3.595∗∗∗       0.755
                                          (0.703)       (0.703)       (0.671)

 Observations                             91,428
 Notes: This table reports results from a multinomial logit model of treat-
 ment effect status relative to treatment level 0. See Section 5 for details and
 Appendix A for data sources. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                        83
Table E.27: Marginal Effects of Multinomial Logit for Propensity Scores with Spillovers:
                                 Closest 10 Neighbors
                                                                     (1)
                                                               Treatment Level
                                                      1              2             3
          Own Lagged Income Growth                -0.059∗∗∗       -0.029∗      -0.038∗∗
                                                   (0.017)        (0.017)       (0.016)

          Own Lagged Employment Growth             4.512∗∗∗       6.450∗∗∗     7.488∗∗∗
                                                    (0.980)        (0.972)      (0.945)

          Own Industry Shifter                    -57.044∗∗∗       -0.684     -42.814∗∗∗
                                                    (7.545)       (7.352)       (7.073)

          Own Migration Shifter                   -4.568∗∗∗       3.460∗∗∗       0.896
                                                   (0.695)         (0.690)      (0.660)

          Other Lagged Income Growth                -0.015       -0.058∗∗∗     -0.050∗∗∗
                                                   (0.017)        (0.017)       (0.016)

          Other Lagged Employment Growth           5.839∗∗∗       3.437∗∗∗     8.298∗∗∗
                                                    (0.981)        (0.999)      (0.955)

          Other Industry Shifter                    1.341        -44.866∗∗∗   -31.883∗∗∗
                                                   (7.652)         (7.818)      (7.329)

          Other Migration Shifter                  4.191∗∗∗      -3.595∗∗∗       0.755
                                                    (0.703)       (0.703)       (0.671)

          Observations                              91,428
          Notes: This table reports marginal effects from a multinomial logit model of
          treatment effect status relative to treatment level 0. See Section 5 for details
          and Appendix A for data sources. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                                 84
Table E.28: Multinomial Logit for Propensity Scores with Spillovers: MSA
                                                             (1)
                                                       Treatment Level
                                                1            2             3
   Own Lagged Income Growth                  -0.007      -0.084∗∗∗     -0.095∗∗∗
                                            (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.007)

   Own Lagged Employment Growth              -0.563      10.451∗∗∗     10.248∗∗∗
                                            (0.408)       (0.398)       (0.400)

   Own Industry Shifter                    9.501∗∗∗      -34.830∗∗∗   -23.854∗∗∗
                                            (2.362)        (2.422)      (2.383)

   Own Migration Shifter                     0.006        1.725∗∗∗     1.568∗∗∗
                                            (0.241)        (0.242)      (0.241)

   Other Lagged Income Growth              -0.083∗∗∗       -0.007      -0.094∗∗∗
                                            (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.007)

   Other Lagged Employment Growth          10.387∗∗∗       -0.570      10.133∗∗∗
                                            (0.398)       (0.408)       (0.400)

   Other Industry Shifter                 -34.894∗∗∗      9.401∗∗∗    -24.263∗∗∗
                                            (2.421)        (2.362)      (2.383)

   Other Migration Shifter                 1.677∗∗∗        -0.056      1.417∗∗∗
                                            (0.242)       (0.241)       (0.241)

   Observations                             547,986
   Notes: This table reports results from a multinomial logit model of treat-
   ment effect status relative to treatment level 0. See Section 5 for details and
   Appendix A for data sources. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                          85
Table E.29: Marginal Effects of Multinomial Logit for Propensity Scores with
                              Spillovers: MSA
                                                                (1)
                                                          Treatment Level
                                                  1             2             3
     Own Lagged Income Growth                  -0.007       -0.084∗∗∗     -0.095∗∗∗
                                              (0.007)        (0.007)       (0.007)

     Own Lagged Employment Growth              -0.563       10.451∗∗∗     10.248∗∗∗
                                              (0.408)        (0.398)       (0.400)

     Own Industry Shifter                     9.501∗∗∗      -34.830∗∗∗   -23.854∗∗∗
                                               (2.362)        (2.422)      (2.383)

     Own Migration Shifter                     0.006         1.725∗∗∗     1.568∗∗∗
                                              (0.241)         (0.242)      (0.241)

     Other Lagged Income Growth              -0.083∗∗∗        -0.007      -0.094∗∗∗
                                              (0.007)        (0.007)       (0.007)

     Other Lagged Employment Growth          10.387∗∗∗        -0.570      10.133∗∗∗
                                              (0.398)        (0.408)       (0.400)

     Other Industry Shifter                  -34.894∗∗∗      9.401∗∗∗    -24.263∗∗∗
                                               (2.421)        (2.362)      (2.383)

     Other Migration Shifter                  1.677∗∗∗        -0.056      1.417∗∗∗
                                               (0.242)       (0.241)       (0.241)

     Observations                             547,986
     Notes: This table reports marginal effects from a multinomial logit model of
     treatment effect status relative to treatment level 0. See Section 5 for details
     and Appendix A for data sources. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                            86
           Table E.30: Treatment Effects Estimates of Potential Outcomes with Spillovers
                                               (1)                                                  (2)
                                       Closest 10 Counties                                         MSA
Treatment Level           Federal Spending Employment            Income        Federal Spending    Employment       Income
0 - No Census Shocks           14.510           9.162∗∗∗        466.431∗∗∗          -13.496          7.206∗∗∗      324.199∗∗∗
                               (3.664)           (0.095)          (6.424)           (1.492)           (0.038)        (2.256)

1- Only Neighbor               22.311∗          9.418∗∗∗        478.777∗∗∗          -16.433          6.922∗∗∗      310.715∗∗∗
has Census Shock               (3.782)           (0.100)          (6.582)           (1.449)           (0.037)        (2.169)

2- Only Own Census            46.746∗∗∗         10.535∗∗∗       549.789∗∗∗          14.176           8.571∗∗∗      393.048∗∗∗
Shock                          (3.652)           (0.100)          (6.465)           (1.196)           (0.035)        (2.159)

3- Both Census Shocks         48.934∗∗∗         10.847∗∗∗       556.436∗∗∗          10.089           8.387∗∗∗      382.786∗∗∗
                               (3.296)           (0.089)          (5.822)           (1.200)           (0.035)        (2.125)
N                               91428                                               547986
Notes: This table reports means of potential outcomes from a multivalued treatment effects approach to analyzing spillover
effects. All variables report growth between years 2 and 5. See Section 5 for details and Appendix A for data sources.
Bootstrapped standard errors that allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level are reported in parentheses. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗
p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                                           87
Table E.31: Estimated Quantiles of the Distributions of Potential Outcomes
                                    (1)               (2)            (3)
   Quantile                  Federal Spending       Income        Employment
   5
   High Census Shock=0          -459.235∗∗∗       -489.979∗∗∗       -7.573∗∗∗
                                  (21.053)          (23.521)         (0.378)

   High Census Shock=1          -395.089∗∗∗       -429.908∗∗∗       -5.867∗∗∗
                                  (15.998)          (19.933)         (0.389)
   15
   High Census Shock=0          -169.599∗∗∗       -151.747∗∗∗       -1.513∗∗∗
                                  (7.851)           (12.402)         (0.204)

   High Census Shock=1          -130.248∗∗∗        -97.082∗∗∗       -0.498∗∗∗
                                  (5.495)           (11.969)         (0.186)
   25
   High Census Shock=0           -72.327∗∗∗        29.708∗∗∗        1.549∗∗∗
                                   (4.010)          (7.342)          (0.166)

   High Census Shock=1           -51.938∗∗∗        66.938∗∗∗        2.496∗∗∗
                                   (3.343)          (10.120)         (0.180)
   50
   High Census Shock=0           29.818∗∗∗        349.956∗∗∗        7.416∗∗∗
                                  (2.915)           (9.466)          (0.148)

   High Census Shock=1           40.162∗∗∗        394.911∗∗∗        8.373∗∗∗
                                  (2.009)           (9.240)          (0.164)
   75
   High Census Shock=0          126.179∗∗∗        772.176∗∗∗        14.628∗∗∗
                                  (3.788)          (15.613)          (0.269)

   High Census Shock=1          126.064∗∗∗        799.071∗∗∗        15.491∗∗∗
                                  (3.459)          (13.323)          (0.252)
   85
   High Census Shock=0          205.431∗∗∗        1078.108∗∗∗       20.230∗∗∗
                                  (6.526)           (21.273)         (0.359)

   High Census Shock=1          204.841∗∗∗        1117.224∗∗∗       20.607∗∗∗
                                  (6.234)           (19.110)         (0.315)
   95
   High Census Shock=0          515.393∗∗∗        2000.694∗∗∗       34.605∗∗∗
                                 (29.301)           (62.756)         (1.146)

   High Census Shock=1           488.247∗∗∗       1941.322∗∗∗        33.605∗∗∗
                                  (28.628)          (44.658)          (0.956)
   Observations                     9,099             9,099            9,099
   Notes: This table reports quantiles of the distribution of potential out-
   comes. All variables report growth between years 2 and 5. See Section
   6 for details and Appendix A for data sources. Bootstrapped standard
   errors that allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level are reported in
   parentheses. ∗ p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                         88
 Table E.32: Quantile Treatment Effects of a Census Shock
                            (1)               (2)          (3)
Effect at Quantile   Federal Spending       Income     Employment
5                        64.146∗∗          60.071∗∗     1.706∗∗∗
                         (26.150)          (30.561)      (0.535)

15                       39.350∗∗∗        54.665∗∗∗      1.015∗∗∗
                          (9.664)          (17.227)       (0.278)

25                       20.390∗∗∗        37.230∗∗∗      0.947∗∗∗
                          (5.272)          (12.433)       (0.247)

50                       10.344∗∗∗        44.955∗∗∗      0.957∗∗∗
                          (3.575)          (12.902)       (0.223)

75                          -0.114          26.895        0.862∗∗
                           (5.123)         (20.624)       (0.368)

85                          -0.589          39.117         0.377
                           (9.186)         (28.502)       (0.468)

95                          -27.146          -59.372       -1.000
                           (41.701)         (75.688)      (1.461)
Observations                 9,099            9,099         9,099
Notes: This table reports differences in the quantiles of the dis-
tribution of potential outcomes. All variables report growth be-
tween years 2 and 5. See Section 6 for details and Appendix A
for data sources. Bootstrapped standard errors that allow for ar-
bitrary correlation at the state level are reported in parentheses.
∗
  p < .1, ∗∗ p < .05, ∗∗∗ p < .01




                                  89
                                   Figure E.1: Semi-parametric Reduced-form Effects on Federal Spending from
                                                           Doubly-robust Estimation
                                 (a) No RA for Lagged Outcomes                                                                                  (b) Controlling for Lagged Outcomes
  0 100 200 300 400 500




                                                                                                   -400 -300 -200 -100 0 100 200 300 400 500
Federal Spending




                                                                                                                   Federal Spending
            -300 -200 -100




                             -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1    0 1   2   3   4   5    6   7   8   9                                                -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1    0 1   2   3   4   5    6   7   8   9
                                                          Year                                                                                                              Year

                                          Reduced-Form Effect            90% CI                                                                             Reduced-Form Effect            90% CI



                                  Notes: These figures plot reduced-form estimates of a Census Shock on federal spending with
                                  a 90% confidence interval. Panel (a) reports estimates that do not control for lagged outcomes.
                                  Panel (b) reports estimates that control for outcomes in years -2 to 2. Standard errors are
                                  bootstrapped and allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level. The plots are based on
                                  estimates reported in column (3) of Tables E.15 and E.16. See Section 4.2 for more details and
                                  Appendix A for data sources.



                                Figure E.2: Semi-parametric Reduced-form Effects on Income from Doubly-robust
                                                                 Estimation
                                 (a) No RA for Lagged Outcomes                                                                                  (b) Controlling for Lagged Outcomes
            900




                                                                                                                         900
            700




                                                                                                                         700
300 500




                                                                                                   300 500
Income




                                                                                                   Income
            100




                                                                                                                         100
            -100




                                                                                                                         -100
            -300




                                                                                                                         -300




                             -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1    0 1   2   3   4   5    6   7   8   9                                                -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1    0 1   2   3   4   5    6   7   8   9
                                                          Year                                                                                                              Year

                                          Reduced-Form Effect            90% CI                                                                             Reduced-Form Effect            90% CI



                                  Notes: These figures plot reduced-form estimates of a Census Shock on income with a 90% con-
                                  fidence interval. Panel (a) reports estimates that do not control for lagged outcomes. Panel (b)
                                  reports estimates that control for outcomes in years -2 to 2. Standard errors are bootstrapped
                                  and allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level. The plots are based on estimates reported
                                  in column (2) of Tables E.15 and E.16. See Section 4.2 for more details and Appendix A for
                                  data sources.




                                                                                              90
                          Figure E.3: Semi-parametric Reduced-form Effects on Employment from Doubly-robust
                                                              Estimation
                              (a) No RA for Lagged Outcomes                                                                 (b) Controlling for Lagged Outcomes
 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16




                                                                                                  2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
Employment




                                                                                                 Employment
          -8 -6 -4 -2 0




                                                                                                           -8 -6 -4 -2 0
                          -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1     0 1   2   3   4    5   6   7   8   9                              -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1     0 1   2   3   4    5   6   7   8   9
                                                        Year                                                                                             Year

                                       Reduced-Form Effect             90% CI                                                           Reduced-Form Effect             90% CI



                               Notes: These figures plot reduced-form estimates of a Census Shock on employment with a
                               90% confidence interval. Panel (a) reports estimates that do not control for lagged outcomes.
                               Panel (b) reports estimates that control for outcomes in years -2 to 2. Standard errors are
                               bootstrapped and allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level. The plots are based on
                               estimates reported in column (3) of Tables E.15 and E.16. See Section 4.2 for more details and
                               Appendix A for data sources.




                              Figure E.4: Semi-parametric Estimates of Income Multiplier from Doubly-robust
                                                               Estimation
                              (a) No RA for Lagged Outcomes                                                                 (b) Controlling for Lagged Outcomes
          6




                                                                                                           6
          5




                                                                                                           5
          4




                                                                                                                   4
Income Multiplier




                                                                                                 Income Multiplier
              3




                                                                                                              3
       2




                                                                                                        2
   1




                                                                                                   1
          0




                                                                                                           0
          -1




                                                                                                           -1
          -2




                                                                                                           -2




                          -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1     0 1   2   3   4    5   6   7   8   9                              -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1     0 1   2   3   4    5   6   7   8   9
                                                        Year                                                                                             Year

                                         Income Multiplier         90% CI                                                                 Income Multiplier         90% CI



                               Notes: These figures plot estimated income multipliers of federal spending with a 90% confi-
                               dence interval. Panel (a) reports estimates that do not control for lagged outcomes. Panel (b)
                               reports estimates that control for outcomes in years -2 to 2. Standard errors are bootstrapped
                               and allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level. The plots are based on estimates reported
                               in column (4) of Tables E.15 and E.16. See Section 4.2 for more details and Appendix A for
                               data sources.




                                                                                            91
                                    Figure E.5: Semi-parametric Estimates of Jobs per $1M from Doubly-robust Estimation
                                        (a) No RA for Lagged Outcomes                                                                  (b) Controlling for Lagged Outcomes
-20 -10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80




                                                                                                            10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
           Jobs per $1M




                                                                                                              Jobs per $1M
                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                        -20 -10




                                    -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1      0 1   2   3   4    5   6   7   8   9                              -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1      0 1   2   3   4    5   6   7   8   9
                                                                   Year                                                                                              Year

                                                    Jobs per $1M              90% CI                                                                  Jobs per $1M              90% CI



                                         Notes: These figures plot estimated employment effects per an additional million dollars of
                                         federal spending with a 90% confidence interval. Panel (a) reports estimates that do not
                                         control for lagged outcomes. Panel (b) reports estimates that control for outcomes in years -2
                                         to 2. Standard errors are bootstrapped and allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level.
                                         The plots are based on estimates reported in column (5) of Tables E.15 and E.16. See Section
                                         4.2 for more details and Appendix A for data sources.




                                                                                                       92
                                       Figure E.6: Semi-parametric Reduced-form Effects on Federal Spending from
                                                  Doubly-robust Estimation: Average Treatment Effects
                                  (a) No RA for Lagged Outcomes                                                             (b) Controlling for Lagged Outcomes
              300




                                                                                                           300
              200




                                                                                                           200
                       100




                                                                                                                100
       Federal Spending




                                                                                                   Federal Spending
-300 -200 -100 0




                                                                                                  -100     0
                                                                                                           -200
                                                                                                           -300
                             -6   -5    -4   -3    -2   -1    0     1   2     3      4   5   6                         -6     -5   -4   -3    -2   -1    0     1   2     3      4   5   6
                                                             Year                                                                                       Year

                                             Reduced-Form Effect            90% CI                                                      Reduced-Form Effect            90% CI



                                   Notes: These figures plot reduced-form estimates of a Census Shock on federal spending with
                                   a 90% confidence interval. Panel (a) reports estimates that do not control for lagged outcomes.
                                   Panel (b) reports estimates that control for outcomes in years -2 to 2. Standard errors are
                                   bootstrapped and allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level. The plots are based on
                                   estimates reported in column (3) of Tables E.17 and E.18. See Section 4.2 for more details and
                                   Appendix A for data sources.



                                  Figure E.7: Semi-parametric Reduced-form Effects on Income from Doubly-robust
                                                      Estimation: Average Treatment Effects
                                  (a) No RA for Lagged Outcomes                                                             (b) Controlling for Lagged Outcomes
              500




                                                                                                           500
              400




                                                                                                           400
              300




                                                                                                           300
100 200




                                                                                                  100 200
Income




                                                                                                   Income
              0




                                                                                                           0
              -200 -100




                                                                                                           -200 -100




                             -6   -5    -4   -3    -2   -1    0     1   2     3      4   5   6                         -6     -5   -4   -3    -2   -1    0     1   2     3      4   5   6
                                                             Year                                                                                       Year

                                             Reduced-Form Effect            90% CI                                                      Reduced-Form Effect            90% CI



                                   Notes: These figures plot reduced-form estimates of a Census Shock on income with a 90% con-
                                   fidence interval. Panel (a) reports estimates that do not control for lagged outcomes. Panel (b)
                                   reports estimates that control for outcomes in years -2 to 2. Standard errors are bootstrapped
                                   and allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level. The plots are based on estimates reported
                                   in column (2) of Tables E.17 and E.18. See Section 4.2 for more details and Appendix A for
                                   data sources.




                                                                                             93
                           Figure E.8: Semi-parametric Reduced-form Effects on Employment from Doubly-robust
                                                 Estimation: Average Treatment Effects
                                (a) No RA for Lagged Outcomes                                                                   (b) Controlling for Lagged Outcomes
             7




                                                                                                             7
             6




                                                                                                             6
             5




                                                                                                             5
             4




                                                                                                             4
-5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3




                                                                                                -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3
              Employment




                                                                                                              Employment
                           -6   -5   -4   -3    -2    -1    0     1   2     3      4   5   6                               -6     -5   -4   -3    -2    -1    0     1   2     3      4   5   6
                                                           Year                                                                                              Year

                                          Reduced-Form Effect             90% CI                                                            Reduced-Form Effect             90% CI



                                Notes: These figures plot reduced-form estimates of a Census Shock on employment with a
                                90% confidence interval. Panel (a) reports estimates that do not control for lagged outcomes.
                                Panel (b) reports estimates that control for outcomes in years -2 to 2. Standard errors are
                                bootstrapped and allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level. The plots are based on
                                estimates reported in column (3) of Tables E.17 and E.18. See Section 4.2 for more details and
                                Appendix A for data sources.




                                Figure E.9: Semi-parametric Estimates of Income Multiplier from Doubly-robust
                                                    Estimation: Average Treatment Effects
                                (a) No RA for Lagged Outcomes                                                                   (b) Controlling for Lagged Outcomes
             4




                                                                                                             4
             3




                                                                                                             3
Income Multiplier




                                                                                                Income Multiplier
               2




                                                                                                             2
       1




                                                                                                     1
 0




                                                                                                0
             -1




                                                                                                             -1
             -2




                                                                                                             -2




                           -6   -5   -4   -3    -2    -1    0     1   2     3      4   5   6                               -6     -5   -4   -3    -2    -1    0     1   2     3      4   5   6
                                                           Year                                                                                              Year

                                            Income Multiplier         90% CI                                                                  Income Multiplier         90% CI



                                Notes: These figures plot estimated income multipliers of federal spending with a 90% confi-
                                dence interval. Panel (a) reports estimates that do not control for lagged outcomes. Panel (b)
                                reports estimates that control for outcomes in years -2 to 2. Standard errors are bootstrapped
                                and allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level. The plots are based on estimates reported
                                in column (4) of Tables E.17 and E.18. See Section 4.2 for more details and Appendix A for
                                data sources.




                                                                                           94
                                   Figure E.10: Semi-parametric Estimates of Jobs per $1M from Doubly-robust
                                                     Estimation: Average Treatment Effects
                              (a) No RA for Lagged Outcomes                                                                  (b) Controlling for Lagged Outcomes
 10 20 30 40 50 60 70




                                                                                                10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Jobs per $1M




                                                                                               Jobs per $1M
           0




                                                                                                          0
           -30 -20 -10




                                                                                                          -30 -20 -10




                         -6   -5     -4   -3     -2   -1       0     1   2    3   4   5   6                             -6     -5   -4   -3     -2   -1       0     1   2    3   4   5   6
                                                              Year                                                                                           Year

                                               Jobs per $1M              90% CI                                                               Jobs per $1M              90% CI



                              Notes: These figures plot estimated employment effects per an additional million dollars of
                              federal spending with a 90% confidence interval. Panel (a) reports estimates that do not
                              control for lagged outcomes. Panel (b) reports estimates that control for outcomes in years -2
                              to 2. Standard errors are bootstrapped and allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level.
                              The plots are based on estimates reported in column (5) of Tables E.17 and E.18. See Section
                              4.2 for more details and Appendix A for data sources.




                                                                                          95
                                      Figure E.11: Semi-parametric Reduced-form Effects on Employment from
                                              Doubly-robust Estimation: Alternative Propensity Score
                                (a) No RA for Lagged Outcomes                                                                        (b) Controlling for Lagged Outcomes
             7




                                                                                                                  7
             6




                                                                                                                  6
             5




                                                                                                                  5
             4




                                                                                                                  4
-5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3




                                                                                                     -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3
              Employment




                                                                                                                   Employment
                           -6   -5     -4   -3     -2   -1       0     1   2     3      4   5   6                               -6     -5   -4   -3     -2   -1       0     1   2     3      4   5   6
                                                                Year                                                                                                 Year

                                            Reduced-Form Effect                90% CI                                                            Reduced-Form Effect                90% CI



                                Notes: These figures plot reduced-form estimates of a Census Shock on employment with a
                                90% confidence interval. Panel (a) reports estimates that do not control for lagged outcomes.
                                Panel (b) reports estimates that control for outcomes in years -2 to 2. Standard errors are
                                bootstrapped and allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level. The plots are based on
                                estimates reported in Table E.19. See Section 4.2 for more details and Appendix A for data
                                sources.



                                     Figure E.12: Semi-parametric Estimates of Jobs per $1M from Doubly-robust
                                                      Estimation: Alternative Propensity Score
                                (a) No RA for Lagged Outcomes                                                                        (b) Controlling for Lagged Outcomes
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80




                                                                                                     10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
 Jobs per $1M




                                                                                                       Jobs per $1M
             -20 -10 0




                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                  -20 -10




                           -6   -5     -4   -3     -2   -1       0     1   2     3      4   5   6                               -6     -5   -4   -3     -2   -1       0     1   2     3      4   5   6
                                                                Year                                                                                                 Year

                                                 Jobs per $1M              90% CI                                                                     Jobs per $1M              90% CI



                                Notes: These figures plot reduced-form estimates of a Census Shock on employment with a
                                90% confidence interval. Panel (a) reports estimates that do not control for lagged outcomes.
                                Panel (b) reports estimates that control for outcomes in years -2 to 2. Standard errors are
                                bootstrapped and allow for arbitrary correlation at the state level. The plots are based on
                                estimates reported in Table E.19. See Section 4.2 for more details and Appendix A for data
                                sources.




                                                                                                96
Figure E.13: Smoothed Density for the Estimated Propensity Score of a Census Shock




                    10
                    8
            Propensity Score
              4     2
                    0  6




                               .2   .4                .6             .8          1
                                                    Density

                                         No Shock             Census Shock

   Notes: This figure plots the smoothed density of the estimated propensity score of Census
   Shock using a standard Epanechnikov kernel. See Section 3.5 for details and Appendix A for
   data sources.




                                                97
      Figure E.14: Smoothed Densities for the Estimated Propensity Score
                   in Spillover Analysis: Closest 10 Neighbors

                              (a) No Census Shocks                                  (b) Only Neighbor has Census Shock




          5 10 15 20




                                                                             5 10 15 20
           Density




                                                                              Density
               0




                                                                                 0
                       .1        .2       .3             .4        .5                     .1      .2       .3             .4        .5
                                      Probability                                                      Probability


                            (c) Only Own Census Shock                                          (d) Both Census Shocks
          5 10 15 20




                                                                             5 10 15 20
           Density




                                                                              Density
               0




                                                                                   0
                       .1        .2       .3             .4        .5                     .1      .2       .3             .4        .5
                                      Probability                                                      Probability


                             No Census Shocks                                             Only Neighbor has Census Shock
                             Only Own Census Shock                                        Both Census Shocks

Notes: These figures plot the smoothed density of the estimated generalized propensity score
for the spillover analysis using a standard Epanechnikov kernel. See Section 5 for details and
Appendix A for data sources.



      Figure E.15: Smoothed Densities for the Estimated Propensity Score
                      in Spillover Analysis: MSA Level

                              (a) No Census Shocks                                  (b) Only Neighbor has Census Shock
            10 15 20




                                                                               10 15 20
          Density




                                                                             Density
               5




                                                                                 5
               0




                                                                                 0




                       0        .1      .2          .3        .4                          0      .1      .2          .3        .4
                                      Probability                                                      Probability


                            (c) Only Own Census Shock                                          (d) Both Census Shocks
            10 15 20




                                                                               10 15 20
          Density




                                                                             Density
               5




                                                                                   5
               0




                                                                                   0




                       0        .1      .2          .3        .4                          0      .1      .2          .3        .4
                                      Probability                                                      Probability


                             No Census Shocks                                             Only Neighbor has Census Shock
                             Only Own Census Shock                                        Both Census Shocks

Notes: These figures plot the smoothed density of the estimated generalized propensity score
for the spillover analysis using a standard Epanechnikov kernel. See Section 5 for details and
Appendix A for data sources.




                                                                        98
                   Figure E.16: IVQR Estimates of Spending Multipliers with State Fixed Effects
                                  (a) Income                                                                      (b) Employment




                                                                                             300




                                                                                                                                                               40
             6




                                                                                             200
                                                                  Jobs per Million Dollars




                                                                                                                                                               30

                                                                                                                                                                    Thousand Dollars
             4
Multiplier




                                                                                             100




                                                                                                                                                               20
             2




                                                                                                                                                               10
                                                                                             0
             0




                                                                                             -100
             -2




                                                                                                                                                               0
                   0     20       40          60   80       100                                     0   20         40          60           80           100
                                   Quantiles                                                                           Quantiles

                          Income Multiplier        90% CI                                               Jobs per $1M               Cost per Job (RHS)


                   Notes: The figure plots the estimated multipliers from the IVQR analysis where we control for
                   state fixed effects and estimated propensity scores along with a 90% confidence interval for 7
                   quantiles of the distribution of the dependent variable. See Section 6 for details and Appendix
                   A for data sources. Panel (a) uses the average annual growth in local personal income from
                   1982 to 1985, 1992 to 1995 and 2002 to 2005. Panel (b) uses the average annual growth in
                   employment. Panel (b) also reports the cost per job created in dollars of 2009 on the right
                   hand side axis at the corresponding quantiles. Standard errors are computed via bootstrap.
                   See Figure E.17 for the corresponding quantile regression estimates.



                         Figure E.17: Quantile Regression Estimates of Spending Multipliers
                                  (a) Income                                                                    (b) Employment
                                                                                             .5
             .25




                                                                                                                                                               10
                                                                                             .4
             .2




                                                                  Jobs per Million Dollars




                                                                                                                                                               8

                                                                                                                                                                    Million Dollars
             .15




                                                                                             .3
Multiplier




                                                                                                                                                               6
             .1




                                                                                             .2
             .05




                                                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                             .1
             0




                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                               2




                   0     20       40          60   80       100                                     0   20         40          60           80           100
                                   Quantiles                                                                           Quantiles

                          Income Multiplier        95% CI                                               Emp Multiplier              Cost per Job (RHS)


                   Notes: The figure plots the estimated multipliers from the IVQR analysis along with a 90%
                   confidence interval for 7 quantiles of the distribution of the dependent variable. See Section 6
                   for details and Appendix A for data sources. Panel (a) uses the average annual growth in local
                   personal income from 1982 to 1985, 1992 to 1995 and 2002 to 2005. Panel (b) uses the average
                   annual growth in employment. Panel (b) also reports the cost per job created in dollars of 2009
                   on the right hand side axis at the corresponding quantiles. Standard errors are computed via
                   bootstrap. See Figure 11 for the corresponding IVQR estimates.




                                                                  99
