                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          TAKING THE LEAP:
    THE DETERMINANTS OF ENTREPRENEURS HIRING THEIR FIRST EMPLOYEE

                                        Robert W. Fairlie
                                         Javier Miranda

                                      Working Paper 22428
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22428


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2016




Forthcoming in the Journal of Economics & Management Strategy. We thank Michael Roach,
Nick Papageorge, and seminar participants at UC Berkeley, Cornell University, Harvard
University, the London School of Economics, the University of Bristol, University of Arizona,
Louisiana Tech, Tufts University, Northeastern University, and the Kauffman/IZA Conference on
Entrepreneurship for comments and suggestions. We also thank the Small Business
Administration for partial funding for the project. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau or
the National Bureau of Economic Research. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no
confidential information is disclosed.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Inc, circulated with permission. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Taking the Leap: The Determinants of Entrepreneurs Hiring their First Employee
Robert W. Fairlie and Javier Miranda
NBER Working Paper No. 22428
July 2016
JEL No. L26

                                          ABSTRACT

Job creation is one of the most important aspects of entrepreneurship, but we know relatively
little about the hiring patterns and decisions of startups. Longitudinal data from the Integrated
Longitudinal Business Database (iLBD), Kauffman Firm Survey (KFS), and the Growing
America through Entrepreneurship (GATE) experiment are used to provide some of the first
evidence in the literature on the determinants of taking the leap from a non-employer to employer
firm among startups. Several interesting patterns emerge regarding the dynamics of non-employer
startups hiring their first employee. Hiring rates among the universe of non-employer startups are
very low, but increase when the population of non-employers is focused on more growth-oriented
businesses such as incorporated and EIN businesses. If non-employer startups hire, the bulk of
hiring occurs in the first few years of existence. After this point in time relatively few non-
employer startups hire an employee. Focusing on more growth- and employment-oriented
startups in the KFS, we find that Asian-owned and Hispanic-owned startups have higher rates of
hiring their first employee than white-owned startups. Female-owned startups are roughly 10
percentage points less likely to hire their first employee by the first, second and seventh years
after startup. The education level of the owner, however, is not found to be associated with the
probability of hiring an employee. Among business characteristics, we find evidence that
business assets and intellectual property are associated with hiring the first employee. Using data
from the largest random experiment providing entrepreneurship training in the United States ever
conducted, we do not find evidence that entrepreneurship training increases the likelihood that
non-employers hire their first employee.


Robert W. Fairlie
Department of Economics
Engineering 2 Building
University of California at Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
rfairlie@ucsc.edu

Javier Miranda
U.S. Bureau of the Census
Center for Economic Studies
4600 Silver Hill Road
Washington, DC 20233
javier.miranda@census.gov
1. Introduction

       Many policymakers and organizations have called upon entrepreneurs to create new jobs.

For example, President Obama has repeatedly emphasized the importance of startups and small

businesses in creating jobs, and has signed laws such as the Small Business Jobs Act of 2010 and

the Jumpstart Our Business Startups (JOBS) Act of 2012, which aim to create jobs through

promoting small businesses. The focus on the job creation potential of entrepreneurs also exists

in Europe and other countries around the world (OECD 2014).

       Several previous studies examine the impact of small businesses on employment. Starting

with the seminal study by Birch (1979) showing that small businesses were the principal driver

of job creation in the U.S. economy and recent refinements of this argument to focus on young

and high-impact firms, there has been considerable interest in what types of firms generate jobs.

Recent evidence indicates that young and high-impact businesses (defined as having high rates

of growth in sales and employment) account for essentially all net jobs in the economy

(Haltiwanger, Jarmin and Miranda 2013 and Tracy 2011). Often overlooked is that self-

employed business owners also create jobs for themselves, representing more than 10 percent of

total employment in the United States and that many employer businesses start as non-employers

(Davis et al 2007).

       But, hiring employees represents one of the major thresholds that entrepreneurs encounter

when growing their businesses. The step from non-employer to employer entails additional

registration and legal requirements; health insurance, workers compensation and unemployment

insurance issues, and the ongoing burden of making payroll. Navigating through filing for an

employer identification number, federal wage and tax statement (Form W-2), employee

eligibility verification (Form I-9), state new hire reporting program, workers' compensation
insurance program, unemployment insurance tax registration program, and disability insurance in

some states may be especially daunting to small business owners considering hiring their first

employee. But perhaps the most important consideration for the owner is whether current and

future revenues are large enough to cover the extra expenses of having employees. Surprisingly,

given its importance there is very little research on the topic.

       This paper examines four main questions related to the decision by entrepreneurs to hire

their first employee that have not been examined in detail in the previous literature. First, what

are the dynamic patterns of hiring employees among startups in their first few years of existence?

Second, what are the demographic and human capital characteristics of entrepreneurs that are

associated with making the decision to hire their first employee in the first several years of

operation? Are female, minority and immigrant owners less likely to cross the employer

threshold? Are more educated entrepreneurs more likely to hire their first employee in the first

years of existence? Third, can an alternative form of human capital, entrepreneurship training,

help overcome some of the barriers to hiring employees? Entrepreneurship training often

specifically teaches self-employed business owners strategies for hiring and managing

employees, and provides training on registering for EINs, tax and insurance compliance, and

legal issues, but does it increase the likelihood of hiring the first employee? Finally, what

dynamic business conditions are associated with hiring the first employee? Is there a sales or

business asset milestone that firms often reach before hiring their first employee? Do non-

employer firms typically have intellectual property, such as patents, copyrights and trademarks,

before hiring their first employee?

       In addition to the previous research on the impact of small businesses on employment in

the United States, a few recent studies examine the relationship and growth patterns between



                                                  2
non-employer to employer businesses. Acs, Headd and Agwara (2009), for example, find that

non-employers have a startup rate of 35 percent, which is nearly three times the startup rate of

employer firms. Using matched data from the Census Bureau, Davis et al. (2007) find that a

significant number of new employer firms start as non-employer firms. The link between non-

employer and employer status and how it is related to reaching business milestones and owner

characteristics, however, has not been previously examined in detail.

        Another strand of research indicates variation in employment rates and average number

of employees by demographic and human capital characteristics of the business owner. Parker

(2009) reviews the literature and reports evidence of positive effects from education, age,

experience, male, parental self-employment, wealth and industry. 1 Three factors that especially

stand out are minority, female ownership and education. In the United States, for example,

Substantial disparities exist between minority vs. non-minority owned firms and female vs. male

owned firms, for example: 13.3 percent of minority-owned firms hire employees compared with

21.6 percent of non-minority owned firms, and 11.7 percent of female-owned business hire

employees compared with 23.2 percent of male-owned businesses (U.S. Census Bureau 2013). 2

The education level of the business owner is also associated with hiring employees, with 32

percent of owners with a university degree hiring employees compared with 28 percent of

owners with a high school degree or lower level of education hiring employees. 3 These findings,

however, are for all existing businesses and do not capture the relationship between owner

characteristic and the employment decision when that decision is made. Previous research also


1
  Also, see Burke et al. (2000, 2002), van Praag and Cramer (2001), Cowling et al. (2004), Henley (2005),
and Fairlie and Robb (2007).
2
  See Fairlie and Robb (2008) for a review of the literature on racial and ethnic patterns in business
employment.
3
  See van der Sluis, van Praag and Vijverberg (2005) for evidence on the relationship between education
and business outcomes.

                                                   3
does not focus on startups, and hiring patterns may differ substantially for all new businesses

than for the subsample of businesses that survive up to the survey year.

        In this paper, we use data from three sources: 1) the U.S. Census Bureau's Integrated

Longitudinal Business Database (iLBD) which provides panel data on the universe of non-

employers matched to employers over time, 2) the Kauffman Firm Survey (KFS) which provides

panel data on detailed owner and business characteristics and follows growth-oriented startups

over the first several years of existence, and 3) the Growing America through Entrepreneurship

(GATE) experiment which is the largest random experiment on the effects of entrepreneurship

training ever conducted. Using these data this paper provides one of the first detailed

longitudinal studies of the owner, business, and training determinants of non-employers hiring

their first employee. The novel results from the iLBD provide the first evidence in the literature

on hiring patterns among the universe of non-employer startups. 4

        The limited previous research on the topic appears to be due to data limitations. Very few

datasets provide information on the time at which a business hires its first employee, owner and

business characteristics, and longitudinal information on business conditions or milestones.

Additionally, no previous datasets have information allowing for a credible method of

identifying whether entrepreneurship training helps business owners hire their first employee.



2. Data

        Three datasets, the Integrated Longitudinal Business Database (iLBD), the Kauffman

Firm Survey (KFS), and the Growing America through Entrepreneurship (GATE) Project, are

used in this study. All three datasets provide difficult-to-find information on when a non-

4
  These results from the new and revised iLBD complement earlier results reported in Davis et al. (2007).
Two major differences in the current study is that we focus specifically on the population of startups and
that we include all industries.

                                                    4
employer business hires its first employee. Each dataset has strengths to contribute to the overall

analysis of patterns and determinants of non-employer businesses hiring their first employee.

The confidential and restricted-access iLBD provides administrative information on the universe

of non-employer firms. These data provide a comprehensive view of patterns of non-employer

startups hiring employees over time. The KFS and GATE also provide detailed information on

the characteristics of the owner and business prior to when the business hires its first employee.

All three panels provide information at the point in time of hiring instead of less reliable

retrospective information. All three datasets provide longitudinal data that follows businesses

over several years.

       To our knowledge, the iLBD and KFS are the only two nationally representative datasets

that provide information on non-employer startups making the transition to employer firms.

Additionally, the only dataset providing information on non-employers hiring employees at the

point of time of hiring and providing an experiment in which entrepreneurship training is

randomly allocated is the GATE data. Although GATE is not nationally representative it does

cover urban and rural populations across 14 different organizations in three different states.



Integrated Longitudinal Business Database (iLBD)

       We use the U.S. Bureau of the Census confidential and restricted-access integrated

Longitudinal Business Database (ILBD). The iLBD covers the universe of non-employer and

employer business units in the nonfarm private sector of the U.S. economy. It is constructed by

linking employer and non-employer businesses units by a variety of identifiers including the

EIN, the SSN, and the name and address of the owner or business (for details on the construction

of this dataset, see Davis et al, 2007). We focus our analysis on non-employer businesses that



                                                  5
transition to employer status. We include the full population of non-employer business and

impose no restrictions in terms of industry, revenue, age of the business owner, or number of

hours spent in the business. 5 We define a non-employer startup as a business with no activity in

the four years prior be it as a non-employer or as an employer. We start from the population of

non-employer startups in 1997. We follow their transitions out of the non-employer population

either as a permanent exit or as a transition into employer status. A permanent exit requires that

the EIN, SSN, or business name do not appear again in the iLBD either as an employer or as a

non-employer. To this end we examine iLBD data through 2011. A transition to employment

status takes place when we are able to identify a non-employer business unit in the employer

universe. We track transitions up to 7 years after startup.

         The iLBD cover the universe of non-employer startups. Every business that is registered

is included. The iLBD contains information on the legal form; sole proprietor, partnership or

corporation, the type of tax identifier; EIN or SSN, revenue size, and industry. It does not contain

any information on the owner. As discussed below the iLBD contains a large number of business

activities that have no intention of hiring employees and represent consulting or contracting

activities. But, these data provide a useful view of the universe of non-employer business units,

and we are able to identify more growth-oriented businesses by conditioning on a few of the

administrative variables in the iLBD.



The Kauffman Firm Survey

         The KFS, conducted by the Kauffman Foundation, is a panel study of 4,928 businesses

founded in 2004. See Robb et al. (2010) for a detailed description of the KFS. The business


5
  We also do not limit ourselves to migrant transitions as defined by Davis el al (2007) and examine instead all
transitions to employer status.

                                                          6
startups were surveyed in 2004 (baseline) and annually after that date. The most recent year of

available data is the seventh follow-up survey conducted in 2011. These data were released in

spring 2013 and are the final wave planned for the KFS. The sampling frame for the KFS is the

Dun & Bradstreet database started in 2004. The definition of a startup used in the KFS is whether

at least one of several business indicators were present for the first time in 2004. The indicators

include payment of unemployment insurance taxes, payment of FICA taxes, presence of a legal

status for the business, presence of an employer identification number (EIN), and use of schedule

C to report business income. Thus, the KFS definition of a business start is somewhat unique and

include a disproportionate number of more "advanced," growth-oriented or employment-oriented

non-employer startups.

        The panel dataset provided in the KFS provides an unprecedented source of data on

business startups in their early years of operation. 6 Detailed information on each firm includes

employment, industry, physical location, sales, profits, and business assets at start-up and over

time. 7 The KFS also includes detailed information on intellectual property, such as patents,

copyrights, and trademarks. The detailed information on employment and other business activity

provided annually in the KFS allows for an examination of the dynamic relationship between

these factors and employment among new businesses. Most importantly, it allows for an analysis

of business and owner characteristics at the time young businesses hire their first employee.




6
 For more information about the KFS survey design and methodology, please see Ballou et al (2008).
7
 The KFS also includes detailed financing information. These variables, however, are not included in the
analysis because of endogeneity concerns. For example, if a firm needs to hire employees prior to
production then the only method of doing this is to obtain financing. In this case, however, the financing
did not cause the business to hire the employee, but instead the need to hire employees caused the
business to find financing. Similar concerns have been noted in the literature examining liquidity
constraints for business creation. See Parker (2009), Kerr and Nanda (2011), and Fairlie and Krashinsky
(2012) for recent discussions of the literature.

                                                    7
        The KFS also provides detailed information on owner characteristics such as age, gender,

race, ethnicity, education, and prior work experience. 8 This information is useful for identifying

the characteristics of owners that hire employees within the first several years of operation. Panel

data allow for measurement of these characteristics year by year, and thus immediately prior to

when non-employer startups make the decision to hire their first employee.

        Robb et al. (2010) provide a detailed comparison of the KFS to several commonly used

business-level datasets. These comparisons, however, include the full sample of businesses in the

KFS. To examine the representativeness of the KFS sample of non-employer startups used in this

study, estimates are compared to estimates from the 2004 iLBD and the 2007 Survey of Business

Owners microdata for a roughly similar population (defined as all non-employer businesses

started in the previous year). Appendix Table 1 reports estimates of the industry distribution

from all three datasets. For most industries, the KFS, iLBD and SBO are roughly similar in

representation. The main exceptions are that the KFS non-employer startup sample is

overrepresented in manufacturing and wholesale trade, and underrepresented in health and

educational services compared with the new non-employer sample in the SBO.



GATE Experiment

        Growing America through Entrepreneurship (Project GATE) is an evaluation designed

and implemented by the U.S. Department of Labor and U.S. Small Business Administration. The

GATE experiment is the largest-ever randomized evaluation of entrepreneurship training and

assistance involving more than 4,000 participants. It differs from earlier large-scale evaluations


8
 Owner characteristics are identified for the primary owner of the business. The primary owner of multi-
owner businesses is identified by the largest equity share in 2004 with ties being allocated by comparing
hours worked and other variables (see Robb et al. 2010). Thanks to Alicia Robb and Joseph Farhat for
providing the codes for primary owners.

                                                    8
in the United States because its training was marketed to any individual interested in starting or

growing a business, and was not limited to individuals receiving unemployment or welfare

benefits. It also involved both individuals who wanted to start a business and individuals who

already owned a business, but wanted to grow that business.

        GATE was administered between September 2003 and July 2005 in cities of varying

sizes: Philadelphia; Pittsburgh; Minneapolis/St. Paul; Duluth, Minnesota; Virginia, Minnesota;

Portland, Maine; Lewiston, Maine; and Bangor, Maine (see Bellotti et al. 2006 for more details).

Both urban and rural populations were served by the sites. Fourteen different organizations

provided the GATE training, including SBA-funded Small Business Development Centers and

non-profit community-based organizations. All of the providers and their programs had been

operating prior to the experiment, and thus collectively represent the existing market for

entrepreneurship training in the United States.

        Individuals interested in applying to receive entrepreneurship training through the

program had to first attend an orientation meeting at a One-Stop Career Center. Applicants were

informed that “GATE does not have space for everyone” and that a “lottery or random drawing

will decide whether you will be able to enter the program.” Applicants were then randomly

assigned to the treatment or control group with equal probability. The treatment group was

offered an array of free services. Program administrators informed the control group that the

GATE program did not have the capacity to offer them services, and administrators offered no

referrals to other (free) services either.

        The array of GATE services offered to the treatment group began with a one-on-one

assessment meeting to determine an individual’s specific training needs. Then training was

provided by experienced business consultants in classroom and/or one-on-one settings.



                                                  9
Classroom offerings targeted a variety of general and specialized topics at different experience

levels. Introductory courses cover subjects such as legal structure, business plans, and marketing.

Intermediate and advanced courses cover subjects including managing growth, legal risks, and

personnel issues. These classes would be especially important for entrepreneurs deciding

whether to hire their first employee. The total cost of providing training to GATE recipients was

estimated to be $1,321 per person.

       Extensive data were collected on treatment and control group members on the application

survey and from three follow-up surveys. Data are available at baseline (prior to

entrepreneurship training) and at follow-up waves of 6 months, 18 months and 60 months after

baseline. Detailed information on employment, sales, profits and other firm characteristics are

available for each time period. Detailed information on owner characteristics such as age,

education, gender, race, immigrant status, marital status, children, family income, health, family

business experience, credit history, unemployment insurance receipt, health insurance, and

personality traits are also available from the baseline survey. The resulting dataset provides

unprecedented longitudinal information on the employment of businesses after the owners of

those businesses received training. The impact of entrepreneurship training on when and whether

businesses hire their first employee has not been previously examined.

       In the experiment, 4,197 individuals completed the application process and were

randomly assigned to the treatment (N=2,094) or control (N=2,103) group. Among participants,

19 percent were self-employed business owners at the time of application (N=774), and 44

percent of the businesses owned reported not ever having employees (N=343). For this study, the

focus is on these non-employer business owners participating in the experiment. Previous

research on the full sample of participants generally finds small or no effects of entrepreneurship



                                                 10
training on outcomes (Benus et al. 2009; Fairlie, Karlan and Zinman 2015), but these studies do

not estimate the effects of entrepreneurship training on hiring the first employee among the

group of non-employer business owners participating in the experiment. This analysis provides

the first evidence in the literature on this question.



3. Hiring Dynamics among Non-Employer Startups

        We first examine the dynamic patterns of hiring employees among startups. The panels of

non-employer startups included in the iLBD and KFS are important because all firms can be

tracked even if they are not successful in the first few years after startup. Cross-sectional data

based on existing non-employer and employer firms include only surviving firms up to that point

in time and all non-surviving firms when they hired their first employee. Also retrospective

information on when the first employee was hired instead of contemporaneous information is

more subject to the possibility of recall bias.

        We start by examining patterns of hiring among non-employer startups in the universe of

non-employers provided in the iLBD. Our definition of a non-employer startup is any firm that

has no record of existing for the previous three years. The first year observed is defined as the

startup year. We include the complete universe of non-employer firms across all industries,

revenues and business types. When a business is identified in a subsequent year in the employer

data base we define that year as the point when the first employee is hired. It is important to note

that there can be slippage in the match from non-employer to employer because the datasets are




                                                   11
generated from different sources. 9 We view these results as a lower bound on the level of

transitions from non-employers to employers.

        Table 1.A reports the distribution of all non-employer startups across hiring their first

employee in up to seven follow-up years, not hiring their first employee by the end of the seven-

year period, or exiting before hiring an employee during the seven period. This provides detail

on when non-employer startups hire their first employee. For example, it answers the question of

what percentage of businesses hire their first employee in the first year after startup vs. the

second year after startup. Among all non-employer startups, 2 percent hire their first employee in

the first year after startup. Very low percentages of non-employer startups hire their first

employee after that year. A large percentage of non-employer startups (12.7 percent), however,

do not hire their first employee by the end of the seven-year period. Finally, 84.8 percent of non-

employer startups exited over the sample period before ever hiring their first employee. But, it is

important to note here that exits are defined as non-employers that do not report revenues in year

7 (and thus are not in the non-employer universe that year). These non-employers could report

revenues and be in the universe of non-employers in later years, but this is out of our sample

period. This could explain the extremely high exit rate as we have defined it here and this should

not be interpreted as a business failure rate for non-employer businesses.

        A very large percentage of these non-employer businesses are consulting, contracting or

small-scale business activities. When we focus on different types of non-employer startups we

find much higher rates of hiring employees. For example, Table 1.B includes only EIN cases for

non-employer startups. These are businesses that are identified through filing for an EIN even

though they do not have employees. Another example, is Table 1.C which includes only

9
  The linkage between the non-employer and the employer universes makes use of the name of the business and the
tax identifiers; the EIN and the SSN. If any of these change then we might not be able to form a link. This is more
likely when there is a change in legal form of organization at the time of the transition.

                                                        12
incorporated non-employer startups. In both cases, transition rates from non-employer to

employer are much higher although most of the transitions are occurring in the first few years

and there continues to be a very high exit rate (or non-existence rate in year 7).

       The iLBD contains a very large number of non-employer businesses that have very low

revenues. Focusing on higher revenue non-employer startups we find higher rates of transitions

to employment. But, focusing on revenues in the first year can be problematic as many

potentially successful businesses take a few years to produce sales.

       These aggregate measures of hiring employees in the first several years following startup

reveal interesting patterns. Many non-employer startups hire their first employee in the first three

years of existence. After that period of time and through seven years, only a few additional firms

make the switch from non-employer to employer.



Hiring Patterns in the KFS

       We turn to the KFS for a similar analysis of patterns of hiring among non-employer

startups. The KFS, which is based on D&B data, is known to include businesses that are more

growth and employment oriented than the universe of non-employers. With this in mind, we also

examine patterns of hiring in these data before turning to an analysis of the determinants of

hiring. The KFS is crucial to examining determinants because it contains detailed information on

owner and business characteristics. The iLBD, unfortunately, is limited to including only a few

pieces of administrative information on businesses. Also, the KFS implicitly rules out the many

non-employer startups that are essentially consulting and small-scale business activities by

individuals with no intention of growing a business and eventually hiring employees. Thus, the

inclusion of this group is problematic for exploring the owner and business characteristics



                                                 13
associated with hiring employees. With this in mind we turn to a detailed analysis of the KFS

data that include more growth- or employment-oriented non-employer startups.

        To better illustrate the KFS panel, Appendix Figure 1 displays the full sequence of hiring

decisions over the first seven years using data from the KFS. The KFS includes information

through seven years following startup. 10 Starting with the first year, there were 2,460 non-

employer startups in the KFS with complete information on employment decisions that year. Of

those non-employer businesses, 38.0 percent hired their first employee and 7.4 percent went out

of business that year. Of the 1,197 businesses remaining as non-employers in the KFS in the

second year, 26.0 percent hired their first employee and 9.5 percent went out of business in that

year. In the following years, the probability of hiring the first employee drops as the remaining

sample of non-employer businesses becomes smaller. The percentage of non-employer

businesses going out of business each year, however, does not decline.

        Table 2.A reports the distribution of non-employer startups across hiring their first

employee in one of the seven follow-up years, not hiring their first employee by the end of the

seven-year period, or going out of business before hiring an employee. This provides detail on

when non-employer startups hire their first employee, summarizing the information displayed in

Appendix Figure 1. Firms that are known to go out of business before hiring an employee by the

reported year are included in the sample, implying that the estimates are not conditional on

survival to that year. But, only businesses with complete information on employment and

survival through all seven years are included to avoid biasing estimates for earlier years. Among

the more growth-oriented non-employer startups captured in the KFS, 36.6 percent hire their first

employee in the first year after startup. 12.6 percent of startups hire their first employee in the


10
  The reported estimates are only for non-employer startups. Startups with employees represent 40.9
percent of all startups captured in the KFS.

                                                  14
second follow-up year, and 4.0 percent hire in the third follow-up year, and 3.1 percent hire in

the fourth follow-up year. Only a small percentage of non-employer startups hire their first

employee in the fifth, sixth or seventh years following startup. A large percentage of non-

employer startups (13.3 percent), however, are still in business, but do not hire their first

employee by the end of the study period. Finally, 27.9 percent of non-employer startups went out

of business over the sample period before ever hiring their first employee.

        Another method of measuring when non-employer startups make the switch to an

employer firm is to examine the likelihood of hiring the first employee by each of the follow-up

years. Table 2.B reports estimates. Again, firms that are known to go out of business before

hiring an employee are included in the sample so the estimates are not conditional on survival.

But, in this case we use the maximum number of observations available to calculate the

probability for each year (which is why the sample size declines with more years available). One

year after startup, 38.0 percent of non-employer startups in the KFS have hired their first

employee. By two years after startup the majority of non-employer firms have hired their first

employee. 11 By seven years after startup, 58.8 percent of initial non-employer businesses have

hired their first employee. 12 The increase in the likelihood of hiring a first employee rises quickly

and then slows down as more businesses have already hired their first employee.

        Although hiring rates among more growth- or employment-oriented non-employer

startups in the KFS are higher than hiring rates among the universe of non-employer startups, the

general patterns are similar. Most non-employer startups that will eventually hire an employee,

11
   The sample size drops for 2 years after startup and each subsequent year because some businesses have
missing information on employment in those years. Estimates of hire rates by follow-up year conditioning
on only businesses with non-missing observations for all survey years are similar.
12
   Annual sample attrition rates are 1 to 4.5 percent per year which contributes to losing observations over
time, but another issue is that even if one missing value is found for employment in an intermediate year
it cannot be used to calculate the seven year cumulative probability. Thus, some caution is needed in
interpreting the 7-year out estimates.

                                                    15
hire their first employee in the first few years of existence (and especially in the first year). After

that period of time and through seven years, only a small percentage of additional firms make the

switch from non-employer to employer.



4. Demographic and Human Capital Characteristics of Entrepreneurs

       This section examines the demographic and human capital characteristics of the owners

of non-employer businesses that lead to hiring their first employee. As noted above, the KFS is

the only large, nationally representative dataset with detailed demographic and human capital

information on the owners of startups.

       We first examine rates of hiring an employee in the first several years of operation among

non-employer startups by race, gender and immigrant status. Table 3 reports estimates of the

percentage of non-employer startups hiring employees by 1, 2 and 7 years after startup. These

years are chosen to represent a wide range of hiring points over the sample period. Estimates

from the KFS indicate that non-employer startups owned by African-Americans have similar

rates of hiring their first employee by each year as do white, non-Hispanic startups. Asian-owned

startups have higher rates of hiring their first employee by each of the follow-up years. Hiring

rates by each follow-up year are also higher among non-employer startups owned by Hispanics.

Related to these racial and ethnic patterns, immigrants have higher rates of hiring their first

employee by the first two follow-up years than the native-born, but the rates of hiring employees

are similar by the seventh follow-up year.

       Non-employer startups owned by men and women differ substantially in their rate of

hiring first employees by each of the reported follow-up years. Female-owned startups are




                                                  16
roughly 10 percentage points less likely to hire their first employee by the first, second and

seventh years after startup.

        To investigate these patterns further and control for potential correlations with other

entrepreneur characteristics we estimate regressions for the probability of hiring employees by

each survey wave. The regression equation is:



(4.1) yi = α + βXi + εi,



where yi is the probability that the non-employer startup hires its first employee by the first,

second or seventh follow-up year. Xi includes demographic and human capital characteristics of

the entrepreneur, and εi is an error term. All specifications are estimated using OLS and

heteroscadasticity-consistent standard errors are reported. Marginal effects estimates are similar

from probit and logit models, and are thus not reported.

        Table 4 reports estimates. Non-employer businesses owned by Asians, other race, and

Hispanics have higher probabilities of hiring their first employee than non-Hispanic, white-

owned businesses, all else equal. Non-employer firms owned by African-Americans have similar

likelihoods of hiring their first employee as non-Hispanic whites. Immigrant status also does not

appear to have an effect on hiring probabilities after controlling for other entrepreneur

characteristics. Female-owned non-employer firms have lower annual probabilities of hiring

their first employee than male-owned firms.

        Turning to the human capital of the entrepreneur, we include the owner's level of

education as a set of dummy variables for thresholds in the regressions. As noted above, owner's

education has been found to be a positive predictor of hiring employees, but the relationship with



                                                 17
early stage hiring patterns are unknown. Surprisingly, estimates from the KFS do not provide

evidence that among non-employer startups owner's education has a strong positive predictive

power on whether the first employee is hired in the first several years of operation. The point

estimates are generally small and statistically insignificant and in a couple of cases negative.

          Another measure of human capital – having more industry work experience before

startup – is found to have a positive, but weak relationship with hiring an employee in the first

several years of operation. Previous industry work experience has been found to be an important

determinant of business success in previous work (e.g. see Fairlie and Robb 2007).

Unfortunately, the KFS does not include contemporaneous information on wage and salary work

of owners which has also been found to be important (Garcia-Perez, Goetz, Haltiwanger and

Sandusky 2013).

          Although human capital, such as owner's education and prior industry work experience,

has been identified as an important determinant of business success in previous research, it

appears to be less important in determining which non-employer startups hire their first

employee in the first several years of operation.

          In contrast to the human capital measures, we find that industry differences are important

in determining which non-employer startups are likely to hire employees. 13 Non-employer

startups in wholesale trade have the highest rate of hiring employees, followed by the

transportation, manufacturing and professional industries. In these industries, hiring employees

may be important for capturing returns-to-scale for growth of businesses.



Legal Form of Organization



13
     Hiring rates by industry are reported in Appendix Table 2.

                                                      18
       The KFS also includes information on the legal form of organization of the business.

Does the legal form of organization affect the probability of hiring an employee among non-

employer startups? This question is examined by estimating the same set of regressions including

dummy variables for the legal form of organization. Dummy variables are included for

incorporated businesses (58.6 percent) and partnerships (5.5 percent). Estimates are reported in

Table 5. Non-employer startups that are incorporated are more likely to hire their first employee

by each of the reported follow-up years relative to non-employer startups that are sole

proprietorships. The evidence is less clear for partnerships. The interpretation of these results is

difficult because decisions about employment might cause businesses to choose their legal status.

For example, a non-employer startup that plans on hiring employees in the first few years might

choose to become incorporated because of the employment decision. Additionally, a relatively

small percentage of firms change legal form status, suggesting that becoming incorporated is not

a potentially important milestone such as revenues or assets (Cole 2011). The estimates for the

demographic and human capital characteristics are not sensitive to the inclusion of the legal form

of organization variables.



5. Dynamic Business Milestones Associated with Hiring the First Employee

       Continuing to use the KFS, we switch the focus to exploring the dynamic business factors

associated with hiring decisions. An important question is whether there are milestones that non-

employer startups often reach before hiring their first employee. For example, non-employer

firms might often wait until they have large enough annual revenues to take on the extra

expenses of hiring employees. Do startups wait to build up assets or obtain intellectual property

before hiring their first employee?



                                                 19
          The examination of these questions requires longitudinal data on startups with measures

of both employment and milestone variables year by year instead of a single point in time. By

combining follow-up years to create a panel it is possible to measure the annual probability that

non-employer firms hire their first employee over the entire sample period. It is also possible to

measure levels of revenues and business assets of non-employer firms prior to the timing of the

employment decision. Table 6 reports an estimate of the annual probability of hiring the first

employee among non-employer firms.

          Estimates of annual hire rates are also reported by revenue class in Table 6. Perhaps

surprisingly, the likelihood of hiring the first employee is not strongly related to total business

revenues. The probability of hiring an employee actually decreases by 8.1 percentage points

from non-employer firms with $0 in annual revenues to non-employer firms with $1-$10,000 in

annual revenues. The likelihood of becoming an employer firm remains steady as revenues

increase until the $100,001 or more level. For revenues of $100,001 or more, the probability of

hiring the first employee in the next year increases by 9 percentage points from non-employers

with revenues of $25,001-$100,000. 14 Even this change is not large considering the potential

importance of higher revenues to offset the increased costs of hiring employees.

          Table 6 also reports estimates by business asset levels. Assets include cash, accounts

receivable, equipment, machinery, product inventory, and vehicles. Non-employer startups may

wait until their business assets hit a certain level to offer financing or collateral for raising money

to hire employees. Similar to revenue levels, however, there is no clear evidence that the

probability of a non-employer firm hiring its first employee over the following year increases

substantially with business asset levels. The probability that a non-employer business with $0 in

total business assets hires its first employee over the following year is 22.0 percent. For non-
14
     Only categorical information on revenues is available in the KFS.

                                                      20
employers with $100,001 or more in total business assets the probability is not much higher.

Non-employers with $25,001-$100,000 in total business assets have a probability that is 4

percentage points higher.

        Both business revenues and assets measure the current resources of the firm, but future

potential resources of the firm may be the most important in making the decision to become an

employer firm. In particular, a milestone for many non-employer startups might be when they

obtain intellectual property, such as a patent, trademark or copyright. Patents, trademarks and

copyrights might be useful for non-employer firms considering hiring employees because they

provide a potential source of future revenues even if the firm is experiencing low current

revenues. For non-employer firms with patents, the probability of hiring the first employee

increases by 8.6 percentage points (see Table 6). Obtaining copyrights and trademarks is also

associated with an increase in the likelihood of becoming an employer firm: for copyrights the

increase is roughly 5 percentage points; for trademarks, 13 percentage points. Combining all

types of measurable intellectual property, the estimates indicate that having at least one type is

associated with roughly a 9 percentage point higher rate of hiring the first employee.

        To identify the independent associations between these milestones and the decision to

hire the first employee, we estimate several regressions for the probability of hiring employees.

The regression equation is:



(5.1) yit = α + βXi + γZit-1 + ui + εit,



where yit is whether the entrepreneur hires in year t, Xi includes entrepreneur characteristics that

do not change over time, Zit-1 include business characteristics that change over time (measured



                                                 21
prior to the employment decision), and ui + εit is the composite error term. The observational unit

in the regressions is the business year, and only startups that have not previously hired an

employee up to that year are included in the sample. All specifications are estimated using OLS

and robust standard errors are reported with adjustments for multiple observations per

entrepreneur (i.e. clustered by entrepreneur). Marginal effects estimates are similar from probit

and logit models, and are thus not reported.

       Table 7 reports estimates. Specification 1 focuses on the independent effects of owner

characteristics and industries on the annual probability of hiring the first employee. The

estimates reveal similar patterns as those for the regressions predicting hiring the first employee

by 1, 2 and 7 years following startup. Asians, other race and Latino non-employers have higher

rates of making the transition to an employer firm than do non-Hispanic, white and black non-

employers. Female-owned businesses have a lower annual probability of hiring the first

employee over the sample period than male-owned businesses. The education level of the

entrepreneur has no effect on the hiring probability, but entrepreneurs with more prior work

experience have a higher annual probability of hiring the first employee.

       Specification 2 adds the dynamic business milestone variables reported in Table 7 to the

regression specification. In addition to these milestone variables, the regression includes all of

the previous owner characteristics, industry, and regional controls. After controlling for other

factors, there does not appear to be a strong, clear relationship between revenues and the

probability of hiring the first employee. Most of the coefficients on revenue levels are negative,

indicating that non-employer businesses with zero revenues have relatively high probabilities of

hiring their first employee in the sample period (the left out or comparison category is zero

revenues). There is some evidence, however, that the largest revenue class has a higher



                                                 22
probability of hiring the first employee than the previous revenue classes, indicating a somewhat

U-shaped relationship.

       The estimates for business assets, however, indicate a positive relationship with the

annual employment probability. An increase in the probability of hiring the first employee occurs

when firms have business assets of $10,001 to $25,000. After that level there is no further

increase, but firms with at least $10,001 in business assets have a 6-9 percentage point higher

probability of hiring the first employee over the sample period, all else equal.

       Having intellectual property also has a positive association with making the non-

employer to employer transition during the sample period. Intellectual property, which includes

patents, copyrights and trademarks, is associated with a 7 percentage point increase in the annual

probability of hiring the first employee.

       Although not reported, regression specifications are estimated that include all three types

separately. Including all three types of intellectual property separately in the regression,

estimates indicate that the strongest relationship is between trademarks and the annual

probability of hiring the first employee.

       Revenues and business assets are positively correlated, which might weaken their

estimated relationships with the employment probability. Specifications 3 and 4 include revenues

and assets alone with the other controls, respectively. The estimates confirm the conclusion from

the previous regressions – business assets have a positive association with the probability of

hiring the first employee, but revenues do not have a clear relationship. It may be more important

for non-employer firms to build up assets to use or borrow against to hire their first employee

than to rely on large revenues in the previous year.




                                                 23
        Although all of these dynamic business milestones are measured when the business has

no current employees, there remains the concern that the estimated effects are not causal. This is

an important concern with the regression results. The positive relationship between business

assets and hiring the first employee might simply represent the unobserved growth plan of the

business and not that higher assets cause non-employer firms to take the leap to being an

employer firm. The same concern arises for intellectual property. Although it is measured for the

business prior to hiring their first employee, estimates of the relationship might capture other

unobserved factors. The finding that revenues do not have a clear positive relationship with the

annual employment probability is less a concern, however, because the likely bias is towards

finding a positive relationship. Without an instrument for revenues, these results do not provide

definitive estimates on the causal effects of reaching milestones on hiring the first employee. 15



Businesses with Positive Revenues

        There is often concern that the behavior of businesses that have no revenues might differ

substantially from businesses with positive revenues. To examine this potential concern, we first

compare the characteristics of zero-revenue observations to positive-revenue observations among

non-employer startups. Appendix Table 3 reports estimates. The owner and firm characteristics

of zero-revenue observations for startups do not appear that different than positive-revenue

observations. Demographic, education and work experience characteristics of the owner do not

look that different (except along a few expected characteristics such as black firms having lower

revenues). The industry distributions for zero and positive revenue startups also look relatively


15
  In this application it is extremely difficult to find an instrumental variable that has an effect on the sales
of the business, but does have an effect on the unobserved component of the decision to hire the first
employee. Similarly, an experiment that randomly varies revenues, assets and intellectual property would
be infeasible.

                                                      24
similar. There are lots of zero-revenue startup observations that hire employees the next year

(27% compared with 22% of positive-revenue observations), and that have intellectual property

(15% compared with 14%). 16

        Although there do not appear to be major differences by zero vs positive revenue

observations, we nevertheless, estimate regressions excluding those observations as a robustness

check. Table 8 reports estimates of the same set of regressions excluding all business

observations with zero revenues. Including only positive revenue non-employer startup

observations reduces the sample size by roughly one-third. The estimates for the owner

characteristics, such as Asian, Hispanic, female and industry work experience are similar. The

estimates for intellectual property are also generally similar.

        The estimates for revenues and business assets reveal some interesting patterns. First,

there is some evidence of a positive relationship for the largest revenue class relative to the $1-

10,000 revenue class. This finding is similar to previous findings, but highlighted somewhat by

the change in the reference from the $0 revenue class in Table 7 to the $1-10,000 revenue class

in Table 8. 17 There is no evidence of a positive relationship across the other revenue classes.

Second, the estimates indicate a stronger positive relationship between business assets and hiring

first employees. The removal of zero revenue observations has increased all of the coefficient

estimates. Finally, similar to previous findings, estimates of the relationship between business

assets and hiring probabilities are not sensitive to the inclusion or exclusion of the revenue




16
   Another interesting finding is that slightly more than 50% of non-employer startups with zero revenues
in one year have positive revenues the following year. Roughly 15% of non-employer startups with
positive revenues follow that year with zero revenues. There appears to be some transitioning back and
forth between not having revenues and having revenues among non-employer startups.
17
   The change in left-out category from Table 7 to Table 8 essentially removes the left part of the U-
shaped relationship.

                                                   25
variables. Overall, the results excluding zero-revenue observations do not change the general

conclusions.



Services and Other Industries

       The relationships between revenues and business assets might differ across industries.

The KFS sample is not large enough to run separate analyses by detailed industry, but it is large

enough to run separate regressions for broad industry groupings. Table 9 reports estimates for

regressions including only non-employer startups in the services industry (where many startups

are found). Table 10 reports estimates for regressions including only non-employer startups in

the construction, manufacturing, trade, and other industries. In the services industries, the

relationship between sales and hiring is not clear. The relationship between business assets and

hiring is also not clear, although there are some positive coefficients relative to the lowest level.

Only a few of the coefficient estimates are statistically significant, which is in part due to smaller

sample sizes.

       In the regressions that include the construction, manufacturing, trade and other industries,

the positive relationship between business assets and hiring probabilities is clear. Hiring

increases generally with each level of business assets. The relationship with revenues is less

clear, with hiring first decreasing with higher sales and then increasing for these industries. The

separate industry analyses, in general, do not reveal different patterns for the revenues and

business asset results than for the main results.

       Estimates for the other variables indicate that intellectual property has a similar

association with hiring in the two broad industry groups. The industry groups also have similar

demographic characteristics predicting which non-employer startups hire. Although it would be



                                                    26
useful to conduct separate analyses with more detailed industries, the results for these broad

groupings do not indicate substantially different results and the sample sizes are not large enough

in the KFS to investigate the question further.



6. Does Entrepreneurship Training Help Owners Hire Their First Employee?

        Returning to the question of whether the human capital of the entrepreneur is important

for hiring decisions, we examine whether entrepreneurship training can help overcome some of

the barriers to hiring employees. Entrepreneurship training often specifically teaches self-

employed business owners strategies for hiring and managing employees, and provides training

on registering for EINs, tax and insurance compliance, and legal issues, but does it increase the

likelihood of hiring the first employee? Data from the largest random experiment providing

entrepreneurship training—the GATE experiment—are used to examine this question.

        As noted above, the analysis focuses on the participants in the GATE experiment who

were self-employed business owners at the time of application and reported not ever having

employees for their businesses. Thus, the experiment is used to estimate the effects of

entrepreneurship training on non-employer entrepreneurs hiring their first employee.

        Table 11 starts by comparing mean baseline characteristics between the treatment and

control groups to check the randomization. The groups appear to be similar. Among the

numerous baseline characteristics measured in the application none are statistically different

between the treatment and control groups. Even though we do not detect any differences, in the

estimates of treatment effects, results are presented both without controls and with controls for a

large set of detailed baseline characteristics.




                                                  27
   With any random experiment, the control group cannot be restricted from obtaining training

elsewhere. They cannot receive free services through the GATE program, but they can seek

assistance through the existing market for training services. Given this limitation with any

training experiment, it is important to examine whether and how the GATE treatment actually

changed the use of training services. Table 12 reports the percentage of participants receiving

entrepreneurship training and the mean hours of training separately for the two main types of

training: classroom, workshops and seminars, and one-on-one counseling or technical assistance.

The treatment group was an estimated 32 percentage points more likely to receive any training in

the 6 months following random assignment than the control group. The first 6 months after

random assignment was the most intensive period for receiving training, with less training

received during the subsequent 12-month period (i.e. between Wave 1 and Wave 2) and the last

12-month period (i.e. before Wave 3).

       The treatment group also received more than twice the number of hours of training by the

first follow-up wave. The difference in training received is 9 hours at Wave 1 and summing

across waves. The extra hours of instructional time are likely to result in substantially more

"homework" time. Although students learn or receive guidance in the classroom or one-on-one

counseling, research and calculations for planning and strategies for business growth are done

elsewhere, and thus not reported as “training” hours. Among those who received any training,

the treatment group received on average 21.0 hours of training in the first 6 months, which is

roughly two-thirds the instructional time for a 5-unit college course over a quarter.

       Follow-up survey responses also indicate that GATE participants were satisfied with

services. Table 13 reports estimates for the treatment and control groups who received services.

48.6 percent of GATE recipients reported that “the overall usefulness” of the services received



                                                 28
was “very useful,” with 31.3 percent responding “somewhat useful.” Most recipients of GATE

training responded that services helped “a lot” or “somewhat” with at least one specific aspect of

the business or business planning (e.g., marketing strategy, accounting, networking, information

technology). The treatment group reported greater satisfaction overall, and for each of the

training aspects, than control group trainees (who obtained non-GATE training of their own

accord). One interesting finding is that a low percentage of the treatment group (and control

group) reported that the entrepreneurship training they received helped "a lot" with "hiring and

dealing with employees" relative to other areas in which it helped. Of course, this may mean they

were not looking for this kind of help, rather than that the training was not useful for hiring

employees. Furthermore, these results must be interpreted with caution because they are only

suggestive self-reports of how areas of training helped participants.



Estimating the Effects of Entrepreneurship Training on Hiring the First Employee

        I next examine the effects of entrepreneurship training on non-employer business owners

hiring their first employee. The regression equation for the employment outcome, yi , in the

context of the random experiment is straightforward:

(6.1) yi = α + δTi + γXi + εi.

where Ti is the treatment indicator, Xi includes all of the baseline covariates reported in Table 11,

and εi is an error term. The effect of becoming eligible for entrepreneurship training through the GATE

program or the "intent-to-treat" (ITT) estimate of the training program is captured by δ. Measures of

employment at three follow-up waves after random assignment are available: Wave 1 at 6

months, Wave 2 at 18 months, and Wave 3 at 60 months. Employment at each of the waves is

examined for the sample of non-employer firms participating in the experiment.



                                                   29
         Table 14 reports estimates from (6.1) of the effects of entrepreneurship training through

the GATE program on employment. In the first panel, the treatment effects on the probability of

hiring the first employee by each of the follow-up waves are reported. The sample includes only

business owners with no employees at the time they applied to the GATE program. This is the

time of random assignment. The first column does not include any controls, and thus essentially

calculates the difference in employment rates between treatment and control groups in the experiment.

At Wave 1, 11.6 percent of the treatment group and 8.8 percent of the control group hired an employee

for a difference of 2.8 percentage points. The estimated treatment-control difference, however, is not

statistically significant.

         Table 14 also reports specifications that include controls and that are for additional

follow-up waves. None of the point estimates for the entrepreneurship training treatment effects

on hiring the first employee are statistically significant. These results are consistent for the 6-

month, 18-month and 60-month follow-up periods.

         Table 14 also reports estimates of the effects of entrepreneurship training on current

employment at the point in time of each follow-up survey. In the second panel, the effects on the

probability of hiring an employee at each of the follow-up waves are reported. The 6-month or

Wave 1 results are the same as those reported in Panel 1 because Wave 1 is the first follow-up

survey. At the 18-month and 60-month periods, the point estimates are no longer positive. They

remain statistically insignificant. In both specifications and across follow-up waves, insignificant

estimates and inconsistent signs on those estimates are found. Thus, there is no evidence of a

positive effect of entrepreneurship training on increasing the likelihood that non-employer

business owners hired an employee at each of the follow-up surveys.

         Although entrepreneurship training through the GATE program does not increase the

likelihood a non-employer firm hires an employee at each follow-up wave, it might increase

                                                    30
overall employment levels. In the second panel, the entrepreneurship training treatment effects

on number of employees for non-employer business owners at each follow-up wave are

investigated. Similarly, there is no evidence of positive effects of entrepreneurship training on

the number of employees.

       The lack of effects on entrepreneurship training on hiring employees does not appear to

be due to differential rates of non-employer businesses ceasing operations over the study period.

If a business stops operating, then technically it cannot hire employees. The estimates do not

condition on survival because that could introduce a bias in estimating the effects of

entrepreneurship training through the experiment.

       Table 15 reports estimates of the effects of entrepreneurship training on whether the non-

employer business owner at baseline continues owning a business at each of the follow-up

waves. There is some drop-off in business ownership, as roughly 20 percent are no longer

business owners at Wave 1, 28 percent at Wave 2, and 33 percent at Wave 3. The estimates,

however, do not provide any clear and consistent evidence that entrepreneurship training

increases the likelihood that non-employer business owners remain in business.

       These results are also consistent with lack of evidence of an effect of entrepreneurship

training on the sales of businesses owned by initial non-employer owners. Estimates are reported

in Table 15. There is no evidence of a positive effect of entrepreneurship training on sales.

       All of the experimental estimates reported thus far capture the “intent-to-treat” or the

effects of the offer of entrepreneurship training through the GATE program. Another commonly

reported estimate in an experimental setting is the local average treatment effect (LATE). LATE

shifts the focus from estimating the effects of the offer of entrepreneurship training on hiring

employees to estimating the effects of receiving entrepreneurship training on hiring employees.



                                                 31
The estimation involves using instrumental variables, which is operationalized by using 2SLS. In

the first stage the probability of receiving any entrepreneurship training is regressed on treatment

(the instrument). In the second stage, employment is regressed on the predicted value of

receiving any entrepreneurship training from the first stage. The technique scales up the ITT

estimate by dividing it by the difference between the percentage of the treatment group receiving

any training and the percentage of the control group receiving any training. It adjusts the

treatment-control difference estimate upward to account for the fact that it was originally

calculated with only part of the treatment group receiving training and part of the control group

not receiving training. 18 As reported in Table 12, 86 percent of the treatment group did not

receive any entrepreneurship training in the first 6 months after random assignment, and 54

percent of the control group received at least some entrepreneurship training (outside of GATE)

in the 6 months after random assignment (e.g. 0.86-054=0.32 for the 6-month survey).

        Appendix Table 4 reports LATE estimates for the three employment outcomes reported

in Table 14. The reported estimates are larger, but not statistically significant for any measure or

any follow-up survey. The main conclusion does not change – we find no evidence that

entrepreneurship training increases the likelihood of hiring employees among non-employer

entrepreneurs.



7. Conclusions


18
  LATE estimates, however, have two well-known drawbacks. First, LATE only provides an estimate of
the effect of receipt of entrepreneurship training for those individuals complying with the experiment (i.e.
the treatment group who received entrepreneurship training and the control group who did not receive
entrepreneurship training). LATE estimates are then interpreted as “local” estimates of the effects of
entrepreneurship training for compliers. Second, they rely on the key assumption that the receipt of any
entrepreneurship training means the same thing for the treatment and control groups (otherwise the
rescaling up of the ITT estimate would be invalid). This is problematic here if the control group is
receiving a very different quality and level of services on average than the treatment group.

                                                     32
       From the analysis of longitudinal data from the iLBD, several interesting patterns emerge

regarding the dynamics of non-employer startups hiring their first employee. Among business

hiring employees, a large percentage of non-employer startups hire their first employee in the

first three years of existence, with only a small percentage hiring their first employee in the few

years after that period. Hiring patterns over time are roughly similar in the KFS sample of non-

employer startups, but higher because of the more growth- and employment-oriented businesses

contained in the underlying D&B data.

       The likelihood of making the transition from non-employer to employer business within

the first several years of operation differs by the race, ethnicity and gender of the entrepreneur.

Non-employer businesses owned by Asians and Hispanics have higher probabilities of hiring

their first employee than white-owned businesses, all else equal. Non-employer firms owned by

African-Americans have similar likelihoods of hiring their first employee as whites. Female-

owned non-employer firms have lower annual probabilities of hiring their first employee than

male-owned firms.

       The entrepreneur's human capital, measured as owner's education and prior industry work

experience, does not strongly predict hiring the first employee, although there is some evidence

of a positive relationship with prior industry work experience. Data from the GATE experiment

is used to examine the question of whether entrepreneurship training increases the likelihood that

non-employer entrepreneurs hire an employee within the next several years. We find do not find

evidence of positive effects of entrepreneurship training on hiring the first employee by 6, 18 and

60 months. Furthermore, the estimates do not provide evidence that the probability of hiring an

employee or the number of employees increases with entrepreneurship training.

Entrepreneurship training, however, might be more effective for business owners in specific



                                                 33
industries or with specific backgrounds. More research with larger samples of non-employer

business owners is needed to explore this question.

       Using the longitudinal data from the KFS, another important question examined is

whether there are milestones that non-employer startups often reach before hiring their first

employee. Surprisingly, we do not find clear evidence of a strong relationship between the

revenues of non-employer firms and the decision to hire their first employee in the KFS sample.

The evidence, however, is less ambiguous that higher levels of business assets are associated

with non-employer businesses making the transition to employer firms. It may be important for

non-employer firms to build up assets to use or borrow against to hire their first employee.

Having intellectual property also has a positive association with making the non-employer to

employer transition during the sample period. Intellectual property, which includes patents,

copyrights and trademarks, is associated with a 7 percentage point increase in the annual

probability of hiring the first employee. Intellectual property may be valuable for securing future

revenues for hiring employees.

       The analysis of iLBD, KFS and GATE experimental data represents one of the detailed

studies on the topic of what predicts whether and when an entrepreneur hires the first employee.

Although some caution is warranted in interpreting the estimates they represent an important first

step towards better understanding the determinants of entrepreneurs making the decision to take

the leap from non-employer to employer firms. More research on the important topic of job

creation by entrepreneurs is clearly needed.




                                                34
References

Acs, Zoltan J., Brian Headd and Hezekiah Agwara. 2009. The Nonemployer Start-up Puzzle,
U.S. Small Business Administration, Office of Advocacy Working Paper.

Ballou, J., Barton, T., DesRoches, D., Potter, F., Reedy, E.J., Robb, A., Shane, S.
Zhao, Z. (2008). Kauffman Firm Survey: Results from the Baseline and First Follow-Up Surveys.
Kauffman Foundation.

Benus, Jacob, Theodore Shen, Sisi Zhang, Mark Chan, and Benjamin Hansen. 2009. Growing
America Through Entrepreneurship: Final Evaluation of Project GATE.

Birch, David L. 1979. The Job Generation Process, Report prepared for the U.S. Department of
Commerce, Economic Development Administration, Washington, D.C.

Bellotti, Jeanne. 2006. "Growing America through Entrepreneurship: Interim Report." Report
Submitted to U.S. Department of Labor.

Burke, Andrew E., Felix R. FitzRoy, and Michael A. Nolan. "When less is more: distinguishing
between entrepreneurial choice and performance." Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics
62.5 (2000): 565-587.

Burke, Andrew E., Felix R. Fitzroy, and Michael A. Nolan. "Self-employment wealth and job
creation: the roles of gender, non-pecuniary motivation and entrepreneurial ability." Small
Business Economics 19.3 (2002): 255-270.

Cole, Rebel A. 2011. "How Do Firms Choose Legal Form of Organization?" Small Business
Administration, Office of Advocacy Report.

Cowling, Marc, Mark Taylor, and Peter Mitchell. "Job creators." The Manchester School 72.5
(2004): 601-617.

Davis, Steven J., John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, C.J. Krizan, Javier Miranda, Al Nucci and
Kristen Sandusky. 2007. "Measuring the Dynamics of Young and Small Businesses: Integrating
the Employer and Nonemployer Universes," NBER Working Paper No. 13226.

Fairlie, Robert W., Dean Karlan and Jonathan Zinman. 2015. "Behind the GATE Experiment:
Evidence on Effects of and Rationales for Subsidized Entrepreneurship Training," American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(2): 125-61.

Fairlie, Robert W., and Harry A. Krashinsky (2012), "Liquidity Constraints, Household Wealth,
and Entrepreneurship Revisited," Review of Income and Wealth, 58(2): 279-306.

Fairlie, Robert W., and Alicia M. Robb. 2007. "Families, Human Capital, and Small Business:
Evidence from the Characteristics of Business Owners Survey," (with Alicia Robb), Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, 60(2): 225-245.


                                              35
Fairlie, Robert W., and Alicia M. Robb. 2007. "Why are Black-Owned Businesses Less
Successful than White-Owned Businesses: The Role of Families, Inheritances, and Business
Human Capital," Journal of Labor Economics, 25(2): 289-323.

Fairlie, Robert W., and Alicia M. Robb. 2008. Race and Entrepreneurial Success: Black-, Asian-,
and White-Owned Businesses in the United States, Cambridge: MIT Press.

Garcia-Perez, Monica, Christopher Goetz, John Haltiwanger, and Kristin Sandusky. 2013.
“Don’t Quit your Day Job: Using Wage and Salary Earnings to Support a New Business,” U.S.
Census Bureau, Center for Economic Studies Working Paper CES 13-45.

Haltiwanger, John C., Ron S. Jarmin and Javier Miranda. 2013. “Who Creates Jobs? Small vs.
Large vs. Young” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2013, vol. 95, issue 2, pages 347-
361.

Henley, Andrew. "Job creation by the self-employed: The roles of entrepreneurial and financial
capital." Small Business Economics 25.2 (2005): 175-196.

Kerr, William R., and Ramana Nanda (2011), "Financing Constraints and Entrepreneurship." in
David Audretsch, Oliver Falck and Stephan Heblich (eds) Handbook on Research on Innovation
and Entrepreneurship, 88-103. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing, Inc.

OECD 2014. Entrepreneurship at a Glance 2014. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development Press, Paris.

Parker, Simon C. (2009). The Economics of Entrepreneurship. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Robb, Alicia M., Robert W. Fairlie, and David T. Robinson. 2012. "Black & White: Racial
Differences in New Firm Financing," Working Paper.

Robb, Alicia M., E.J. Reedy, Janice Ballou, David DesRoches, Frank Potter, and Zhanyun Zhao.
2010. An Overview of the Kauffman Firm Survey: Results from the 2004–2008 Data, Kansas
City: Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation.

Tracy, Spencer L. 2011. Accelerating Job Creation in America: The Promise of High-Impact
Companies, U.S. Small Business Administration, Office of Advocacy Working Paper.

U.S. Census Bureau. 2013. Survey of Business Owners 2007,
http://www.census.gov/econ/sbo/07menu.html

van der Sluis, J., van Praag, M., and Vijverberg, W. 2005. "Education and Entrepreneurship in
Industrialized Countries: A Meta-Analysis," World Bank Economic Review, 19(2): 225-261.




                                              36
Van Praag, C. Mirjam, and Jan S. Cramer. "The roots of entrepreneurship and labour demand:
Individual ability and low risk aversion." Economica 68.269 (2001): 45-62.




                                             37
 Appendix Table 1: Industry Distribution of Non-Employer Startups in Kauffman Firm Survey (2004), Non-
 Employer Startups in iLBD (2004), and New Non-Employer Firms in Survey of Business Owners (2007)

                                  Non-Employer Startups    Non-Employer           New Non-Employers
                                        (KFS 2004)      Startups (iLBD 2004)           (SBO 2007)
Industry                           Percent       N      Percent         N         Percent       N
Other industries                     1.4%       2838      2.0%       5543283       1.2%       151113
Construction                        12.1%       2838     12.4%       5543283       11.2%      151113
Manufacturing                        5.8%       2838      1.4%       5543283        1.5%      151113
Wholesale trade                      5.6%       2838      1.8%       5543283        1.8%      151113
Retail trade                        13.6%       2838     10.0%       5543283        9.8%      151113
Transportation and warehousing       2.7%       2838      4.6%       5543283        4.9%      151113
Information                          3.4%       2838      1.9%       5543283        1.9%      151113
Finance, insurance and real estate 10.9%        2838     12.3%       5543283       11.5%      151113
Professional services               17.0%       2838     13.5%       5543283       18.0%      151113
Management                          10.1%       2838      7.7%       5543283       8.9%       151113
Health and educational services      3.4%       2838     12.3%       5543283       12.0%      151113
Entertainment, accommodation
and food services                    3.9%       2838      6.3%       5543283        6.3%       151113
Other services                      10.3%       2838     13.9%       5543283       11.1%       151113
Notes: (1) The KFS sample consists of businesses with no employees at startup in 2004. (2) The iLBD
consists of the universe of non-employer startups. (3) The SBO sample consists of businesses with no
employees staring in 2006 or 2007. (4) Sample weights are used for the KFS and SBO estimates.




                                                   38
           Appendix Table 2: Industries and Hiring Rates of First Employee among Non-Employer Startups
                                         Kauffman Firm Survey (2004-2011)
                                                                   y                     y                  y
                                                    by 1 Year after       by 2 Years after   by 7 Years after
                                                        Startup               Startup            Startup
Industry                                          Percent        N      Percent        N   Percent        N
Other industries                                   26.4%         26      39.7%         26   38.3%         12
Construction                                       42.2%        197      59.6%        171   79.4%         77
Manufacturing                                      45.4%        375      61.1%        250   76.2%        111
Wholesale trade                                    55.1%         88      69.6%         88   88.1%        44
Retail trade                                       36.9%        240      53.2%        205   73.6%        78
Transportation and warehousing                     39.1%         49      69.4%         44   90.0%         19
Information                                        31.0%         95      54.8%         77   59.9%         42
Finance, insurance and real estate                 25.0%        177      42.4%        163   59.2%         72
Professional services                              43.5%        647      59.3%        552   78.0%        290
Management                                         40.2%        200      64.8%        149   80.7%         68
Health and educational services                    37.5%         59      56.7%         55   79.2%         23
Entertainment, accommod. and food services 29.2%                 80      49.8%         59   59.8%         36
Other services                                     30.3%        227      50.2%        193   66.8%         82
Note: The sample consists of businesses with no employees at startup in 2004.




                                                      39
  Appendix Table 3: Owner and Firm Characteristics among Zero- and Positive-
                       Revenue Non-Employer Startups
                      Kauffman Firm Survey (2004-2011)

                                        Zero Revenue        Positive Revenue
Owner Characteristic                    Observations          Observations
White, non-Hispanic                         73.2%                 88.2%
African-American                            17.3%                  5.6%
Asian-American                               3.7%                  2.1%
Other race                                   5.4%                  3.5%
Hispanic                                     4.7%                  3.4%
Immigrant                                    9.6%                  6.7%
Female                                      33.0%                 36.8%
High school or less                         13.2%                 14.0%
Some college                                41.0%                 40.0%
College graduate                            45.8%                 46.0%
Industry work experience >= 10 years        41.4%                 42.8%
Other industries                             1.9%                  2.0%
Construction                                13.1%                 11.3%
Manufacturing                                5.3%                  5.4%
Wholesale trade                              3.0%                  4.4%
Retail trade                                10.9%                 13.4%
Transportation and warehousing               3.8%                  1.4%
Information                                  3.1%                  4.1%
Finance, insurance and real estate          16.3%                 11.7%
Professional services                       14.4%                 18.6%
Management                                   8.8%                  9.3%
Health and educational services              4.0%                  3.0%
Entertainment, accommodation and
food services                                4.2%                  4.2%
Other services                              11.1%                 11.2%
Business Assets: Zero                       24.0%                  4.7%
Business Assets: $1-10,000                  33.6%                 34.1%
Business Assets: $10,000-25,000             11.6%                 18.4%
Business Assets: $25,000-100,000            15.5%                 25.2%
Business Assets: $100,000 or more           15.3%                 17.7%
Patents                                      3.3%                  1.1%
Copyrights                                   6.7%                  8.2%
Trademarks                                   9.1%                  8.6%
Any intellectural property                  14.7%                 13.9%
Hires employee next year                    26.7%                 21.9%
Sample size                                  1750                  4169
Note: The sample consists of all non-employer observations over sample period,
2004 to 2011.

                                                40
 Appendix Table 4: LATE Estimates of Impact of Entrepreneurship Training on Hiring Employees for Non-
                                Employer Business Owners at Baseline

                                                              Treatment-Control (LATE/IV Estimates)
                                                      No Covars           Covariates                 N
Dependent Variable                                        (1)                  (2)                  (3)
Has any employees by W1 survey date                     0.0864               0.0989                302
                                                       (0.1089)            (0.1108)
Has any employees by W2 survey date                     0.1257               0.2192                275
                                                       (0.1868)            (0.1802)
Has any employees by W3 survey date                     0.2033               0.1956                225
                                                       (0.2571)            (0.2988)
Has any employees at W1 survey date                     0.0864               0.0989                302
                                                       (0.1089)            (0.1108)
Has any employees at W2 survey date                    -0.0104               0.0404                276
                                                       (0.1580)            (0.1546)
Has any employees at W3 survey date                    -0.1545              -0.2514                228
                                                       (0.1963)            (0.2267)
Number of employees at W1                              -0.3152              -0.3570                302
                                                       (0.4814)            (0.5073)
Number of employees at W2                              -0.9478              -0.8013                276
                                                       (0.7251)            (0.6797)
Number of employees at W3                              -0.5282              -0.7336                228
                                                       (1.0317)            (1.3029)

Notes: (1) The first-stage in the IV (LATE) model regresses receipt of entrepreneurship training on
treatment. The second-stage regresses the listed outcome on predicted receipt of entrepreneurship
training. (2) The wave 1, wave 2 and wave 3 surveys are conducted at 6, 18, and 60 months after time of
application. (3) Covariates include program sites, female, race, immigrant, age, married, children,
education level, household income, self-employed at application, health problems, worked in family
business, bad credit history, unemployment compensation, employer provided health insurance,
autonomy, and risk tolerance. (4) *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01
levels, respectively.




                                                   41
       Appendix Figure 1: Rates of Hiring First Employee and Going Out of Business for Non-Employer Startups
                                          Kauffman Firm Survey (2004-2011)




 Year 0          Year 1            Year 2           Year 3           Year 4             Year 5            Year 6             Year 7




No employee    No employee
                  (54%)

              Hire employee      No employee
                  (38%)             (64%)

              Out of business   Hire employee      No employee
                   (7%)             (26%)             (80%)

                                Out of business   Hire employee      No employee
                                    (10%)             (14%)             (83%)
                                                                                       No employee
                                                  Out of business   Hire employee
                                                                                          (85%)
                                                       (6%)             (12%)
                                                                                      Hire employee      No employee
                                                                    Out of business                         (83%)
                                                                                           (8%)
                                                                         (5%)                                              No employee
                                                                                      Out of business   Hire employee
                                                                                                                              (89%)
                                                                                           (7%)              (6%)

                                                                                                        Out of business   Hire employee
                                                                                                                               (3%)
                                                                                                            (12%)
                                                                                                                          Out of business
                                                                                                                               (8%)
  Table 1.A: Distribution across Years in which Non-Employer Startup
              Hired Its First Employee - All Non-Employers
           Integrated Longitudinal Business Database (ILBD)

                                                     Percent    Universe
Hired first employee at:
 1 year after startup                                  1.9%      84,500
 2 years after startup                                 0.2%      10,200
 3 years after startup                                 0.1%       4,900
 4 years after startup                                 0.1%       2,900
 5 years after startup                                 0.1%       2,500
 6 years after startup                                 0.0%       1,500
 7 years after startup                                 0.0%       1,200
 Has not hired employee by end of                     12.7%     556,200
 study period
 Exit before hiring employee by end of                84.8% 3,704,800
 study period
Total number of non-employer startups:                         4,368,700
Notes: (1) The data consists of the universe of non-employer startups in
1997. (2) Non-employer startups are defined as non-employers
appearing in the non-employer data for the first time in at least three
years.
Table 1.B: Distribution across Years in which Non-Employer Startup Hired
                       Its First Employee - EIN Cases
            Integrated Longitudinal Business Database (ILBD)

                                               Percent         Universe
Hired first employee at:
 1 year after startup                          11.0%              63,900
 2 years after startup                         1.5%                8,800
 3 years after startup                         0.7%                4,100
 4 years after startup                         0.4%                2,400
 5 years after startup                         0.3%                1,800
 6 years after startup                         0.2%                1,200
 7 years after startup                         0.2%                1,000
 Has not hired employee by end of              13.0%              75,700
 study period
 Exit before hiring employee by end of         72.7%            422,300
 study period
Total number of non-employer startups:                          581,200
Notes: (1) The data consists of the universe of non-employer startups in
1997. (2) Non-employer startups are defined as non-employers
appearing in the non-employer data for the first time in at least three
years.




                                                  2
Table 1.C: Distribution across Years in which Non-Employer Startup Hired
                  Its First Employee - Incorporated Cases
            Integrated Longitudinal Business Database (ILBD)

                                               Percent         Universe
Hired first employee at:
 1 year after startup                          16.2%              52,700
 2 years after startup                         2.3%                7,500
 3 years after startup                         1.1%                3,500
 4 years after startup                         0.6%                2,100
 5 years after startup                         0.5%                1,500
 6 years after startup                         0.3%                1,000
 7 years after startup                         0.2%                  800
 Has not hired employee by end of              8.8%               28,600
 study period
 Exit before hiring employee by end of         70.0%            227,800
 study period
Total number of non-employer startups:                          325,500
Notes: (1) The data consists of the universe of non-employer startups in
1997. (2) Non-employer startups are defined as non-employers
appearing in the non-employer data for the first time in at least three
years.




                                                  3
 Table 2.A: Distribution across Years in which Non-Employer Startup
                        Hired Its First Employee
                  Kauffman Firm Survey (2004-2011)

                                              Percent           N
Hired first employee at:
 1 year after startup                          36.6%           1590
 2 years after startup                         12.6%           1590
 3 years after startup                         4.0%            1590
 4 years after startup                         3.1%            1590
 5 years after startup                         1.4%            1590
 6 years after startup                         0.8%            1590
 7 years after startup                         0.4%            1590
 Has not hired employee by end of              13.3%           1590
 study period
 Out of business before hiring                 27.9%           1590
 employee by end of study period
Notes: (1) The sample consists of businesses with no employees at
startup in 2004. (2) The sample includes only businesses with non-
missing information for all follow-up years.




                                                  4
   Table 2B: Hiring Rates of First Employee by Year among Non-
                        Employer Startups
                 Kauffman Firm Survey (2004-2011)

                                            Percent            N
Hire first employee by:
 1 year after startup                       38.0%            2460
 2 years after startup                      51.0%            2214
 3 years after startup                      54.0%            1960
 4 years after startup                      57.2%            1810
 5 years after startup                      58.4%            1712
 6 years after startup                      58.5%            1626
 7 years after startup                      58.8%            1590
Note: The sample consists of businesses with no employees at
startup in 2004. For each follow-up year only observations with
non-missing information for all years up to that point are included.




                                                    5
      Table 3: Owner Characteristics and Hiring Rates of First Employee among Non-Employer Startups
                                     Kauffman Firm Survey (2004-2011)

                                     Hire First Employee by Hire First Employee by Hire First Employee by
                                      1 Year after Startup   2 Years after Startup  7 Years after Startup
Owner Characteristic                  Percent         N      Percent          N     Percent          N
Total                                  38.0%         2460     51.0%         2214     58.8%         1590
White, non-Hispanic                    36.3%         2010     48.9%         1823     57.9%         1326
African-American                       38.8%         197      49.9%          169     58.5%          110
Asian-American                         53.7%          81      68.9%           70     70.2%           51
Other race                             51.3%         131      65.6%          114     67.0%           77
Hispanic                               48.1%         118      64.5%          104     67.0%           68
Native born                            37.4%         2220     50.3%         2005     58.8%         1452
Immigrant                              44.8%         235      58.3%          204     58.6%          136
Male                                   41.0%         1762     54.5%         1592     62.2%         1140
Female                                 31.9%         696      43.9%          620     51.8%          449
High school or less                    35.7%         309      48.9%          271     58.5%          182
Some college                           36.7%         898      49.9%          796     55.1%          553
College graduate                       40.0%         1243     52.7%         1137     62.2%          848
Industry work experience < 10 years    35.2%         1283     47.2%         1133     54.5%          813
Industry work experience >= 10 years 41.7%           1171     56.2%         1075     64.6%          773
Note: The sample consists of businesses with no employees at startup in 2004.




                                                        6
               Table 4: Regressions for Probability of Hiring First Employee
               Non-employer Startups - Kauffman Firm Survey (2004-2011)

                                  By 1 Year after         By 2 Years           By 7 Years
                                       Startup          after Startup         after Startup
Explanatory Variables                    (1)                   (2)                  (3)
African-American                      0.00838              -0.00565             0.05406
                                     (0.04258)            (0.04910)            (0.06387)
Asian-American                        0.17478      **      0.23409       ***     0.17472    **
                                     (0.06897)            (0.07674)            (0.07932)
Other race                            0.12570      **      0.13483       **      0.15197    **
                                     (0.05140)            (0.05403)            (0.06377)
Hispanic                              0.07071              0.13196       **      0.12730
                                     (0.05468)            (0.06050)            (0.07875)
Immigrant                             -0.01565             -0.02637             -0.06087
                                     (0.04415)            (0.05123)            (0.06658)
Female                                -0.08755     ***     -0.09266      ***    -0.03513
                                     (0.02474)            (0.02898)            (0.03788)
Some college                          0.01975              0.01476              -0.09452    *
                                     (0.03478)            (0.04234)            (0.05039)
College graduate                      0.04388              0.02914              -0.08744    *
                                     (0.03527)            (0.04271)            (0.04743)
Industry work exp. > 10 years         0.03302              0.05531       **     0.02439
                                     (0.02298)            (0.02609)            (0.03433)
Other industry                        -0.01589             -0.08660             -0.24204
                                     (0.09890)            (0.10919)            (0.16904)
Construction                          0.07575              0.04544              0.09997
                                     (0.04964)            (0.05699)            (0.07534)
Manufacturing                         0.14575      ***     0.12237       *      0.09981
                                     (0.05570)            (0.06538)            (0.08850)
Wholesale trade                       0.25716      ***     0.17615       **     0.21710     ***
                                     (0.06048)            (0.06953)            (0.08295)
Retail trade                          0.08518      *       0.05171              0.07725
                                     (0.04684)            (0.05404)            (0.07745)
Transportation and                    0.12147              0.19142       **     0.21907     **
warehousing                          (0.07555)            (0.08966)            (0.09122)
Information                           -0.03328             -0.01662             -0.06866
                                     (0.06582)            (0.07588)            (0.10955)
Finance, insurance and real           -0.05926             -0.08031             -0.04966
estate                               (0.04934)            (0.05928)            (0.08550)
Professional services                 0.12143      ***     0.06974              0.12723     *
                                     (0.04231)            (0.04889)            (0.06607)
Management                            0.07932              0.12508       **     0.14899     *
                                     (0.04891)            (0.05734)            (0.07638)
Health and educational services       0.08719              0.05560              0.15946
                                     (0.07186)            (0.08357)            (0.11404)
Entertainment, accommodation          0.01381              0.01163              -0.04673
and food services                    (0.06352)            (0.08011)            (0.11191)
                                      0.37991              0.56187              0.73760
Sample size                             2419                 1982                  931
Notes: (1) The sample consists of businesses with no employees at startup in 2004. (2)
Regional controls are included in all specifications. (3) *, **, and *** denote statistical
significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.

                                                             7
  Table 5: Regressions for Probability of Hiring First Employee including Legal Form of
                                      Organization
             Non-employer Startups - Kauffman Firm Survey (2004-2011)
                                  By 1 Year after         By 2 Years           By 7 Years
                                       Startup          after Startup         after Startup
Explanatory Variables                    (1)                   (2)                  (3)
African-American                      0.01034              -0.00366              0.06132
                                     (0.04274)            (0.04959)            (0.06620)
Asian-American                        0.17392      **      0.24039       ***     0.17309    **
                                     (0.06891)            (0.07826)            (0.08546)
Other race                            0.12539      **      0.13259       **      0.14550    **
                                     (0.05111)            (0.05337)            (0.06643)
Hispanic                              0.07476              0.13187       **      0.12716
                                     (0.05448)            (0.06014)            (0.08069)
Immigrant                             -0.02032             -0.02839             -0.06111
                                     (0.04395)            (0.05112)            (0.07029)
Female                                -0.08134     ***     -0.08636      ***    -0.02430
                                     (0.02475)            (0.02905)            (0.03783)
Some college                          0.01558              0.00931              -0.10647    **
                                     (0.03457)            (0.04232)            (0.05096)
College graduate                      0.03296              0.01626              -0.11064    **
                                     (0.03528)            (0.04299)            (0.04882)
Industry work exp. > 10 years         0.03072              0.05432       **     0.02239
                                     (0.02293)            (0.02607)            (0.03439)
Other industry                        -0.03129             -0.10504             -0.26844
                                     (0.09977)            (0.10849)            (0.16663)
Construction                          0.06745              0.03233              0.08164
                                     (0.04986)            (0.05691)            (0.07519)
Manufacturing                         0.13623      **      0.11074       *      0.08227
                                     (0.05522)            (0.06557)            (0.08912)
Wholesale trade                       0.24504      ***     0.15788       **     0.18410     **
                                     (0.06022)            (0.06968)            (0.08441)
Retail trade                          0.07800      *       0.03926              0.06719
                                     (0.04683)            (0.05429)            (0.07661)
Transportation and                    0.10656              0.17467       **     0.19072     **
warehousing                          (0.07640)            (0.08910)            (0.09246)
Information                           -0.03497             -0.02492             -0.05656
                                     (0.06661)            (0.07559)            (0.10771)
Finance, insurance and real           -0.08099             -0.09314             -0.07188
estate                               (0.05049)            (0.05941)            (0.08645)
Professional services                 0.11198      ***     0.05687              0.10927     *
                                     (0.04241)            (0.04913)            (0.06635)
Management                            0.07356              0.11384       **     0.13076     *
                                     (0.04866)            (0.05771)            (0.07668)
Health and educational services       0.08124              0.03695              0.14838
                                     (0.07128)            (0.08375)            (0.11582)
Entertainment, accommodation          0.00350              0.00017              -0.04575
and food services                    (0.06360)            (0.08032)            (0.11238)
Incorporated                          0.06045      **      0.04264               0.08700    **
                                     (0.02612)            (0.02934)            (0.03799)
Partnership                           0.04194              -0.08990             -0.05928
                                     (0.05408)            (0.06198)            (0.10680)
Mean of Dep. Variable                 0.37991              0.56187              0.73760
Sample size                             2419                  1982                 931
Notes: (1) The sample consists of businesses with no employees at startup in 2004. (2)
Regional controls are included in all specifications. (3) *, **, and *** denote statistical
significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.

                                                                  8
      Table 6: Annual Rates of Hiring First Employee
Non-Employer Panel Data - Kauffman Firm Survey (2004-2011)

                                      Hire First Employee
Milestone                            Percent           N
All Non-Employer Observations            23.4%            6092
Total Revenues (Annual)
 Zero                                    26.7%            1750
 $1-10,000                               18.6%            1313
 $10,000-25,000                          19.8%             710
 $25,000-100,000                         21.4%            1369
 $100,000 or more                        30.4%             777
Total Business Assets
 Zero                                    22.0%             667
 $1-10,000                               19.7%            2130
 $10,000-25,000                          24.6%            1013
 $25,000-100,000                         28.2%            1342
 $100,000 or more                        24.2%             920
Patents
 No                                      23.3%            5867
 Yes                                     31.9%             168
Copyrights
 No                                      23.2%            5447
 Yes                                     28.1%             535
Trademarks
 No                                      22.4%            5382
 Yes                                     35.6%             586
Any intellectual property
 No                                      22.4%            4951
 Yes                                     31.2%             940
Note: The sample consists of all non-employer observations
over sample period, 2004 to 2011.




                                             9
                   Table 7: Regressions for Annual Probability of Hiring First Employee
                     Non-Employer Panel Data - Kauffman Firm Survey (2004-2011)

                                    In Following         In Following         In Following      In Following
                                        Year                  Year                 Year              Year
Explanatory Variables                    (1)                   (2)                  (3)                (4)
African-American                      0.01613               0.00594              -0.00150           0.02098
                                     (0.03221)             (0.03209)           (0.03203)          (0.03240)
Asian-American                        0.15645      **       0.18576     ***      0.18753   ***      0.18813      ***
                                     (0.06803)             (0.06900)           (0.06930)          (0.06850)
Other race                            0.13127      ***      0.11198     **       0.11485   **       0.11975      ***
                                     (0.04513)             (0.04809)           (0.04732)          (0.04635)
Hispanic                              0.11114      **       0.11271     **       0.11263   **       0.11206      **
                                     (0.05336)             (0.05503)           (0.05445)          (0.05411)
Immigrant                             0.01809               0.01743              0.01828            0.01720
                                     (0.03663)             (0.03877)           (0.03855)          (0.03756)
Female                                -0.05342     ***      -0.04123    **       -0.04524  ***     -0.04228 **
                                     (0.01666)             (0.01704)           (0.01705)          (0.01688)
Some college                          -0.01868              -0.01937             -0.02212          -0.02015
                                     (0.02579)             (0.02582)           (0.02595)          (0.02579)
College graduate                      0.00106               -0.00504             -0.00745          -0.00045
                                     (0.02580)             (0.02597)           (0.02617)          (0.02596)
Industry work exp. > 10 years         0.03943      **       0.03625     **       0.03511   **       0.03836      **
                                     (0.01634)             (0.01665)           (0.01668)          (0.01652)
Revenues: $1-$10,000                                        -0.06380    ***      -0.06557  ***
                                                           (0.02028)           (0.02002)
Revenues: $10,001-$25,000                                   -0.07024    ***      -0.06052  ***
                                                           (0.02321)           (0.02308)
Revenues: $25,001-$100,000                                  -0.06149    ***      -0.04157  **
                                                           (0.01969)           (0.01929)
Revenues: $100,000 or more                                  -0.00204             0.02897
                                                           (0.02860)           (0.02765)
Business assets: $1-$10,000                                 0.02041                                -0.00814
                                                           (0.02323)                              (0.02279)
Business assets: $10,001-$25,000                            0.06255     **                          0.03479
                                                           (0.02760)                              (0.02700)
Business assets: $25,001-$100,000                           0.08812     ***                         0.06469      **
                                                           (0.02681)                              (0.02603)
Business assets: $100,000 or more                           0.07367     **                          0.05923      **
                                                           (0.02903)                              (0.02818)
Intellectual property                                       0.07379     ***      0.07598   ***      0.07995      ***
                                                           (0.02321)            (0.02321)         (0.02333)
Mean of Dep. Variable                 0.23364               0.23531              0.23526            0.23538
Sample size                             5793                  5452                 5455               5593
Notes: (1) The sample consists of all non-employer observations over sample period, 2004 to 2011. The unit
observation is a business-year. (2) Industry and regional controls are included in all specifications. (3) *, **,
and *** denote statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.




                                                             10
   Table 8: Regressions for Annual Probability of Hiring First Employee including only Businesses with
                                                Revenues
                    Non-Employer Panel Data - Kauffman Firm Survey (2004-2011)

                                    In Following         In Following         In Following       In Following
                                        Year                 Year                 Year               Year
Explanatory Variables                    (1)                  (2)                  (3)                 (4)
African-American                      -0.01531             -0.00914             -0.01404           -0.01261
                                     (0.04044)            (0.04102)            (0.04053)           (0.04100)
Asian-American                        0.11369              0.15396      *       0.15597      *      0.14705      *
                                     (0.08564)            (0.08592)            (0.08580)           (0.08621)
Other race                            0.18526    ***       0.16512      **      0.17400      ***    0.16612      **
                                     (0.06469)            (0.06775)            (0.06640)           (0.06668)
Hispanic                              0.10238              0.11102              0.10927             0.10679
                                     (0.07062)            (0.07244)            (0.07141)           (0.07167)
Immigrant                             0.03152              0.02764              0.02850             0.02991
                                     (0.04573)            (0.04796)            (0.04809)           (0.04655)
Female                                -0.06438   ***       -0.05118     ***     -0.05417     ***   -0.05362      ***
                                     (0.01902)            (0.01932)            (0.01944)           (0.01927)
Some college                          0.01075              0.01347              0.00966             0.01468
                                     (0.02860)            (0.02840)            (0.02860)           (0.02854)
College graduate                      0.01511              0.01293              0.00918             0.01567
                                     (0.02892)            (0.02879)            (0.02913)           (0.02894)
Industry work exp. > 10 years         0.04201    **        0.03649      *       0.03503      *      0.03934      **
                                     (0.01849)            (0.01879)            (0.01882)           (0.01868)
Revenues: $1-$10,000

Revenues: $10,001-$25,000                                     -0.01267            0.00080
                                                             (0.02307)           (0.02291)
Revenues: $25,001-$100,000                                    -0.00588            0.01882
                                                             (0.02222)           (0.02102)
Revenues: $100,000 or more                                    0.05509     *       0.09175     ***
                                                             (0.03084)           (0.02883)
Business assets: $1-$10,000                                   0.07753     ***                         0.07404     ***
                                                             (0.02664)                               (0.02680)
Business assets: $10,001-$25,000                              0.11764     ***                         0.11617     ***
                                                             (0.03108)                               (0.03095)
Business assets: $25,001-$100,000                             0.14693     ***                         0.15522     ***
                                                             (0.03040)                               (0.03020)
Business assets: $100,000 or more                             0.13240     ***                         0.14923     ***
                                                             (0.03440)                               (0.03370)
Intellectual property                                         0.05170     **      0.05662     **      0.05426     **
                                                             (0.02577)           (0.02590)           (0.02573)
Mean of Dep. Variable                  0.21876                0.22045             0.22042             0.22045
Sample size                              3975                   3841                3842                3841
Notes: (1) The sample consists of all non-employer observations with non-zero revenues over sample period,
2004 to 2011. The unit observation is a business-year. (2) Industry and regional controls are included in all
specifications. (3) *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.




                                                             11
        Table 9: Regressions for Annual Probability of Hiring First Employee in Services Industries
                    Non-Employer Panel Data - Kauffman Firm Survey (2004-2011)

                                    In Following             In Following         In Following       In Following
                                        Year                      Year                 Year              Year
Explanatory Variables                    (1)                       (2)                  (3)                (4)
African-American                      0.03894                   0.02898              0.02396            0.03741
                                     (0.03626)                (0.03571)            (0.03557)           (0.03616)
Asian-American                        0.14699         *         0.17646    **        0.17721    **      0.17809   **
                                     (0.08018)                (0.07971)            (0.08102)           (0.07991)
Other race                            0.07472                   0.05551              0.05774            0.06479
                                     (0.04577)                (0.04954)            (0.04868)           (0.04682)
Hispanic                              0.16409         ***       0.17559    ***       0.17230    ***     0.16894   ***
                                     (0.05809)                (0.06069)            (0.06017)           (0.05917)
Immigrant                             0.00959                   0.01106              0.01203            0.00309
                                     (0.04238)                (0.04526)            (0.04542)           (0.04319)
Female                                -0.06331        ***       -0.05483   ***       -0.05621   ***    -0.05773 ***
                                     (0.01890)                (0.01918)            (0.01930)           (0.01906)
Some college                          0.00085                   -0.00500             -0.00987          -0.00010
                                     (0.03252)                (0.03339)            (0.03360)           (0.03275)
College graduate                      -0.00602                  -0.01526             -0.01974          -0.00837
                                     (0.03199)                (0.03296)            (0.03325)           (0.03234)
Industry work exp. > 10 years         0.03300         *         0.02418              0.02488            0.02854
                                     (0.01880)                (0.01911)            (0.01916)           (0.01900)
Revenues: $1-$10,000                                            -0.03554             -0.03275
                                                              (0.02421)            (0.02406)
Revenues: $10,001-$25,000                                       -0.01943             -0.00957
                                                              (0.02797)            (0.02783)
Revenues: $25,001-$100,000                                      -0.05796   ***       -0.04213   *
                                                              (0.02247)            (0.02206)
Revenues: $100,000 or more                                      0.04599              0.05773    *
                                                              (0.03468)            (0.03438)
Business assets: $1-$10,000                                     0.02405                                 0.01376
                                                              (0.02680)                                (0.02571)
Business assets: $10,001-$25,000                                0.09125    ***                          0.07803   **
                                                              (0.03235)                                (0.03144)
Business assets: $25,001-$100,000                               0.05284    *                            0.04867
                                                               (0.03121)                               (0.02992)
Business assets: $100,000 or more                               0.03040                                 0.03725
                                                               (0.03268)                               (0.03202)
Intellectual property                                           0.05320    **        0.05464    **      0.05574   **
                                                               (0.02617)            (0.02620)          (0.02612)
Mean of Dep. Variable                     0.21624               0.21826              0.21818            0.21736
Sample size                                 3716                  3497                 3499               3587
Notes: (1) The sample consists of all non-employer observations in the services industries over sample
period, 2004 to 2011. The unit observation is a business-year. (2) Industry and regional controls are included
in all specifications. (3) *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels,
respectively.




                                                              12
      Table 10: Regressions for Annual Probability of Hiring First Employee in Construction, Trade,
                                 Manufacturing, and Other Industries
                    Non-Employer Panel Data - Kauffman Firm Survey (2004-2011)

                                     In Following        In Following          In Following         In Following
                                         Year                 Year                  Year                 Year
Explanatory Variables                     (1)                  (2)                   (3)                   (4)
African-American                       -0.03484             -0.04780              -0.05602             -0.02316
                                      (0.05637)            (0.05927)            (0.05912)             (0.05934)
Asian-American                         0.19793    *         0.25723       ***     0.25749     **        0.24691    **
                                      (0.11080)            (0.09885)            (0.10667)             (0.10188)
Other race                             0.23075    ***       0.19378       **      0.21335     **        0.20403    **
                                      (0.08747)            (0.09173)            (0.08937)             (0.08994)
Hispanic                               0.03478              0.03300               0.03479               0.03585
                                      (0.08394)            (0.07932)            (0.08121)             (0.08065)
Immigrant                              0.02244              0.01363               0.01496               0.02534
                                      (0.06389)            (0.06578)            (0.06441)             (0.06662)
Female                                 -0.02926             0.00097               -0.01004             -0.00195
                                      (0.03135)            (0.03182)            (0.03204)             (0.03122)
Some college                           -0.03824             -0.02776              -0.03390             -0.03336
                                      (0.03881)            (0.03749)            (0.03778)             (0.03774)
College graduate                       0.03947              0.03275               0.03417               0.03898
                                      (0.04166)            (0.04101)            (0.04134)             (0.04129)
Industry work exp. > 10 years          0.06054    **        0.07212       **      0.06709     **        0.07133    **
                                      (0.02998)            (0.03050)            (0.03023)             (0.03019)
Revenues: $1-$10,000                                        -0.11233      ***     -0.12286    ***
                                                           (0.03512)            (0.03478)
Revenues: $10,001-$25,000                                   -0.16260      ***     -0.16098    ***
                                                           (0.03960)            (0.03915)
Revenues: $25,001-$100,000                                  -0.06566      *       -0.03727
                                                           (0.03636)            (0.03526)
Revenues: $100,000 or more                                  -0.06664              -0.00680
                                                           (0.04792)            (0.04435)
Business assets: $1-$10,000                                 0.00669                                    -0.05468
                                                           (0.04470)                                  (0.04473)
Business assets: $10,001-$25,000                            0.02643                                    -0.03355
                                                           (0.05019)                                  (0.04936)
Business assets: $25,001-$100,000                           0.12735       **                            0.06840
                                                           (0.04961)                                  (0.04809)
Business assets: $100,000 or more                           0.13181       **                            0.07935
                                                           (0.05703)                                  (0.05426)
Intellectual property                                       0.09773       **      0.10088     **        0.11985    ***
                                                           (0.04302)             (0.04369)            (0.04356)
Mean of Dep. Variable                 0.26185               0.26283               0.26282               0.26441
Sample size                             2077                  1955                  1956                  2006
Notes: (1) The sample consists of all non-employer observations in the construction, manufacturing, trade,
and other industries over sample period, 2004 to 2011. The unit observation is a business-year. (2) Industry
and regional controls are included in all specifications. (3) *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the
0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively.




                                                              13
      Table 11: Treatment/Control Comparison of Baseline
             Characteristics for GATE Experiment


                                                            P-Value
                                  Treatment   Control      for Treat-
                                    Group     Group         Control
                                     (1)        (2)           (3)
Philadelphia                         19.0%      16.0%           0.47
Pittsburgh                           10.3%      14.8%           0.22
Minneapolis-St. Paul                 52.3%      49.1%           0.56
Duluth                                3.5%       5.3%           0.40
Maine                                14.9%      14.8%           0.97
Female                               46.0%      45.0%           0.85
Black                                25.3%      23.8%           0.75
Latino                                8.6%       4.8%           0.15
Asian                                 2.9%       4.2%           0.52
Other                                 6.9%       8.3%           0.62
Not U.S. born                         9.2%       9.5%           0.93
Age                                   44.19      43.70          0.66
Married                              46.6%      55.1%           0.12
Has children                         46.0%      47.3%           0.80
Highest grade completed               15.07      15.21          0.56
HH Income $25,000-49,999             28.3%      29.2%           0.86
HH Income $50,000-74,999             19.7%      20.8%           0.79
HH Income $75,000-99,999              5.2%       5.4%           0.95
HH Income $100,000+                   5.2%       6.6%           0.60
Has a health problem                  7.5%       5.9%           0.57
Has relatives or friends who
have been previously S.E.            75.3%      74.6%           0.88
Ever worked for relatives or
friends who are S.E.                 30.5%      26.6%           0.43
Has a bad credit history             41.4%      37.3%           0.44
Currently receiving UI benefits      31.6%      25.6%           0.22
Sample Size                             174        169
Notes: (1) All reported characteristics are measured at time of
application, prior to random assignment. (2) Sample includes
only non-employer business owners at time of application.




                                                      14
                             Table 12: Treatment and Control Groups Receipt of Entrepreneurship Training

                                    R.A. to Wave 1      Wave 1 to Wave 2 Year Prior to Wave 3   Cumulative to            Cumulative to
                                   (6 month period)     (12 month period) (12 month period)         Wave 2                   Wave 3
                                  Percent    Mean       Percent    Mean   Percent      Mean   Percent    Mean          Percent    Mean
                                 Receiving Hours       Receiving Hours Receiving Hours Receiving Hours                Receiving Hours
                                     (1)       (2)         (3)      (4)      (5)        (6)     (7)        (8)           (9)       (10)
Treatment group
 Any entrepreneurship training      86.0%       18.0      50.0%       9.7     31.7%        6.8     86.4%       27.8      88.7%       34.5
 Attended classes, workshops
 or seminars                        72.0%       15.9      45.8%       8.9     28.5%        5.9     74.1%       24.8      77.0%       30.7
 Received one-on-one
 counseling or technical            57.3%        2.1      18.1%       1.1     17.1%        0.7     58.8%        3.2      63.7%        3.9

Control group
 Any entrepreneurship training    53.7%         9.1    47.8%          8.7    40.2%         7.9    57.3%        17.8      65.4%       25.7
 Attended classes, workshops
 or seminars                      46.3%         8.2    44.0%          7.3    37.4%         7.3    50.6%        15.5      58.7%       22.8
 Received one-on-one
 counseling or technical          22.4%         0.9    20.1%          1.5    11.2%         0.6    27.9%         2.5      34.4%        3.1
Note: The wave 1, wave 2 and wave 3 surveys are conducted at 6, 18, and 60 months after time of application.




                                                                        15
         Table 13: Self-Reported Amount that Entrepreneurship Training Helped Recipients in Various Ways

                                                   Very      Somewhat      Not Very    Not at All
                                                  Useful       Useful       Useful      Useful
How would you rate the overall usefulness
of the services you have received?
Treatment group                                      48.6%        31.3%        12.5%         7.6%
Control group                                        35.6%        45.5%         6.9%        11.9%

                                                           Treatment Group                       Control Group
GATE Services                                      A Lot    Somewhat Not at All           A Lot    Somewhat Not at All
Helped with applying for loans                         9.4%     23.2%    67.4%                0.0%     11.0%   89.0%
Helped with deciding whether to pursue self. em       37.1%     20.3%    42.7%               23.3%     24.3%   52.4%
Helped with refining the business idea                32.9%     37.1%    30.1%               25.2%     33.0%   41.7%
Helped with credit issues                             18.2%     27.3%    54.5%                6.9%     18.8%   74.3%
Helped with developing a marketing strategy           34.3%     35.0%    30.8%               22.3%     31.1%   46.6%
Helped with legal issues                              13.3%     32.9%    53.8%               10.7%     24.3%   65.0%
Helped with accounting issues                         22.9%     34.0%    43.1%                8.7%     31.1%   60.2%
Helped with hiring and dealing with employees          9.2%     18.3%    72.5%                5.8%     17.5%   76.7%
Helped with networking                                31.3%     32.6%    36.1%               23.3%     29.1%   47.6%
Helped with using computers and technology             8.3%     29.2%    62.5%                5.8%     23.3%   70.9%
Helped with dealing with clients                      19.4%     36.1%    44.4%               13.6%     31.1%   55.3%
Helped with providing psychological support           19.0%     28.2%    52.8%               15.7%     21.6%   62.7%
Notes: (1) Sample includes treatment and control group participants who received any entrepreneurship training by wave 1
follow-up survey (6 months). (2) Evaluation of services was asked at W1.




                                                                 16
Table 14: Impact of Entrepreneurship Training on Hiring Employees for Non-Employer Business Owners at
                                                Baseline

                                                                Treatment-Control ITT Estimates
                                                      No Covars           Covariates                  N
Dependent Variable                                        (1)                 (2)                    (3)
Has any employees by W1 survey date                     0.0277              0.0319                   302
                                                       (0.0349)            (0.0357)
Has any employees by W2 survey date                     0.0303              0.0532                   275
                                                       (0.0450)            (0.0438)
Has any employees by W3 survey date                     0.0418              0.0349                   225
                                                       (0.0529)            (0.0533)
Has any employees at W1 survey date                     0.0277              0.0319                   302
                                                       (0.0349)            (0.0357)
Has any employees at W2 survey date                    -0.0025              0.0098                   276
                                                       (0.0382)            (0.0375)
Has any employees at W3 survey date                    -0.0325             -0.0459                   228
                                                       (0.0413)            (0.0413)
Number of employees at W1                              -0.1011             -0.1152                   302
                                                       (0.1544)            (0.1637)
Number of employees at W2                              -0.2292             -0.1944                   276
                                                       (0.1753)            (0.1649)
Number of employees at W3                              -0.1110             -0.1338                   228
                                                       (0.2169)            (0.2376)
Notes: (1) Intent-to-Treat (ITT) estimates are reported for the listed outcome regressed on
entrepreneurship training treatment. (2) The wave 1, wave 2 and wave 3 surveys are conducted at 6, 18,
and 60 months after time of application. (3) Covariates include program sites, female, race, immigrant,
age, married, children, education level, household income, self-employed at application, health problems,
worked in family business, bad credit history, unemployment compensation, employer provided health
insurance, autonomy, and risk tolerance. (4) *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05,
and 0.01 levels, respectively.




                                                      17
    Table 15: Impact of Entrepreneurship Training on Business Ownership and Sales for Non-Employer
                                      Business Owners at Baseline

                                                                Treatment-Control ITT Estimates
                                                      No Covars           Covariates                  N
Dependent Variable                                        (1)                 (2)                    (3)
Business owner at W1 survey date                       -0.0296             -0.0052                   302
                                                       (0.0454)            (0.0464)
Business owner at W2 survey date                       -0.0017              0.0046                   278
                                                       (0.0539)            (0.0551)
Business owner at W3 survey date                        0.0555              0.0213                   230
                                                       (0.0627)            (0.0666)
Monthly business sales at W1 survey date               -0.5808             -0.5062                   252
(000s)                                                 (0.5336)            (0.5281)
Monthly business sales at W2 survey date               -1.3105      *      -1.1815                   235
(000s)                                                 (0.7545)            (0.7225)
Monthly business sales at W3 survey date               -0.8671             -0.8182                   214
(000s)                                                 (2.9767)            (2.8160)
Notes: (1) Intent-to-Treat (ITT) estimates are reported for the listed outcome regressed on
entrepreneurship training treatment. (2) The wave 1, wave 2 and wave 3 surveys are conducted at 6, 18,
and 60 months after time of application. (3) Covariates include program sites, female, race, immigrant,
age, married, children, education level, household income, self-employed at application, health problems,
worked in family business, bad credit history, unemployment compensation, employer provided health
insurance, autonomy, and risk tolerance. (4) *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05,
and 0.01 levels, respectively.




                                                      18
