NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE INNER WORKINGS OF THE PATIENT CENTERED MEDICAL HOME MODEL
Guy David
Philip A. Saynisch
Aaron Smith-McLallen
Working Paper 22429
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22429

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2016

We thank the participants of seminars at University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, Harvard,
University of Minnesota, University of Illinois at Chicago, and University of Pennsylvania. As
well as participants of the 2016 American Health Economics Conference, the 6th Biennial
Conference of the American Society of Health Economists, and the IDC School of Economics
conference. Special thanks to Ravi Chawla, Somesh Nigam, Cindy Wang, Sarah Scholle, and
Candace Gunnarsson for data support and helpful suggestions. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22429.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Guy David, Philip A. Saynisch, and Aaron Smith-McLallen. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Inner Workings of the Patient Centered Medical Home Model
Guy David, Philip A. Saynisch, and Aaron Smith-McLallen
NBER Working Paper No. 22429
July 2016
JEL No. I1,I10,I13,I18,L21,L23
ABSTRACT
The patient-centered medical home (PCMH) is a model for restructuring primary care with a
focus on improved access to care and clinical excellence. However, to date, the evidence on its
effect on healthcare utilization and expenditures has been quite mixed. One possible reason for
this may lie in the flexibility with which a practice can meet the thresholds for PCMH
recognition, adopting practice reforms in vastly different domains. Hence, practices with the same
recognition level may in fact demonstrate divergent capabilities, and subsequently have different
leverage over the achievement of the PCMH goals. We study this idea by using previously
unavailable data that spans all PCMH recognition domains. The richness of our data allows us to
group practices into clusters based on their choice of attributes during the recognition process,
and then examine the performance of individual clusters in reducing healthcare utilization and
expenditures. We find that treating the PCMH model as an undifferentiated intervention obscures
meaningful variation in implementation across practices. In particular, clusters emphasizing
practice improvements like use of decision support, enhanced access to care and population
management tools have demonstrated some success in impacting utilization and expenditures
patterns after PCMH recognition.
Guy David
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
202 Colonial Penn Center
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6218
and NBER
gdavid2@wharton.upenn.edu
Philip A. Saynisch
Harvard Business School
psaynisch@hbs.edu

Aaron Smith-McLallen
Independence Blue Cross
1900 Market Street
Philadelphia, PA 19103-1480
Aaron.Smith-McLallen@ibx.com

I. Introduction
The increasing prevalence of chronic illnesses and mounting associated costs are major concerns for the
US healthcare system. Along with other reforms, considerable attention has been devoted to efforts to
restructure primary care with the goal of improving the coordination of care. One model for reform which
has generated considerable attention is the Patient-Centered Medical Home (PCMH), a suite of primary
care improvements including assignment of patients to a personal physician responsible for directing
“whole person” care, adoption and use of health information technology and expanded patient access to
care providers (American Academy of Family Physicians, American Academy of Pediatrics, American
College of Physicians, & American Osteopathic Association, 2007).
Despite numerous pilot projects and extensive efforts at evaluating the PCMH, the evidence regarding the
model’s impacts on patient experience, utilization and expenditures remains mixed. This study aims to
improve the present understanding of how the PCMH model may increase the reliance on primary care and
reduce downstream utilization of specialist care as well as emergency department visits and hospitalizations
through the use of a unique dataset containing detailed data on specific capabilities for medical home
practices, which has never previously been linked to patient-level claims data. Because primary care
practices can achieve PCMH recognition from the National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) by
adopting a self-selected subset of practice improvements, a binary categorization of practices as medical
homes or not could obscure substantial variation in implementation. One recent study described substantial
variation in how practices implemented the PCMH model, and its authors point out that further research is
needed to know whether these different approaches have varying impacts on patient outcomes (Tirodkar et
al., 2014). This echoes a more general call in economics to engage in “mechanism experiments,” studying
not only whole policy interventions but also attempting to identify the specific channels by which these
programs yield improvements (Ludwig, Kling, & Mullainathan, 2011). By documenting which specific
PCMH capabilities were present in the recognized practices, we intend to assess whether these capabilities

‐1‐

have differential impact on patient interaction with the healthcare system, potentially clarifying some of the
conflicting results from prior studies.
This paper uses data on 152,093 patients over six years (370,764 patient-years in total) covered by a single
large, private insurer in southeastern Pennsylvania. These patients were treated in 104 practices which
gained recognition as medical homes between 2008 and 2012, with healthcare utilization and expenditures
tracked through 2013. The dataset describing the specific PCMH components which practices had in place
is extremely detailed, including scoring based on 127 individual “factors” of implementation.1 As a
consequence, the number of dimensions of interest exceeds the number of practices with which to study
them. Moreover, the specific functional form of the primary care production function is not known, and
there may be important interactions between PCMH factors in determining patient outcomes.
To address these issues, we group medical home practices into one of three types using a hierarchical
clustering approach. The algorithm used here starts with N clusters of 1 practice, and sequentially groups
practices based on their similarity in terms of implemented PCMH “factors”. This dramatically reduces the
dimensionality of the problem described above, as we are able to include only indicators for cluster
identifiers in the regression analyses. Using this approach, we find substantial heterogeneity in
implementation across clusters, with different areas of focus (generally summarized as “the basic model”,
“enhanced population health management” and “enhanced access, decision support and data reporting”).
Moreover, we find that both analyses which treat the PCMH model as an undifferentiated intervention and
alternative specifications that use the level of PCMH recognition to differentiate between practices miss
significant variation in effects on patient expenditure and utilization outcomes, which become apparent
when the PCMH model is instead evaluated in terms of the performance of clusters of similar practices.
Additionally, we find that this pattern – heterogeneity in PCMH implementation and subsequent differential

1

The 127 individual NCQA factors span 139 binary components.

‐2‐

effects on patient outcomes – is not explained away by practice-type mix or prevalence of chronic illness
across practices.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: the following section describes the patient centered medical
home model and discusses previous efforts at evaluating its effects on patient outcomes. Section III
introduces a theoretical model of profit or value-driven procurement under asymmetric information to
describe the contractual interactions between insurers and primary care practices. The model highlights the
role of quality assurance credentialing (such as NCQA’s PCMH recognition process), which certifies that
practices have adopted a range of quality-improving features. Some of these features may have costreducing effects valued by the insurer, thereby providing a noisy signal of efficiency to insurers. This
certification process may play a role in mitigating adverse selection and in ensuring that certain productive
tasks are performed by the practice.
Having provided a theoretical framework for understanding why insurers may value the signal of quality
provided by NCQA accreditation, we then assess how the signal is being produced. Whereas previous
analyses have been limited to coarse summaries of PCMH recognition (either a binary indicator of PCMH
adoption or the level of recognition), this study makes use of the granular practice data used by NCQA in
the recognition process. Section IV discusses the sources of patient and primary care practice data used in
this study. Section V describes our empirical approach, covering both the clustering technique and
regression analysis used to assess patient-level data. In Section VI, we present our results. We find that
practices achieve PCMH recognition with different combinations of eligible features, and that this variation
is not captured by previously-used summary measures such as PCMH level. Additionally, when considered
as a single intervention, PCMH adoption explains little of the variation in patient outcomes; however, when
practices are analyzed as belonging to a commonly implemented subtype, a relationship between PCMH
adoption and patient outcomes emerges. Section VII includes discussion of these results, and Section VIII
concludes.

‐3‐

II. The Patient Centered Medical Home
The status quo approach to organizing primary care is poorly suited to address the needs of patients. An
extensive body of literature points to a number of problems - for example, care is often structured to address
acute health issues, rather than to manage on-going concerns (Bodenheimer, Wagner, & Grumbach, 2002;
Wagner, Austin, & Von Korff, 1996). Specialist and procedural services such as diagnostic imaging are
reimbursed at higher rates compared to core primary care activities aimed at disease management, and
physicians may not be paid at all for work to coordinate care outside of primary care practices (Bodenheimer
& Pham, 2010). Additionally, fewer than half of office-based physicians had an electronic health record
(EHR) system in place as of 2008, when the PCMH initiative considered in this study began (Hsiao & Hing,
2014), potentially leading to difficulty monitoring the care and condition of patients with chronic illnesses.

The patient centered medical home is the leading model currently being advanced to address these
significant problems in primary care. The medical home provides “whole person” care, aimed at treating
acute needs as well as focusing on broader goals like population health management, coordination of care
across sites, improved patient engagement, implementation of evidence-based care, using health
information technology, expanded practice hours and improved patient-provider communication.2

These goals were operationalized by the National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA), an
organization which has produced a recognition checklist for practices seeking accreditation as patient
centered medical homes. In recent years, these guidelines have become the standard recognition criteria
used in evaluations of the PCMH model (Cassidy, 2010; Friedberg, Lai, Hussey, & Schneider, 2009). By
October 2014, 11,058 sites of care and 55,156 clinicians were recognized by NCQA as PCMH (roughly a
quarter of all practicing primary care physicians in the U.S.). The 2008 NCQA guidelines, which were used

2

The origins and evolution of the PCMH model have been extensively documented by health services researchers
(Friedberg et al., 2009; Kilo & Wasson, 2010).

‐4‐

to evaluate the practices included in this study, provide 127 specific action items (or “factors,”) which are
grouped into 30 “elements,” which are further grouped into nine “standards;” practices accrue points based
on the number and type of PCMH factors which have been implemented, with different weightings
depending on the specific area of practice improvement. Practices achieve PCMH recognition at one of
three levels by satisfying two sets of requirements: first, they must receive at least 50% of the possible
points in five or more of ten “must-pass” elements; second, they must receive 25 or more total points (out
of a possible score of 100). Practices qualify for Level 1 recognition with 5 or more must-pass elements
and 25 points; Level 2 is reached when practices pass all 10 must-pass elements and have accrued at least
50 points; and Level 3 is reserved for practices satisfying all 10 must-pass requirements and receiving a
total score of 75 points or more (National Committee for Quality Assurance, 2008). An overview of these
standards and elements appears in Table 1.
[TABLE 1]

The PCMH model is expected to lead to better care management and subsequently to a reduction in
utilization of high-cost, high-intensity care such as hospitalizations or emergency department (ED) visits
(Hearld & Alexander, 2012). By one estimate, as many as 27% of ED visits could have been effectively
treated in an office-based setting (Weinick, Burns, & Mehrotra, 2010). The evidence on the PCMH model’s
impact on patient outcomes to date has been mixed. While several studies of the PCMH model have found
evidence of reduced total expenditures (Devries et al., 2012; Paustian et al., 2013) and lower utilization of
high-cost medical services such as hospital admission and ED visits (Reid et al., 2010; David et al., 2014;
Rosenthal et al., 2015, 2016), other studies, including systematic literature reviews, found the PCMH to
have limited or no effect on quality, utilization or expenditures (Friedberg et al., 2014; Peikes, Zutshi,
Genevro, Parchman, & Meyers, 2012; Jackson et al., 2013; Peikes et al., 2011). All these studies analyze
implementation of the PCMH model as a whole, rather than studying the specific components practices
adopted.

‐5‐

III. Theoretical Model
The purpose of this section is to describe the potential value of NCQA recognition to insurers in a principalagent procurement framework. In this framework, asymmetric information allows for informational rents
and distortion of optimal levels of an unobserved efficiency parameter. There is an extensive literature on
the value and desirability of auditing (Khalil & Lawarree, 1995), supervision (Engel, 2006) and monitoring
(Lewis & Sappington, 1991; Liu, 1982; Zhao, 2008) in reducing such distortions. This literature emphasizes
threats of collusion between the supervisor and either party - principal or agent (Strausz, 1997; Vafaï, 2005).
For example, Strausz (1997) shows the delegation of monitoring to a third-party supervisor is profitable
even in the face of collusion. While most of this literature analyzes these issues in the case of within-firm
hierarchical labor relations between owners and managers (or managers and their staff), our context lends
itself to a procurement framework, as it pertains to cases were the insurer is not financially integrated with
the physician practice with which it contracts.3 Since a health care provider must consent to any type of
external monitoring, we focus on information extraction by the insurer that relies on third-party
credentialing organizations (such as NCQA). We disregard the possibility of collusion between NCQA and
health care providers, but instead point to the fact that there may be a misalignment between the parameters
collected by the NCQA and the ones the insurer cares about. In particular, the information sought by a profit
maximizing insurer is likely to differ from the information generated through a process designed to achieve
social value. Moreover, based on the underlying NCQA process, recognition can be achieved through
different combinations of actions (or clusters of actions). And while these different clusters can plausibly
lead to the same desirable social outcome, they may differentially affect the insurer’s profitability.

Assume a risk-neutral insurer and a risk-neutral primary care practice which respectively insure and serve
a group of individuals. Extending the simple principal-agent framework, we assume that the practice can

3

Notable exceptions include integrated delivery systems that have an insurance component (typically an HMO) under
a single parent company. Examples include Kaiser Permanente in California, Geisinger Health System in
Pennsylvania, or Intermountain Healthcare in Utah.

‐6‐

take on a set of indivisible actions not fully observed by the insurer. A specific combination of actions
would yield a value, , to a pure profit maximizing insurer. We assume that is large enough to justify the
creation of a contractual environment that would induce the practice to take such actions. In addition, we
assume that the sole motivation for the practice in taking an action is to maximize the difference between
the monetary transfer from the insurer, t, and its cost of taking such action. This excludes the possibility
that these actions benefit the practice in other ways, in particular, the practice may derive utility from
enhancing its quality and reputation either due to altruistic motives or through its ability to translate quality
reputation into surplus (e.g. by charging higher prices, increasing its patient panel, etc.).

For simplicity, we will consider three specific actions taken by the practice. The first is an action that
benefits both patients and the insurer, implemented at effort level eip. For example, the practice can allocate
resources to improve population health management which results in a reduction in avoidable downstream
health care utilization. The second is an action that benefits only patients, with effort expressed as ep. For
example, the practice may refer patients for treatment that is both more effective and more expensive. The
third is an action that benefits only the insurer, with effort level, ei. For example, referring a patient to an
equally competent, yet lower cost specialist. The total level of effort is the sum of the three action



components (i.e. e  e p  ei  eip ).

Since these actions may require different diagnostic, technological, and informational capabilities the
practice may come to realize that it is well suited for some actions and less so for others. This concept is



modeled by variation in the efficiency vector  , which is realized after a contract is offered by the insurer
to the practice. When the practice is efficient in performing an action, high effort has relatively low disutility
associated with it. The efficiency vector is represented by a set of efficiency parameters that correspond to



the actions in the effort vector (i.e.    p  i  ip ).

‐7‐

The cost of effort (or a measure of disutility of effort in monetary terms) is assumed to be additively
separable in the three effort components and proportional to the parameters in the efficiency vector, such



 

1
2
1
2
that:   , e  ½  p  e p  ½  i  ei  ½ ip  eip . Letting subscripts denote partial derivatives, for any

1

2



 



 

component of e, we verify that   ,0  0 ,  e  , e  0 ,

 

 

 

 ee  , e   0 ,    , e   0 , and  e  , e   0 .

This cost function implies that the marginal disutility from effort at any effort level,



 e  , e  is lower when



 is higher. For example, reducing medication errors is easier when the practice uses an electronic system
to order prescriptions, to check for safety and to promote efficiency when prescribing. Similarly, identifying
patient language preferences to overcome patient-specific barriers to communication is easier when the
practice staff is fluent in that language. Finally, we focus on the illustratively and computationally simpler
case in which each component  j , where j  p , i , ip  , can take only one of two values,  j, H or  j, L , with



 j , H   j , L  0 . Since  is realized after the contract is introduced, we assume that the insurer knows the


true distribution of each individual component of  , such that Prob ( j , H )  q j  (0,1) .



The insurer has access to a signal, s, on  , and can refine its contracts to the practice based on this signal.
The information available to the insurer comes from a third-party credentialing organization through the
implementation of a quality assurance initiative (e.g. NCQA PCMH recognition). The signal is a discrete
credentialing level – a new information that allows for the screening of practices to more effectively combat
adverse selection.4 Furthermore, note that the third-party credentialing organization only observes the
realization of capabilities,  , but not how they are used, e. It is interested solely in quality of care, and
therefore collects information exclusively on  p and  ip .

4

Third-party screening, while producing a signal for the insurer should be distinguished from the concept of Signaling,
which implies that the informed practice moves first by choosing an action to signal its type.

‐8‐

Therefore, after the contract is set, the insurer observes the credentialing level sH when s   p   ip or sL
when s   p   ip that the practice obtained. Since the profit maximizing insurer does not care about  p
and the signal contains no information about  i , its informational value depends exclusively on how  p and

 ip map into s. To make credentialing instructive in this setting let s   p , H   ip , H and s   p , L   ip , L , that
is, sH and sL correctly correspond to the realizations (H,H) and (L,L). Therefore, the key question is how

 p , L   ip , H and  p , H   ip , L map onto s. If  p , L   ip , H belongs to sH and  p , H   ip , L to sL , the signal
accurately reveals the state of  ip .

Under this scenario, the insurer observes  ip but not  i , and hence can specify two conditional contracts

(( t HH , ei , H ), (t HL , ei , H ) | s H ) and (( t LH , ei , L ), (t LL , ei , L ) | s L ) that take into account the random nature of  i
and condition on the realization of  ip . The two resulting individual rationality (IR) constraints will be a
hybrid between the case where all values of

are observed and the case where none of the values of

are

observed. The IR constraints are presented in III.2 and III.3. The incentive compatibility (IC) constraints
(III.4 and III.5) ensure that a contract designed for one type of practice would be preferred by that practice
to the one designed for the other practice type.

The expected profit maximization problem for the insurer is given by:

Max

t HH ,t HL ,t LH ,t LL

s.t.

E  qi  qip  (ei , H  eip , H  t HH )  qi  (1  qip )  (ei , H  eip , L  t HL ) 
 (1  qi )  qip  (ei , L  eip , H  t LH )  (1  qi )  (1  qip )  (ei , L  eip , L  t LL )
qip  (tLH 

ei2,L
2i , L



eip2 , H
2ip , H

)  (1  qip )  (tLL 

‐9‐

ei2, L
2i , L



eip2 , L
2ip, L

)0

(III.1)

(III.2)

qip  (tHH 

qip  (t HH 
qip  (t LH

2i , H
ei2, H



eip2 , H
2ip, H

)  (1  qip )  (tHL 

eip2 , H

ei2, H
2i , H
ei2, H



eip2 , L
2ip , L

)0

ei2, L

eip2 , H

ei2, L

(III.3)

eip2 , L

)  (1  qip )  (t HL 


)
2 i , H 2 ip , H
2i , H 2ip , L
eip2 , H
eip2 , L
ei2, L
ei2, L


)  (1  qip )  (t LL 

)
2i , H 2ip , H
2i , H 2ip , L

qip  (t LH 
qip  (t HH

ei2, H

(III.4)

eip2 , L


)  (1  qip )  (t LL 

)
2i , L 2ip , H
2i , L 2ip , L
eip2 , H
eip2 , L
ei2, H
ei2, H


)  (1  qip )  (t HL 

)
2i , L 2ip , H
2i , L 2ip , L

(III.5)

We can ignore the IR constraint in (III.3), as this constraint is a combination of constraints (III.4) and (III.1)
and hence, the set of feasible contracts in the problem remain exactly the same after (III.3) is dropped.

((t HH , ei , H ), (t HL , ei , H ) |  i   i , H )  ((t LH , ei , L ), (t LL , ei , L ) |  i   i , H )  ((t LH , ei , L ), (t LL , ei , L ) |  i   i , H )  0
The solution to the problem using Kuhn-Tucker conditions follows a similar logic to classic work in
economics.5 The equilibrium effort levels are given by eˆip , H   ip , H , eˆip , L   ip , L , eˆi , H   i , H and

  qi   i , H 
eˆi , L   i , L   i , H
 leading effort in state i, L be below both the level of effort when i is observed,
  i , H  qi   i , L 

eˆi , L  i , L  ei*, L as well as below the level of effort in state i, H , eˆi , L  i , H  eˆi , H . For the technical notes
regarding the solution above, see Appendix B.
While the reduction in variability does not bring the insurer to a first-best contracting situation, it does
lessen the amount of surplus transfer to the practice which would be required under the second-best solution
without third-party screening. Put differently, conditioning on a third-party extracted signal enables the
insurer to reduce the informational rent and consequently reduce the distortion in effort for type  L . When

5

In particular, work on asymmetric information with hidden information such as Pigou’s (1912) second-degree price
discrimination representation, the Rothschild & Stiglitz (1976) model of adverse selection in insurance markets, or
Maskin & Riley (1984) model of auction design.

‐10‐

the optimal level of effort is chosen, the effort ratio in high and low states is proportional to the realized
efficiency parameter. If the signal s, accurately reveals the realized value of  ip , the insurer can eliminate
the distortion to effort eip , while such distortion persists for ei .

The left hand-side panel of Figure 1 plots the contracts under an observed  ip , where the transfer level is
depicted on the vertical axis and effort level is depicted on the horizontal axis. The blue convex curves
represent the practice indifference curves for each realization of  ip , i.e. all t and eip pairs that makes the
practice indifferent between taking the contract and not. These curves start at the origin as, (t , eip )  ( 0,0)
represents the normalized opportunity cost of effort. A shift of the practice indifference curve to the
northwest results in a positive surplus for the practice. The red linear curves represent the insurer iso-profit
curves for each realization of  , i.e. all t and eip pairs that make the insurer maintain a fixed level of profit,

. A shift of the insurer iso-profit curve to the southeast results in an increase in surplus for the insurer.
Therefore, the optimal contracts for the insurer, conditional on the practice’s participation constraint, will
always be the tangency between the two curves. In these points the practice is required to set its effort level
to the point at which the marginal benefit exactly equals its marginal cost.

[FIGURE 1]

Note that the first-best solution is no longer attainable as it is clear that type  i, H will derive higher surplus
from choosing the contract directed at practice type  i, L (the dotted line). Hence, the IC constraint for  i, H

~
must be binding. The two second-best contracts ( ~
tH , ~
ei ,H )  R x R+ for state  H and ( tL , e~i ,L )  R x R+ for

‐11‐

state  i , L that

solve

the

problem

yield

equilibrium

effort

levels

~
ei , H   i , H and

   qi   i , H 
~
~
ei , L   i , L   i , H
   i , H  ei , H .

q



i
i,L 
 i,H

The right hand-side panel of Figure 1 illustrates the equilibrium for i , in which the contract directed at
type  i, L , ( ~
tL , e~i ,L ) is no longer incentive compatible (i.e. the practice’s indifference curve is not tangent to
the iso-profit curve). Hence, a type  i, L practice will exert less effort, e~i ,L  ei*,L and receive a lower transfer

~
tL  tL* , keeping it on the same original indifference curve with reservation utility zero. Practice type  i , H
~
will exert the same (efficient) level of effort, e~i ,H  ei*,H , but receive a higher transfer, tH  tH* , placing it
on a higher indifference curve with a reservation utility greater than zero. The reason for the transfer of
surplus from the insurer to the practice lies in the fact that a  i , H type can disguise as a  i, L type, which in
turn forces the insurer to give up surplus in order to have  i , H reveal its true type.

Now consider the case where either both  p , L   ip , H and  p , H   ip , L belong to sH or alternatively both

 p , L   ip , H and  p , H   ip , L belong to sL . In these cases, the insurer cannot use the signal to accurately
detect the value of  ip . Nevertheless, the signal may still be desired as its value is not zero. If both

 p , L   ip , H and  p , H   ip , L belong to sL ,  ip   ip , H

is detected when s  s H . Similarly, if both

 p , L   ip , H and  p , H   ip , L belong to sH ,  ip   ip , L is detected when s  sL . Hence, two elements raise
the value of quality assurance recognition to the insurer – the strength of the signal in detecting the true
value of  ip , and the contribution of eip (relative to ei ) to the insurer’s surplus. In other words, the value of
the signal is greater the larger the scope for actions that benefit both patients and the insurer and the more

‐12‐

accurate the NCQA signal is in detecting how efficient the practice is in taking these actions, and the more
profitable it is for the insurer to ensure that the practice exerts the utmost effort in that regard.

This model ignores an important aspect of the problem – namely, practices have reasons to refuse screening
by the credentialing organization. This could happen for two key reasons: the first, the credentialing process
may claim resources from the practice, and the second, contracting based on the credentialing signal
competes away informational rents that otherwise raise the practices’ expected utility. This may explain
why in practice, insurance companies have paid the implementation costs associated with implementing the
PCMH model, as well as tied the practice per-member per-month reimbursement to the level of NCQA
recognition.

IV. Data
Program Description
This study analyzes data from HMO enrollees in a single large, commercial insurer in Pennsylvania. This
insurer actively encouraged primary care practices to seek PCMH recognition (level 1 or higher), offering
support services as well as financial compensation to practices which implemented the PCMH model. Early
adopters received payments in order to defray the costs of PCMH infrastructure In addition, level 3 PCMH
practices receive an increase in reimbursement of $3.00 per-member per-month (PMPM), while level 2 and
level 1 PCMH practices receive $2.00 and $1.25 PMPM, respectively.6 The insurer offered a number of
clinical support services as well: practices gained access to the American College of Physicians’ Practice
Advisor tool, which provides guidance on care, workflow and practice organization, as well as a PCMH
resource library (provided by NaviNet), and a variety of clinical reports.

6

Note that this boost is large, when considering that practices receive an average of $16.14 (PMPM) for commercially
insured patients and an average of $25.89 (PMPM) for Medicare Advantage patients.

‐13‐

Recognition Data
Though data on practice PCMH recognition level had previously been available to researchers, the detailed
data on specific practice capabilities had not. As a result, evaluations of the PCMH model have generally
proceeded without detailed data on which capabilities practices had implemented. One exception is
Friedberg et al. (2014), which used surveys of practices to assess which PCMH components were present.
These survey results provided useful description of a small number of early PCMH implementation, but
were not used to assess whether and how heterogeneity in implementation may have impacted patient
outcomes. Another recent study (Tirodkar et al., 2014) used the detailed recognition data for descriptive
purposes, identifying significant variation in PCMH implementation, even among practices recognized at
Level 3. However, this study did not link the recognition scoring to claims data or any other information
on patient outcomes, and states that further research to identify the highest-impact PCMH components is
needed. For the following analyses, practice-level recognition data were obtained from NCQA. In order to
facilitate this access, we have identified all the practices which adopted the PCMH model by September
2012. We contacted the practices to obtain consent for NCQA to release the detailed recognition data to us
and followed up on all contacted practices intensively, making repeated attempts to contact nonrespondents. The resulting dataset includes 139 binary dimensions of PCMH recognition for each practice,
representing the most granular information used in the 2008 PCMH recognition process.
Selection Criteria
All practices in our analysis achieved PCMH recognition but differ in the timing of accreditation. Practices
receiving recognition as a PCMH after September 2012 were excluded from consideration as this
information did not exist at the time we began reaching out to practices to obtain consent for data release.
Of 280 eligible practices, we received responses from 134 practices. We excluded 27 pediatric practices,
since children have vastly different health needs and a different profile of health care utilization compared
to the adult population. In addition, we excluded 3 practices that did not span the full six-year study period,

‐14‐

leaving 104 practices whose data are included in this study. Figure 2 represents the cumulative number of
PCMH-recognized practices over time. The top blue line tracks the timing of recognition for all 280 PCMH
in this market between March 2008 and September 2012. The orange line below it tracks the 225 adult
PCMHs (excluding 55 pediatric practices). The green line below it tracks the 134 practices for which
detailed NCQA recognition data was obtained, and finally, the bottom red line tracks the final sample used
in this paper. PCMH recognitions have accelerated over time with 4 recognitions in 2008, 7 in 2009, 10 in
2010, 46 in 2011 and 36 over 9 months in 2012. In 2013 all 104 practices had PCMH status. The recognition
dynamics are similar across the four samples. .
[Figure 2]
Patients enrolled in an insurance plan which did not require them to select a primary care physician (and
who therefore could not be reliably attributed to any one practice) were excluded from the study. All patientyear observations include members with 12 months of continuous enrollment in the plan. Finally, to account
for short-term disruptions around PCMH adoption and because all outcomes are observed at the patientyear-level (e.g. expenditures per year), the year of PCMH recognition was excluded from this analysis.7
Applying these exclusion criteria generated two datasets: the first includes 370,764 patient-year
observations; and a second, referred to as “patient panel sample,” is comprised of 105,606 patient-years for
members enrolled in the same practice during all 6 years of the study period. The patient panel excludes
potential selective entry and attrition of patients before and after PCMH implementation. Additionally, we
identify patients with any of five chronic illnesses: congestive heart failure, chronic obstructive lung
disease, coronary artery disease, asthma and diabetes. For robustness, we conducted separate sub-analyses
using only chronically ill patients in order to ascertain whether and to what extent the transition to a PCMH
model affects such patients differentially.

7

Models including switch year data and controlling for both the year of PCMH implementation as well as the fraction
of that year spent in PCMH status yield similar results, but are not as conservative due to potential issues taking
place during the implementation year.

‐15‐

Patient and Practice Covariates
A number of variables were used to control for patient attributes. In addition to demographic information
like gender and age, each patient-year observation includes a risk score estimated using the Verisk Health
DxCG Risk Solutions model, which incorporates clinical and demographic data for each patient (Verisk
Health Inc., 2010). A number of practice descriptors, such as medical specialty were included. Summary
statistics describing this pool of eligible patient-years appear in Table 2.
[TABLE 2]
Several features of Table 2 warrant further discussion. First, note that patients in the “panel” sample (those
with 6 years of continuous enrollment in the data) are somewhat older than in the “full” sample, and that
patients with chronic illnesses are substantially older than either group. This is due to the fact that the most
common reasons for plan enrollment discontinuity are job switching, relocations, and enrollment in higher
education programs, all of which happen more frequently at younger ages. We also observe some variability
in age across clusters, with Cluster 1 serving substantially younger patients than 2 or 3.
Additionally, along with this difference in age across clusters, we see a substantial difference in terms of
patient health. The first panel of Table 2 points to patients in Cluster 3 practices having the highest risk
scores, followed by Clusters 2 and 1. These differences are likely attributable to the age differences across
clusters as well as the modest differences in comorbidity prevalence presented in Table 2, but as the gradient
across clusters persists in the panel sample, it is unlikely for these differences to reflect selective entry or
attrition of patients.
Patient Outcomes Data
A summary table of patient outcomes, overall and by cluster, appears in the bottom panel of Table 2. Two
sets of patient outcomes data are available for analysis in this study. First, patient healthcare utilization is
measured in terms of hospital admissions, primary care physician (PCP) visits, specialist physician visits,

‐16‐

and emergency department visits. We analyze data on the impact of the PCMH clusters on these utilization
outcomes with respect to both extensive and intensive margins (that is, the probability of any encounter and
the number of encounters conditional on having at least one, respectively). Additionally, per patient
spending on professional services (that is, primary and specialist care) is considered in terms of the total
amount of their medical claims that were considered eligible for payment.8 Expenditures are available as a
per-patient per-year total and are conditional on having non-zero expenditures in that year (reducing the
sample from 370,764 to 322,539 patient-year observations).
Of particular importance is the long time series analyzed in this study, allowing exploration of the long-run
effects of the PCMH on patient outcomes. The earliest practice recognitions in our data occur in 2008, so
even with the exclusion of the transition year, we are able to observe up to five years of data post-recognition
for some patients. This represents a significant advantage over many previous studies with more limited
follow-up periods.
IV. Empirical Approach
Clustering Procedure
The evaluation of a practice-level intervention places our effective sample size (104 for which recognition
data is available and which meet our inclusion criteria) below the number of PCMH recognition dimensions,
precluding the more straightforward analysis of the impact of individual facets of the PMCH model on
patient outcomes.
Therefore, the approach we take is to identify “clusters” of practices which implemented similar mixes of
PCMH components, as measured at the “factor” level (the most granular level of data available on practice
behavior). Clustering techniques are used in a variety of fields to develop taxonomies, including marketing
(Punj & Stewart, 1983), strategic management (Ketchen Jr. & Shook, 1996) and health services research

8

This amount is based on the insurance company’s reimbursement rates, gross of coordination of benefits or subscriber
liability.

‐17‐

(Shortell, Wu, Lewis, Colla, & Fisher, 2014). The 2008 NCQA recognition process includes 139 unique
components.9 While 2139 combinations of PCMH factors are technically possible, relatively few of these
combinations are realized. Economies of scope are likely responsible for this fact.10
We employed an agglomerative hierarchical clustering approach to group similar practices.11 This approach
begins with N clusters of size one, and sequentially combines the most similar practices into larger clusters.
Similarity of practices was measured using the Jaccard distance, and practices were grouped using Ward’s
method, which minimizes within-cluster variance. This process produces a vector of possible clustering
solutions, ranging from the starting point (N clusters of size one) to a single cluster of N units. For the
analysis which follows, a single clustering solution was chosen through inspection of a dendrogram, which
provides a visual representation of the increase in within-cluster distance after each aggregation. Ultimately,
a three-cluster solution was chosen.12 Figure 3 shows a plot of the dendrogram used in this process.
[Figure 3]
This procedure defines the three clusters used in the following analyses, but does not provide any indication
of how the practices in each cluster differ. In order to identify the distinguishing characteristics of each
cluster, we use a one-way ANOVA to test whether each one of the 30 mean element-level scores (that is,
the level of aggregation above factors) differ by cluster.

9

Of the 127 factors, 117 were already in binary form (Yes/No) and ten expressed as either a percentage or offered
four qualitative categories. Factors expressed as percentage were converted to a binary by assigning a threshold.
Qualitative factors were converted to a series of four dummy variables. In total, the clustering analysis was based on
a total of 139 factors and sub-factors.
10
For example, the individual factors under Standard 2, Element A (“basic system for managing patient data”) list
different pieces of information to be stored in an EHR, the majority of which would be present if any were. Other
examples include “scheduling each patient with a personal physician for continuity of care” (Element A1, Factor 1)
and “electronic system to order imaging tests” (Element B6, Factor 2).
11
The commonly-used k-means clustering approach may have undesirable properties when attempting to identify
clusters in higher-dimensional space (Sun, Wang, & Fang, 2012).
12
The dendrogram in Figure 1 provides roughly equal support for a three- or four-cluster solution. However, in the
four cluster solution, every practice in one of the clusters became PCMH recognized in the same year; a resulting
collinearity between the treatment indicator and year fixed effects precluded use of the four-cluster solution.

‐18‐

The three-cluster solution was chosen in part to serve as a parallel to the NCQA-defined three-level
typology of PCMH recognition, which is currently used to set PMPM reimbursement levels for participating
practices. If the various components of the PCMH model were equally important to improving patient care,
one would expect practices recognized at higher levels to strictly dominate those with lower levels of
recognition, since greater numbers of total points and higher performance on must-pass elements is required
to achieve each successive level. Moreover, there is good reason to expect that the clustering algorithm
above will result in a partition that mimics these recognition levels. That is, if there is little within-level
variation in the choice of recognition attributes, clustering should return the NCQA level classification.
However, a high degree of within-level variation in implementation is likely to lead to a partition that
crosses recognition levels and results in clusters that cannot be explained by NCQA recognition levels.
Varian (2014) outlines strategies for analyzing data when the number of regressors exceeds the sample size,
including LASSO and spike-and-slab variable selection techniques. These approaches could be viewed as
alternatives to the clustering analysis described above: rather than grouping practices into clusters with
similar implementation, one could instead estimate models to identify the subset of PCMH factors which
have the greatest impact on patient outcomes. However, these alternative approaches are best tailored to
situations in which covariates are being chosen in order to maximize a model’s predictive power with
respect to a single outcome of interest, whereas this analysis considers a large number of patient outcomes.
It would be possible to estimate separate models for each, but each LASSO (or similar) regression could
identify different sets of PCMH factors. While the models could be designed to consider interactions
between factors, these cross-model combinations of factors may never be observed in actual practices.
Using the clustering approach sacrifices some ability to identify the influence of individual factors, but
ensures that only realistic approaches to PCMH implantation are considered in the analysis. Moreover, the
individual coefficient estimates from such prediction models may not be interpretable in a straightforward
way, limiting their usefulness in assessing the impact of components of PCMH recognition. These
approaches are engineered to produce accurate predictions rather than stable coefficient estimates, and if

‐19‐

substantial collinearities exist between predictors, removing one could lead to large changes in the
coefficient estimates of interest while minimally affecting the predicted outcomes. In contexts like ours,
where large complementarities in implementation between factors create plausible collinearity, clustering
analysis provides an attractive alternative.
One further issue regarding the practice capability data analyzed in this study is that while we were able to
observe detailed information about practice attributes post-implementation, we lack any data on the
capabilities in place prior to recognition. One assumption we can (confidently) make is that practices neither
omitted capabilities which were in place from the PCMH recognition process, nor discarded capabilities
which had been in place prior to certification. Acknowledging that in some cases the PCMH recognition
process simply catalogs capabilities already in place (rather than catalyzing the introduction of new ones),
we can treat our difference-in-differences estimates of the PCMH and cluster effects as lower bound on the
true effect, as in the limit, if all capabilities where already in place prior to recognition, its effect should be
zero.
Regression Framework
We estimate the impact of practices switching to PCMH status using a generalized difference-in-differences
approach. The analytical sample includes only practices which eventually switched to the PCMH model,
and practices which had not yet converted at a given point in time serve as controls for the practices
switching to PCMH status. The sample is limited to the practices which eventually achieved PCMH
recognition for two reasons: first, the detailed recognition data is only available for these practices; and
second, to address potential selection issues which would result from including “never adopters” in the
control group.
However, a regression approach which estimates these effects using a single indicator for the post-treatment
period (as in David et al. (2014)) treats the PCMH model as a “black box” and may miss important
differences in implementation. Instead, we present the results from the single-indicator approach described
‐20‐

above alongside two more flexible alternatives: first, a specification which includes separate “post x
treatment” indicators for each of three levels defined by NCQA; and second, which includes “post x
treatment” interactions for each of the clusters identified by our hierarchical algorithm. This research design
employs an identification strategy which exploits the fact that the transition to PCMH status occurred at
different times across primary care clinics, so patient outcomes could be tracked before and after the switch
at different points in time and across practices. These effects were estimated using models of the form
outlined below:
μ/

∑

(IV.1)

The outcome variable Yjit for patient j enrolled at primary care practice i during year t is either (1) a
dichotomous variable tracking whether a patient-year observation includes any hospitalization, or PCP,
specialist or ED visit (=1) or no such encounter (=0), (2) the number of such encounters, conditional on
having at least one, or (3) expenditures for professional (physician) services. These expenditures for
professional services are important as it captures the total monetary value for encounters with both primary
care physicians and specialists. Specialist care is typically less frequent and more expensive than primary
care. The PCMH model strives to enable primary care physician to operate at the top of their license and
negate expensive and potentially avoidable downstream specialist care.
In the tables that follow, the “baseline model” which appears in Panel A includes only the “post” term,
indicating that a patient-year is associated with a recognized PCMH practice. In other words, there is only
a single PCMH “cluster” of all practices. This “baseline model” ignores the richness of our data and mimics
existing studies of PCMH. Panel B extends the analysis to include the “post x level” interactions, and in the
models represented in Panel C, we replace them with separate (Post x Clusterc)it terms.
The key explanatory variables are the (Post x Clusterc)it terms, which are indicator variables capturing each
practice’s PCMH status during a given year. (Post x Clusterc)it equals 1 if an observation was recorded
during the first full calendar year following a practice becoming PCMH recognized (or in subsequent years),
‐21‐

and if that practice was identified as being a part of cluster c; this indicator is set to zero otherwise.
Observations recorded during the transitional year in which the switch to the PCMH model was made were
dropped from the analysis in order to account for the challenges of PCMH implementation documented in
the literature (Berenson et al., 2008; Harbrecht & Latts, 2012; Kilo & Wasson, 2010). Studies of other
health system reforms, including the Massachusetts health insurance reforms, have noted the importance of
accounting for such transitional periods in analytical design (Chandra, Gruber, & McKnight, 2011; Joynt,
Chan, Orav, & Jha, 2013).13 λt is a year fixed effects term, and μi/j represents practice or patient fixed effects,
depending on the specification. All models include these terms in order to account for secular trends and
unobserved, time-invariant characteristics of individual patients, respectively. Additionally, the model
expressed in equation (1) controls for time-varying patient characteristics such as risk score, age, and
comorbidities. The error term εjit represents the remaining, unobserved variation in patient and practice
attributes.
Robustness Analyses
The features of the age distribution and rates of chronic illness across clusters may have significant
implications for our analyses. First, it may be the case that practices are choosing which elements of the
PCMH model to implement based on idiosyncratic practice characteristics such as their specialty type or
patient mix.
Additionally, there has been debate in the literature about whether the PCMH model should be applied to
the treatment of all patients, or targeted to patients with chronic illnesses (Berenson et al., 2008). Prior
analyses have indicated that the PCMH model may differentially benefit patients with chronic illnesses
(David et al., 2015). In light of these considerations, we restrict our sample to patients identified as having
chronic illnesses. While our results are not affected by excluding patient risk score as an explanatory

13

Similar results are obtained from models using a “during” variable, which equals 1 in the switch year and zero
before and after that year and a variable capturing the fraction of the year in PCMH status.

‐22‐

variable, we explore whether PCMH adoption is affecting patient risk score, by repeating the same
specifications (excluding the risk score) and treating the score as a dependent variable. If the risk score is
reduced by implementation of the PCMH due to improvements in care, our estimates may be biased in
models which include this as a control.
V. Results
Clustering Results
As discussed above, the dendrogram in Figure 3 supports the use of a practice typology solution which
includes three clusters (labelled 1-3). The three clusters are described using a Venn diagram in Figure 4.
[FIGURE 4]
This diagram was generated by first performing a series of one-way ANOVA tests, which compared the
fraction of points within each of the 30 PCMH “elements” that each cluster received. In cases where the
clustering explained a significant (p<0.05) proportion of the variance in by-element scores, we attempted
to identify whether one cluster (or a pair of clusters) dominated the others in terms of implementation. For
example, consider element F8 – Electronic reporting to external entities - which appears in the Cluster 3
region of Figure 4. Practices in Cluster 3 received all possible points associated with element F8 (i.e. 100%),
whereas the practices in the Clusters 1 and 2 received averages of 35.5%, and 33.3%, respectively. Another
example is element B2 – Electronic system for clinical data – which received an average score of 100%
and 98% in Clusters 1 and 3, while receiving an average score of only 41.7% in cluster 2. Put differently,
nearly all practices in Clusters 1 and 3 have fully implemented B2, while for practices in Cluster 2 there is
partial implementation. The score for Cluster 2 can reflect a situation where only two in five practices
implements this element fully, or where all practices in the cluster have implemented a two-fifths of factors
within this element. B2 appears in the area shared by clusters 1 and 3, which represents the case where the
Clusters 1 and 3 dominate Cluster 2. A complete summary of the ANOVA analysis appears in Appendix
Table A1.
‐23‐

While most elements are easily assignable to a given location on the diagram, element E3 – Continuity of
care - did not. Cluster 3 is dominated by the other two clusters, as all its practices had zero points for this
element, and at the same time, the scores for Clusters 1 and 2 were not comparable: Cluster 1 received an
average of 87% while Cluster 2 received an average of 52%. As a result we placed E3 in-between the area
common to Clusters 1 and 2 and the area belonging exclusively to Cluster 1 to highlight the hierarchy across
the three cluster as it relates to element E3.
[APPENDIX TABLE A1]
In Figure 4, one cluster dominating the other two is represented by an element label appearing in only one
circle; if two clusters dominated the third, the element label appears in the bullet-shaped area shared by the
two clusters’ regions. Finally, the center area includes the elements for which no cluster had a clear
advantage over the others (that is, the average element scores were not statistically significantly different
across the three clusters). Two general themes of differentiation in PCMH implementation can be attributed
to Clusters 1 and 3, based on the labels highlighted in Figure 4. Clusters 1 and 3 dominate Cluster 2 in terms
of average total points received – 82 and 83.7 versus 55.9. Hence, the relatively few factors recorded for
Cluster 2 are also shared by Clusters 1 and 3. The higher score of practices in these two clusters was
achieved by (1) recording additional similar factors (presented by specific elements in the area shared by
the two clusters) and (2) recording additional factors that differ between Clusters 1 and 3 (presented in areas
that belong to a single cluster). Cluster 1 appears to be focusing in population management activities,
whereas Cluster 3 emphasizes implementation of decision support, data reporting, and enhanced access.
A second Venn diagram, expressing the differences in emphasis of the 30 elements by NCQA recognition
level, appears in the Appendix as Figure A1.
[APPENDIX FIGURE A1]
This figure largely reflects the dominance relationships we would expect from the structure of the NCQA
rules. We observe a number of elements on which the three levels are not differentiating (including some
‐24‐

must-pass elements), a smaller number on which Levels 2 and 3 dominate Level 1, and finally 12 elements
for which Level 3 practices distinguish themselves from Levels 1 and 2. There is one outlier – Level 2
practices have an apparent advantage in terms of A4 – Documenting communication needs. Additionally,
the average score for Level 1 practices exceeds the 50 points needed for Level 2 recognition. The reason
for this is the presence of clinics with scores sufficient for achieving level 2 or even level 3 who do not
have the required 10 “must pass” elements.
The importance of the Venn diagrams goes beyond illustrating the variation across clusters of NCQA
recognition, highlighting two important features. The first is that recognition level may not be very
informative. Even practices with similar achievement in total points (information that is only available to
the practice) can differ in terms of care orientation and emphasize different productive tasks.14 Second,
outcomes that tend to improve only for patients in one cluster can be subsequently traced back to the
underlying elements that separate this cluster from its counterparts. A similar exercise can be performed
for elements for which two clusters have an advantage.
Some of the elements have clear connections to the outcomes of interest. For example, Cluster 1 dominates
in terms of element F2, or “Use of a system for population management.” Since this covers areas like
proactive engagement on preventive and follow-up care, we would expect reductions in use of high-cost,
high-intensity services like inpatient care (with the potential for increased use of PCP care to implement
this management). Turning to Cluster 3, we find a distinctive emphasis on a number of decision support
and reporting areas. Cluster 3 also dominates on element A6, which concerns management of patient test
results – these improvements could reduce the need for repeated tests, reducing the number of PCP and
specialist visits. Though it offers less sharp predictions about how patient outcomes will change, Cluster 3
also dominates in terms of three performance reporting elements – C8, E8 and F8. It may be the case that

14

Even levels of recognition, which are public information, are not informative. For example, both Cluster 1 and
Cluster 2 include practices of all three levels even though the average total score in Cluster 1 is almost 50% higher
than that in Cluster 2.

‐25‐

improved documentation of treatment and outcomes, as well as the prospect of having these outcomes
reported to insurance companies or other external parties, prompt physicians to change practice style.
Generally, we would expect Clusters 1 and 3 to dominate Cluster 2, which has both a lower average overall
practice score and no areas of implementation where it has clear advantages over Clusters 1 or 3. We can
make some further predictions about relative performance in terms of the specific areas where Clusters 1
and 3 show an advantage. Elements B2 and C2 (“Electronic System for Clinical Data” and “Use of
electronic clinical data”) do not provide sharp predictions about specific performance areas, but element
E2, “Identifying important conditions,” would suggest better performance among patients with chronic
illness. The elements under Standard 3, “Care Management,” would predict increased use of preventive
care and medication adherence, potentially with downstream reduction in high-cost, high intensity services
like hospitalizations. Element B4, “Self-management support,” could potentially reduce overall utilization
by substituting self-management for formal contact with the medical system.
Patient Outcome Regression Results
Primary Care and Specialist Visit Outcomes
The tables which follow present results from a series of specifications for each outcome of interest. The top
row in each table specifies the outcome of interest. In the following row, we find three specification labels
– PCP fixed effects, member fixed effects, and member fixed effects (panel) – indicating that the μ / term
in the regression specification references to physician or patient fixed effects. In the third case, the sample
is restricted to the panel of continuously enrolled patients. The third row repeats two labels under each
specification heading: “all adult” and “chronic,” indicating whether the model is estimated using all adult
patients, or the subset of adult patients with one of the chronic illnesses of interest. The coefficient estimates
presented in the table represent percentage point changes in the case of binary outcomes, fractional visits
in the case of the conditional utilization outcomes, and dollar changes in the expenditure tables. In the
descriptions of the results which follow, the coefficient estimates from the tables are presented as a percent
‐26‐

increase or decrease relative to overall rates for the outcomes in question. Finally, each table is split into
three panels: A, which treats the PCMH as a single intervention; B, which estimates the level effects
separately; and C, which employs the novel clustering typology.
For the Panel A results the baselines used are the outcome rates in the full sample and patient panel sample.
For the results in Panel B, the rates are based on the within-level averages, and in Panel C, the baseline used
is the within-cluster rate.
[TABLE 3]
Panel A of Table 3 displays the difference-in-differences coefficients for the single PCMH adoption
indicator on the probability of having one or more primary care or specialist visits in a given year. These
results provide only limited evidence for an overall PCMH effect on PCP utilization, with a significant
estimate in only one specification. We find more consistent evidence of a roughly 2% increase in specialist
visits among the chronically ill subsample, though these estimates are only marginally significant in the
PCP fixed effects model, and non-significant in the stable panel. In Panel B, we find similarly weak
evidence for any effect of the PCMH levels – only one specification yielded a significant increase in PCP
visits, along with two marginally significant results for specialist utilization.
Turning to Panel C, we find the results from the specification using separate difference-in-differences terms
for each of the four clusters. These coefficient estimates provide substantial evidence that there are
heterogeneous impacts of PCMH adoption which depend on the specific constellation of practice
improvements put in place. With respect to primary care visits, we find consistent evidence of an increase
in utilization in Clusters 1 and 3 (2.8-4.4% and 1.9-4.1%, respectively), and a large decrease in Cluster 2
(8.0-13.1%). These results are robust to the use of patient or practice fixed effects, the full sample or the
chronically ill only as well as to limiting the analysis to the stable panel. Turning to the specialist results,
we find evidence of increased specialist utilization among the chronically ill subsample in Cluster 1 (2.8-

‐27‐

5.0%), and decreased utilization in the full sample in Cluster 3 (2.3-3.4%). Only one of the models produced
a significant estimate for Cluster 2, and the direction of the effect is inconsistent across specifications.
[TABLE 4]
Table 4 presents the estimated effects on primary care and specialist visits with respect to intensive margins
(the number of visits, conditional on having at least one in a given year). Again, we find limited and mixed
evidence of an overall PCMH effect on utilization. We find no significant effects on the number of specialist
visits, whether using the single PCMH indicator (Panel A) or level-specific indicators (Panel B). With
respect to PCP visits, we find two marginally significant effects in the chronic samples (though with
conflicting signs), and a less ambiguously significant decrease in the all adult panel sample, with the results
reported in panel A. In Panel B, we find evidence that these results are driven by an apparent decrease in
the conditional number of visits among the stable panel of patients in Level 1 and 2 practices, and an
increase in visits in Level 3 practices, though the sign and significance vary across specifications.
However, in Panel C, we find results for the individual cluster effects on the number of PCP visits which
largely echo those in Table 3. We find significant increases in the number of visits in Clusters 1 and 3,
except in the patient panel specifications, and across the board decreases in the number of visits in Cluster
2. On the other hand, we find only one significant effect on the number of specialist visits, with inconsistent
signs across specifications.

Inpatient and Emergency Department Utilization
Table 5 displays the output from regressions predicting the probability of having at least one inpatient
hospitalization or ED visit in a given year. In Panel A, we find two specifications produced significant
estimates of the overall PCMH effect on the probability of being hospitalized, predicting an increased
chance of being admitted, when patient fixed effects are employed. With respect to ED utilization, we find

‐28‐

only one (marginally) significant effect of the PCMH as a whole. In the results from the specifications using
the level terms reported in Panel B, we similarly find generally marginally- or non-significant results.
[TABLE 5]
In Panel C, we find additional evidence of a PCMH effect by cluster, though the results are again mixed.
We observe significant increases in hospitalizations in the two patient fixed effects specifications in the
chronically ill subsample for Cluster 1, and significant decreases in the full sample for Cluster 3 – though
not in the stable panel or in the chronically ill subsamples.
For ED utilization, we find no significant effects on the probability of one or more visits in Clusters 1 or 3,
but some evidence of increased ED utilization in Cluster 2 (ranging from 8.1-14.8% among the significant
results, and 4.7-14.8% overall).
[TABLE 6]
The results for the conditional hospitalization and ED visit regressions appear in Table 6. Regarding the
overall PCMH results for number of hospitalizations in Panel A, only the estimates using the stable patient
panel and patient fixed effects are significant, though the sign is consistently negative across all six
estimates. These results are echoed in Panel B, though with reduced significance. In Panel C, we again find
that the estimates of the effect of PCMH adoption are confined to the panel sample, and limited to Clusters
1 and 2. In all three cases, the estimate is smaller in magnitude and only marginally significant when
analyzing all patients (as opposed to the chronically ill subsample). We find no evidence of effect of the
overall PCMH on ED utilization, and only two marginally significant estimates when looking at the clusters
individually.

‐29‐

Expenditures for Physician Services
Table 7 presents a final set of outcomes – expenditures on professional services.
[TABLE 7]
Consistent with the previous tables, we find no overall effect of the PCMH model, or when using the levelspecific interaction terms, on expenditures for professional services. However, in Panel C we observe a
consistent PCMH effect across all six specifications for Cluster 3, with reductions in expenditures of
between 4.2 and 18.0% relative to baseline.
Specification Check – Risk Score Regressions
Finally, the right side of Table 7 presents results from a set of regressions treating the risk score as an
outcome of interest. Successful implementation of the PCMH model may reduce the burden of disease for
the clinic members and represent a benefit that extends beyond short run monetary savings or reduction in
utilization. In the non-panel specifications, it may capture selection issues, either riskier patients who select
into a PCMH or clinics cherry picking patients. In addition, this serves as a specification check to assess
whether adoption of the PCMH model impacts the risk score used as a patient control in all of the models
presented above. If the medical home’s chronic illness management components were sufficiently effective,
it is possible that adoption might reduce the apparent severity of illness and consequently bias our estimates
of the PCMH effect when controlling for risk. However, we find no such effect, either of the PCMH overall
or the individual clusters (Panels A and C), suggesting that this potential source of bias is not confounding
our results. The two “all adults” non-panel specifications returned significant reductions in risk score for
practices with Level 2 certification in Panel B. While not statistically significant, the “chronic” sample
yields increases in risk. This suggests potential favorable selection of members with no chronic conditions
in Level 2 practices.

‐30‐

VI. Discussion
Theoretically, primary care reform holds much promise for improving access, quality and cost of care.
However, in practice there is little evidence that quality assurance, staffing regulation, and massive
investments in technology are bearing fruit. Our theoretical model has a number of important features which
can inform considerations of these topics. First, the practice can allocate resources to different subsets of
actions that would benefit stakeholders (namely patients and insurers) differentially. For example, insurers
would benefit from primary care providers substituting lower-cost specialty service (like diagnostic
imaging) providers, so long as these substitutions do not entail quality reductions that increase spending
downstream. Alternatively, given a fixed threshold for recognition, providers will likely choose to achieve
PCMH status by implementing the subset of actions where they find the lowest costs of improvement, rather
than the ones most likely to (for example) reduce total spending. Understanding these dynamics can help
explain why the incentives put in place by the PCMH recognition process do not generally reduce costs.
Further, the type of signal which NCQA recognition provides – indexing the different actions into a single
metric – makes it difficult to fully overcome practice-level adverse selection; nonetheless, insurers (even if
their motives are pure profit maximization) will likely find value in credentialing signals. To be clear,
insurers could benefit much more from observing the different capacities for actions at the practice level.
By collapsing the various dimensions of capability into a single practice score (here, the PCMH recognition
level), the NCQA limits the ability of insurers to contract on them. However, the size of the efforts which
benefit both patients and insurers, (eip), is crucial. If it is zero, NCQA recognition is meaningless for a pure
profit maximizing insurer, as the signal provided will reflect only gains which accrue to patients. If, on the
other hand, the scope of activities which potentially benefit both patients and insurers, (eip), is quite broad,
insurers could benefit significantly from even a noisy signal. The PCMH model’s focus on areas like
decision support, data reporting and access to care is consistent with trying to provide such a signal - both
parties stand to gain from avoiding utilization of intensive medical services that is likely to follow from
lack of access to primary care and breaks in patient-physician communication.
‐31‐

The use of clustering as a first step in analyzing the effects of the PCMH model provides both potentially
useful typologies of PCMH practices, as well as a viable strategy for evaluating the different approaches
practices have taken in implementation. This approach confers a number of benefits beyond overcoming
the obvious dimensionality problem. First, an analysis attempting to estimate the effects of individual
factors or elements would likely be complicated by significant collinearity issues: for example, practices
would be unlikely to adopt an electronic system for managing patient data, but neither organize nor use it
(which are all separate elements). Additionally, the functional form of the primary care “production
function” is not precisely understood, and any piecemeal analysis of the PCMH components would ideally
consider two-way (and greater) interactions between complementary aspects of the PCMH model, thereby
greatly increasing the dimensionality of the problem.
Turning to the empirical results, we find that previous analyses which have evaluated the patient centered
medical home model as a single, homogenous intervention have missed substantial variation in
implementation, and that this heterogeneity may have important implications for patient outcomes. This is
true for our naïve PCMH analysis in Panel A of all regression tables, where we ignore the richness of our
data and treat all recognized practices in the same manner. A summary of the intensity of implementation
is the practice score, measured from zero to 100. However, we find that two of our clusters (1 and 3) have
roughly equal average scores (82.0 and 83.7) and recognition levels, but differ in their implementation on
potentially important elements and exhibit different impacts on utilization and expenditures for their patient
population. Moreover, an analysis which uses the greatest level of detail typically available to researchers
– practice recognition level – produces largely null results regarding the PCMH effect as well. This suggests
that greater detail regarding practice capabilities than is currently available to most researchers will be
needed to successfully evaluate the impact of the PCMH and other primary care initiatives.
Our findings suggest that PCMH heterogeneity should not be taken as value-neutral, especially if practices
are likely to emphasize PCMH capability areas of relative strength (which provide the easiest path to
certification), as our model would suggest. Since not all approaches to implementation are equally effective,
‐32‐

the current treatment of the PCMH recognition data as private is problematic, but may not be surprising.
As highlighted in the theoretical model in Section III, practices may enjoy informational rents when the
specifics of implementation are not revealed to the insurer.
The next question to consider regarding the use of the clustering approach is whether the areas of apparent
emphasis have any predictive power with respect to patient outcomes following NCQA recognition, as per
the discussion in Section V.1. We do find some evidence of reduced PCP contacts in Cluster 1, consistent
with the advanced communications tools, though this does not translate into significant reductions in
spending. Table 5 also presents some evidence of an increase in ED utilization in Cluster 1, which conflicts
with our priors given the emphasis on population management. Despite dominating on overall PCMH points
and with respect to implementation of specific PCMH components, Clusters 1 and 3 do not (generally)
dominate Cluster 2 in terms of post-implementation improvements in hospitalizations or ED utilization,
though we do find reductions in professional spending for Cluster 3.
Finally, considering the results using only the restricted sample of patients with chronic illness, we would
expect to find larger and more significant effects of PCMH implementation, because these patients should
stand to gain the most from the introduction of improved population health management. However, we find
little evidence of this being the case in our sample.
VII. Conclusion
Though the patient centered medical home is a leading model for primary care improvement, previous
studies in this area (due mostly to data limitations) have not accounted for the substantial heterogeneity in
the implementation of the PCMH model, which in turn has significant implications for patient outcomes.
Our analysis provides a framework for understanding this heterogeneity, by identifying the subsets of
PCMH improvements which different clusters of practices tend to emphasize, and evaluating their
differential effects on patients. As others have noted, some degree of flexibility in implementation may
indeed have been essential to encourage uptake of a new model of care like the PCMH. However, as these
‐33‐

policies mature (and as funds are directed to promoting implementation), identifying the elements of the
PCMH which are driving improvements in patient outcomes becomes an essential task. Otherwise, practices
may simply implement the lowest-cost capabilities needed to reach recognition, rather than the highestvalue elements from a societal standpoint.
As alternative payment models like Accountable Care Organizations (ACOs) grow in prominence, it will
be important not only to offer primary care practices incentives to control costs, but also to provide them
with the evidence-based guidelines for population health management that make these cost-savings
possible. In this sense, the PCMH model may best be viewed as a complement to other care coordination
and reorganization approaches, rather than as a substitutes, and it will be essential to offer primary care
providers clear insights about which improvements can reduce costs and utilization of expensive, highintensity healthcare services.

‐34‐

References
American Academy of Family Physicians, American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of
Physicians, & American Osteopathic Association. (2007). Joint Principles of the Patient-Centered
Medical Home . Retrieved from
http://www.acponline.org/advocacy/where_we_stand/medical_home/approve_jp.pdf
Berenson, R. A., Hammons, T., Gans, D. N., Zuckerman, S., Merrell, K., Underwood, W. S., & Williams,
A. F. (2008). A house is not a home: keeping patients at the center of practice redesign. Health
Affairs, 27(5), 1219–1230. http://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.27.5.1219
Bodenheimer, T., & Pham, H. H. (2010). Primary care: Current problems and proposed solutions. Health
Affairs, 29(5), 799–805. http://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2010.0026
Bodenheimer, T., Wagner, E. H., & Grumbach, K. (2002). Improving Primary Care for Patients With
Chronic Illness. Jama, 288(14), 1775–1779.
Cassidy, A. (2010). Patient-Centered Medical Homes. Health Affairs.
Chandra, A., Gruber, J., & McKnight, R. (2011). The importance of the individual mandate--evidence
from Massachusetts. New England Journal of Medicine, 364(4), 293–295.
http://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMp1013067
David, G., Gunnarsson, C., Saynisch, P. A., Chawla, R., & Nigam, S. (2015). Do patient-centered medical
homes reduce emergency department visits? Health Services Research, 50(2), 418–439.
http://doi.org/10.1111/1475-6773.12218
Devries, A., Li, C. H., Sridhar, G., Hummel, J. R., Breidbart, S., & Barron, J. J. (2012). Impact of medical
homes on quality, healthcare utilization, and costs. Am J Manag Care, 18(9), 534–544. Retrieved
from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23009304
Engel, C. (2006). Corporate Design for Regulability : A Principal-Agent-Supervisor Model. Journal of
Institutional and Theoretical Economics, 162(1), 104–124.
Friedberg, M. W., Lai, D. J., Hussey, P. S., & Schneider, E. C. (2009). A guide to the medical home as a
practice-level intervention. Am J Manag Care, 15(10 Suppl), S291–9. Retrieved from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20088633
Friedberg, M. W., Schneider, E. C., Rosenthal, M. B., Volpp, K. G., & Werner, R. M. (2014). Association
between participation in a multipayer medical home intervention and changes in quality, utilization,
and costs of care. JAMA : The Journal of the American Medical Association, 311(8), 815–25.
http://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2014.353
Harbrecht, M. G., & Latts, L. M. (2012). Colorado’s Patient-Centered Medical Home Pilot Met
Numerous Obstacles, Yet Saw Results Such As Reduced Hospital Admissions. Health Affairs,
31(9), 2010–2017. http://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2012.0359
Hearld, L. R., & Alexander, J. A. (2012). Patient-centered care and emergency department utilization: a
path analysis of the mediating effects of care coordination and delays in care. Medical Care
Research and Review, 69(5), 560–580. http://doi.org/10.1177/1077558712453618
Hsiao, C.-J., & Hing, E. (2014). Use and characteristics of electronic health record systems among officebased physician practices: United States, 2001-2013. NCHS Data Brief, (143), 1–8. Retrieved from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24439138
Jackson, G. L., Powers, B. J., Chatterjee, R., Bettger, J. P., Kemper, A. R., Hasselblad, V., … Williams, J.
W. J. (2013). The Patient-Centered Medical Home: A Systematic Review. Annals of Internal
Medicine, 158(3), 169–178.

‐35‐

Joynt, K. E., Chan, D., Orav, E. J., & Jha, A. K. (2013). Insurance expansion in massachusetts did not
reduce access among previously insured medicare patients. Health Affairs, 32(3), 571–578.
http://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2012.1018
Ketchen Jr., D. J., & Shook, C. L. (1996). The Application of Cluster Analysis in Management Strategic
Research : An Analysis and Critique. Strategic Management Journal, 17(6), 441–458.
Khalil, F., & Lawarree, J. (1995). Collusive Auditors. American Economic Review: Papers and
Proceedings, 85(2), 442–446.
Kilo, C. M., & Wasson, J. H. (2010). Practice redesign and the patient-centered medical home: history,
promises, and challenges. Health Affairs, 29(5), 773–778. http://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2010.0012
Lewis, T. R., & Sappington, D. E. M. (1991). Incentives for monitoring quality. The RAND Journal of
Economics, 22(3), 370–384. http://doi.org/10.2307/2601053
Liu, P.-W. (1982). Imperfect Information, Monitoring Cost and Incentives in the Agency Problem.
Journal of Economics, 42(2), 235–245.
Ludwig, J., Kling, J. R., & Mullainathan, S. (2011). Mechanism Experiments and Policy Evaluations.
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(3), 17–38. http://doi.org/10.1257/jep.25.3.17
Maskin, E., & Riley, J. (1984). Optimal Auctions with Risk Averse Buyers. Econometrica, 52(6), 1473–
1518. http://doi.org/10.2307/1913516
National Committee for Quality Assurance. (2008). Standards and Guidelines for Physician Practice
Connections® — Patient-Centered Medical Home (PPC-PCMHTM). Washington, DC: National
Committee for Quality Assurance.
Paustian, M. L., Alexander, J. A., El Reda, D. K., Wise, C. G., Green, L. A., & Fetters, M. D. (2013).
Partial and Incremental PCMH Practice Transformation: Implications for Quality and Costs. Health
Services Research. http://doi.org/10.1111/1475-6773.12085
Peikes, D., Dale, S., Lundquist, E., Genevro, J., Meyers, D., & Quality, A. for H. R. and. (2011). Building
the Evidence Base for the Medical Home: What Sample and Sample Size Do Studies Need? White
Paper (Prepared by Mathematica Policy Research). Rockville, MD.
Peikes, D., Zutshi, A., Genevro, J. L., Parchman, M. L., & Meyers, D. S. (2012). Early evaluations of the
medical home: building on a promising start. Am J Manag Care, 18(2), 105–116. Retrieved from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22435838
Pigou, A. C. (1912). Wealth and welfare. Macmillian and Company, limited.
Punj, G., & Stewart, D. W. (1983). Cluster Analyis in Marketing Research: Review and Suggestions for
Application. Journal of Marketing Research, 20(2), 134–148.
Reid, R. J., Coleman, K., Johnson, E. a, Fishman, P. a, Hsu, C., Soman, M. P., … Larson, E. B. (2010).
The Group Health medical home at year two: cost savings, higher patient satisfaction, and less
burnout for providers. Health Affairs, 29(5), 835–43. http://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2010.0158
Rothschild, M., & Stiglitz, J. (1976). Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets: An Essay on the
Economics of Imperfect Information. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90(4), 629.
http://doi.org/10.2307/1885326
Shortell, S. M., Wu, F. M., Lewis, V. a., Colla, C. H., & Fisher, E. S. (2014). A Taxonomy of
Accountable Care Organizations for Policy and Practice. Health Services Research, n/a–n/a.
http://doi.org/10.1111/1475-6773.12234
Strausz, R. (1997). Delegation of Monitoring in a Principal-Agent Relationship. Review of Economic
Studies, 64(3), 337. http://doi.org/10.2307/2971717
Sun, W., Wang, J., & Fang, Y. (2012). Regularized k-means clustering of high-dimensional data and its
‐36‐

asymptotic consistency. Electronic Journal of Statistics, 6(April 2011), 148–167.
http://doi.org/10.1214/12-EJS668
Tirodkar, M. a, Morton, S., Whiting, T., Monahan, P., McBee, E., Saunders, R., & Scholle, S. H. (2014).
There’s more than one way to build a medical home. Am J Manag Care, 20(12), e582–9. Retrieved
from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25741875
Vafaï, K. (2005). Collusion and organization design. Economica, 72(285), 17–37.
http://doi.org/10.1111/j.0013-0427.2005.00400.x
Varian, H. R. (2014). Big Data: New Tricks for Econometrics. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(2),
3–28. http://doi.org/10.1257/jep.28.2.3
Verisk Health Inc. (2010). Sightlines DxCG Risk Solutions: Concepts and Methodologies Guide for
UNIX. Waltham, MA.
Wagner, E. H., Austin, B. T., & Von Korff, M. (1996). Organizing care for patients with chronic illness.
Milbank Quarterly, 74(4), 511–544. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8941260
Weinick, R. M., Burns, R. M., & Mehrotra, A. (2010). Many emergency department visits could be
managed at urgent care centers and retail clinics. Health Affairs, 29(9), 1630–1636.
http://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2009.0748
Zhao, R. R. (2008). All-or-Nothing Monitoring. The American Economic Review, 98(4), 1619–1628.

‐37‐

Table 1: 2008 NCQA PCMH Scoring Guidelines

Standards and Elements

Max Score

PPC1: Access and Communication
Access and communication processes**
Access and communication results**

9
4
5

PPC2: Patient Tracking and Registry Functions
Basic system for managing patient data
Electronic system for clinical data
Use of electronic clinical data
Organizing clinical data**
Identifying important conditions**
Use of system for population management

21
2
3
3
6
4
3

PPC3: Care Management
Guidelines for important conditions**
Preventive service clinician reminders
Practice organization
Care management for important conditions
Continuity of care
PPC4: Patient Self‐Management Support
Documenting communication needs
Self‐management support**

Standards and Elements

Max Score

PPC5: Electronic Prescribing
Electronic prescription writing
Prescribing decision support ‐ safety
Prescribing decision support ‐ efficiency

8
3
3
2

PPC6: Test Tracking
Test tracking and follow up**
Electronic system for managing tests

13
7
6

PPC7: Referral Tracking
Referral tracking**

4
4

20
3
4
3
5
5

PPC8: Performance Reporting and Improvement
Measures of performance**
Patient experience data
Reporting to physicians**
Setting goals and taking action
Reporting standardized measures
Electronic reporting to external entities

15
3
3
3
3
2
1

6
2
4

PPC9: Advanced Electronic Communications
Availability of interactive website
Electronic patient identification
Electronic care management support

4
1
2
1

** Must Pass Element

‐38‐

Table 2: Summary Statistics: Patient and Practice Characteristics
All Adult
Patients

Chronic
Patients

Adult
Panel

Chronic
Panel

All Adult Patients
Cluster 1 Cluster 2 Cluster 3

370,764

75,320

105,606

25,265

232,699

82,231

55,834

44,526

17,713

13,081

48.45
(19.26)

61.51
(18.00)

54.29
(18.81)

65.23
(16.53)

47.86
(19.09)

49.50
(19.71)

49.36
(19.19)

60.76
(18.18)

63.15
(17.72)

61.84
(17.57)

Gender (Female)

0.56
(0.50)

0.54
(0.50)

0.57
(0.49)

0.54
(0.50)

0.57
(0.50)

0.55
(0.50)

0.57
(0.49)

0.55
(0.50)

0.51
(0.50)

0.56
(0.50)

Risk Score

2.76
(7.35)

6.92
(12.89)

2.91
(6.80)

6.27
(10.99)

2.62
(7.01)

2.93
(7.68)

3.11
(8.19)

6.59
(12.43)

7.37
(13.15)

7.43
(13.99)

Congestive Heart Failure

0.02
(0.14)

0.10
(0.30)

0.02
(0.15)

0.09
(0.29)

0.02
(0.13)

0.02
(0.15)

0.02
(0.15)

0.09
(0.29)

0.10
(0.31)

0.10
(0.30)

Chronic Obstructive Lung
Disease

0.03
(0.17)

0.15
(0.35)

0.03
(0.18)

0.14
(0.35)

0.03
(0.16)

0.03
(0.18)

0.04
(0.20)

0.14
(0.34)

0.15
(0.35)

0.18
(0.38)

Coronary Artery Disease

0.06
(0.24)

0.30
(0.46)

0.08
(0.27)

0.33
(0.47)

0.06
(0.23)

0.07
(0.26)

0.07
(0.25)

0.29
(0.45)

0.34
(0.47)

0.29
(0.45)

Asthma

0.07
(0.25)

0.33
(0.47)

0.07
(0.25)

0.29
(0.45)

0.06
(0.24)

0.07
(0.25)

0.08
(0.27)

0.34
(0.47)

0.30
(0.46)

0.34
(0.47)

Diabetes

0.10
(0.30)

0.48
(0.50)

0.12
(0.32)

0.50
(0.50)

0.09
(0.29)

0.10
(0.30)

0.11
(0.32)

0.47
(0.50)

0.48
(0.50)

0.48
(0.50)

104

50

33

21

74.07
(15.89)
0.413
(0.495)
0.567
(0.498)
0.019
(0.138)

82.00
(8.12)
0.440
(0.501)
0.560
(0.501)

55.90
(14.54)
0.394
(0.496)
0.545
(0.506)
0.061
(0.242)

83.73
(0.83)
0.381
(0.498)
0.619
(0.498)

Observations
PATIENT CHARACTERISTICS
Age

PRACTICE CHARACTERISTICS
Number of Practices
Total NCQA Points
Internal Medicine
Family Practice
Pediatrics and Other*
UTILIZATION
Hospitalization

Adult Panel
Cluster I Cluster II Cluster III

0.08
(0.28)

0.20
(0.40)

0.08
(0.28)

0.18
(0.39)

0.08
(0.27)

0.09
(0.29)

0.10
(0.29)

0.19
(0.39)

0.22
(0.42)

0.22
(0.41)

PCP Visits

0.81
(0.39)

0.94
(0.24)

0.83
(0.37)

0.94
(0.23)

0.83
(0.38)

0.77
(0.42)

0.81
(0.39)

0.95
(0.21)

0.90
(0.30)

0.95
(0.22)

Specialist Visits

0.47
(0.50)

0.75
(0.43)

0.51
(0.50)

0.76
(0.43)

0.46
(0.50)

0.47
(0.50)

0.49
(0.50)

0.74
(0.44)

0.76
(0.43)

0.75
(0.44)

ED Visits

0.13
(0.34)

0.19
(0.39)

0.12
(0.33)

0.17
(0.37)

0.13
(0.34)

0.14
(0.34)

0.14
(0.35)

0.19
(0.39)

0.20
(0.40)

0.19
(0.39)

Professional
Expenditures

2,085.28 3,723.21 2,082.98
(6,856.16) (7,416.81) (5,094.82)

3,410.73
(6,267.11)

2,043.59 2,170.51 2,134.67
(7,440.29) (5,523.45) (6,024.49)

* "Other" practice type refers to Certified Registered Nurse Practitioner (CRNP) practices

‐39‐

3,645.60 3,852.71 3,812.45
(7,110.36) (7,562.22) (8,189.90)

Table 3: Primary Care and Specialist Visits – Any Visit

Primary Care Practice Visits

Specialist Visits

PCP Fixed‐Effects Member Fixed‐Effects Member FE (Panel)

PCP Fixed‐Effects Member Fixed‐Effects Member FE (Panel)

All Adult Chronic All Adult

Chronic

All Adult Chronic

All Adult Chronic All Adult

Chronic

All Adult Chronic

0.0049 ‐0.00132 0.00714** 0.00605
[0.00327] [0.00459] [0.00329] [0.00512]

‐0.00081 ‐0.00378
[0.00491] [0.00716]

0.00173 0.0155* ‐0.000799
[0.00397] [0.00807] [0.00393]

0.0184** ‐0.00481 0.0163
[0.00800] [0.00609] [0.0114]

A ‐ Baseline Model
POST

Observations
370,764 75,320 370,764
75,320
R‐squared
0.096
0.064
0.623
0.599
B ‐ Level x POST interactions
Level 1 x POST
0.0021
0.0027
0.0024
0.0046
[0.00560] [0.00765] [0.00601] [0.00907]
Level 2 x POST
0.0018
0.0024
0.0018
0.0023
[0.00528] [0.00713] [0.00572] [0.00854]
Level 3 x POST
0.0028
0.0027 0.0102*** 0.0032
[0.00333] [0.00463] [0.00337] [0.00519]
Observations
R‐squared

370,764
0.099

75,320
0.078

370,764
0.625

C ‐ Cluster x POST interactions
Cluster 1 x POST
0.0297*** 0.0308*** 0.0292***
[0.00347] [0.00486] [0.00353]
‐0.0703*** ‐0.101*** ‐0.0620***
Cluster 2 x POST
[0.00416] [0.00576] [0.00436]
Cluster 3 x POST
0.0221*** 0.0305*** 0.0283***
[0.00449] [0.00606] [0.00487]
Observations
R‐squared

370,764
0.096

75,320
0.064

370,764
0.623

75,320
0.606
0.0360***
[0.00547]
‐0.0832***
[0.00666]
0.0334***
[0.00732]
75,320
0.599

105,606
0.467

25,265
0.443

0.00205 0.00355
[0.00811] [0.0114]
0.0021
0.0025
[0.00773] [0.0109]
0.0015
0.0024
[0.00499] [0.00717]
105,606
0.472

25,265
0.459

0.0268*** 0.0308***
[0.00520] [0.00756]
‐0.0813***‐0.0953***
[0.00612] [0.00881]
0.0232*** 0.0179*
[0.00669] [0.00953]
105,606
0.467

25,265
0.443

370,764
0.178

75,320
0.129

370,764
0.669

‐0.00404
[0.00683]
0.0043
[0.00643]
0.00201
[0.00406]

‐0.00199
[0.0136]
0.0031
[0.00627]
0.0156*
[0.00826]

‐0.00105
[0.00721]
‐0.0032
[0.00685]
‐0.000461
[0.00404]

370,764
0.178

75,320
0.129

370,764
0.669

0.00664
[0.00422]
‐0.00133
[0.00507]
‐0.0121**
[0.00546]
370,764
0.178

75,320
0.705

105,606
0.545

25,265
0.589

0.0215
‐0.0103 0.0222
[0.0144] [0.0101] [0.0186]
0.0195
‐0.00642 0.0155
[0.0135] [0.00966] [0.0177]
0.0178** ‐0.00392 0.0156
[0.00824] [0.00624] [0.0117]
75,320
0.705

105,606
0.545

25,265
0.589

0.0186** 0.00487 0.0230*** 0.00328 0.0208*
[0.00860] [0.00422] [0.00860] [0.00647] [0.0122]
0.0153 ‐0.00564
0.0123 ‐0.0161** 0.00601
[0.0102] [0.00521] [0.0105] [0.00761] [0.0142]
0.00563 ‐0.0168*** 0.00992 ‐0.0172** 0.0166
[0.0107] [0.00582] [0.0115] [0.00831] [0.0153]
75,320
0.129

370,764
0.669

75,320
0.705

105,606
0.545

25,265
0.589

Robust standard errors in brackets; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
All models control for patient demographics (age, age squared, and gender), patient risk score, five comorbid conditions (congestive heart failure, chronic
obstructive lung disease, coronary artery disease, asthma and diabetes), year fixed effects and either practice or member fixed effects

‐40‐

Table 4: Primary Care and Specialist Visits – Number of Visits, Conditional on at Least One

Primary Care Practice Visits (Cond.)

Specialist Visits (Cond.)

PCP Fixed‐Effects Member Fixed‐Effects Member FE (Panel)

PCP Fixed‐Effects

Member Fixed‐Effects Member FE (Panel)

All Adult Chronic All Adult

Chronic

All Adult Chronic

All Adult Chronic All Adult

Chronic

All Adult Chronic

0.0108
[0.0271]

0.0832
[0.0748]

‐0.0119
[0.0259]

0.115*
[0.0691]

‐0.116*** ‐0.168*
[0.0396] [0.0952]

0.0475
[0.0628]

‐0.0682
[0.142]

0.067
[0.0654]

0.0738
[0.131]

‐0.0732
[0.0935]

‐0.233
[0.181]

Observations
307,747
R‐squared
0.184
B ‐ Level x POST interactions
0.0138
Level 1 x POST
[0.0467]
0.0733
Level 2 x POST
[0.0480]
0.0105
Level 3 x POST
[0.0276]

71,738
0.156

307,747
0.724

71,738
0.758

179,200
0.222

57,297
0.187

179,200
0.766

57,297
0.792

55,676
0.654

19,550
0.681

0.0145
[0.126]
0.0162
[0.128]
0.0247
[0.0763]

‐0.0113
[0.0476]
‐0.0884
[0.0507]
0.0277
[0.0265]

‐0.0208
[0.124]
‐0.081
[0.129]
0.1408**
[0.0709]

‐0.106
[0.106]
0.022
[0.0982]
0.041
[0.0641]

‐0.189
[0.237]
0.028
[0.217]
0.102
[0.145]

‐0.00685
[0.118]
0.021
[0.109]
0.0561
[0.0671]

‐0.0782
[0.232]
0.046
[0.215]
0.0198
[0.135]

‐0.23
[0.151]
0.041
[0.143]
0.057
[0.0956]

‐0.217
[0.284]
0.012
[0.271]
0.252
[0.185]

71,738
0.156

307,747
0.724

71,738
0.758

179,200
0.222

57,297
0.187

179,200
0.766

57,297
0.792

55,676
0.654

19,550
0.681

0.0462
[0.0664]
0.0968
[0.0791]
‐0.0182
[0.0848]

‐0.0921
[0.151]
0.108
[0.177]
‐0.234
[0.187]

0.0392
[0.0698]
0.131
[0.0855]
0.0785
[0.0947]

0.0106
[0.141]
0.356**
[0.170]
‐0.151
[0.188]

‐0.101
[0.0989]
‐0.0763
[0.115]
0.0369
[0.126]

‐0.301
[0.192]
‐0.017
[0.221]
‐0.347
[0.241]

179,200
0.222

57,297
0.187

179,200
0.766

57,297
0.792

55,676
0.654

19,550
0.681

A ‐ Baseline Model
POST

Observations
R‐squared

307,747
0.184

C ‐ Cluster x POST interactions
0.130***
Cluster 1 x POST
[0.0287]
‐0.431***
Cluster 2 x POST
[0.0355]
0.153***
Cluster 3 x POST
[0.0372]
Observations
R‐squared

307,747
0.184

0.277***
[0.0795]
‐0.629***
[0.0965]
0.350***
[0.0990]
71,738
0.156

90,013
0.61

24,189
0.666

‐0.234*** ‐0.329**
[0.0660] [0.154]
‐0.149** ‐0.301*
[0.0694] [0.160]
0.0113
0.0445
[0.0403] [0.0971]
90,013
0.61

24,189
0.667

0.119*** 0.332***
0.0481
0.0939
[0.0276]
[0.0740] [0.0419] [0.101]
‐0.479*** ‐0.651*** ‐0.676*** ‐1.047***
[0.0355]
[0.0928] [0.0508] [0.120]
0.121*** 0.416***
0.0605
0.182
[0.0382]
[0.0989] [0.0539] [0.127]
307,747
0.724

71,738
0.758

90,013
0.61

24,189
0.666

Robust standard errors in brackets; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
All models control for patient demographics (age, age squared, and gender), patient risk score, five comorbid conditions (congestive heart failure, chronic
obstructive lung disease, coronary artery disease, asthma and diabetes), year fixed effects and either practice or member fixed effects

‐41‐

Table 5: Inpatient Admissions and ED Visits – Any Visit

Inpatient Hospital Admissions
PCP Fixed‐Effects

Emergency Department Visits

Member Fixed‐Effects Member FE (Panel)

PCP Fixed‐Effects Member Fixed‐Effects Member FE (Panel)

All Adult

All Adult Chronic

All Adult Chronic All Adult

Chronic

0.0164** 0.00361 0.0197*
[0.00771] [0.00359] [0.0107]

0.00523* 0.00592 0.00501
[0.00293] [0.00758] [0.00325]

0.00861 0.00714 0.0137
[0.00870] [0.00490] [0.0120]

All Adult

Chronic

‐0.00177
[0.00204]

‐0.00329 ‐0.00019
[0.00645] [0.00235]

Chronic

All Adult Chronic

A ‐ Baseline Model
POST

Observations
370,764
R‐squared
0.308
B ‐ Level x POST interactions
‐0.003
Level 1 x POST
[0.00350]
0.000585
Level 2 x POST
[0.00330]
‐0.00194
Level 3 x POST
[0.00208]
Observations
R‐squared

370,764
0.308

C ‐ Cluster x POST interactions
‐0.00147
Cluster 1 x POST
[0.00216]
0.00066
Cluster 2 x POST
[0.00260]
‐0.00643**
Cluster 3 x POST
[0.00280]
Observations
R‐squared

370,764
0.308

75,320
0.352

370,764
0.621

0.00195
[0.0109]
0.00905
[0.0102]
‐0.00554
[0.00660]

‐0.00264
[0.00431]
0.00296
[0.00409]
‐0.00032
[0.00241]

75,320
0.352

370,764
0.621

‐0.00572
[0.00688]
0.00472
[0.00814]
‐0.00629
[0.00857]
75,320
0.352

75,320
0.681

25,265
0.557

370,764
0.041

75,320
0.055

370,764
0.515

0.014
‐0.00097 0.0128
[0.0139] [0.00597] [0.0174]
0.0206
0.00578 0.0258
[0.0131] [0.00570] [0.0166]
0.0160** 0.00388 0.0198*
[0.00794] [0.00368] [0.0110]

0.00946*
[0.00503]
0.00131
[0.00474]
0.00376
[0.00299]

0.0135
[0.0128]
0.0176
[0.0119]
0.00348
[0.00776]

0.00119
[0.00595]
0.00157
[0.00565]
0.00285
[0.00334]

370,764
0.041

75,320
0.054

370,764
0.515

75,320
0.681

105,606
0.481

105,606
0.481

25,265
0.557

‐0.00013 0.0187**
0.0042
0.0222*
[0.00252] [0.00830] [0.00382] [0.0114]
0.00323
0.0193*
0.00626
0.021
[0.00311] [0.0101] [0.00449] [0.0133]
‐0.00609* 0.00297 ‐0.00278 0.00856
[0.00348] [0.0111] [0.00490] [0.0144]
370,764
0.621

75,320
0.681

105,606
0.481

25,265
0.557

0.00372 0.00064
[0.00310] [0.00808]
0.0110*** 0.0201**
[0.00373] [0.00956]
0.00247 0.00375
[0.00402] [0.0101]
370,764
0.041

75,320
0.055

75,320
0.571

105,606
0.312

0.0205
0.0113
0.0276
[0.0157] [0.00814] [0.0196]
0.0197
0.00148
0.016
[0.0147] [0.00776] [0.0187]
0.00565
0.0056
0.0114
[0.00896] [0.00501] [0.0124]
75,320
0.571

105,606
0.312

25,265
0.396

0.00408
0.00506 0.00813 0.0124
[0.00348] [0.00936] [0.00520] [0.0128]
0.0115*** 0.0178
0.00917 0.0195
[0.00430] [0.0114] [0.00611] [0.0149]
‐0.00176
0.00767 0.000221 0.00885
[0.00480] [0.0125] [0.00668] [0.0162]
370,764
0.515

75,320
0.571

105,606
0.312

Robust standard errors in brackets; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
All models control for patient demographics (age, age squared, and gender), patient risk score, five comorbid conditions (congestive heart failure, chronic
obstructive lung disease, coronary artery disease, asthma and diabetes), year fixed effects and either practice or member fixed effects

‐42‐

25,265
0.396

25,265
0.396

Table 6: Inpatient Admissions and ED Visits – Number of Visits

Inpatient Hospital Admissions (Cond.)
PCP Fixed‐Effects

Emergency Department Visits (Cond.)

Member Fixed‐Effects Member FE (Panel)

PCP Fixed‐Effects Member Fixed‐Effects Member FE (Panel)

All Adult

Chronic

All Adult

Chronic

All Adult Chronic

All Adult Chronic All Adult

Chronic

All Adult Chronic

‐0.0233
[0.0330]

‐0.0468
[0.0557]

‐0.043
[0.0761]

‐0.118
[0.103]

‐0.174*
[0.0919]

‐0.253**
[0.124]

‐0.00261 ‐0.00237 0.0364
[0.0242] [0.0655] [0.0447]

0.102
[0.108]

0.0103
[0.0543]

0.0316
[0.110]

31,287
0.367

15,908
0.374

31,287
0.845

15908
0.851

9,068
0.743

4,838
0.758

53,750
0.04

53,750
0.813

15513
0.825

14,057
0.579

4,645
0.584

‐0.0619
[0.0564]
‐0.00155
[0.0490]
‐0.0227
[0.0338]

‐0.119
[0.0902]
‐0.0475
[0.0805]
‐0.0375
[0.0569]

‐0.115
[0.126]
‐0.0455
[0.114]
‐0.0327
[0.0781]

‐0.15
[0.162]
‐0.113
[0.157]
‐0.114
[0.107]

‐0.236*
[0.136]
‐0.139
[0.0941]
‐0.196
[0.128]

‐0.237*
[0.128]
‐0.261
[0.177]
‐0.258
[0.172]

0.00134
[0.0407]
‐0.00531
[0.0473]
‐0.00635
[0.0933]

0.00159 0.0423
[0.109] [0.0788]
‐0.00665 0.0207
[0.1000] [0.0773]
‐0.00224 0.0124
[0.0672] [0.0462]

0.292
[0.186]
0.0284
[0.176]
0.0421
[0.112]

0.0789
[0.0870]
0.0258
[0.0844]
‐0.0359
[0.0557]

0.274
[0.172]
0.0275
[0.166]
‐0.0525
[0.113]

31,287
0.367

15,908
0.374

31,287
0.845

15908
0.851

9,068
0.743

4,838
0.758

53,750
0.04

15513
0.826

14,057
0.58

4,645
0.585

‐0.0247
[0.0352]
‐0.0177
[0.0410]
‐0.0271
[0.0438]

‐0.0412
[0.0594]
‐0.0589
[0.0677]
‐0.0459
[0.0721]

‐0.0497
[0.0812]
‐0.0434
[0.0947]
‐0.0169
[0.106]

‐0.12
[0.111]
‐0.117
[0.127]
‐0.115
[0.145]

‐0.187*
[0.0966]
‐0.200*
[0.109]
‐0.0726
[0.120]

‐0.264**
[0.131]
‐0.298**
[0.145]
‐0.1
[0.166]

‐0.00321
[0.0259]
0.00508
[0.0309]
‐0.011
[0.0328]

31,287
0.367

15,908
0.374

31,287
0.845

15908
0.851

9,068
0.743

4,838
0.758

53,750
0.04

A ‐ Baseline Model
POST

Observations
R‐squared
B ‐ Level x POST interactions
Level 1 x POST
Level 2 x POST
Level 3 x POST

Observations
R‐squared

15,513
0.047

15,513
0.047

53,750
0.813

C ‐ Cluster x POST interactions
Cluster 1 x POST
Cluster 2 x POST
Cluster 3 x POST

Observations
R‐squared

0.0239
0.0189
[0.0702] [0.0485]
‐0.0166 0.105*
[0.0819] [0.0592]
‐0.0624 ‐0.00414
[0.0870] [0.0644]
15,513
0.047

53,750
0.813

0.0607
[0.118]
0.193
[0.138]
0.0882
[0.156]
15513
0.825

‐0.022
‐0.0171
[0.0579] [0.118]
0.121*
0.144
[0.0682] [0.134]
‐0.0385 ‐0.00494
[0.0732] [0.151]
14,057
0.579

Robust standard errors in brackets; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
All models control for patient demographics (age, age squared, and gender), patient risk score, five comorbid conditions (congestive heart failure, chronic
obstructive lung disease, coronary artery disease, asthma and diabetes), year fixed effects and either practice or member fixed effects

‐43‐

4,645
0.584

Table 7: Professional Expenditures (conditional on non-zero) and Risk Score

Professional Expenditures (PCPs and Specialists)

Risk Score 

PCP Fixed‐Effects Member Fixed‐Effects Member FE (Panel)

PCP Fixed‐Effects Member Fixed‐Effects Member FE (Panel)

All Adult Chronic All Adult

Chronic

All Adult Chronic

All Adult Chronic All Adult

Chronic

All Adult Chronic

A ‐ Baseline Model
‐72.29
[58.60]

‐22.82
[123.7]

‐5.514
[42.06]

1.811
[109.0]

‐74.6
[59.23]

‐216.2
[141.6]

0.00165
[0.0567]

0.0148
[0.227]

‐0.0992
[0.0953]

‐0.00376
[0.228]

‐0.0645
[0.0843]

0.377
[0.304]

Observations
322,539
R‐squared
0.184
B ‐ Level x POST interactions
151.8
Level 1 x POST
[99.82]
23.9
Level 2 x POST
[96.48]
‐98.31
Level 3 x POST
[59.82]

73,845
0.314

322,539
0.84

73,845
0.819

93,973
0.657

24,885
0.714

370,764
0.231

75,320
0.216

370,764
0.698

75,320
0.727

105,606
0.530

25,265
0.560

129.4
[208.1]
46.8
[195.6]
‐72.42
[126.5]

84.18
[76.26]
35.2
[75.05]
‐13.02
[43.18]

54.38
[194.6]
48.2
[185.4]
‐52.35
[112.1]

127.1
[97.51]
46.86
[95.38]
‐83.37
[60.56]

25.13
[229.3]
‐16.1
[220.3]
‐210.7
[145.3]

0.0623
0.449
[0.0973] [0.383]
‐0.223** 0.136
[0.0917] [0.357]
0.0244 ‐0.0524
[0.0579] [0.232]

‐0.0754
[0.101]
‐0.203**
[0.0964]
‐0.0886
[0.0569]

0.119
[0.411]
0.252
[0.387]
‐0.0528
[0.235]

‐0.0783
[0.140]
‐0.181
[0.134]
‐0.0471
[0.0863]

0.676
[0.494]
0.66
[0.472]
0.295
[0.312]

Observations
R‐squared

73,845
0.321

322,539
0.838

73,845
0.823

93,973
0.687

24,885
0.702

370,764
0.231

75,320
0.216

370,764
0.698

75,320
0.727

105,606
0.530

25,265
0.560

0.0488
[0.0601]
‐0.0873
[0.0722]
‐0.0443
[0.0779]

‐0.0147
[0.242]
0.191
[0.286]
‐0.129
[0.302]

‐0.0725
[0.0593]
‐0.162
[0.173]
‐0.109
[0.0819]

‐0.108
[0.246]
0.216
[0.299]
0.0497
[0.329]

‐0.0455
[0.0895]
‐0.129
[0.105]
‐0.0343
[0.115]

0.254
[0.324]
0.618
[0.377]
0.432
[0.408]

370,764
0.231

75,320
0.216

370,764
0.698

75,320
0.727

105,606
0.530

25,265
0.560

POST

322,539
0.183

C ‐ Cluster x POST interactions
Cluster 1 x POST
Cluster 2 x POST
Cluster 3 x POST

Observations
R‐squared

‐59.52
[62.11]
12.65
[74.91]
‐237.8***
[79.84]
322,539
0.184

37.93
26.39
[131.8] [45.02]
99.79
‐3.445
[156.0] [56.05]
‐384.7** ‐140.6**
[163.7] [61.46]
73,845
0.314

322,539
0.84

19.57
[117.1]
194.8
[142.6]
‐376.6**
[156.0]
73,845
0.819

‐51.09
‐186.7
[62.80]
[150.8]
‐74.17
‐53.48
[74.20]
[175.5]
‐161.7** ‐575.6***
[79.98]
[189.3]
93,973
0.657

24,885
0.714

Robust standard errors in brackets; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
All models control for patient demographics (age, age squared, and gender), patient risk score, five comorbid conditions (congestive heart failure, chronic
obstructive lung disease, coronary artery disease, asthma and diabetes), year fixed effects and either practice or member fixed effects
 Risk score models omit risk score as explanatory variable

‐44‐

Figure 1: The optimal contracts when ip is observed i is unobserved by the insurer
Observed ip

Unobserved i

t

t

Ei*,H

*
ip ,L

Eip* ,H

E

Ei*,L

ei

eip

‐45‐

Figure 2

‐46‐

Figure 3: Dendrogram for Hierarchical Clustering Approach

‐47‐

Figure 4: Cluster Description Venn Diagram

‐48‐

Appendix Figure 1: Level Description Venn Diagram

‐49‐

Appendix Table A1: ANOVA Results for Cluster Comparisons
NCQA Recognition Element
Access and communication processes**
Access and communication results**
Basic system for managing patient data
Electronic system for clinical data
Use of electronic clinical data
Organizing clinical data**
Identifying important conditions**
Use of system for population management
Guidelines for important conditions**
Preventive service clinician reminders
Practice organization
Care management for important conditions
Continuity of care
Documenting communication needs
Self‐management support**
Electronic prescription writing
Prescribing decision support ‐ safety
Prescribing decision support ‐ efficiency
Test tracking and follow up**
Electronic system for managing tests
Referral tracking**
Measures of performance**
Patient experience data
Reporting to physicians**
Setting goals and taking action
Reporting standardized measures
Electronic reporting to external entities
Availability of interactive website
Electronic patient identification
Electronic care management support

1
81.50
(5.04)
66.50
(3.95)
69.50
(5.77)
98.00
(1.40)
85.00
(3.57)
99.00
(1.00)
96.00
(1.31)
70.50
(5.04)
98.00
(2.00)
93.00
(2.03)
58.50
(4.66)
99.50
(0.50)
87.00
(3.93)
61.00
(5.01)
90.50
(2.56)
80.00
(4.84)
92.00
(2.42)
94.00
(1.96)
84.00
(3.33)
96.00
(1.31)
79.00
(3.38)
90.00
(4.04)
75.00
(6.10)
70.00
(4.52)
74.00
(5.39)
70.00
(5.89)
35.50
(6.55)
53.00
(5.33)
14.00
(4.96)
38.50
(6.07)

2
89.39
(4.22)
40.91
(4.96)
85.61
(5.33)
41.67
(8.61)
44.70
(8.27)
93.18
(4.25)
81.06
(3.93)
33.33
(5.18)
79.55
(6.10)
62.88
(6.63)
58.33
(6.50)
75.00
(7.54)
52.27
(6.65)
56.06
(6.44)
65.91
(6.87)
46.21
(8.08)
46.97
(7.03)
44.70
(7.60)
31.82
(5.99)
44.70
(7.20)
49.24
(6.30)
78.79
(6.89)
78.79
(6.89)
54.55
(5.90)
31.82
(6.08)
39.39
(7.30)
33.33
(6.94)
18.18
(5.36)
0.00
(0.00)
18.18
(5.68)

3
100.00
(0.00)
75.00
(0.00)
100.00
(0.00)
100.00
(0.00)
92.86
(2.53)
100.00
(0.00)
100.00
(0.00)
50.00
(0.00)
100.00
(0.00)
100.00
(0.00)
67.86
(4.28)
100.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
47.62
(2.38)
91.67
(2.64)
92.86
(4.92)
100.00
(0.00)
100.00
(0.00)
100.00
(0.00)
100.00
(0.00)
75.00
(0.00)
100.00
(0.00)
100.00
(0.00)
100.00
(0.00)
50.00
(0.00)
100.00
(0.00)
100.00
(0.00)
75.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)

‐50‐

3.236
0.043
14.819
0.000
6.734
0.002
44.382
0.000
19.914
0.000
2.009
0.139
15.018
0.000
15.639
0.000
8.463
0.000
21.534
0.000
0.712
0.493
11.406
0.000
67.982
0.000
1.253
0.290
10.297
0.000
12.675
0.000
39.153
0.000
42.546
0.000
59.601
0.000
53.417
0.000
13.479
0.000
3.362
0.039
3.406
0.037
15.498
0.000
16.597
0.000
17.308
0.000
23.216
0.000
23.069
0.000
4.269
0.017
9.632
0.000

Appendix B:
Below is a technical note on the solution of the profit maximization problem is given by:

Max

t HH ,t HL , t LH ,t LL

s.t.

E  qi  qip  (ei , H  eip , H  t HH )  qi  (1  qip )  (ei , H  eip , L  t HL ) 
 (1  qi )  qip  (ei , L  eip , H  t LH )  (1  qi )  (1  qip )  (ei , L  eip , L  t LL )
qip  (t LH 

qip  (t HH 
qip  (t LH

2i , L
ei2, H



eip2 , H
2ip , H

ei2, L



eip2 , H

ei2, L

)  (1  qip )  (t LL 



2i , L

)  (1  qip )  (t HL 

ei2, H

eip2 , L
2ip , L

)0

eip2 , H

(III.4.2)

eip2 , L

)
2i , H 2ip , H
2i , H 2ip , L
e2
e2
e2
e2
 i , L  ip , H )  (1  qip )  (t LL  i , L  ip , L )
2i , H 2ip , H
2i , H 2ip , L

qip  (t LH 
qip  (t HH

ei2, L

(III.4.1)



(III.4.4)

eip2 , L

ei2, L


)  (1  qip )  (t LL 

)
2i , L 2ip , H
2i , L 2ip , L
eip2 , H
eip2 , L
ei2, H
ei2, H


)  (1  qip )  (tHL 

)
2i , L 2ip , H
2i , L 2ip , L

(III.4.5)

Note that constraint (III.4.3) is omitted per our discussion on page 17. Let  be the multiplier on the IR
constraint (III.4.1) and let 1 and 2 be the multipliers on the IC constraints (III.4.4) and (III.4.5),
respectively. The Kuhn-Tucker conditions for this problem can be written as follows:

ei , H

qi  1 

Condition with respect to ei , L :

(1  qi )  

Condition with respect to eip , H :

qip   qip 

Condition with respect to eip , L :

(1  qip )   (1  qip ) 

i , H

 2 

ei , H

Condition with respect to ei , H :

ei , L:

i , L
eip , H

ip , H

‐51‐

i , L

 2 

0
ei , L

i , L

(A.1)

 1 

0

ei , L

i , H

0

(A.2)

(A.3)

eip , L

ip , L

0

(A.4)

To insure that all transfer values are positive (i.e. tHH  0, t HL  0, t LH  0, and t LL  0 ), consider the
following conditions:
Condition with respect to t HH or tHL :

 qi  1  2  0

(A.5)

Condition with respect to t LH or tLL :

 (1  qi )   1  2  0

(A.6)

Note that condition (A.5) implies that 1  0 . Thus, constraint (III.4.4) must hold with equality at the
optimal solution. Combining conditions (A.5) and (A.6) implies that  1 . Plugging   1 in (A.3) and
(A.4) provides the first result: eˆip , H   ip , H and eˆip , L   ip , L , suggesting that these effort levels are at their
optimal levels.
Next, note that both ei , H and ei , L are strictly positive. (A.1) cannot hold if ei , H  0 and (A.2) cannot hold
when ei , L  0 as qi  0 . We can use (A.1) and (A.5) in conjunction to the information we have uncovered
thus far to conclude that

1  qi and 2  0 . Plugging this solution back in (A.1) and (A.2) we obtain:
qi  qi 

ei , H

i , H

(1  qi ) 

0

ei , L:

i , L

 qi 

(A.1*)

ei , L

i , H

0

(A.2*)

Rearranging conditions (A.1*) and (A.2*) we receive the second set of equilibrium effort levels: eˆi , H   i , H

 i , H  qi   i , H 
.
  i , H  qi   i , L 

and eˆi , L   i , L  

‐52‐

