                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        CAN PAYING FIRMS QUICKER AFFECT AGGREGATE EMPLOYMENT?

                                       Jean-Noel Barrot
                                        Ramana Nanda

                                      Working Paper 22420
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22420


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2016




We are grateful to Manuel Adelino, Oriana Bandiera, Nittai Bergman, Hui Chen, Erik Hurst, Erik
Loualiche, Karen Mills, Ben Pugsley, David Robinson, Antoinette Schoar, Scott Stern, John Van
Reenen, Chris Woodruff, and participants at the NBER Entrepreneurship and Economic Growth
Conference, Toulouse School of Economics , MIT Finance lunch, INSEAD, LSE, and Maryland
Junior Finance Conference for helpful feedback. We are also grateful to the US Department of
Defense for sharing data on the timing of payments from their MOCAS accounting system.
Barrot recognizes the support of the Kauffman Foundation Junior Faculty Fellowship and MIT
Sloan. Nanda thanks the Division of Research and Faculty Development at HBS for financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Jean-Noel Barrot and Ramana Nanda. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Can Paying Firms Quicker Affect Aggregate Employment?
Jean-Noel Barrot and Ramana Nanda
NBER Working Paper No. 22420
July 2016
JEL No. E2,G2,H57,J2

                                         ABSTRACT

In 2011, the federal government accelerated payments to their small business contractors,
spanning virtually every county and industry in the US. We study the impact of this reform on
county-sector employment growth over the subsequent three years. Despite firms being paid just
15 days sooner, we find payroll increased 10 cents for each accelerated dollar, with two-thirds of
the effect coming from an increase in new hires and the balance from an increase in earnings.
Importantly, however, we document substantial crowding out of non-treated firms employment,
particularly in counties with low rates of unemployment. Our results highlight an important
channel through which financing constraints can be alleviated for small firms, but also emphasize
the general-equilibrium effects of large-scale interventions, which can lead to a substantially
lower net impact on aggregate outcomes.


Jean-Noel Barrot
MIT
Sloan School of Management
Building E62
100 Main Street
Cambridge, MA 02142
jnbarrot@mit.edu

Ramana Nanda
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 317
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
rnanda@hbs.edu
1     Introduction

The role of financing frictions in impacting employment has received substantial interest
following the 2008 financial crisis and subsequent slow recovery, where contraction in
bank lending has been argued to have had a substantial impact on the real economy and
particularly so on smaller firms (Greenstone et al. 2014; Chodorow-Reich 2014; Siemer
2014; Mills 2014). Policy makers interested in stimulating aggregate employment have
focused on small firms’ access to bank credit as a central means for alleviating potential
financing constraints (Bernanke 2010; Yellen 2013).
    Although a focus on bank lending is important, a more direct way that government
can impact small firms’ financing is through its role as their customer: federal government
procurement amounts to 4% of GDP in the US and includes $100 billion in goods and
services purchased directly from small firms. Typical contracts require payment one-to-
two months following the approval of an invoice, implying that these small businesses are
effectively lending to the government while simultaneously having to borrow from banks
to finance their payroll and working capital. Can paying small business contractors faster
have a meaningful effect on their cash flows, facilitate hiring, and ultimately stimulate
aggregate employment?
    Theoretically, complementarities between capital and labor imply that employment is
likely to be depressed when firm-level investment is held back by financing constraints. In
addition, if there is a mismatch between the timing of cash flow generation and payments
to labor, firms need to finance their payroll through the production process (Jermann
and Quadrini 2012; Benmelech et al. 2011). A positive cash flow shock from accelerated
payments could therefore have direct effects on employment for firms looking to grow,
independent of the indirect effects through firm-level investment. Nevertheless, there are
reasons to also believe that faster payment might not affect aggregate employment by
much, or at all: an acceleration of payment should have a negligible effect in the absence


                                            2
of financing frictions, since firms can easily fund the shortfall with bank credit. And even
if affected firms grow their workforce in response to the payment acceleration, this might
have negative spillovers on the employment decisions of other firms hiring from the same
local labor markets. The overall effect of payment acceleration on employment therefore
depends both on the intensity of financing frictions and the direction and magnitude of
spillovers.
       We study the impact of the federal Quickpay reform on aggregate employment through
the acceleration effect it had on the“cash conversion cycle”1 of small business contractors.
The reform, announced in September 2011 by President Obama, accelerated payments to
a subset of small business contractors of the US federal government, reducing the time
taken between invoice receipt and payment by 15 days. $64 billion in annual contract
value was accelerated and impacted a set of small businesses across virtually every US
county due to the massive footprint of federal government procurement.
       A unique element of our setting is the fact that despite being extensive in coverage, the
reform was focused on firms that were small business contractors to the federal government
who were not already being paid in 15 days. This provides us with useful cross-sectional
variation in the intensity of treatment across county-sector cells and is therefore a key of
our identification strategy. Our approach also allows us to contrast the effect of treatment
on different local labor markets and hence examine, for example, how it varied across
counties where unemployment rates were particularly high at the time the reform was
implemented, or where bank credit was particularly scarce. Finally, we are able to separate
the direct effects of the reform from potential spillovers on firms that did not directly
benefit from the reform, allowing us to study the components to the overall effect of this
large-scale intervention.
   1
    The cash conversion cycle refers to the number of days of working capital need to be financed. For
example, if the firm has to pay cash on delivery of inputs, which sit in inventory for an average of 15
days, and on average, the firm is paid by its customers 30 days after the sale, then the cash conversion
cycle is 45 days.



                                                   3
   We find a very substantial impact of accelerated payment on small firms, despite the
acceleration being a ‘mere 15 days’. We estimate that on average, each accelerated dollar
of sales led to almost 10 cent increase in payroll, with two-thirds of the increase coming
from new hires and the balance third from increased earnings per worker. Our estimates
suggest that the direct effect of the policy was to increase annual payroll by $6 billion, and
to create just over 75,000 additional jobs over the three years following the reform. We
show that there are no prior trends, and that the effects are not driven by county-sector
exposure to government contracts or to small businesses, but by exposure to accelerated
contracts only. Consistent with the acceleration of the ‘cash conversion cycle’ driving
payroll growth, we find the effect to be strongest in sectors where receivables account for
a larger share of assets and in counties where financing frictions are more severe for small
firms.
   Importantly, however, we also document substantial crowding out of employment
growth among non-treated firms. Since the increased demand for labor from treated firms
in tighter labor markets also exerts pressure on wages, this makes it relatively harder for
non-treated firms to hire, leading them to grow employment slower. We find negative
spillovers to be stronger within sector than across sectors. We also provide evidence
of actual job flows from low to high treatment sectors. Finally, we show that negative
spillovers are concentrated in local labor markets with comparatively lower unemployment
rates at the time of the reform.
   Overall these findings highlight a new channel through which financial frictions affect
firm-level employment. Nevertheless, we find that while the federal payment acceleration
reform did stimulate employment in areas with high unemployment at the time of its
introduction, it had little or no effect elsewhere. This highlights how the general equi-
librium effect of relaxing financing constraints in terms of employment growth might be
substantially lower than partial equilibrium estimates might suggest, due to competition
for inputs in common factor markets (Acemoglu 2010).

                                              4
       Our results are related to several strands of the literature. We first contribute to a
growing stream of research focusing on the relationship between financial frictions and
employment.2 Relative to the few other studies in this area, our experiment allows us
to rigorously study the direct effects of relaxed financial constraints on aggregate em-
ployment, something that is harder to do when looking at other shocks such as those to
bank credit, which tend to also be correlated with macroeconomic conditions. Since we
can measure the dollar-magnitude of treatment, we are able to estimate the cash-flow
elasticity of payroll, and thereby infer the intensity of financial frictions facing small busi-
nesses. Another important contribution of our work is therefore the ability to compare
the elasticity of the payroll response for small businesses to other estimates gleaned from
studying large, publicly traded firms. In addition to studying the direct effects of the
treatment, our context also provides a unique opportunity to study crowding out effects
on non-treated firms, due to the targeted nature of the treatment.
       Secondly, our work sheds light on the implicit cost of trade credit, a question that
has only recently begun to be examined in detail. By being paid weeks after the sale
of a good or a service, firms effectively provide short-term corporate financing to their
customers. Such inter-firm financing is referred to as trade credit and, in aggregate, is
three times as large as bank loans and fifteen times as large as commercial paper in
the US.3 Trade credit claims, recorded as accounts receivable on firms’ balance sheets, are
typically seen as short-term, liquid, low-risk claims that should be very easy to pledge, and
that should not constrain firm growth. Yet recent research as found that long payment
terms forces financially constrained firms to cut back investment (Murfin and Njoroge
2014) and exposes them to liquidity risk (Barrot 2015).4 Our work shows that trade
   2
     The effect of financing frictions on capital investment has been studied extensively, starting with Faz-
zari et al. (1988), who find a strong positive relationship between cash flows and investment. Subsequent
studies have complemented these findings using exogenous variations in cash flows including Blanchard
et al. (1994), Lamont (1997), Rauh (2006), Faulkender and Petersen (2012), variations in collateral such
as Chaney et al. (2012), or structural models including Whited (1992).
   3
     As of September 2012, according to the US Flow of Funds Accounts.
   4
     Other contributions to the literature on trade credit include Petersen and Rajan (1997), Biais and


                                                     5
credit provision also constrains employment growth, even when the debtor is a low-risk
customer such as the federal government.5
   Finally, our findings build on the literature assessing the role of policy intervention
targeting businesses in the US, most of which has focused on fiscal policies including bonus
depreciation (House and Shapiro 2008; Zwick and Mahon 2016) or tax refunds (Dobridge
2016) so far. We evaluate the effect of the federal payment acceleration reform which was
motivated by the need to stimulate job growth in the wake of the Great Recession. Related
to this, our work is among the first to examine the role of government as a customer and
its implications for the private sector.6 We show that targeting the working capital of
small businesses can be a potentially effective way for policy makers to alleviate financing
constraints but this needs to be balanced against the potential crowding out of firms that
are not direct contractors to the government.
   The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we provide an overview
of the Quickpay reform and sketch a simple theoretical model that demonstrates how
accelerated payments impact labor market outcomes in the presence of financial frictions.
In Section 3, we describe our identification strategy and provide an overview of the data we
use to study the effect of Quickpay. Section 4 outlines our results, and relates the results
from our regressions to the theoretical model to provide a perspective on the magnitudes.
Finally, Section 5 concludes.
Gollier (1997), Burkart and Ellingsen (2004), and Murfin and Njoroge (2014) Wilner (2000), Demirguc-
Kunt and Maksimovic (2001), Frank and Maksimovic (2005), Cunat (2007), Giannetti et al. (2011), Antras
and Foley (2011), Dass et al. (2011), Kim and Shin (2012), Klapper et al. (2012), Garcia-Appendini and
Montoriol-Garriga (forthcoming)
   5
     In practice, there impediments in the pledgeability of government trade credit claims. We provide
more details below.
   6
     Other studies include Liebman and Mahoney (2013), Cohen and Malloy (2014), Ferraz and Finan
(2015) Goldman (2015).




                                                  6
2     Financing Labor Inputs

2.1    Theoretical Considerations

In the presence of adverse selection (e.g., Stiglitz and Weiss (1981)) or moral hazard (e.g.,
Holmstrom and Tirole (1997)), firms may be unable to raise outside finance and may
consequently need to forgo positive net present value projects. The traditional view of
labor inputs is that they are ‘self-financing’, so that such financing constraints are thought
to impact a firm’s hiring decisions only indirectly, through the effect they have on capital
investment decisions. In this case, a relaxation in financing constraints will lead to more
hiring when labor and capital are complements, but might lead to a fall in employment
when capital and labor are substitutes, as evidenced in Chaney et al. (2016). Recent
work has highlighted that employment decisions might still be affected by frictions in
the capital markets if labor is not a variable factor of production but rather has a fixed,
or quasi-fixed cost component (Hamermesh 1989; Hamermesh and Pfann 1996). These
adjustment costs could emerge because of hiring and training costs, for instance.
    Aside from adjustment costs, however, financing frictions can have a consequential
effect on employment when firms face a constraint on working capital (Jermann and
Quadrini 2012). This is particularly true among small or young firms that are in growth
mode, as the mismatch between the timing of cash flow generation and payments to labor
requires firms to finance their payroll through the production process - in advance of
getting paid - and means that firms may have to cut back on hiring even in the presence
of customer demand and adequate labor supply, due to an inability to pay workers in
advance of receiving cash for their product or service. Survey evidence indeed suggests
that over 90% of small businesses pay their employees twice a month or more frequently,
with nearly half paying their employees weekly (Dennis 2006).
    In the absence of financing frictions, a firm will be able to borrow fully against future



                                              7
cash flows, leading any change in the working capital cycle to have virtually no effect on
a firm’s hiring decisions. However, young firms without a history of cash flows or a well
established credit rating can face significant challenges in accessing a working capital line
of credit from banks. An alternative for them is to turn to factoring companies, who
buy accounts receivable in exchange for cash upfront. In practice, however, the negative
stigma associated with factors leads small firms to go to them only as a last resort.7
       One might argue that government contractors should easily find external financing for
their receivables in the form of working capital loans or factoring. This is not necessarily
true for at least two reasons. First, in order to obtain a security interest on a government
receivable, the credit provider must give timely written notice of the assignment to both
the agency’s contracting officer and its disbursing officer, and obtain written confirmation
from both under the Federal Government Assignment of Claims Act (FACA). Moreover,
while it is probably true that the government is a safer customer than many firms in the
economy, typical government contracts include provisions allowing the purchasing agency
to arbitrarily terminate the contract for convenience or for failure to obtain necessary
budgeting.
       In the presence of financing frictions, even small improvements in cash collection can
have large direct effects on hiring due to the multiplier effect of working capital. To
see why, note that a firm with $1 million of sales being paid 30 days after delivering its
product always has $80,000 of cash ‘tied up’ in receivables at any moment in time. A shift
in the payment regime from 30 days to 15 days therefore permanently unlocks $40,000
of cash for the firm on an ongoing basis. In the extreme where the firm was only able to
support growth through internal cash flow, this will allow the firm to double in size, to $2
million, showing how seemingly small improvements in the working capital position for
   7
    Indeed customers have been known to pull back on demand upon learning that receivables were
factored as this could suggest firms are on their last legs and hence can lead to issues with supply going
forward. In addition, non-recourse factoring (where the factor takes on the full counter-party risk) has
become far less prevalent for small firms, so that even if small firms did use factors, this would not free
up a large amount of cash for them to put towards firm growth.


                                                    8
constrained firms can have consequential effects for growth in sales and in payroll.
      We formalize this intuition with a one-period model featuring constraints on working
capital finance. Firms hire labor, produce and sell continuously but only receive payments
after selling their output, so that they have to finance their inputs in advance. To do so,
they can raise money up to a fraction of future profits (pledgeable profits). The economy
consists in two sets of firms t and u, with respective mass µ and 1 − µ, that only differ in
the amount of working capital they need to finance upfront.8 Both sets of firms i ∈ (t, u)
have the same decreasing returns to scale technology in labor:


                                             Y = Lα                                            (1)


where α < 1 captures the decreasing returns to scale. Firms maximize profit:


                                max Π(L) = pY − wL − rγi wL                                    (2)
                                 L



subject to the working capital constraint (Jermann and Quadrini 2012):


                                         γi wL ≤ ξΠ(L)                                         (3)


      where we take output as the numeraire such that p = 1, and w is the competitive wage.
γi is the number of days of inputs firms of type i have to finance in advance, as a fraction
of the number of days in the year. ξ is the maximum external finance that can be taken
as a fraction of end-of-period profits. We borrow this reduced form representation of the
constraint on external financing from Jermann and Quadrini (2012), and note that ξ could
either be driven by the reluctance of financiers to lend, or of firms to borrow. r is the
interest rate on the working capital loan. The first order conditions for the maximization
  8
   Having two sets of competitive firms in the model allows us to separately consider the effect of
payment acceleration on treated firms and other firms.



                                                9
of profit with respect to labor is given by:

                                                                  1
                                                                 α−1
                                              w 1 + λξ + rλγi
                               L∗i    =                                                   (4)
                                              α    1 + λξ

where λ is the Lagrange multiplier on the working capital constraint, which captures the
shadow value of cash inside the firm – the units of profits that can be obtained by relaxing
the constraint. Assuming the constraint is binding, we can rewrite this as:

                                                                  1
                                                                 α−1
                                                γi + ξ + rξγi
                                L∗i   =       w                                           (5)
                                                      ξ

   which shows that for a given level of the competitive wage, labor demand is increasing
in the level of pledgeability of profits ξ and decreasing in γi , the working capital the firm
needs to finance. Importantly, equation (5) shows that even when ξ is relatively large, so
that firms are able to borrow against a substantial share of their future profits, a small
change in γi can nevertheless have a large impact on the change in firm-level employment.
   We next consider the households’ problem and assume they maximize the following
utility function:
                                                                 1
                                                      L1− θ
                                     U (C, L) = C − ζ                                     (6)
                                                      1 − 1θ

where C is the numeraire, L is labor supply, subject to the budget constraint:


                                          C ≤ wL + Π(L)                                   (7)


The first order conditions of this problem allow us to express labor supply as:

                                                       −θ
                                                       w
                                              L∗s   =                                     (8)
                                                       ζ

where θ is the labor supply elasticity. We finally obtain the equilibrium wage w∗ from



                                                     10
the market clearing condition, by equating demand and supply on the labor market. Our
empirical analysis considers the response of employment to a change in the number of
days receivables. Within the model, we can compare the change in the optimal quantity
of labor when going from γi,1 prior to Quickpay to γi,2 afterwards. We express employment
growth for treated firms (i = t) across the two steady states, prior and after Quickpay as

                                                                 1             1
                         L∗t,2                                         w2∗
                                                              α−1           α−1
                                       γt,2 + ξ + rξγt,2
                               =                                                                  (9)
                         L∗t,1         γt,1 + ξ + rξγt,1               w1∗

The first term on the right hand side of equation 9 captures the effect of higher labor
demand triggered by the reform. The second term captures the negative effect such higher
demand has on demand through the change in wages. For untreated firms, γu,2 = γu,1
and employment growth reduces to

                                                                1
                                         L∗u,2         w2∗
                                                             α−1
                                               =                                                 (10)
                                         L∗u,1         w1∗

which is decreasing in wage growth. Untreated firms are thus negatively affected by the
increase in wage triggered by the higher demand of treated firms.
                                                                                     L∗i,2
   The nice feature of equation 9 is that we can calibrate all parameters but        L∗i,1
                                                                                             and ξ,
                                                                                       L∗i,2
the pledgeability constraint. The empirical exercise we present below delivers         L∗i,1
                                                                                             ,   thus
allowing us to pin down ξ. Our findings therefore shed light on the intensity of financing
constraints facing firms in the US at the time of the Quickpay reform that we describe
next.


2.2     The Quickpay Reform

Although the economy began recovering from the trough of the Great Recession in June
2009, employment growth was sluggish, in what is now commonly referred to as the ‘jobless
recovery’. Bank lending following the financial crisis also continued to lag, particularly


                                                   11
for small businesses. Alternative channels of finance were expensive, with interest rates
typically upwards of 25% even when these firms could access credit (Mount 2012).
      Faster payment to small business contractors of the federal government was initially
promoted by the President’s Council on Jobs and Competitiveness and supported by
the Small Business Administration (SBA). The main motivation for undertaking this
payment acceleration reform was to stimulate job creation as clearly evidenced in the
White House press release announcing the reform.9 The underlying idea was that “small
businesses are the primary engine of job creation and job growth”. Given that the Federal
Government purchases approximately $100 billion each year for goods and services from
small businesses, accelerating payments was intended to allow them to “reinvest that
money in the economy and drive job growth”.
      In 2011, US federal agencies started accelerating payments to their small business con-
tractors, a reform named Quickpay. Prior to the reform, payments were typically made
within 30 days from when an agency received an invoice, in accordance with the Prompt
Payment Act.10 If an agency did not pay a vendor the amount due by the required pay-
ment date, it was required to pay the vendor a late-payment interest penalty. Under the
new policy, agencies were asked to make payments as quickly as possible and within 15
days of receiving proper documentation, including an invoice for the amount due and con-
firmation that the goods or services have been received and accepted.11 The reform was
formally announced on September 14, 2011 with the goal of achieving payments acceler-
ation in all federal agencies by November 1, 2011.12 However, some agencies anticipated
the reform by a few months. In particular, the Department of Defense, the largest contrib-
utor to federal procurement by far, started accelerating payments as of April 27, 2011.13
Accelerated dollars over the subsequent three years (our window of analysis) amounted
  9
    Getting Money to Small Businesses Faster, White House Press Release, 2011
 10
    Chapter 39 of title 31 of the United States Code
 11
    See Memorandum M11-32 of the Office of Management and Budget, 2011
 12
    See Memorandum M11-32 of the Office of Management and Budget, 2011
 13
    See Memorandum 2011-O0007 of the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense, 2011.


                                               12
to $64 billion per year.
       For the purpose of this policy, small businesses are defined according to SBA’s thresh-
olds. These thresholds vary significantly across industries: the upper limit varies from
0.75 million to 38.5 million in annual receipts, or between 100 and 1500 employees.14
The contracting officer in any given federal agency is in charge of checking whether the
contractor is a small business firm and whether it is therefore eligible to accelerated pay-
ments. While all contracts awarded to small businesses were accelerated after the reform,
some contracts were already typically paid sooner than 15 days, and remained unaffected
by the policy change. More precisely, government contracts fall under two broad cate-
gories: fixed-price and cost-plus. Under fixed-price contracts, contractors agree to deliver
the product or service at a pre-negotiated price. Under cost-plus contracts, contractors
are paid for their expenses up to a set limit, plus profit.15 The Department of Defense,
which accounts for approximately two thirds of federal procurement, was already paying
its cost-plus contracts within 15 days.16 In the rest of the paper, we use the term “ineli-
gible” or “cost-plus” contracts to refer to DOD cost-plus contracts that were being paid
within 15 days even before the reform.17 As we discuss later, this heterogeneity across
contract types’ exposure to the reform allows us to tightly identify the effect of payment
acceleration on labor market outcomes. Table A.2 shows the distribution of cost-plus
and fixed-price contracts across industries and firm-type. We discuss the specifics of our
identification strategy in the following section.
  14
     For more details on these thresholds, see https://www.sba.gov/content/small-business-size-standards
  15
     For further analyses of these two contract types, see Horton (2008), for instance.
  16
     See Subpart 232.906 of the Department of Defense Supplement to the Federal Acquisition Regulation
(DFARS), 48 CFR Chapter 2
  17
     With a slight abuse of notation, we therefore group non-DOD cost-plus contracts with fixed-price
contracts.




                                                  13
3     Empirical design

3.1    Identification Strategy

To understand the change in labor market outcomes driven by the Quickpay reform, we
start with the following specification at the county-sector-year level:


              LogYsct = γst + λct + ηsc + β1 .(T reatmentsc .dt ) + β2 .Xsct + sct         (11)

    where Ystc is either total payroll, total employment or average earnings, measured in
county c and sector (or industry) s at date t = {2011Q1, 2014Q1}. dt is a dummy for
                                                        F Asc
observations in 2014Q1. T reatmentsc is defined as     Ysc2011
                                                                 where F Asc is the average quar-
terly amount of eligible government contracts to be performed in a given county×sector
between 2009Q1-2011Q1. This includes all contracts awarded to small businesses, exclud-
ing cost-plus contracts awarded by the DOD, which were already paid within 15 days.
Ysc2011 is quarterly payroll measured 2011Q1. Our measure of treatment therefore captures
the intensity of exposure to “Treated Contracts” in the quarter preceding the reform. As
can be seen in Figure 1, treatment spans virtually every county in the US and exhibits
substantial within-state variation, even without accounting for within county variation at
the sector level. Moreover, since we measure treatment at the county-sector-year level,
this allows us to identify the effect of the treatment while including fixed effects at sector-
year level (γst ), the county-year level (λct ) and county-sector level (ηsc ). Xsct is a set of
time-varying controls at the industry-sector level including government spending at the
county-sector level.
    As in Card (1992) and Angrist and Pischke (2012), given that we analyze data for two
periods, we collapse equation 11 into the following equation in first-differences:


                                  0    0                               0    0
                    ∆LogYsc = γs + λc + β1 .T reatmentsc + β2 .Xsc + sc                    (12)


                                               14
   where ∆LogYsc is the change in log payroll from 2011Q1 to 2014Q1. The set of
            0
controls, Xsc , include average quarterly government spending at the county-sector level
normalized by 2011Q1 payroll, as well as the unemployment rate, correlation of employ-
ment growth with US employment growth, log employment, log average earnings, past
three year employment growth, past three year earnings growth, past ten year employ-
ment growth, log average establishment size, and the share of small establishments, all
measured as of 2011Q1.
   The main coefficient of interest, β1 , measures the sensitivity of payroll growth from
2011Q1 to 2014Q1 to the county-sector share of accelerated contracts in total payroll.
                                   Ysc2014 −Ysc2011                                          F Asc
Because ∆LogYsc approximates           Ysc2011
                                                    ,   and recalling that T reatmentsc =   Ysc2011
                                                                                                    ,
β1 can also be interpreted as a cash-flow elasticity of payroll, namely, the additional $ of
payroll spent for each accelerated $ of sales (F Asc ).
   Our identifying assumption, which is analogous to the parallel trends assumption, is
that conditional on controls, treatment is orthogonal to labor market changes for the
control group. There are several potential concerns about this assumption. First, county-
sectors with high treatment intensity might be more exposed to government spending,
and might therefore be on a different trend. We address this concern in several ways. We
control for overall exposure to government contracts in all regressions. We also control
for both ten-year employment growth as well as the correlation of employment growth in
each county-sector with US employment growth in the past ten years. Finally, in placebo
regressions, we check that county-sector exposure to government contracts that were not
accelerated, either because they were already paid within 15 days, or because they were
awarded to large businesses, does not drive employment growth.
   Another concern is that county-sectors with high treatment intensity might be more
exposed to small businesses, who might also have a different sensitivity to the business
cycle. In addition to controlling for long term employment growth and correlation with
the business cycle, we also control for the share of small establishments and the average

                                                 15
size of establishments in all regressions. If exposure to small businesses is driving the
results, these variables should absorb the effect. In addition, we directly check in placebo
regressions whether government contracts awarded to small businesses that were not ac-
celerated following Quickpay, because they were already paid within 15 days, had any
impact on payroll growth.
       One might also worry that procurement policy might have changed after the reform
in ways that could explain the results, irrespective of the payment acceleration. In par-
ticular, one might worry that firms in areas highly exposed to treatment might have been
awarded significantly more government contracts after the change. We check in Appendix
Table A.1 whether county-sector exposure to treatment is associated with a change in
average quarterly government contracts in the three years after Quickpay relative to the
pre-period, normalized by 2011Q1 payroll. We find that this is not the case, so that
results are unlikely to be driven by a surge of government contracts targeting areas where
payments were also accelerated.18
       A related concern is that other contract terms might have changed endogenously as
a results of the reform. In particular, prices might have gone down as a result of the
more aggressive bidding by small businesses after payments are accelerated. One may
wonder whether the drop in prices could offset the increased liquidity associated with
the acceleration. If it were the case, then this would go against finding any effect of
the reform on payroll. While we do not observe prices, we check whether government
auctions are more likely to be awarded to small businesses and find no evidence for this.19
Alternatively, if the time between invoicing and payment was used by federal agencies to
  18
     We also re-run our regressions using a measure based on contemporaneous acceleration of contracts
and find the results to be unchanged. Note, however, that we do not attempt to distinguish how much
of the effects we are capturing are coming from firms that were government contractors before the intro-
duction of Quickpay and benefit from the payment acceleration, of from firms that became government
contractors or were created after its introduction.
  19
     Moreover, while small businesses can theoretically revert to their reservation profits after Quickpay
by lowering prices, they might still grow payroll and employment in the process, thereby achieving the
same level of profit with higher employment.



                                                   16
check the quality of the goods being delivered, the shorter time period might allow small
businesses to produce lower quality output, and might lead the government to shift its
procurement away from them (Breza and Liberman 2016). Again, this would probably
go against finding any positive effect of Quickpay on small business payroll.


3.2       Data

We measure labor market outcomes using data from the US Census Quarterly Workforce
Indicators (QWI), derived from the Longitudinal Employer Household Dynamics program
(LEHD). For each two-digit sector20 in each county, we obtain quarterly payrolls, employ-
ment and average earnings per worker.21 The focus of our analysis is on the change in
these outcomes from 2011Q1 to 2014Q1. The data allow us to separately analyze job
creations and separations, as well as the earnings of new and existing workers. We also
take advantage of a recently released supplement to the QWI, the job-to-job flows data.
In each quarter, we obtain the number of workers leaving a job in a given State and
sector to start a new one in some other State and sector. Control variables at the county-
sector level are derived from the QWI and the County Business Patterns (CBP) data set
published by the US Census Bureau and based on the Longitudinal Business Database
(LBD).
       We measure exposure to the treatment using publicly available data on government
contracts. The Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006 required
the Office of Management and Budget to create a public website describing each federal
award in great details, including contracts, grants, direct payments and loans. This
website was launched in 2007 and includes archives from the Federal Procurement Data
System (FPDS) since 2000. For each contract, we obtain the contract identifier, amount
  20
    Sectors are defined according to the National American Industry Classification System (NAICS).
  21
    Unfortunately, these data do not allow us to measure wages. Earnings per worker are defined as the
product of hourly wage and the number of hours of work per month.



                                                 17
and date when the contract is signed, the contract type (cost-plus or fixed-price), the
name of the contractor and its six-digit sector, whether the contractor is a small business
or not, and the zip code where the place is to be performed.22 As noted above, these
data allow us to create a county-sector level measure of exposure to treatment, based on
the average quarterly value of contracts awarded to small businesses in that cell over the
period 2009Q1-2011Q1, scaled by payroll in that cell in 2011Q1.
       FPDS data does not incorporate payment speed information. To verify that the re-
form was effectively implemented, we obtained proprietory cash flow information from the
Department of Defense’s main payment system, the Mechanization of Contract Adminis-
tration Services (MOCAS). For all receipts processed from 2010Q3 to 2014Q3, we obtain
the date between receipt and payment as well as contract characteristics including the
contract identifier that allow us to merge this information with FPDS data. Appendix
Figure A.1 presents average payment terms, measured as the difference in days between
the receipt and payment and the invoice around the implementation of the acceleration.
From Panel A, we see that payment terms faced by small businesses with fixed-price con-
tract experience fall sharply. By contrast, Panel B shows that payment terms faced by
large businesses do not change. Moreover, small businesses with cost-plus contracts are
already paid within 15 days before the reform and experience little or no acceleration on
average. We also show in Appendix Figure A.2 that the aggregate accounts payable of
the federal government, including agencies for which we do not have the contract level
descriptive data, go down starting in fiscal year 2011,23 .
       Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for our main variables. As can be seen from
Table 1, on average, the quarterly dollar value of accelerated contracts was 2.3% of the
county-sector’s 2011Q1 payroll. The average county-sector has 2,203 employees, aver-
  22
     We also obtain the place of location of the contractor. While this is a less well measured data point,
we find similar results when we use this information instead, most likely because both locations are the
same in a vast majority of cases.
  23
     Fiscal year end on September 30.



                                                    18
age annual earnings per worker of $32,485 and average payroll of close to $100 million.
County-sectors in the sample have on average 136 establishments in 2011, of which 15
had government contracts, and 8 had government contracts that were accelerated. Panel
B of Table 1 also shows that accelerated contracts spanned every industry in our sample.
Appendix Table A.2 further details the average annual $ value of of government contracts
awarded to small and large businesses. Manufacturing and Professional Services account
for over half the $ value of accelerated contracts, with Construction, Administration and
Wholesale also accounting for a further third of the contract value. Appendix Table A.3
and A.4 provide more detailed description of the 4-digit NAICS sectors and county-by-
2-digit NAICS cells that experienced the highest and lowest acceleration, respectively.
Overall, treatment seems spread out across sectors and geographical areas.



4     Results

4.1    The Direct Effect of Accelerated Payments

We first estimate the effect of the payment acceleration on payroll. As we show in equa-
tion 12, we aggregate both the exposure to the shock and the labor market outcomes of
interest to the county-sector level. We consider the three-year change in total payroll from
2011Q1 to 2014Q1 as a function of the exposure to treatment. Table 2 presents our base-
line results. Across specifications, the coefficient on treatment is positive and significant.
The introduction of controls does attenuate the coefficient slightly, which remains stable
around 0.1. In the most conservative specifications which includes the full set of controls
as well as industry- and county fixed effects, we obtain a coefficient of 0.097 (Column 5).
    Given that treatment is 2.3% on average, our findings suggest that county-sector
payrolls increase by 0.23% on average following the payment acceleration. Panel B reports
the magnitudes in terms of a standardized treatment, and shows that a one standard


                                             19
deviation increase in treatment corresponds to a 1.1% increase in payroll. To get a sense
of the magnitude of the effect of Quickpay on total payroll, we multiply the exponential
of our coefficient, 0.097, times the value of treatment, by the 2011Q1 payroll for every
county-sector. We sum the result across county-sectors and find a total of $1.5 billion
increase in quarterly payroll, or $6 billion in annualized terms. Reassuringly, this is close
to the estimate reached by using 10% of the $64 billion value of contracts eligible to the
acceleration.
   Our estimate implies that payrolls increase by 10 cents for each accelerated dollar of
sales. Measuring the implied cash-flow elasticity of payroll can be done by recognizing
that a dollar of sales with the government prior to Quickpay requires 30 days of working
capital. This implies that 30/365=8 cents are tied up in accounts receivables at any
point in time. Moving to 15 days permanently frees up 4 cents of cash flows that can be
compared with the 10 cents in additional payrolls. This elasticity of 2.5 is higher than
the few existing estimates from prior work focusing on publicly listed firms in Compustat
and summarized in Schoefer (2015) who shows they range between 0.2 and 1. This should
not come as a complete surprise given that the focus of our study is on small businesses
that face more severe financing frictions, and that the cash-flow shock we consider is more
permanent than what other studies have considered – and might thus trigger a more
significant response.
   We provide several robustness tests for our baseline specification that we present in
the Appendix. In Appendix Table A.5, we run a differences-in-differences specification
analogous to Equation 11, including a time dimension in the data. As shown in Equation
11, this allows us to also control for industry-year, sector-year and county-sector fixed
effects. The magnitudes of coefficients are almost unchanged, suggesting that our speci-
fication in first-differences accounts for the relevant sources of unobserved heterogeneity.
Panel B shows that the results hold when we use a dummy for high treatment rather
than the continuous version of treatment that we use in the baseline analysis. In Panel

                                             20
A of Appendix Table A.6 we show that measuring treatment based on ex post acceler-
ated contracts as opposed to our exogenous measure of exposure to acceleration based on
pre-period contracts yields similar magnitudes. Finally in Appendix Table A.7 we run
our specifications at the county-by-4-digit NAICS to include tighter industry fixed effects.
The results are unchanged.


4.1.1   Dynamics and Falsification Tests

We next examine the dynamics around the reform. Table 3 replicates columns 5 in
Table 2, but with different long-difference intervals so as to analyze the evolution of the
effects between 2009 and 2014. Column 1 of Table 3 looks at the change in payroll from
2009Q1 to 2011Q1 and column 2 looks at the change from 2010Q1 to 2011Q1. Both
Columns 1 and 2 show that, there is no evidence of a pre-trend. Columns 3-5 look at
the post-period, with increasing windows from the introduction of the reform. Column
3 shows that about half the measured effect in Table 2 was realized in the first year,
although this is not precisely estimated. Further, but diminishing marginal growth is
seen in the subsequent two years. These dynamics are reassuring, as they highlight that
the timing of the effects are consistent with the accelerated payments causing the increase
in payroll.
   From an identification perspective, a nice feature of the Quickpay reform was that
it accelerated a subset of small business contracts and left all large business contracts
unchanged. This allows us to run falsification tests where we can split total government
spending at the county-sector level into its constituent parts and see whether county-sector
exposure to DOD cost-plus contracts awarded to small business or contracts awarded to
large business contracts are also associated with payroll growth. If this were so, it would
suggest that something related broadly to government exposure, or a particular contract-
type, rather than the Quickpay reform per se, was responsible for our findings. We report
the results from these falsification regressions in Table 4, which are similar to those in

                                            21
Table 2. As seen in Table 2, only exposure to fixed-price contracts awarded to small
businesses leads to an increase in aggregate payroll. Exposure to the other three types of
government contracts lead to precisely estimated zero effects. This provides compelling
evidence that it is exposure to accelerated contracts as opposed to other correlates that
is driving the payroll growth.


4.1.2   Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

The results in Table 3 and 4 together document that accelerated payments can stimulate
payroll growth. We next check whether the effects are larger in some industries and areas.
Since our treatment variable is scaled by payroll, we would expect to find a larger effect
in industries where payroll is larger relative to sales. For the same level of our treatment
variable, a firm is more likely to grow if accelerated contracts are a larger share of its total
sales – which our treatment variable will capture if the ratio of payroll to sales is larger.
We find that this is the case in Column 1 of Table 5, where we interact the treatment
variable with a dummy for high payroll-to-sales sectors, based on BEA industry accounts.
Moreover, if these effects are driven by the faster ‘cash conversion cycle’, we would expect
the effects to be stronger in sectors where receivables form a larger share of total assets.
If a firm needs a lot of other assets to operate, then a reduction in its accounts receivable
is unlikely to have a major effect. This is what we find in Column 2 of Table 5, where
we interact the treatment variable with a dummy for high receivables-to-assets sectors,
based on Compustat.
   Moreover, we would expect the effects to be stronger where financing frictions are
more severe. In Columns 3 and 4 of Table 5, we estimate the coefficient on the treatment
variable separately in industries with high and low degrees of pledgeability, measured
with the ratio of fixed assets to assets obtained from Compustat, and in counties with
high or low issuances of small business loans per establishments in 2010, based on Com-
munity Reinvestment Act and County Business Patterns data. We find the effects to be

                                              22
pronounced in low pledegeability industries and counties with fewer small business loans,
where credit availability is likely to be lower. This provides strong evidence that the effect
of payment acceleration on payroll is driven by a relaxation in financing constraints.


4.1.3    Employment Response

The QWI data allow us to separate payroll growth into the share arising from employment
growth versus growth in average earnings. We therefore study the degree to which payroll
increased at the extensive margin (employment growth) versus the intensive margin (earn-
ings growth).24 We report the results in Table 6, which is equivalent to Table 2, except
that ∆LogYsc now measures the change in total employment and the change in average
earnings between 2011Q1 and 2014Q1 at the county-sector level. As with Table 2, the
coefficients attenuate slightly with the inclusion of fixed effects. They remain statistically
significant and economically meaningful even with the inclusion of the full set of fixed
effects, as evidenced in Column 5. Comparing the magnitude of the coefficients in Panel
A and Panel B to those found in Table 2, we conclude that about two-thirds of the change
in payroll growth comes from the extensive margin through growth in employment, with
the remaining third arising at the intensive margin from a change in earnings. Such an
increase in employment might be driven by an increase in new hires or a decrease in sepa-
rations. We show in Appendix Table A.8 both hiring and separations go up following the
payment acceleration, with the former growing faster than the later, leading to more net
hires. Finally, to get a sense of the magnitude of the effect of Quickpay on total employ-
ment, we multiply the exponential of our coefficient, 0.062, times the value of treatment,
by 2011Q1 employment for every county-sector. We sum the result across county-sectors
and find a total of just over 75,000 new jobs.
  24
    Again, earnings growth can either be explained by a increase in wages or an increase in hours worked,
and our data does not allow us to differentiate between the two.




                                                   23
4.1.4         Extent of Financing Constraint Implied by Estimates

As noted in Section 2 above, an attractive feature of our setting is that we are able to map
our reduced form estimates to the simple model outlined in Section 2, and thereby infer the
size of financing frictions facing the small businesses in our setting. Recall that Equation
9 allows us to estimate the degree of constraints faced by firms, because it only depends
on employment growth and the change in γi that we both observe empirically, model
parameters that we can calibrate with standard values, as well as ξ, the pledgeability
constraint, that we can therefore infer. More precisely, we assume that for the subset of
firms t affected by the change, γt,1 = 30/365 = .8 and γt,2 = 15/365 = .4. By contrast, for
the subset of firms u unaffected by the reform, γu,1 = γu,2 = 30/365 = .8. We follow Basu
and Fernald (1997) and assume α = 0.85. We also assume a standard elasticity of labor
supply of 0.5. We set r to 4% to reflect rates on short term loans according to the Survey
of Terms of Business Lending as of 2011.25 Table 7 presents the values for employment
growth implied by our theoretical framework as a function of the pledgeability constraint
ξ.
          Our reduced form estimates measure the firm response if 100% of payroll was acceler-
ated. Given that the average share of payroll in total sales is 33% in the BEA input-output
data, a firm with 100% of its sales affected by the reform would experience a 0.062*3=19%
increase in employment. As can be seen from Panel A of Table 7, our results are therefore
consistent with a cap on external financing of 1.5 the profits of the firm.26 That is, even
in the presence of what might seem like well functioning credit markets where firms can
borrow 1.5x expected profits of the future period, we find that the multiplier effect of an
improvement in the working capital cycle can lead to large direct effects on employment.
     25
    See: http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/e2/201103/default.htm
     26
    By means of comparison, the mean and median debt-to-ebitda ratios in Compustat as of 2011 are
2.9 and 1.7, respectively.




                                                 24
4.2       Spillover Effects

We next turn to the analysis of spillovers to firms not directly affected by the reform. Our
theoretical framework highlights that these firms face an increase in equilibrium wages
from the rising labor demand of treated firms, that in turn reduces their demand for labor.
To test for the presence and the direction of spillovers, we augment our baseline specifica-
tion with a measure of total accelerated dollars at the commuting zone level, which is the
appropriate level to capture labor market dynamics.27 More precisely, we construct the
variable Treatment: CZ defined as the average quarterly amount of eligible government
contracts to be performed in a given commuting zone between 2009Q1-2011Q1, excluding
the focal county×sector, normalized by aggregate quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1, also ex-
cluding the focal county×sector. Controlling for the treatment at the county-sector level,
this measure therefore picks up the intensity of treatment in other county-sectors in a
given commuting zone relative to the focal county-sector. The coefficient on this variable
is positive if spillovers are positive, and conversely if they are negative. We standard-
ize the county-sector level treatment and the commuting zone level treatment by their
respective cross-sectional standard deviations to be able to compare their economic mag-
nitudes. Finally, we augment our baseline specification with several commuting zone level
controls including the unemployment rate, the share of small establishments, the average
establishment size and the log of total employment and average earnings measured in
2011Q1.28
       As evidenced in the first row of Table 8, treatment at the county-sector level contin-
ues to maintain its significance and economic magnitude. A one standard deviation in
Treatment is associated with a 1.3% increase in payrolls, a 0.9% increase in employment
and a 0.4% in earnings. The inclusion of Treatment: CZ comes in with a negative and
  27
     There are a total of 741 commuting zones that cover the entire land area of the US and represent
labor market clusters of US counties.
  28
     Because we now include a county-level measure as a regressor, we so nor include county fixed effects
and include state fixed effects instead.


                                                   25
significant coefficient, implying that a one standard deviation in Treatment at the com-
muting zone level is associated with a drop by 0.7% in payrolls and 0.6% in employment.
Little or no effect is found on earnings.29 This is consistent with the payment acceleration
having substantial crowding out effect on other firms’ employment.
       In Table 9, we run the same regressions as those in Table 3, but with the inclusion of
Treatment: CZ along side the county-sector treatment. Again, it can be seen that there
are no pre-trends in payroll growth, either in terms of direct effects and in terms of the
crowding out effects. Table 10 runs the same falsification regressions as in Table 4 and
shows that crowding out effects are only found in commuting zones with a large exposure
to small firm, fixed-price contracts. As with the direct effects, the results in Tables 9
and 10 provide confidence that the effects we are seeing are being driven by the reform,
and moreover, are not due to any systematic differences in counties with exposure to
either government contracts or small businesses in general.
       The fact that non-treated firms grow employment more slowly in more intensely
treated commuting zones suggests that there is fluidity across sectors and counties within
a defined labor market. However, we would expect the crowding out effects to be felt
most strongly within a given sector than across sectors in a given commuting zone. We
test this hypothesis in Table 11, where we examine the extent to which the intensity of
spillover varies with the level at which we measure treatment, namely, at the commuting
zone, the county and the commuting zone-by-sector level. Across the columns of Table 11
we find evidence of negative spillovers whichever way we measure treatment. However,
when we include all three together, we see that the effect is captured most strongly by
treatment measured at the commuting zone-by-sector level. This suggests that most of
the crowding out is happening within sectors, across counties of the same commuting
zone. This confirms that firms are most affected by the growth of other firms within their
  29
    One reason for this result is that the two components of earnings, wages and hours worked, are likely
to be affected in different directions by the reform.



                                                   26
own sector.
   We then search for direct evidence of employment flows from low to high treatment
firms. We use the recently released data on Job-to-Job flows from the Longitudinal
Employer-Household Dynamics database to examine the origin and destination State-
sectors of people changing jobs. We run regressions of the form

%∆JobF lowo,d = β0 + β1 .T reatmento + β2 .T reatmentd + β3 .Xo + β4 .Xd + ηo + ωd + o,d

   where ∆JobF lowo,d is defined as the percentage growth in average quarterly job flows
from State-sectors o to d in the three years before and after the introduction of QuickPay,
T reatmento is the treatment for origin State-sector o, and T reatmentd is the treatment
for destination State-sector d. As can be seen from Panel A of Table 12, destination
sectors exposed to high treatment are more likely to see an inflow and origin sectors
exposed to high treatment are less likely to see an outflow of workers. Panel B of Table 12
takes the difference in the treatment between the destination and origin State-sectors and
shows that the difference strongly predicts job-flows. Together with the results in Tables
8-11, this is compelling evidence of firms across sectors competing in common local factor
markets, leading to crowding out effects when some firms face a reduction in financing
constraints.


4.3    Heterogeneity across Local Labor Markets

Since our mechanism depends on labor demand among non-treated firms falling due to
an increase in equilibrium wages, we should expect the effects to be felt more strongly
in counties where there is more labor slack. As can be seen from Figure A.3, there was
substantial heterogeneity in the unemployment rates across commuting zones in the time
period of our analysis. We therefore segment the commuting zones in our sample into those
with relatively high unemployment in 2010 versus those with relatively low unemployment
in 2010 and compare the magnitudes in Table 13. In counties where unemployment is

                                            27
relatively high, we find that the direct impact of acceleration is felt more strongly and
that there is no measured effect in terms of spillovers. On the other hand, in counties
where unemployment is already relatively low in 2010, there is substantial crowding out
among non-treated firms.
       Consistent with the findings in Table 13, when we aggregate the analysis at the com-
muting zone level, we find in Appendix Table A.10 that the aggregate effects of the reform
at the commuting zone level are only observed where unemployment rates are high. By
contrast, there is no effect of payment acceleration in commuting zones with lower levels of
unemployment. Together, these results provide evidence of the strong interaction effects
between financing frictions and local labor market conditions.
       Even though we observe negative spillovers of treatment effect on average, this might
hide some positive spillover effect through aggregate demand. In the presence of nominal
rigidities, if firms in a commuting zone start hiring due to the payment acceleration,
this might generate some additional demand for local non-tradable industries. We check
whether this is the case by separately estimating the coefficient on the treatment variable
measured at the commuting zone level for tradable and non-tradable industries.30 As can
be seen in Table A.11, the negative spillover effect is largely mitigated for non-tradable
industries, which is consistent with the idea that they also benefit from a boost in demand
that offset the crowding out effect they experience on their local labor market.



5        Conclusion

In this paper we analyze the impact of the Quickpay reform of 2011 and we document
two important dimensions through which financing decisions at the firm level impact
labor markets. First, we show that a fall in the need to finance payroll and working
  30
    Non-tradable industries include health care, hospitality, food service, education, retail, and construc-
tion.




                                                    28
capital through the production process can have substantial effects on firms’ employment
decisions, even when financial frictions facing firms are relatively small. This is due to
the large multiplier effect that a reduction in working capital can have on cash flows and
firm growth. Second, we show that the reduction in financing constraints among some
firms can have significant negative spillovers on firms that compete in common factor
markets. In some counties in our setting, these spillovers completely negate the positive
effects of the reform on firms that benefit from the treatment, although the net effect
remains positive in counties with initially higher levels of unemployment. More generally,
this crowding out effect has important consequences for policy. The overall effect of a
reduction in financing constraints is likely to be significantly smaller when firms compete
for talent, particularly in local labor markets where unemployment rates are already low.
Our work therefore highlights the strong linkages between capital and labor markets,
through the financing frictions and hiring decisions faced by small firms. The degree of
financing frictions determine the elasticity of employment with respect to a positive cash
flow shock, but the characteristics of the local labor markets also have a bearing on the
extent of crowding out and hence the effect such shocks may have on aggregate labor
market outcomes.




                                            29
References

Acemoglu, Daron, “Theory, General Equilibrium, and Political Economy in Develop-
  ment Economics,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, September 2010, 24 (3), 17–32.

Antras, Pol and C. Fritz Foley, “Poultry in Motion: A Study of International Trade
  Finance Practices,” NBER working paper, May 2011, (17091).

Barrot, Jean-Noel, “Trade credit and industry dynamics: Evidence from trucking
  firms,” The Journal of Finance, 2015.

Basu, Susanto and John G Fernald, “Returns to scale in US production: Estimates
  and implications,” Journal of political economy, 1997, 105 (2), 249–283.

Benmelech, Efraim, Nittai K Bergman, and Amit Seru, “Financing labor,” 2011.

Bernanke, Ben S., “Restoring the Flow of Credit to Small Businesses,” Federal Reserve
  Meeting Series: Addressing the Financing Needs of Small Businesses”, July 12 2010,
  http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20100712a.htm.

Biais, Bruno and Christian Gollier, “Trade Credit and Credit Rationing,” Review of
  Financial Studies, 1997, 10 (4), 903–37.

Blanchard, Olivier Jean, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer,
  “What Do Firms Do with Cash Windfalls?,” Journal of Financial Economics, 1994,
  36 (3), 337–360.

Breza, Emily and Andres Liberman, “Financial contracting and organizational form:
  Evidence from the regulation of trade credit,” Journal of Finance, Forthcoming, 2016.

Burkart, Mike and Tore Ellingsen, “In-Kind Finance: A Theory of Trade Credit,”
  American Economic Review, 2004, 94 (3), 569–590.



                                             30
Chaney, Thomas, David Sraer, and David Thesmar, “The Collateral Channel:
  How Real Estate Shocks Affect Corporate Investment,” American Economic Review,
  2012, 102 (6), 2381–2409.

  , Zongbo Huang, David Sraer, and David Thesmar, “Aggregate Effects of Col-
  lateral Constraints,” 2016.

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, “The Employment Effects of Credit Market Disruptions:
  Firm-level Evidence from the 2008–9 Financial Crisis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2014, 129 (1), 1–59.

Cohen, Lauren and Christopher Malloy, “Mini west Virginias: Corporations as
  government dependents,” 2014.

Cunat, Vicente, “Trade credit: suppliers as debt collectors and insurance providers,”
  Review of Financial Studies, 2007, 20 (2), 491–527.

Dass, Nishant, Jayant Kale, and Vikram Nanda, “Trade Credit, Relationship-
  specific Investment, and Product-market Power,” Working paper, 2011.

Demirguc-Kunt, Asli and Vojislav Maksimovic, “Firms as financial intermediaries
  - evidence from trade credit data,” Policy Research Working Paper Series 2696, The
  World Bank October 2001.

Demiroglu, Cem and Christopher M James, “The information content of bank loan
  covenants,” Review of financial Studies, 2010, 23 (10), 3700–3737.

Dennis, William, “National Small Business Poll: Payroll,” NFIB Small Business Poll,
  2006, 6 (1).

Dobridge, Christine L, “Fiscal stimulus and firms: A tale of two recessions,” 2016.




                                          31
Faulkender, Michael and Mitchell Petersen, “Investment and Capital Constraints:
  Repatriations Under the American Jobs Creation Act,” Review of Financial Studies,
  2012, 25 (11), 3351–3388.

Fazzari, Steven M, R Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C Petersen, “Financing Con-
  straints and Corporate Investment,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1988,
  1988 (1), 141–206.

Ferraz, Claudio and Frederico Finan, “Procuring Firm Growth: The Effects of Gov-
  ernment Purchases on Firm Dynamics,” NBER Working paper, 2015, 21219.

Frank, Murray Z and Vojislav Maksimovic, “Trade Credit, Collateral, and Adverse
  Selection,” Mimeo, University of Maryland, 2005.

Garcia-Appendini, Emilia and Judit Montoriol-Garriga, “Firms as liquidity
  providers: Evidence from the 2007-2008 financial crisis,” Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics, forthcoming.

Giannetti, M, M Burkart, and T Ellingsen, “What You Sell Is What You Lend?
  Explaining Trade Credit Contracts,” Review of Financial Studies, 2011, 24 (4), 1261–
  1298.

Goldman, Jim, “Government as Customer of Last Resort: The Stabilizing Effect of
  Government Purchases on Firms,” 2015.

Greenstone, Michael, Alexandre Mas, and Hoai-Luu Nguyen, “Do credit market
  shocks affect the real economy? Quasi-experimental evidence from the Great Recession
  and normaleconomic times,” 2014.

Hamermesh, Daniel S, “Labor Demand and the Structure of Adjustment Costs,” The
  American Economic Review, 1989, pp. 674–689.


                                          32
   and Gerard A Pfann, “Adjustment costs in factor demand,” Journal of Economic
  Literature, 1996, 34 (3), 1264–1292.

Holmstrom, Bengt and Jean Tirole, “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and
  the Real Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1997, 112 (3), 663–91.

Horton, John J, “Procurement, Incentives and Bargaining Friction: Evidence from
  Government Contracts,” Available at SSRN 1094622, 2008.

House, Christopher L and Matthew D Shapiro, “Temporary investment tax incen-
  tives: theory with evidence from bonus depreciation,” The American Economic Review,
  2008, 98 (3), 737–768.

Jermann, Urban and Vincenzo Quadrini, “Macroeconomic Effects of Financial
  Shocks,” The American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (1), 238.

Kim, Se-Jik and Hyun Song Shin, “Sustaining Production Chains through Financial
  Linkages,” American Economic Review, May 2012, 102 (3), 402–06.

Klapper, Leora, Luc Laeven, and Raghuram Rajan, “Trade Credit Contracts,”
  Review of Financial Studies, 2012, 25 (3), 838–867.

Lamont, Owen, “Cash Flow and Investment: Evidence from Internal Capital Markets,”
  Journal of Finance, 1997, 52 (1), 83–109.

Liebman, Jeffrey B and Neale Mahoney, “Do expiring budgets lead to wasteful
  year-end spending? Evidence from federal procurement,” 2013.

Mills, Karen, “The State of Small Business Lending: Credit Access During the Recovery
  and How Technology May Change the Game.,” Harvard Business School Working Paper
  15-004, 2014.




                                          33
Mount, Ian, “When Banks Wont Lend, There Are Alternatives, Though Often Expen-
  sive,” The New York Times, 2012, Aug 1, 2012 (l).

Murfin, Justin and Ken Njoroge, “The implicit costs of trade credit borrowing by
  large firms,” Review of Financial Studies, 2014, p. hhu051.

Petersen, Mitchell A and Raghuram G Rajan, “Trade credit: theories and evi-
  dence,” Review of Financial Studies, 1997, 10 (3), 661–691.

Rauh, Joshua D, “Investment and Financing Constraints: Evidence from the Funding
  of Corporate Pension Plans,” Journal of Finance, 2006, 61 (1), 33–71.

Schoefer, Benjamin, “The financial channel of wage rigidity,” 2015.

Siemer, Michael, “Firm entry and employment dynamics in the great recession,” 2014.

Stiglitz, Joseph E and Andrew Weiss, “Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect
  Information,” American Economic Review, June 1981, 71 (3), 393–410.

Whited, Toni M, “Debt, Liquidity Constraints, and Corporate Investment: Evidence
  from Panel Data,” Journal of Finance, 1992, 47 (4), 1425–1460.

Wilner, Benjamin S, “The Exploitation of Relationships in Financial Distress: The
  Case of Trade Credit,” Journal of Finance, 2000, 55 (1), 153–178.

Yellen, Janet, “Interconnectedness and systemic risk: Lessons from the financial crisis
  and policy implications,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washing-
  ton, DC, 2013.

Zwick, Eric and James Mahon, “Tax Policy and Heterogeneous Investment Behavior,”
  2016.




                                           34
                          Panel A. Total governement contrats




                  Amount of government contracts over total county payroll (2010-2011)


                      Panel B. Accelerated governement contracts




            Amount of accelerated government contracts over total county payroll (2010-2011)


Figure 1: Distribution of government contracts across US counties. This figure
shows the distribution of total government contracts (Panel A) and government contracts
eligible to acceleration (Panel B) aggregated at the county level in the two years prior to
the reform, normalized by total county payrolls. Darker shades indicate larger intensity
county level exposure.


                                            35
                                   Table 1: Summary statistics
Panel A of this table presents summary statistics for the key outcome and control variables, measured
at the county×sector level we consider in our analysis. There are 3120 counties and 18 industries.
Treatment is the average quarterly amount of eligible government contracts to be performed in a given
county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by average quarterly payrolls measured in 2011Q1.
Variables of interest include payroll, employment and earnings growth rates between 2011Q1 and 2014Q1.
Controls variables include the average quarterly amount of all government contracts to be performed in
a given county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by average quarterly payrolls during the
same period, as well as additional county×sector controls including the share of small establishment,
the average establishment share, 2000Q1 to 2011Q1 average annual employment growth, the correlation
of employment growth in a given county×sector with aggregate employment growth, total employment,
total annualized payrolls and average earnings measured in 2011Q1. Panel B presents the distribution of
the treatment variable across two-digit sectors.


                                        Panel A: Key variables
                                                   Mean       Sd       p5       p95

                 Treatment                          0.023    0.113    0.000     0.089
                 Government contracts              0.067     0.322    0.000     0.251
                 ∆ log payroll                     0.146     0.391   -0.369     0.698
                 ∆ log employment                   0.040    0.322   -0.399     0.490
                 ∆ log earnings                    0.106     0.200   -0.164     0.397
                 Unemployment rate                 9.464     3.026    4.600    14.500
                 Corr with US emp growth            0.120    0.275   -0.331     0.579
                 Average establishment size         2.219    0.870    0.916     3.726
                 Share of small establishments     0.994     0.024    0.966     1.000
                 Long term employment growth        0.064    0.143   -0.040     0.377
                 Employment                         2203     9728      18       9009
                 Annualized earnings (’000)        32.485   19.351   11.064    66.732
                 Annualized payroll (’000)         99809    862909     368     349934

                           Panel B: Distribution of treatment across sectors

                 Accommodation                     0.003    0.039     0.000    0.006
                 Administrative and support        0.049    0.168     0.000    0.237
                 Agriculture                       0.040    0.155     0.000    0.213
                 Arts                              0.003    0.023     0.000    0.006
                 Construction                      0.101    0.249     0.000    0.678
                 Education                         0.023    0.117     0.000    0.095
                 Finance                           0.001    0.016     0.000    0.000
                 Health care                       0.003    0.023     0.000    0.009
                 Information                       0.014    0.087     0.000    0.037
                 Manufacturing                     0.040    0.136     0.000    0.168
                 Mining                            0.011    0.082     0.000    0.022
                 Other services                    0.006    0.046     0.000    0.020
                 Professional services             0.032    0.107     0.000    0.146
                 Real estate                       0.039    0.116     0.000    0.171
                 Retail                            0.002    0.013     0.000    0.009
                 Transportation                    0.014    0.088     0.000    0.041
                 Utilities                         0.008    0.070     0.000    0.014
                 Wholesale                         0.018    0.094     0.000    0.063
                 Total                             0.023    0.113     0.000    0.089
                                                  36
                  Table 2: Direct effect of payment acceleration on payrolls
This table presents the results of a difference-in-difference estimation in first-differences. We run OLS
regressions at the county×sector level of the change in log payroll on county×sector exposure to gov-
ernment contracts that were accelerated following the implementation of the federal payment reform of
2011. Treatment is the average quarterly amount of eligible government contracts to be performed in
a given county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1. Control
variables include the average quarterly amount of all government contracts to be performed in a given
county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1, as well as addi-
tional county×sector controls including the share of small establishment, the log average establishment
size, 2000Q1 to 2011Q1 average annual employment growth, the correlation of employment growth with
aggregate employment growth, the log of total employment and the log average earnings. There are 3120
counties and 18 industries. Panel A presents the baseline estimation. In Panel B, the treatment variable
is normalized by its cross-sectional standard deviation. Standard errors presented in parentheses are
clustered at the State-level. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.


                                                  ∆ Log payroll (2011Q1-2014Q1)

                                                           Panel A: Baseline
                                            ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
             Treatment                 0.192       0.128       0.114∗∗∗   0.132∗∗∗   0.097∗∗∗
                                        (0.038)     (0.036)     (0.036)    (0.037)    (0.036)

             County×sector controls       No         Yes         Yes           Yes     Yes
             Sector FE                    No         No          Yes           No      Yes
             County FE                    No         No          No            Yes     Yes

             Observations               45333       45333       45333      45333      45333
             R2                         0.003       0.045       0.059      0.147      0.166


                                                  Panel B: Standardized treatment

             Treatment (std)           0.022∗∗∗    0.015∗∗∗    0.013∗∗∗   0.015∗∗∗   0.011∗∗∗
                                        (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.004)

             County×sector controls       No         Yes         Yes           Yes     Yes
             Sector FE                    No         No          Yes           No      Yes
             County FE                    No         No          No            Yes     Yes

             Observations               45333       45333       45333      45333      45333
             R2                         0.003       0.045       0.059      0.147      0.166




                                                   37
                  Table 3: Direct effect of payment acceleration: dynamics
This table presents the results of a difference-in-difference estimation in first-differences. We run OLS
regressions at the county×sector level of the change in log payroll on county×sector exposure to gov-
ernment contracts that were accelerated following the implementation of the federal payment reform of
2011. Treatment is the average quarterly amount of eligible government contracts to be performed in
a given county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1. Control
variables include the average quarterly amount of all government contracts to be performed in a given
county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1, as well as addi-
tional county×sector controls including the share of small establishment, the log average establishment
size, 2000Q1 to 2011Q1 average annual employment growth, the correlation of employment growth with
aggregate employment growth, the log of total employment and the log average earnings. There are 3120
counties and 18 industries. Standard errors presented in parentheses are clustered at the State-level. *,
**, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.


                                                 ∆ Log payroll (relative to 2011Q1)

                                          [t-2,t]    [t-1,t]   [t,t+1]   [t,t+2]   [t,t+3]

               Treatment                  -0.014     -0.035     0.046    0.079∗∗   0.097∗∗∗
                                         (0.024)    (0.031)    (0.028)   (0.030)    (0.036)

               County×sector controls      Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes
               Sector FE                   Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes
               County FE                   Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes

               Observations               45172      45159     45201     45201      45333
               R2                         0.576      0.320     0.127     0.146      0.166




                                                    38
              Table 4: Direct effect of payment acceleration: falsification tests
This table presents the results of a difference-in-difference estimation in first-differences. We run OLS
regressions at the county×sector level of the change in log payroll on county×sector exposure to govern-
ment contracts normalized by quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1. Small and Large refer to contracts awarded
to small and large business respectively. Fixed-price and Cost-plus contracts refer to fixed-price and cost-
plus contracts, respectively. Control variables include the average quarterly amount of all government
contracts to be performed in a given county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by quarterly
payrolls in 2011Q1, as well as additional county×sector controls including the share of small establish-
ment, the log average establishment size, 2000Q1 to 2011Q1 average annual employment growth, the
correlation of employment growth with aggregate employment growth, the log of total employment and
the log average earnings. There are 3120 counties and 18 industries. Standard errors presented in paren-
theses are clustered at the State-level. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%,
respectively.


                                                   ∆ Log payroll (2011Q1-2014Q1)

             Small and fixed-price      0.186∗∗∗    0.124∗∗∗   0.106∗∗∗   0.133∗∗∗   0.091∗∗∗
                                         (0.033)     (0.031)    (0.032)    (0.033)    (0.033)
             Large and fixed-price        -0.009      -0.010     -0.010     -0.010     -0.018
                                         (0.013)     (0.012)    (0.013)    (0.012)    (0.012)
             Small and cost-plus          -0.124      -0.102     -0.127      0.004     -0.044
                                         (0.119)     (0.119)    (0.116)    (0.123)    (0.120)
             Large and cost-plus          -0.008       0.004     -0.002     0.016       0.014
                                         (0.016)     (0.016)    (0.016)    (0.017)    (0.017)

             County×sector controls        No         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes
             Sector FE                     No         No         Yes         No         Yes
             County FE                     No         No         No          Yes        Yes

             Observations                 45333      45333      45333      45333       45333
             R2                           0.003      0.045      0.059      0.147       0.166




                                                    39
     Table 5: Direct effect of payment acceleration: heterogeneous treatment effects
This table presents the results of a difference-in-difference estimation in first-differences. We run OLS
regressions at the county×sector level of the change in log payroll on county×sector exposure to govern-
ment contracts that were accelerated following the implementation of the federal payment reform of 2011.
Treatment is the average quarterly amount of eligible government contracts to be performed in a given
county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1. The treatment
variable is interacted successively with a dummy for high payroll/sales sectors (based on BEA industry
accounts), high receivables/assets sectors (based on Compustat), high pledgeability (fixed assets/assets
based on Compustat), and high small business loans per establishments (based on Community Reinvest-
ment Act and County Business Patterns data). Control variables include the average quarterly amount of
all government contracts to be performed in a given county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized
by quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1, as well as additional county×sector controls including the share of small
establishment, the log average establishment size, 2000Q1 to 2011Q1 average annual employment growth,
the correlation of employment growth with aggregate employment growth, the log of total employment
and the log average earnings. There are 3120 counties and 18 industries. Standard errors presented in
parentheses are clustered at the State-level. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%,
respectively.


                                                 ∆ Log payroll (2011Q1-2014Q1)

                                      Treatment intensity              Access to external finance

                               Sector mean        Sector mean       Sector mean     Small bus. loans
                               payroll/sales   receivables/assets   pledgeability   per establishment

    Treatment × high              0.143∗∗          0.119∗∗∗             0.044             0.044
                                  (0.057)           (0.043)            (0.049)           (0.044)
    Treatment × low                0.040             0.043            0.122∗∗∗           0.142∗∗
                                  (0.035)           (0.057)            (0.046)           (0.061)

    County×sector controls          Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
    Sector FE                       Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
    County FE                       Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes

    Observations                  45333              42350             42350             45333
    R2                            0.166              0.173             0.173             0.166




                                                   40
         Table 6: Direct effect of payment acceleration: employment and earnings
This table presents the results of a difference-in-difference estimation in first-differences. We run OLS
regressions at the county×sector level of the change in log employment (Panel A) and log average earn-
ings (Panel B) on county×sector exposure to government contracts that were accelerated following the
implementation of the federal payment reform of 2011. Treatment is the average quarterly amount of
eligible government contracts to be performed in a given county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, nor-
malized by quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1. Control variables include the average quarterly amount of all
government contracts to be performed in a given county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by
quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1, as well as additional county×sector controls including the share of small
establishment, the log average establishment size, 2000Q1 to 2011Q1 average annual employment growth,
the correlation of employment growth with aggregate employment growth, the log of total employment
and the log average earnings. There are 3120 counties and 18 industries. Standard errors presented in
parentheses are clustered at the State-level. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%,
respectively.


                                          Panel A: ∆ log employment (2011Q1-2014Q1)

             Treatment                  0.119∗∗∗   0.086∗∗∗   0.075∗∗∗   0.090∗∗∗   0.062∗∗
                                         (0.029)    (0.029)    (0.027)    (0.030)   (0.029)

             County×sector controls       No         Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes
             Sector FE                    No         No         Yes        No        Yes
             County FE                    No         No         No         Yes       Yes

             Observations                45333      45333      45333      45333     45333
             R2                          0.002      0.037      0.056      0.132     0.157

             hline
                                            Panel B: ∆ log earnings (2011Q1-2014Q1)

             Treatment                  0.073∗∗∗   0.042∗∗    0.039∗∗    0.042∗∗    0.035∗∗
                                         (0.019)   (0.017)    (0.017)    (0.017)    (0.017)

             County×sector controls       No         Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes
             Sector FE                    No         No         Yes        No        Yes
             County FE                    No         No         No         Yes       Yes

             Observations                45333      45333      45333      45333     45333
             R2                          0.001      0.083      0.142      0.162     0.221




                                                   41
         Table 7: Direct effect of payment acceleration: implied financing frictions
This table presents the values for employment growth implied by our theoretical framework presented in
section 2 as a function of the pledgeability constraint ξ. We also present the corresponding reduced form
coefficient, where we divide the model prediction by 3 to reflect the fact that our treatment variable is
scaled by payroll rather than sales.


                                                 Predicted employment growth as a function of ξ

     ξ                                          0.70    0.85    1.00   1.15    1.30    1.45    1.60

     Implied ∆L∗t − 1                          0.41     0.34    0.29   0.25    0.22    0.20    0.18
     Corresponding reduced form coefficient    0.138    0.113   0.96   0.083   0.073   0.066   0.060




                                                   42
                  Table 8: Spillover effect of payment acceleration: baseline
This table presents the results of a difference-in-difference estimation in first-differences. We run OLS
regressions at the county×sector level of the change in log payroll, log employment and log earnings on
county×sector exposure to government contracts that were accelerated following the implementation of
the federal payment reform of 2011. Treatment is the average quarterly amount of eligible government
contracts to be performed in a given county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by quarterly
payrolls in 2011Q1. Treatment: CZ is the same variable, measured at the commuting zone level rather
than the county×sector level, and excluding the focal county×sector. Treatment and Treatment: CZ
are normalized by their cross-sectional standard deviation. County×sector control variables include the
average quarterly amount of all government contracts to be performed in a given county×sector between
2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1, as well as additional county×sector controls
including the share of small establishment, the log average establishment size, 2000Q1 to 2011Q1 average
annual employment growth, the correlation of employment growth with aggregate employment growth,
the log of total employment and the log average earnings. CZ controls include the unemployment rate, the
share of small establishments, the log average establishment size, log total employment and log average
earnings in 2011Q1. There are 3120 counties and 18 industries. Standard errors presented in parentheses
are clustered at the State-level. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.


                                      ∆ log payroll      ∆ log employment        ∆ log earnings

        Treatment                  0.015∗∗∗   0.013∗∗∗   0.010∗∗∗   0.009∗∗∗   0.005∗∗   0.004∗∗
                                    (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.003)    (0.003)   (0.002)   (0.002)
        Treatment: CZ              -0.009∗∗   -0.007∗    -0.006∗    -0.006∗∗   -0.003∗    -0.001
                                    (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.003)    (0.003)   (0.002)   (0.002)

        County×sector controls       Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes
        CZ controls                  Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes
        Sector FE                    No         Yes         No         Yes       No        Yes
        State FE                     Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes

        Observations                45318      45318      45318      45318      45318     45318
        R2                          0.060      0.076      0.048      0.068      0.093     0.154




                                                   43
                 Table 9: Spillover effect of payment acceleration: dynamics
This table presents the results of a difference-in-difference estimation in first-differences. We run OLS
regressions at the county×sector level of the change in log employment on county×sector exposure to
government contracts that were accelerated following the implementation of the federal payment reform
of 2011. Treatment is the average quarterly amount of eligible government contracts to be performed in
a given county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1. Treatment:
CZ is the same variable, measured at the commuting zone level rather than the county×sector level,
and excluding the focal county×sector. Treatment and Treatment: CZ are normalized by their cross-
sectional standard deviation. County×sector control variables include the average quarterly amount of
all government contracts to be performed in a given county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized
by quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1, as well as additional county×sector controls including the share of small
establishment, the log average establishment size, 2000Q1 to 2011Q1 average annual employment growth,
the correlation of employment growth with aggregate employment growth, the log of total employment and
the log average earnings. CZ controls include the unemployment rate, the share of small establishments,
the log average establishment size, log total employment and log average earnings in 2011Q1. There are
3120 counties and 18 industries. Standard errors presented in parentheses are clustered at the State-level.
*, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.


                                              ∆ log employment (relative to 2011Q1)

                                          [t-2,t]   [t-1,t]   [t,t+1]    [t,t+2]    [t,t+3]

               Treatment                   -0.001    -0.002   0.003∗    0.008∗∗∗   0.009∗∗∗
                                          (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.003)
               Treatment: CZ                0.000    -0.000    -0.003     -0.005   -0.006∗∗
                                          (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.003)

               County×sector controls       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes
               CZ controls                  Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes
               Sector FE                    Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes
               State FE                     Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes

               Observations               45157     45144     45186      45186      45318
               R2                         0.549     0.271     0.039      0.054      0.068




                                                    44
            Table 10: Spillover effect of payment acceleration: falsification tests
This table presents the results of a difference-in-difference estimation in first-differences. We run OLS
regressions at the county×sector level of the change in log employment on commuting zone exposure to
government contracts normalized by quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1. Small and Large refer to contracts
awarded to small and large business respectively. Fixed-price and Cost-plus contracts refer to fixed-price
and cost-plus contracts, respectively. All four variables are standardized by their cross-sectional standard
deviation. County×sector control variables include the average quarterly amount of all government
contracts to be performed in a given county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by quarterly
payrolls in 2011Q1, as well as additional county×sector controls including the share of small establishment,
the log average establishment size, 2000Q1 to 2011Q1 average annual employment growth, the correlation
of employment growth with aggregate employment growth, the log of total employment and the log
average earnings. CZ controls include the unemployment rate, the share of small establishments, the log
average establishment size, log total employment and log average earnings in 2011Q1. There are 3120
counties and 18 industries. Standard errors presented in parentheses are clustered at the State-level. *,
**, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.


                                                   ∆ log employment (2011Q1-2014Q1)

           Small and fixed-price: CZ     -0.011∗∗∗    -0.007∗∗   -0.011∗∗∗   -0.007∗∗   -0.007∗∗
                                          (0.003)      (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.003)
           Large and fixed-price: CZ       0.003         0.000     0.003        0.000     0.001
                                          (0.003)      (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.002)
           Small and cost-plus: CZ         0.002         0.001     0.002        0.001      0.001
                                          (0.002)      (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.002)
           Large and cost-plus: CZ         0.002        -0.002     0.002       -0.002     -0.002
                                          (0.002)      (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.002)

           County×sector controls           No            Yes      No          Yes        Yes
           CZ controls                      No            Yes      No          Yes        Yes
           Sector FE                        No            No       Yes         No         Yes
           State FE                         Yes           Yes      Yes         Yes        Yes

           Observations                    45333       45318      45333       45318      45318
           R2                              0.010       0.048      0.025       0.048      0.068




                                                     45
              Table 11: Spillover effect of payment acceleration: heterogeneity
This table presents the results of a difference-in-difference estimation in first-differences. We run OLS
regressions at the county×sector level of the change in log payroll on county×sector exposure to gov-
ernment contracts that were accelerated following the implementation of the federal payment reform of
2011. Treatment is the average quarterly amount of eligible government contracts to be performed in a
given county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1. Treatment:
CZ, Treatment: county, and Treatment: CZ*Sector are the same variable, measured at the commuting
zone, county and commuting zone and sector level rather than the county×sector level, and excluding
the focal county×sector. All treatment variables are normalized by their cross-sectional standard devia-
tion. County×sector control variables include the average quarterly amount of all government contracts
to be performed in a given county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by quarterly payrolls in
2011Q1, as well as additional county×sector controls including the share of small establishment, the log
average establishment size, 2000Q1 to 2011Q1 average annual employment growth, the correlation of
employment growth with aggregate employment growth, the log of total employment and the log average
earnings. CZ controls include the unemployment rate, the share of small establishments, the log average
establishment size, log total employment and log average earnings in 2011Q1. There are 3120 counties
and 18 industries.Standard errors presented in parentheses are clustered at the State-level. *, **, and
*** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.


                                               ∆ log employment (2011Q1-2014Q1)

                Treatment variables are standardized by their sample standard deviation

                Treatment                 0.009∗∗∗    0.009∗∗∗      0.009∗∗∗   0.009∗∗∗
                                           (0.003)     (0.003)       (0.003)    (0.003)
                Treatment: CZ             -0.006∗∗                               -0.003
                                           (0.003)                              (0.004)
                Treatment: county                         -0.004∗                -0.003
                                                          (0.002)               (0.002)
                Treatment: CZ*Sector                                -0.006∗∗   -0.005∗∗
                                                                     (0.002)    (0.002)

                County×sector controls       Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes
                CZ controls                  Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes
                Sector FE                    Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes
                State FE                     Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes

                Observations               45318          45314      44043      44039
                R2                         0.068          0.068      0.070      0.070




                                                     46
            Table 12: Spillover effect of payment acceleration: Job-to-job flows
This table presents the results of a difference-in-difference estimation in first-differences. We run OLS
regressions at the origin State-sector× destination State-sector of the percentage growth in average quar-
terly job flows between the three year prior to the reform and three subsequent years. Treatment is
the average quarterly amount of eligible government contracts to be performed in a given State×sector
between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by average quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1. In Panel A, both treat-
ment variables for the origin and destination sectors enter the regressions separately, while we use the
difference between the two in Panel B. Control variables include the average quarterly amount of all
government contracts to be performed in a given State×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by
quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1, as well as additional State×sector controls including the share of small es-
tablishment, the log average establishment size, 2000Q1 to 2011Q1 average annual employment growth,
the correlation of employment growth with aggregate employment growth, the log of total employment
and the log average earnings. Standard errors presented in parentheses are clustered at the State-level.
*, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.


                                                    Growth in average quarterly job flows
         Treatment, destination                  0.251     0.450∗∗   0.364∗    0.451∗∗   0.367∗
                                                (0.215)    (0.218)   (0.185)   (0.217)   (0.185)
         Treatment, origin                     -0.741∗∗∗    -0.108    -0.092    -0.075    -0.109
                                                (0.094)    (0.097)   (0.107)   (0.089)   (0.100)

         Observations                           341947     331733    331733    331733    331733
         R2                                      0.005      0.011     0.013     0.011     0.014

                                                    Growth in average quarterly job flows

         Difference in treatment               0.515∗∗∗    0.267∗∗   0.217∗∗   0.267∗∗   0.241∗∗
                                                (0.117)    (0.113)   (0.107)   (0.113)   (0.106)

         Observations                           341947     331733    331733    331733    331733
         R2                                      0.005      0.011     0.013     0.011     0.014

         Controls (origin State-sector)           No         Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes
         Controls (destination State-sector)      No         Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes
         Origin sector FE                         No         No        Yes       No         Yes
         Destination sector FE                    No         No        Yes       No         Yes
         Destination State FE                     Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes
         Origin State FE                          No         No        No        Yes        Yes




                                                   47
         Table 13: Spillover effect of payment acceleration: labor market tightness
This table presents the results of a difference-in-difference estimation in first-differences. We run OLS
regressions at the county×sector level of the change in log payroll on county×sector exposure to gov-
ernment contracts that were accelerated following the implementation of the federal payment reform of
2011. Treatment is the average quarterly amount of eligible government contracts to be performed in a
given county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1. Treatment:
CZ is the same variable, measured at the commuting zone level rather than the county×sector level,
and excluding the focal county×sector. Treatment and Treatment: CZ are normalized by their cross-
sectional standard deviation. County×sector control variables include the average quarterly amount of
all government contracts to be performed in a given county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized
by quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1, as well as additional county×sector controls including the share of small
establishment, the log average establishment size, 2000Q1 to 2011Q1 average annual employment growth,
the correlation of employment growth with aggregate employment growth, the log of total employment
and the log average earnings. CZ controls include the unemployment rate, the share of small establish-
ments, the log average establishment size, log total employment and log average earnings in 2011Q1.
There are 3120 counties and 18 industries. Standard errors presented in parentheses are clustered at the
State-level. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.


                  High versus low unemployment (2010) CZ
                  Above or below median
                                            ∆ log employment (2011Q1-2014Q1)

                  Treatment × high            0.015∗∗∗   0.013∗∗∗   0.015∗∗∗   0.014∗∗∗
                                               (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.004)
                  Treatment × low               0.006      0.004       0.006      0.005
                                               (0.005)    (0.004)    (0.005)    (0.004)
                  Treatment: CZ × high                                -0.003     -0.003
                                                                     (0.003)    (0.003)
                  Treatment: CZ × low                               -0.009∗    -0.009∗
                                                                     (0.005)    (0.005)

                  County× sector controls       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
                  CZ controls                   Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
                  Sector FE                     No         Yes        No         Yes
                  State FE                      Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes

                  Observations                 45318      45318      45318      45318
                  R2                           0.047      0.068      0.048      0.068




                                                   48
              Appendix
Can Paying Firms Quicker Affect Aggregate
              Employment?




                    1
                               Panel A. Treated government contracts

                                         Average payment terms (days)
                        30



                        25
                 Days



                        20



                        15



                        10
                        01oct2010   01jan2011   01apr2011     01jul2011     01oct2011   01jan2012

                                                 Small business and Fixed-price




                             Panel B. Untreated government contracts

                                         Average payment terms (days)
                        30



                        25
                 Days




                        20



                        15



                        10
                        01oct2010   01jan2011   01apr2011     01jul2011     01oct2011   01jan2012

                                                 Small business and Cost-plus
                                                 Large business and Fixed-price




Figure A.1: Department of Defense payment terms. This figure shows the average
number of days between receipt and payment of invoices in the MOCAS payment system of
the Department of Defense. Panel A presents the difference between payments associated
with contracts awarded to small versus large businesses. Panel B presents the difference
between contracts awarded on fixed-price rather than a cost-plus basis. Under fixed-price
contracts, contractors agree to deliver the product or service at a pre-negotiated price.
Under cost-plus contracts, contractors are paid for their expenses up to a set limit, plus
profit.

                                                       2
                                      Federal accounts payable in billion dollars




                     50
                     40
              Accounts payable
              20     10
                     0 30




                                 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014




Figure A.2: US federal accounts payable. This figure presents total accounts payables
across agencies of the US federal government for fiscal years 2003 to 2014, obtained from
United States Government Notes to the Financial Statements. These aggregates exclude
agencies that did not report payables consistently across the period.

                                   Unemployment rate across Commuting Zones
               .12
               .1
               .08
               .06
               .04




                        2008                     2010                2012                 2014
                                                            Qyear

                                                 25 percentile        75 percentile




Figure A.3: Unemployment rates across CZs . This figure presents the 25th and
75th percentile of the distribution of unemployment rates across commuting zones in the
US, from 2008 to 2014.

                                                             3
                     Table A.1: Change in government contract intensity
This table presents the results of a difference-in-difference estimation in first-differences. We run OLS
regressions at the county×sector level of the change in average quarterly government contracts between the
two year prior and the three years after the payment acceleration, scaled by 2011 payroll, on county×sector
exposure to government contracts that were accelerated following the implementation of the federal
payment reform of 2011. Treatment is the average quarterly amount of eligible government contracts
to be performed in a given county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by quarterly payrolls
in 2011Q1. Control variables include the average quarterly amount of all government contracts to be
performed in a given county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1,
as well as additional county×sector controls including the share of small establishment, the log average
establishment size, 2000Q1 to 2011Q1 average annual employment growth, the correlation of employment
growth with aggregate employment growth, the log of total employment and the log average earnings.
There are 3120 counties and 18 industries. Standard errors presented in parentheses are clustered at the
State-level. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.


                  ∆ Average quarterly government contract, scaled by 2011Q1 payroll

                Treatment                   0.067     0.073     0.072     0.054     0.046
                                           (0.052)   (0.051)   (0.051)   (0.053)   (0.052)

                County×sector controls       No          Yes     Yes       Yes       Yes
                Sector FE                    No          No      Yes       No        Yes
                County FE                    No          No      No        Yes       Yes

                Observations                45333     45333     45333     45333     45333
                R2                          0.283     0.284     0.290     0.349     0.356




                                                     4
              Table A.2: Distribution of procurement contracts across sectors
This table presents the cross-sector distribution of average yearly amounts of Government contracts
granted between 2009 and 2014, in billion dollars. Eligible refers to all contracts but DOD cost-plus
contracts. Ineligible refer to DOD cost-plus contracts. There are 18 industries.


                                     Average yearly amounts 2009-2014, in billion dollars

                                   All businesses    Small businesses        Large businesses
           Sector                                   Eligible   Ineligible   Eligible   Ineligible

           Manufacturing              175.30         18.49        1.18      118.24       37.39
           Professional services      131.03         18.41        5.93       29.69       77.00
           Admin                      42.58          5.63         0.41      11.53        25.01
           Construction               39.23          9.14        0.03       28.16         1.91
           Wholesale                  20.81          4.91         0.33      12.00         3.57
           Transportation             14.39          2.07         0.03       9.57         2.73
           Finance                     12.99          0.33        0.00        2.86        9.80
           Information                 11.24          2.18        0.18        6.09        2.79
           Health care                 5.97          1.28         0.01       4.13         0.55
           Education                   4.70           0.91        0.03       1.83         1.92
           Retail                      3.90          1.24        0.30         1.94        0.42
           Other services              3.37           0.58        0.02        1.51        1.27
           Real estate                 3.33          1.37         0.00       1.89         0.07
           Utilities                   2.30          0.17         0.00        1.90        0.23
           Accomodation                1.09          0.22        0.01         0.80        0.06
           Agriculture                 0.43          0.30         0.01        0.05        0.07
           Mining                      0.34           0.09       -0.00        0.21        0.04
           Arts                        0.07          0.04        0.00         0.03        0.00




                                                    5
                  Table A.3: Top and bottom 20 4-digit NAICS industries
This tabe presents the top 20 and bottom 20 4-digit NAICS industries based on treatment, measured
as the average quarterly amount of eligible government contracts to be performed in a given industry
between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by quarterly payroll in 2011Q1 . There are 287 4-digit NAICS
industries.


       Rank    Naics 4   Description

       1       3159      Apparel Accessories and Other Apparel Manufacturing
       2       1153      Support Activities for Forestry
       3       3366      Ship and Boat Building
       4       2379      Other Heavy and Civil Engineering Construction
       5       5629      Remediation and Other Waste Management Services
       6       5612      Facilities Support Services
       7       2362      Nonresidential Building Construction
       8       3149      Other Textile Product Mills
       9       6114      Business Schools and Computer and Management Training
       10      4247      Petroleum and Petroleum Products Merchant Wholesalers
       11      4812      Nonscheduled Air Transportation
       12      3162      Footwear Manufacturing
       13      4831      Deep Sea, Coastal, and Great Lakes Water Transportation
       14      3112      Grain and Oilseed Milling
       15      5311      Lessors of Real Estate
       16      3333      Commercial and Service Industry Machinery Manufacturing
       17      3169      Other Leather and Allied Product Manufacturing
       18      3329      Other Fabricated Metal Product Manufacturing
       19      3325      Hardware Manufacturing
       20      2373      Highway, Street, and Bridge Construction

       267     5221      Depository Credit Intermediation
       268     2121      Coal Mining
       269     8132      Grantmaking and Giving Services
       270     4862      Pipeline Transportation of Natural Gas
       271     6223      Specialty (except Psychiatric and Substance Abuse) Hospitals
       272     5331      Lessors of Nonfinancial Intangible Assets (except Copyrighted Works)
       273     3274      Lime and Gypsum Product Manufacturing
       274     7131      Amusement Parks and Arcades
       275     4453      Beer, Wine, and Liquor Stores
       276     4248      Beer, Wine, and Distilled Alcoholic Beverage Merchant Wholesalers
       277     4521      Department Stores
       278     3122      Tobacco Manufacturing
       279     7132      Gambling Industries
       280     4879      Scenic and Sightseeing Transportation, Other
       281     4861      Pipeline Transportation of Crude Oil
       282     5211      Monetary Authorities-Central Bank
       283     2122      Metal Ore Mining
       284     7224      Drinking Places (Alcoholic Beverages)
       285     5232      Securities and Commodity Exchanges
       286     5259      Other Investment Pools and Funds
       287     4869      Other Pipeline Transportation



                                                 6
           Table A.4: Top and bottom 20 County × 2-digit NAICS industries
This tabe presents the top 20 and bottom 20 county×sectors based on treatment, measured as the
average quarterly amount of eligible government contracts to be performed in a given county×sector
between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by quarterly payroll in 2011Q1. There are 3120 counties and 18
industries, and a total of 45333 county×sectors.


                Rank    2-digit NAICS                County                  State

                1       Agriculture                  Sweetwater County       WY
                2       Real estate                  Bradford County         FL
                3       Real estate                  Craig County            OK
                4       Administrative and support   Miami County            IN
                5       Professional services        Garfield County         UT
                6       Construction                 Lake County             OR
                7       Real estate                  Brewster County         TX
                8       Wholesale                    Virginia Beach city     VA
                9       Information                  Ontario County          NY
                10      Professional services        Ste. Genevieve County   MO
                11      Construction                 Catron County           NM
                12      Manufacturing                McCreary County         KY
                13      Education                    Shelby County           KY
                14      Administrative and support   Accomack County         VA
                15      Education                    Dougherty County        GA
                16      Administrative and support   Gooding County          ID
                17      Transportation               Valley County           ID
                18      Construction                 Socorro County          NM
                19      Administrative and support   Humphreys County        MS
                20      Mining                       Otero County            NM

                45313   Manufacturing                Hidalgo County          TX
                45314   Education                    Walker County           AL
                45315   Accommodation                Cape May County         NJ
                45316   Administrative and support   York County             PA
                45317   Professional services        Wilcox County           AL
                45318   Real estate                  St. James Parish        LA
                45319   Administrative and support   St. Charles Parish      LA
                45320   Professional services        Nelson County           ND
                45321   Real estate                  Avoyelles Parish        LA
                45322   Administrative and support   Jefferson Parish        LA
                45323   Administrative and support   McKenzie County         ND
                45324   Mining                       Carbon County           WY
                45325   Construction                 Dixie County            FL
                45326   Arts                         Park County             WY
                45327   Real estate                  Cullman County          AL
                45328   Professional services        Ingham County           MI
                45329   Real estate                  Evangeline Parish       LA
                45330   Education                    Anderson County         TN
                45331   Information                  Leon County             FL
                45332   Mining                       Fairfield County        CT
                45333   Arts                         Madison County          AL



                                                7
              Table A.5: Robustness: Baseline using alternative specifications
This table presents alternative specifications. Panel A presents a difference-in-difference estimation of
the three year change in log payroll on the interaction of a post dummy taking the value of one for
the 2011-14 period, and zero for the 2008-11 period with a treatment variable measured as the average
quarterly amount of eligible government contracts to be performed in a given county×sector between
2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1. Panel B presents OLS regressions of the
change in log payroll on a dummy taking the value of one for county×sector with treatment above the
sample median. Control variables include the average quarterly amount of all government contracts to be
performed in a given county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1,
as well as additional county×sector controls including the share of small establishment, the log average
establishment size, 2000Q1 to 2011Q1 average annual employment growth, the corr elation of employment
growth with aggregate employment growth, the log of total employment and the log average earnings.
There are 3120 counties and 18 industries. Standard errors presented in parentheses are clustered at the
State-level. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.


                                               Panel A: two period DID, 2008-11, 2011-14

          Post × Treatment                0.144∗∗∗       0.131∗∗    0.153∗∗∗   0.139∗∗∗   0.095∗
                                           (0.052)       (0.051)     (0.054)    (0.052)   (0.051)
          County×sector controls             Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes
          County×sector FE                   Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes
          Sector×year FE                     No            Yes         No         Yes       Yes
          State×year FE                      No            No          Yes        Yes       Yes
          Post×County×sector controls        Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes
          Observations                      91850         91850       91850      91850     91850
          R2                                0.795         0.798       0.817      0.819     0.822


                                             Panel B: dummy for high versus low treatment

          High treatment                    0.004        0.024∗∗∗   0.017∗∗∗   0.031∗∗∗   0.015∗∗∗
                                           (0.006)        (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.006)
          County×sector controls             No             Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
          Sector FE                          No             No         Yes        No         Yes
          County FE                          No             No         No         Yes        Yes
          Observations                      45333          45333      45333      45333      45333
          R2                                0.003          0.041      0.060      0.155      0.178




                                                     8
  Table A.6: Robustness: Baseline results using 2011Q2-2014Q1 government contracts
This table presents the results of a difference-in-difference estimation in first-differences. We run OLS
regressions at the county×sector level of the change in log payroll on county×sector exposure to gov-
ernment contracts that were accelerated following the implementation of the federal payment reform of
2011. Treatment is the average quarterly amount of eligible government contracts to be performed in
a given county×sector between 2011Q1-2014Q1, normalized by quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1. Control
variables include the average quarterly amount of all government contracts to be performed in a given
county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1, as well as addi-
tional county×sector controls including the share of small establishment, the log average establishment
size, 2000Q1 to 2011Q1 average annual employment growth, the correlation of employment growth with
aggregate employment growth, the log of total employment and the log average earnings. There are 3120
counties and 18 industries. Standard errors presented in parentheses are clustered at the State-level. *,
**, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.


                                             Panel A: ∆ log payroll (2011Q1-2014Q1)

              Treatment                 0.200∗∗∗   0.120∗∗∗   0.096∗∗   0.138∗∗∗   0.083∗∗
                                         (0.040)    (0.038)   (0.040)    (0.041)   (0.040)

              County×sector controls       No          Yes      Yes       Yes        Yes
              Sector FE                    No          No       Yes       No         Yes
              County FE                    No          No       No        Yes        Yes

              Observations               45333      45333      45333     45333      45333
              R2                         0.002      0.045      0.059     0.147      0.166

              hline
                                          Panel B: ∆ log employment (2011Q1-2014Q1)

              Treatment                 0.129∗∗∗   0.086∗∗∗   0.065∗∗   0.103∗∗∗    0.053
                                         (0.032)    (0.031)   (0.031)    (0.036)   (0.035)

              County×sector controls       No          Yes      Yes       Yes        Yes
              Sector FE                    No          No       Yes       No         Yes
              County FE                    No          No       No        Yes        Yes

              Observations               45333      45333      45333     45333      45333
              R2                         0.001      0.037      0.056     0.132      0.157

              hline
                                            Panel C: ∆ log earnings (2011Q1-2014Q1)

              Treatment                 0.071∗∗∗     0.034     0.032      0.035     0.030
                                         (0.021)    (0.021)   (0.023)    (0.021)   (0.022)

              County×sector controls       No          Yes      Yes       Yes        Yes
              Sector FE                    No          No       Yes       No         Yes
              County FE                    No          No       No        Yes        Yes

              Observations               45333      45333      45333     45333      45333
              R2                         0.001      0.083      0.142     0.162      0.221
                                                   9
                       Table A.7: Robustness: County×four-digit sector
This table presents the results of a difference-in-difference estimation in first-differences. We run OLS
regressions at the county×4-digit sector level of the change in log payroll on county×sector exposure to
government contracts that were accelerated following the implementation of the federal payment reform
of 2011. Treatment is the average quarterly amount of eligible government contracts to be performed
in a given county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1. Control
variables include the average quarterly amount of all government contracts to be performed in a given
county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1, as well as addi-
tional county×sector controls including the share of small establishment, the log average establishment
size, 2000Q1 to 2011Q1 average annual employment growth, the correlation of employment growth with
aggregate employment growth, the log of total employment and the log average earnings. There are 3120
counties and 18 industries. Standard errors presented in parentheses are clustered at the State-level. *,
**, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.


                                                  ∆ log payroll (2011Q1-2014Q1)

             Treatment                 0.052∗∗∗   0.031∗∗∗   0.033∗∗∗   0.027∗∗∗   0.077∗∗∗
                                        (0.010)    (0.009)    (0.009)    (0.009)    (0.025)

             County×sector controls       No         Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes
             Sector (4 digit) FE          No         No         Yes       No         Yes
             County FE                    No         No         No        Yes        Yes

             Observations               269283     269283     269283     269283     269332
             R2                          0.004      0.049      0.077      0.075      0.162




                                                   10
               Table A.8: Employment growth: job creations and destructions
This table presents the results of a difference-in-difference estimation in first-differences. We run OLS re-
gressions at the county× two-digit sector level of average quarterly job creations and job destruction rates
on county×sector exposure to government contracts that were accelerated following the implementation
of the federal payment reform of 2011. Treatment is the average quarterly amount of eligible government
contracts to be performed in a given county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by quarterly
payrolls in 2011Q1. Control variables include the average quarterly amount of all government contracts
to be performed in a given county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by quarterly payrolls in
2011Q1, as well as additional county×sector controls including the share of small establishment, the log
average establishment size, 2000Q1 to 2011Q1 average annual employment growth, the correlation of
employment growth with aggregate employment growth, the log of total employment and the log aver-
age earnings. There are 3120 counties and 18 industries. Standard errors presented in parentheses are
clustered at the State-level. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.


                                              Average quarterly rate (2011Q2-2014Q1)
                                              Job creations       Job destructions

                   Treatment                     0.014∗∗∗               0.009∗∗∗
                                                  (0.005)                (0.003)

                   County×sector controls          Yes                    Yes
                   Sector FE                       Yes                    Yes
                   County FE                       Yes                    Yes

                   Observations                   45333                  45333
                   R2                             0.324                  0.294




                                                     11
                    Table A.9: Earnings growth: new and existing workers
This table presents the results of a difference-in-difference estimation in first-differences. We run OLS
regressions at the county×sector level of the change in log earnings for new hires and existing workers on
county×sector exposure to government contracts that were accelerated following the implementation of
the federal payment reform of 2011. Treatment is the average quarterly amount of eligible government
contracts to be performed in a given county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by quarterly
payrolls in 2011Q1. Control variables include the average quarterly amount of all government contracts
to be performed in a given county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by quarterly payrolls
in 2011Q1, as well as additional county×sector controls including the share of small establishment, the
log average establishment size, 2000Q1 to 2011Q1 average annual employment growth, the correlation
of employment growth with aggregate employment growth, the log of total employment and the log
average earnings. There are 3120 counties and 18 industries. Standard errors presented in parentheses
are clustered at the State-level. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.


                                                 ∆ log earnings (2011Q1-2014Q1)
                                                All    New hires Existing workers

                   Treatment                  0.035∗∗      0.059           0.025
                                              (0.017)     (0.049)         (0.015)

                   County×sector controls       Yes        Yes              Yes
                   Sector FE                    Yes        Yes              Yes
                   County FE                    Yes        Yes              Yes

                   Observations                45333      41634           35884
                   R2                          0.221      0.109           0.222




                                                   12
                     Table A.10: Employment effects at aggregated levels
This table presents the results of a difference-in-difference estimation in first-differences. We run OLS
regressions at the commuting zone level of the change in log payroll on commuting zone exposure to
government contracts that were accelerated following the implementation of the federal payment reform
of 2011. Treatment is the average quarterly amount of eligible government contracts to be performed
in a given commuting zone between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1. Con-
trol variables include the average quarterly amount of all government contracts to be performed in a
given commuting zone between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1, as well as
additional commuting zone level controls including the share of small establishment, the log average es-
tablishment size, 2000Q1 to 2011Q1 average annual employment growth, the correlation of employment
growth with aggregate employment growth, the log of total employment and the log average earnings.
There are 703 commuting zones. Robust standard errors presented in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.


                                           ∆ log employment (2011Q1-2014Q1)

                                                     High CZ           Low CZ
                                           All     unemployment     unemployment

                     Treatment            0.148         0.368∗∗          -0.013
                                         (0.145)        (0.171)         (0.226)

                     CZ level controls     Yes           Yes              Yes

                     Observations          703           350              353
                     R2                   0.178         0.265            0.312




                                                   13
    Table A.11: Spillover effect of payment acceleration: tradable and non tradables
This table presents the results of a difference-in-difference estimation in first-differences. We run OLS
regressions at the county×sector level of the change in log payroll on county×sector exposure to gov-
ernment contracts that were accelerated following the implementation of the federal payment reform of
2011. Treatment is the average quarterly amount of eligible government contracts to be performed in a
given county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized by quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1. Treatment:
CZ is the same variable, measured at the commuting zone level rather than the county×sector level,
and excluding the focal county×sector. Treatment and Treatment: CZ are normalized by their cross-
sectional standard deviation. County×sector control variables include the average quarterly amount of
all government contracts to be performed in a given county×sector between 2009Q1-2011Q1, normalized
by quarterly payrolls in 2011Q1, as well as additional county×sector controls including the share of small
establishment, the log average establishment size, 2000Q1 to 2011Q1 average annual employment growth,
the correlation of employment growth with aggregate employment growth, the log of total employment
and the log average earnings. CZ controls include the unemployment rate, the share of small establish-
ments, the log average establishment size, log total employment and log average earnings in 2011Q1.
Non-tradable industries include health care, hospitality, food service, education, retail, and construction.
There are 3120 counties and 18 industries. Standard errors presented in parentheses are clustered at the
State-level. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.


                                                    ∆ log employment (2011Q1-2014Q1)

                 Treatment: CZ × Non-tradable         -0.001               -0.002
                                                     (0.003)              (0.003)
                 Treatment: CZ × Tradable           -0.009∗∗             -0.008∗∗
                                                     (0.004)              (0.004)

                 County× sector controls               Yes                 Yes
                 CZ controls                           Yes                 Yes
                 Sector FE                             No                  Yes
                 State FE                              Yes                 Yes

                 Observations                        45318                45318
                 R2                                  0.049                0.068




                                                    14
