NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MEASURING GROUP DIFFERENCES IN HIGH-DIMENSIONAL CHOICES:
METHOD AND APPLICATION TO CONGRESSIONAL SPEECH
Matthew Gentzkow
Jesse M. Shapiro
Matt Taddy
Working Paper 22423
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22423

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2016, Revised March 2019
Previously circulated as "Measuring Polarization in High-Dimensional Data: Method and
Application to Congressional Speech." We acknowledge funding from the Initiative on Global
Markets and the Stigler Center at Chicago Booth, the National Science Foundation, the Brown
University Population Studies and Training Center, and the Stanford Institute for Economic
Policy Research (SIEPR).We thank Egor Abramov, Brian Knight, John Marshall, Suresh Naidu,
Vincent Pons, Justin Rao, and Gaurav Sood for their comments and suggestions. We thank
Frances Lee for sharing her data on congressional communications staff. We also thank numerous
seminar audiences and our many dedicated research assistants for their contributions to this
project. This work was completed in part with resources provided by the University of Chicago
Research Computing Center and the Stanford Research Computing Center. The data providers
and funding agencies bear no responsibility for use of the data or for interpretations or inferences
based upon such uses. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22423.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Matthew Gentzkow, Jesse M. Shapiro, and Matt Taddy. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Measuring Group Differences in High-Dimensional Choices: Method and Application to Congressional
Speech
Matthew Gentzkow, Jesse M. Shapiro, and Matt Taddy
NBER Working Paper No. 22423
July 2016, Revised March 2019
JEL No. D72
ABSTRACT
We study the problem of measuring group differences in choices when the dimensionality of the
choice set is large. We show that standard approaches suffer from a severe finite-sample bias, and
we propose an estimator that applies recent advances in machine learning to address this bias. We
apply this method to measure trends in the partisanship of congressional speech from 1873 to
2016, defining partisanship to be the ease with which an observer could infer a congressperson’s
party from a single utterance. Our estimates imply that partisanship is far greater in recent years
than in the past, and that it increased sharply in the early 1990s after remaining low and relatively
constant over the preceding century.
Matthew Gentzkow
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
gentzkow@stanford.edu

Matt Taddy
Amazon
mataddy@gmail.com

Jesse M. Shapiro
Economics Department
Box B
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
jesse_shapiro_1@brown.edu

A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22423
A dataset is available at https://data.stanford.edu/congress_text

1

Introduction

In many settings, researchers seek to measure differences in the choices made by different groups,
and the way such differences evolve over time. Examples include measuring the extent of racial
segregation in residential choices (Reardon and Firebaugh 2002), of partisanship in digital media
consumption (Gentzkow and Shapiro 2011; Flaxman et al. 2016), of geographic differences in
treatment choices of physicians (Chandra et al. 2012), and of differences between demographic
groups in survey responses (Bertrand and Kamenica 2018). We consider the problem of measuring
such differences in settings where the dimensionality of the choice set is large—i.e., where the
number of possible choices is large relative to the number of actual choices observed. We show
that in such settings standard approaches suffer from a severe finite-sample bias, and we propose
methods based on recent advances in machine learning that address this bias in a way that is
computationally tractable with large-scale data.
Our approach is motivated by a specific application: measuring trends in party differences in
political speech. It is widely apparent that America’s two political parties speak different languages.1 Partisan differences in language diffuse into media coverage (Gentzkow and Shapiro
2010; Martin and Yurukoglu 2017) and other domains of public discourse (Greenstein and Zhu
2012; Jensen et al. 2012), and partisan framing has been shown to have large effects on public
opinion (Nelson et al. 1997; Graetz and Shapiro 2006; Chong and Druckman 2007).
Our main question of interest is to what extent the party differences in speech that we observe
today are a new phenomenon. One can easily find examples of politically charged terms in America’s distant past.2 Yet the magnitude of the differences between parties, the deliberate strategic
choices that seem to underlie them, and the expanding role of consultants, focus groups, and polls
(Bai 2005; Luntz 2006; Issenberg 2012) suggest that the partisan differences in language that we
see today might represent a consequential change (Lakoff 2003). If the two parties speak more
differently today than in the past, these divisions could be contributing to deeper polarization in
Congress and cross-party animus in the broader public.
1 See,

for example, Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010), Ball (2013), and Economist (2013). Within hours of the 2016
killing of 49 people in a nightclub in Orlando, Democrats were calling the event a “mass shooting”—linking it to the
broader problem of gun violence—while Republicans were calling it an act of “radical Islamic terrorism”—linking it
to concerns about national security and immigration (Andrews and Buchanan 2016).
2 In the 1946 essay “Politics and the English Language,” George Orwell discusses the widespread use of political
euphemisms (Orwell 1946). Northerners referred to the American Civil War as the “War of the Rebellion” or the
“Great Rebellion,” while southerners called it the “War for Southern Independence” or, in later years, the “War of
Northern Aggression” (McCardell 2004).

2

We use data on the text of speeches in the US Congress from 1873 to 2016 to quantify the
magnitude of partisan differences in speech, and to characterize the way these differences have
evolved over time. We specify a multinomial model of speech with choice probabilities that vary
by party. We measure partisan differences in speech in a given session of Congress by the ease
with which an observer who knows the model could guess a speaker’s party based solely on the
speaker’s choice of a single phrase. We call this measure partisanship for short.
To compute an accurate estimate of partisanship, we must grapple with two methodological
challenges. The first is the finite-sample bias mentioned above. The bias arises because the number
of phrases a speaker could choose is large relative to the total amount of speech we observe, so
many phrases are said mostly by one party or the other purely by chance. Naive estimators interpret
such differences as evidence of partisanship, leading to a bias we show can be many orders of
magnitude larger than the true signal in the data. Second, although our model takes a convenient
multinomial logit form, the large number of choices and parameters makes standard approaches to
estimation computationally infeasible.
We use two estimation approaches to address these challenges. The first is a leave-out estimator that addresses the main source of finite-sample bias while allowing for simple inspection of
the data. The second, our preferred estimator, uses an L1 or lasso-type penalty on key model parameters to control bias, and a Poisson approximation to the multinomial logit likelihood to permit
distributed computing. A permutation test and an out-of-sample validation both suggest that any
bias that remains in these estimates is dramatically lower than in standard approaches, and small
relative to the true variation in partisanship over time.
We find that the partisanship of language has exploded in recent decades, reaching an unprecedented level. From 1873 to the early 1990s, partisanship was nearly constant and fairly small
in magnitude: in the 43rd session of Congress (1873-75), the probability of correctly guessing a
speaker’s party based on a one-minute speech was 54 percent; by the 101st session (1989-1990)
this figure had increased to 57 percent. Beginning with the congressional election of 1994, partisanship turned sharply upward, with the probability of guessing correctly based on a one-minute
speech climbing to 73 percent by the 110th session (2007-09). Methods that do not correct for
finite-sample bias, including the maximum likelihood estimator of our model, instead imply that
partisanship is no higher today than in the past.
We unpack the recent increase in partisanship along a number of dimensions. The most partisan
phrases in each period—defined as those phrases most diagnostic of the speaker’s party—align well
3

with the issues emphasized in party platforms and, in recent years, include well-known partisan
phrases such as “death tax” and “estate tax.” Manually classifying phrases into substantive topics
shows that the increase in partisanship is due more to changes in the language used to discuss a
given topic (e.g., “estate tax” vs. “death tax”) than to changes in the topics parties emphasize (e.g.,
Republicans focusing more on taxes and Democrats focusing more on labor issues).
While we cannot definitively say why partisanship of language increased when it did, the evidence points to innovation in political persuasion as a proximate cause. The 1994 inflection point
in our series coincides precisely with the Republican takeover of Congress led by Newt Gingrich,
under a platform called the Contract with America (Gingrich and Armey 1994). This election
is widely considered a watershed moment in political marketing, with consultants such as Frank
Luntz applying novel techniques to identify effective language and disseminate it to candidates
(Lakoff 2004; Luntz 2004; Bai 2005). We also discuss related changes such as the expansion of
cable television coverage that may have provided further incentives for linguistic innovation.
This discussion highlights that partisanship of speech as we define it is a distinct phenomenon
from other inter-party differences. In particular, the large body of work building on the ideal point
model of Poole and Rosenthal (1985) finds that inter-party differences in roll-call voting fell from
the late nineteenth to the mid-twentieth century, and have since steadily increased (McCarty et
al. 2015). These dynamics are very different from those we observe in speech, consistent with
our expectation that speech and roll-call votes respond to different incentives and constraints, and
suggesting that the analysis of speech may reveal aspects of the political landscape that are not
apparent from the analysis of roll-call votes.
We build on methods developed by Taddy (2013, 2015). Many aspects of the current paper,
including our proposed leave-out estimator, our approaches to validation and inference, and the
covariate specification of our model are novel with respect to that prior work. Most importantly,
Taddy (2013, 2015) makes no attempt to define or quantify the divergence in language between
groups either at a point in time or over time, nor does he discuss the finite sample biases that arise
in doing so. Our paper also relates to other work on measuring document partisanship, including
Laver et al. (2003), Groseclose and Milyo (2005), Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010), Kim et al.
(2018), and Yan et al. (2018).3
Our paper contributes a recipe for using statistical predictability in a probability model of
3 More

broadly, our paper relates to work in statistics on authorship determination (Mosteller and Wallace 1963), work
in economics that uses text to measure the sentiment of a document (e.g., Antweiler and Frank 2004; Tetlock 2007),
and work that classifies documents according to similarity of text (Blei and Lafferty 2007; Grimmer 2010).

4

speech as a metric of differences in partisan language between groups. Jensen et al. (2012) use text
from the Congressional Record to characterize party differences in language from the late nineteenth century to the present. Their index, which is based on the observed correlation of phrases
with party labels, implies that partisanship has been rising recently but was similarly high in the
past. We apply a different method that addresses finite-sample bias and leads to substantially different conclusions. Lauderdale and Herzog (2016) specify a generative hierarchical model of floor
debates and estimate the model on speech data from the Irish Dail and the US Senate. Studying
the US Senate from 1995 to 2014, they find that party differences in speech have increased faster
than party differences in roll-call voting. Peterson and Spirling (2018) study trends in the partisanship of speech in the UK House of Commons. In contrast to Lauderdale and Herzog’s (2016)
analysis (and ours), Peterson and Spirling (2018) do not specify a generative model of speech. Instead, Peterson and Spirling (2018) measure partisanship using the predictive accuracy of several
machine-learning algorithms. They cite our article to justify using randomization tests to check
for spurious trends in their measure. These tests (Peterson and Spirling 2018, Online Appendix C)
show that their measure implies significant and time-varying partisanship even in fictitious data in
which speech patterns are independent of party.
The recipe that we develop can be applied to a broad class of problems in which the goal is
to characterize group differences in high-dimensional choices. A prominent example is the measurement of residential segregation (e.g., Reardon and Firebaugh 2002), where the groups might
be defined by race or ethnicity and the choices might be neighborhoods or schools. The finitesample bias that we highlight has been noted in that context by Cortese et al. (1976) and addressed
by benchmarking against random allocation (Carrington and Troske 1997), applying asymptotic
or bootstrap bias corrections (Allen et al. 2015), and estimating mixture models (Rathelot 2012;
D’Haultfœuille and Rathelot 2017).4 Recent work has derived axiomatic foundations for segregation measures (Echenique and Fryer 2007; Frankel and Volij 2011), asking which measures of
segregation satisfy certain properties.5 Instead, our approach is to specify a generative model of
the data and to measure group differences using objects that have a well-defined meaning in the
context of the model.6 In the body of the paper, we note some formal connections to the litera4 Logan et al.

(2018) develop methods for bias correction in the context of measuring residential segregation by income.
also Mele (2013) and Ballester and Vorsatz (2014). Our measure of partisanship is also related to measures of
cohesiveness in preferences of social groups, as in Alcalde-Unzu and Vorsatz (2013).
6 In this respect, our paper builds on Ellison and Glaeser (1997), who use a model-based approach to measure agglomeration spillovers in US manufacturing. Davis et al. (forthcoming) use a structural demand model to estimate racial
segregation in restaurant choices in a sample of New York City Yelp reviewers. Mele (2017) shows how to estimate
5 See

5

ture on residential segregation, and in an earlier draft we pursue a detailed application to trends in
residential segregation by political affiliation (Gentzkow et al. 2017).

2

Congressional Speech Data

Our primary data source is the text of the United States Congressional Record (hereafter, the
Record) from the 43rd Congress to the 114th Congress. We obtain digital text from HeinOnline,
who performed optical character recognition (OCR) on scanned print volumes. The Record is
a “substantially verbatim” record of speech on the floor of Congress (Amer 1993). We exclude
Extensions of Remarks, which are used to print unspoken additions by members of the House that
are not germane to the day’s proceedings.7
The modern Record is issued in a daily edition, printed at the end of each day that Congress is
in session, and in a bound edition that collects the content for an entire Congress. These editions
differ in formatting and in some minor elements of content (Amer 1993). Our data contains bound
editions for the 43rd to 111th Congresses, and daily editions for the 97th to 114th Congresses. We
use the bound edition in the sessions where it is available and the daily edition thereafter. The
Online Appendix shows results from an alternative data build that uses the bound edition through
the 96th Congress and the daily edition thereafter.
We use an automated script to parse the raw text into individual speeches. Beginnings of
speeches are demarcated in the Record by speaker names, usually in all caps (e.g., “Mr. ALLEN
of Illinois.”). We determine the identity of each speaker using a combination of manual and automated procedures, and append data on the state, chamber, and gender of each member from
historical sources.8 We exclude any speaker who is not a Republican or a Democrat, speakers who
preferences in a random-graph model of network formation and measures the degree of homophily in preferences.
Bayer et al. (2002) use an equilibrium model of a housing market to study the effect of changes in preferences on
patterns of residential segregation. Fossett (2011) uses an agent-based model to study the effect of agent preferences
on the degree of segregation.
7 The Record seeks to capture speech as it was intended to have been said (Amer 1993). Speakers are allowed to insert
new remarks, extend their remarks on a specific topic, and remove errors from their own remarks before the Record
is printed. The rules for such insertions and edits, as well as the way they appear in print, differ between the House
and Senate, and have changed to some degree over time (Amer 1993; Johnson 1997; Haas 2015). We are not aware
of any significant changes that align with the changing partisanship we observe in our data. We present our results
separately for the House and Senate in the Online Appendix.
8 Our main source for information on congresspeople is the congress-legislators GitHub repository
https://github.com/unitedstates/congress-legislators/tree/1473ea983d5538c25f5d315626445ab038d8141b accessed
on November 15, 2016. We make manual corrections, and add additional information from ICPSR and McKibbin
(1997), the Voteview Roll Call Data (Carroll et al. 2015a, b), and the King (1995) election returns. Some of these
sources include metadata from Martis (1989).

6

are identified by office rather than name, non-voting delegates, and speakers whose identities we
cannot determine.9 The Online Appendix presents the results of a manual audit of the reliability
of our parsing.
The input to our main analysis is a matrix Ct whose rows correspond to speakers and whose
columns correspond to distinct two-word phrases or bigrams (hereafter, simply “phrases”). An
element ci jt thus gives the number of times speaker i has spoken phrase j in session (Congress)
t. To create these counts, we first perform the following pre-processing steps: (i) delete hyphens
and apostrophes; (ii) replace all other punctuation with spaces; (iii) remove non-spoken parenthetical insertions; (iv) drop a list of extremely common words;10 and (v) reduce words to their
stems according to the Porter2 stemming algorithm (Porter 2009). We then drop phrases that are
likely to be procedural or have low semantic meaning according to criteria we define in the Online
Appendix. Finally, we restrict attention to phrases spoken at least 10 times in at least one session,
spoken in at least 10 unique speaker-sessions, and spoken at least 100 times across all sessions.
The Online Appendix presents results from a sample in which we tighten each of these restrictions
by 10 percent. The Online Appendix also presents results from an alternative construction of Ct
containing counts of three-word phrases or trigrams.
The decision to represent text as a matrix of phrase counts is fairly common in text analysis,
as is the decision to reduce the dimensionality of the data by removing word stems and nonword content (Gentzkow et al. forthcoming). We remove procedural phrases because they appear
frequently and their use is likely not informative about the inter-party differences that we wish to
measure (Gentzkow and Shapiro 2010). We remove infrequently used phrases to economize on
computation (Gentzkow et al. forthcoming).
9 In

the rare case in which a speaker switches parties during a term, we assign the new party to all the speech
in that term. We handle the similarly rare case in which a speaker switches chambers in a single session (usually from the House to the Senate) by treating the text from each chamber as a distinct speakersession. If a speaker begins a session in the House as a non-voting delegate of a territory and receives
voting privileges after the territory gains statehood, we treat the speaker as a voting delegate for the entirety of that speaker-session. If a non-voting delegate of the House later becomes a senator, we treat each
position as a separate speaker-session. We obtain data on the acquisition of statehood from http://www.thirtythousand.org/pages/QHA-02.htm (accessed on January 18, 2017) and data on the initial delegates for each
state from https://web.archive.org/web/20060601025644/http://www.gpoaccess.gov/serialset/cdocuments/hd108222/index.html. When we assign a majority party in each session, we count the handful of independents that caucus
with the Republicans or Democrats as contributing to the party’s majority in the Senate. Due to path dependence
in our data build, such independents are omitted when computing the majority party in the House. The Online
Appendix shows the results of a specification in which we exclude from the sample any speaker whose party changes
between sessions.
10 The
set
of
these
“stopwords”
we
drop
is
defined
by
a
list
obtained
from
http://snowball.tartarus.org/algorithms/english/stop.txt on November 11, 2010.

7

The resulting vocabulary contains 508,352 unique phrases spoken a total of 287 million times
by 7,732 unique speakers. We analyze data at the level of the speaker-session, of which there are
36,161. The Online Appendix reports additional summary statistics for our estimation sample and
vocabulary.
We identify 22 substantive topics based on our knowledge of the Record. We associate each
topic with a non-mutually exclusive subset of the vocabulary. To do this, we begin by grouping a
set of partisan phrases into the 22 topics (e.g., taxes, defense, etc.). For each topic, we form a set
of keywords by (i) selecting relevant words from the associated partisan phrases and (ii) manually
adding other topical words. Finally, we identify all phrases in the vocabulary that include one of
the topic keywords, are used more frequently than a topic-specific occurrence threshold, and are
not obvious false matches. The Online Appendix lists, for each topic, the keywords, the occurrence
threshold, and a random sample of included and excluded phrases.

3
3.1

Model and Measure of Partisanship
Model of Speech

The observed outcome is a J−vector cit of phrase counts for speaker i, which we assume comes
from a multinomial distribution


P(i)
cit ∼ MN mit , qt (xit ) ,

(1)

with mit = ∑ j ci jt denoting the total amount of speech by speaker i in session t, P (i) ∈ {R, D}
denoting the party affiliation of speaker i, xit denoting a K−vector of (possibly time-varying)
speaker characteristics, and qtP (xit ) ∈ (0, 1)J denoting the vector of choice probabilities. We let
Rt = {i : P (i) = R, mit > 0} and Dt = {i : P (i) = D, mit > 0} denote the set of Republicans and
Democrats, respectively, active in session t. The speech-generating process is fully characterized
by the verbosity mit and the probability qtP (·) of speaking each phrase.
We suppose further that the choice probabilities are
P(i)

q jt (xit ) = eui jt / ∑ euilt
l

ui jt = α jt + x0it γ jt + ϕ jt 1i∈Rt .

8

(2)

Here α jt is a scalar parameter capturing the baseline popularity of phrase j in session t, γ jt is a
K−vector capturing the effect of characteristics xit on the propensity to use phrase j in session
t, and ϕ jt is a scalar parameter capturing the effect of party affiliation on the propensity to use

phrase j in session t. If xit := xt , any phrase probabilities qtR (·) , qtD (·) can be represented with
appropriate choice of parameters in equation (2).
The model in (1) and (2) is restrictive, and it ignores many important aspects of speech. For
example, it implies that the propensity to use a given phrase is not related to other phrases used
by speaker i in session t, and need not be affected by the speaker’s verbosity mit . We adopt this
model because it is tractable and has proved useful in extracting meaning from text in many related
contexts (Groseclose and Milyo 2005; Taddy 2013, 2015).
The model also implies that speaker identities matter only through party affiliation P (i) and
the characteristics xit . Specification of xit is therefore important for our analysis. We consider
specifications of xit with different sets of observable characteristics, as well as a specification with
unobserved speaker characteristics (i.e., speaker random effects).
We assume throughout that if a phrase (or set of phrases) is excluded from the choice set, the
relative frequencies of the remaining phrases are unchanged. We use this assumption in Sections
6 and 7 to compute average partisanship for interesting subsets of the full vocabulary. This assumption encodes the independence of irrelevant alternatives familiar from other applications of
the multinomial logit model. It is a restrictive assumption, as some phrases are clearly better substitutes than others, but it provides a useful benchmark for analysis absent a method for estimating
flexible substitution patterns in a large vocabulary.
3.2

Measure of Partisanship

For given characteristics x, we define partisanship of speech to be the divergence between qtR (x)
and qtD (x). When these vectors are close, Republicans and Democrats speak similarly and we say
that partisanship is low. When these vectors are far from each other, the parties speak differently
and we say that partisanship is high.
We choose a particular measure of this divergence that has a clear interpretation in the context
of our model: the posterior probability that an observer with a neutral prior expects to assign to a
speaker’s true party after hearing the speaker utter a single phrase.

9

Definition. The partisanship of speech at x is:
1
1
πt (x) = qtR (x) · ρ t (x) + qtD (x) · (1 − ρ t (x)) ,
2
2
where
ρ jt (x) =

qRjt (x)
qRjt (x) + qDjt (x)

.

(3)

(4)

Average partisanship in session t is:
πt =

1
πt (xit ) .
|Rt ∪ Dt | i∈R∑
t ∪Dt

(5)

To understand these definitions, note that ρ jt (x) is the posterior belief that an observer with a
neutral prior assigns to a speaker being Republican if the speaker chooses phrase j in session t and
has characteristics x. Partisanship πt (x) averages ρ jt (x) over the possible parties and phrases: if
the speaker is a Republican (which occurs with probability 21 ), the probability of a given phrase j
is qRjt (x) and the probability assigned to the true party after hearing j is ρ jt (x); if the speaker is
a Democrat, these probabilities are qDjt (x) and 1 − ρ jt (x), respectively. Average partisanship π t ,
which is our target for estimation, averages πt (xit ) over the characteristics xit of speakers active in
session t. Average partisanship is defined with respect to a given vocabulary of J phrases.
There are many possible measures of the divergence between between qtR (x) and qtD (x). We
show in the Online Appendix that the time series of partisanship looks qualitatively similar if we
replace our partisanship measure with either the Euclidean distance between qtR (x) and qtD (x) or
the implied mutual information between party and phrase choice, though the series for Euclidean
distance is noisier.
Partisanship is closely related to the isolation index, a common index of residential segregation
(White 1986; Cutler et al. 1999).11 Frankel and Volij (2011) characterize a large set of segregation
indices based on a set of ordinal axioms. Ignoring covariates x, our measure satisfies six of these
axioms: Non-triviality, Continuity, Scale Invariance, Symmetry, Composition Invariance, and the
School Division Property. It fails to satisfy one axiom: Independence.12
11 To

see this, imagine that choices are neighborhoods rather than phrases, and let mit = 1 for all i and t, so that each
individual chooses one and only one neighborhood. Isolation is the difference in the share Republican of the average
Republican’s neighborhood and the average Democrat’s neighborhood. In an infinite population with an equal share
of Republicans and Democrats, all with characteristics x, this is simply 2πt (x) − 1.
12 In our context, Independence would require that the ranking in terms of partisanship of two years t and s remains
unchanged if we add a new set of phrases J ∗ to the vocabulary whose probabilities are the same in both years

10

Average partisanship π t summarizes how well an observer can predict a hypothetical speaker’s
party given a single realization and knowledge of the true model. This is distinct from the question
of how well an econometrician can predict a given speaker’s party in a given sample of text.

4

Estimation, Inference, and Validation

4.1

Plug-in Estimators

Maximum likelihood estimation is straightforward in our context. Ignoring covariates x, the maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) can be computed by plugging in empirical analogues for the
terms that appear in equation (3).
More precisely, let q̂it = cit /mit be the empirical phrase frequencies for speaker i. Let q̂tP =


∑i∈Pt cit / ∑i∈Pt mit be the empirical phrase frequencies for party P, and let ρ̂ jt = q̂Rjt / q̂Rjt + q̂Djt ,
excluding from the choice set any phrases that are not spoken in session t. Then the MLE of π t
when xit := xt is:
π̂tMLE =


1 R
1
ρ t + q̂tD · (1 − ρ̂
ρt).
q̂t · ρ̂
2
2

(6)

An important theme of our paper is that this and related estimators can be severely biased in
finite samples even if xit := xt . Intuitively, partisanship will be high when the dispersion of the
posteriors ρ jt is large—i.e., when some phrases are spoken far more by Republicans and others
are spoken far more by Democrats. The MLE estimates the ρ jt using their sample analogues ρ̂ jt .
However, sampling error will tend to increase the dispersion of the ρ̂ jt relative to the dispersion of
the true ρ jt . When the number of phrases is large relative to the volume of speech observed, many
phrases will be spoken only a handful of times, and so may be spoken mainly by Republicans
(ρ̂ jt ≈ 1) or mainly by Democrats (ρ̂ jt ≈ 0) by chance even if the true choice probabilities do not
differ by party.
To see the source of the bias more formally, note that π̂tMLE is a convex function of q̂tR and
q̂tD , and so Jensen’s inequality implies that it has a positive bias. We can also use the fact that



ρ t as:
E q̂tR , q̂tD = qtR , qtD to decompose the bias of a generic term q̂tR · ρ̂
E





ρ t − ρ t ) + Cov
ρ t − qtR · ρ t = qtR · E (ρ̂
q̂tR · ρ̂



ρt − ρt) .
q̂tR − qtR , (ρ̂

(7)

(qPjt = qPjs ∀P, j ∈ J ∗ ). Frankel and Volij (2011) list one other axiom, the Group Division Property, which is only
applicable for indices where the number of groups (i.e., parties in our case) is allowed to vary.

11

ρ t is mechanically
The second term will typically be far from zero because the sampling error in ρ̂

related to the sampling error in q̂tR , q̂tD . Any positive residual in q̂tR will increase both terms
inside the covariance; any negative residual will do the reverse. The first term is also nonzero

ρ t is a nonlinear transformation of q̂tR , q̂tD ,13 though this component of the bias tends to
because ρ̂
be small in practice.
The bias we highlight is not specific to the MLE, but will tend to arise for any measure of
group differences that uses observed choices as a direct approximation of true choice probabilities. This is especially transparent if we measure the difference between qtR and qtD using a norm
such as Euclidean distance: Jensen’s inequality implies that for any norm k·k, E q̂tR − q̂tD >
qtR − qtD . Similar issues arise for the measure of Jensen et al. (2012), which is given by

1
R
D
mt ∑ j m jt corr ci jt , 1i∈Rt . If speech is independent of party (qt = qt ) and verbosity is fixed,

then the population value of corr ci jt , 1i∈Rt is zero. But in any finite sample the correlation will
be nonzero with positive probability, so the measure may imply party differences even when speech
is unrelated to party.
4.2

Leave-Out Estimator

The first approach we propose to addressing this bias is a leave-out estimator that uses different
ρ t . This makes the errors in the former independent of the errors in the
samples to estimate q̂tP and ρ̂
latter by construction, and so eliminates the second bias term in equation (7).
The leave-out estimator is given by:
π̂tLO =


1 1
1 1
ρ −i,t +
ρ −i,t ,
q̂i,t · ρ̂
q̂i,t · 1 − ρ̂
∑
∑
2 |Rt | i∈Rt
2 |Dt | i∈Dt

(8)

ρ −i,t is the analogue of ρ̂
ρ t computed from the speech of all speakers other than i.14 This
where ρ̂
estimator is biased for π t , even if xit := xt , because of the first term in equation (7), but we expect
(and find) that this bias is small in practice.
13 Suppose

that there are two speakers, one Democrat and one Republican, each with mit = 1. There are two phrases.
The Republican says the second phrase with certainty and the Democrat says the second phrase with probability
0.01. Then E (ρ̂2t ) = 0.01( 12 ) + 0.99 (1) = 0.995 > ρ2t = 1/1.01 ≈ 0.990.

14 For

each i, j, and t, define q̂P−i, j,t =

∑l∈{Pt \i} cl jt
∑l∈{Pt \i} mlt

for P ∈ {R, D} and

ρ̂−i, j,t =

q̂R−i, j,t
q̂R−i, j,t + q̂D
−i, j,t

.

Implicitly, in each session t we exclude from the calculation in (8) any phrase that is spoken only by a single speaker.

12

The leave-out estimator is simple to compute and provides a direct look at the patterns in the
data. It also has important limitations. In particular, it does not allow us to incorporate covariates.
In addition, it does not recover the underlying parameters of the model and so does not directly
provide estimates of objects such as the most partisan phrases, which we rely on heavily in our
application.
4.3

Penalized Estimator

The second approach we propose uses a penalized estimator to fully estimate the model and incorT
α t , γ t , ϕ t }t=1
porate covariates. We estimate the parameters {α
of equation (2) by minimization of

the following penalized objective function:
(

∑
j

h
∑ ∑ mit exp(α jt + x0it γ jt + ϕ jt 1i∈Rt ) − ci jt (α jt + x0it γ jt + ϕ jt 1i∈Rt )+
t

i


ψ

α jt + γ jt


1

+ λ j ϕ jt

)
i
. (9)

We form an estimate π̂t∗ of π t by substituting estimated parameters into the probability objects in
equation (5).
Because partisanship is defined as a function of the characteristics x, the choice of characteristics to include in the model affects our target for estimation. We wish to include those characteristics that are likely to be related both to party and to speech but whose relationship with speech
would not generally be thought of as a manifestation of party differences. A leading example
of such a confound is geographic region: speakers from different parts of the country will tend
to come from different parties and to use different phrases, but regional differences in language
would not generally be thought of as a manifestation of party differences.
In our baseline specification, xit consists of indicators for state, chamber, gender, Census region, and whether the party is in the majority for the entirety of the session. The coefficients γ jt
on these attributes are static in time (i.e., γ jtk := γ jk ) except for those on Census region, which
are allowed to vary freely across sessions to allow more flexibly for regional variation in speech.
The online appendix shows results from a specification in which xit includes unobserved speakerlevel preference shocks (i.e. speaker random effects), from a specification in which xit includes no
covariates, and from a specification in which xit includes several additional covariates.
The minimand in (9) encodes two key decisions. First, we approximate the likelihood of our
13

multinomial logit model with the likelihood of a Poisson model (Palmgren 1981; Baker 1994;


Taddy 2015), where ci jt ∼ Pois exp µit + ui jt , and we use the plug-in estimate µ̂it = log mit
of the parameter µit . Because the Poisson and the multinomial logit share the same conditional
likelihood Pr (cit | mit ), their MLEs coincide when µ̂it is the MLE. Although our plug-in is not the
MLE, Taddy (2015) shows that our approach often performs well in related settings. In the Online
Appendix, we show that our estimator performs well on data simulated from the multinomial logit
model.
We adopt the Poisson approximation because, fixing µ̂it , the likelihood of the Poisson is separable across phrases. This feature allows us to use distributed computing to estimate the model
parameters (Taddy 2015). Without the Poisson approximation, computation of our estimator would
be infeasible due to the cost of repeatedly calculating the denominator of the logit choice probabilities.
The second key decision is the use of an L1 penalty λ j ϕ jt , which imposes sparsity on the
party loadings and shrinks them toward zero (Tibshirani 1996). Sparsity and shrinkage limit the
effect of sampling error on the dispersion of the estimated posteriors ρ jt , which is the source of
the bias in π̂tMLE . We determine the penalties λ by regularization path estimation, first finding
λ j1 large enough so that ϕ jt is estimated to be 0, and then incrementally decreasing λ j2 , ..., λ jG and
updating parameter estimates accordingly. An attractive computational property of this approach
is that the coefficient estimates change smoothly along the path of penalties, so each segment’s
solution acts as a hot-start for the next segment and the optimizations are fast to solve. We then
choose the value of λ j that minimizes a Bayesian Information Criterion.15 The Online Appendix
reports a qualitatively similar time series of partisanship when we use 5- or 10-fold cross-validation
to select the λ j that minimizes average out-of-sample deviance.
We also impose a minimal penalty of ψ = 10−5 on the phrase-specific intercepts α jt and the
covariate coefficients γ jt . We do this to handle the fact that some combinations of data and covariate design do not have an MLE in the Poisson model (Haberman 1973; Santos Silva and Tenreyro
2010). A small penalty allows us to achieve numerical convergence while still treating the covariates in a flexible way.16
15 The

Bayesian Information Criterion we use is −2 ∑i,t log Pois (ci jt ; exp[µ̂i + ui jt ]) + d f log n, where n =
(|D
∑t
t | + |Rt |) is the number of speaker-sessions and d f is a degrees-of-freedom term that (following Zou et al.
2007) is given by the number of parameters estimated with nonzero values (excluding the µ̂it , as outlined in Taddy
2015).
16 The Online Appendix shows how our results vary with alternative values of ψ. Larger values of ψ decrease computational time for a given problem. Note that in practice we implement our regularization path computationally as

14

4.4

Inference

For all of our main results, we perform inference via subsampling. We draw without replacement
100 random subsets of size equal to one-tenth the number of speakers (up to integer restrictions)
and re-estimate on each subset. We then report confidence intervals based on the distribution of
√
the estimator across these subsets, under the assumption of n convergence. We center these
confidence intervals around the estimated series and report uncentered bias-corrected confidence
intervals for our main estimator in the Online Appendix.
Politis et al. (1999, Theorem 2.2.1) show that this procedure yields valid confidence intervals under the assumption that the distribution of the estimator converges weakly to some non√
degenerate distribution at a n rate. In the Appendix, we extend a result of Knight and Fu (2000)
to show that this property holds, with fixed vocabulary and a suitable rate condition on the penalty,
for the penalized maximum likelihood estimator of our multinomial logit model. This is the estimator that we approximate with the Poisson distribution in equation 9. Though we do not pursue
formal results for the case where the vocabulary grows with the sample size, we note that such
asymptotics might better approximate the finite-sample behavior of our estimators.
In the Online Appendix, we report the results of several exercises designed to probe the accuracy of our confidence intervals. First, we consider three alternative subsampling strategies: (i)
doubling the number of speakers in each subsample, (ii) using 10 non-overlapping subsamples
rather than 100 overlapping subsamples, and (iii) using 5 non-overlapping subsamples. Second,
we compute confidence intervals based on a parametric bootstrap, repeatedly simulating data from
our estimated model and re-estimating the model on the simulated data. Third, we compute confidence intervals using a sample-splitting procedure that uses one half of the model to perform
variable selection and then estimates the selected model with minimal penalty across repeated
bootstrap replicates on the second half of the sample. All of these procedures yield qualitatively
similar conclusions. Note that we do not report results for a standard nonparametric bootstrap; the
standard nonparametric bootstrap is known to be invalid for lasso regression (Chatterjee and Lahiri
2011).

ψ λ̃ j2 , ..., ψ λ̃ jG where λ̃ jG = ι λ̃ j1 , ι = 10−5 , and G = 100. To ensure that the choice of λ̃ j is not constrained by the
regularization path, we recommend that users choose values of ψ and ι small enough that forcing λ̃ j = λ̃ jG for all j
either leads to π̂t∗ ≈ π̂tMLE or to an estimator π̂t∗ that substantially differs from the one chosen by BIC.

15

4.5

Validation

As usual with non-linear models, none of the estimators proposed here are exactly unbiased in
finite samples. Our goal is to reduce bias to the point that it is dominated by the signal in the data.
We gauge our success in three main ways.
First, we consider a permutation test in which we randomly reassign parties to speakers and
then re-estimate each measure on the resulting data. In this “random” series, qtR = qtD by construction, so the true value of πt is equal to
estimator of πt has expected value

1
2

1
2

in all years. Thus the random series for an unbiased

in each session t, and the deviation from

1
2

provides a valid

measure of bias under the permutation.
Second, in the Online Appendix we present results from exercises in which we apply our
estimators to two types of simulated data. The first exercise is a Monte Carlo in which we simulate
data from our estimated model. The second exercise is a falsification test in which we simulate data
from a model in which qtR and qtD (and hence partisanship) are constant over time but verbosity mit
is allowed to follow its empirical distribution.
Third, we perform an out-of-sample validation in which our hypothetical observer learns the
partisanship of phrases from one sample of speech and attempts to predict the party of speakers in
another. In particular, we divide the sample of speakers into five mutually exclusive partitions. For
each partition k and each estimator, we estimate the ρ t (x) terms in equation (3) using the given
estimator on the sample excluding the kth partition, and the qtR (x) and qtD (x) terms using their
empirical frequencies within the kth partition. We then average the estimates across partitions and
compare to our in-sample estimates.

5

Main Results

Figure 1 presents the time series of the maximum likelihood estimator π̂tMLE of our model, and of
the index reported by Jensen et al. (2012) computed from their publicly available data.17 Panel A
shows that the random series for π̂ MLE is far from 21 , indicating that the bias in the MLE is severe in
practice. Variation over time in the magnitude of the bias dominates the series, leading the random
series and the real series to be highly correlated. Taking the MLE at face value, we would conclude
17 Downloaded

from http://www.brookings.edu/∼/media/Projects/BPEA/Fall-2012/Jensen-Data.zip?la=en on March
25, 2016. In the Online Appendix, we show that the dynamics of π̂tMLE in Jensen et al.’s (2012) data are similar to
those in our own data, which is reassuring as Jensen et al. (2012) obtain the Congressional Record independently,
use different processing algorithms, and use a vocabulary of three-word phrases rather than two-word phrases.

16

that language was much more partisan in the past and that the upward trend in recent years is small
by historical standards.
Because bias is a finite-sample property, it is natural to expect that the severity of the bias in
π̂tMLE in a given session t depends on the amount of speech—i.e., on the verbosities mit of speakers
in that session. The Online Appendix shows that this is indeed the case: a first-order approximation
to the bias in π̂tMLE as a function of verbosity follows a similar path to the random series in Panel
A of Figure 1, and the dynamics of π̂tMLE are similar to those in the real series when we allow

verbosity to follow its empirical distribution but fix phrase frequencies qtR , qtD at those observed
in a particular session t ∗ . The Online Appendix also shows that while the severity of the bias falls
as we exclude less frequently spoken phrases, very severe sample restrictions are needed to control
bias, and a significant time-varying bias remains even when we exclude 99 percent of phrases from
our calculations.18
Panel B of Figure 1 shows that the Jensen et al. (2012) polarization measure behaves similarly
to the MLE. The plot for the real series replicates the published version. The random series is far
from 0, and the real and random series both trend downward in the first part of the sample period.
Jensen et al. (2012) conclude that polarization has been increasing recently, but that it was as high
or higher in earlier years. The results in Panel B suggest that the second part of this conclusion
could be an artifact of the finite-sample mechanics of their index.
Figure 2 presents our main estimates. Panel A shows the leave-out estimator π̂tLO . The random
series suggests that the leave-out correction largely purges the estimator of bias: the series is close
to

1
2

throughout the period.

Panel B presents our preferred penalized estimator, including controls for covariates xit . Estimates for the random series indicate minimal bias. The Online Appendix shows that the use of
regularization is the key to the performance of this estimator: imposing only a minimal penalty
(i.e., setting λ ≈ 0) leads, as expected, to behavior similar to that of the MLE. The Online Appendix also shows that, in contrast to the MLE, the dynamics of our proposed estimators cannot be
explained by changes in verbosity over time.
Looking at the data through the sharper lens of the leave-out and penalized estimators reveals
that partisanship was low and relatively constant until the early 1990s, then exploded, reaching
unprecedented heights in recent years. This is a dramatically different picture than one would infer
from the MLE or the Jensen et al. (2012) series. The sharp increase in partisanship is much larger
18 Across

the sessions in our data, the 99th percentile phrase is spoken between 40 and 192 times per session.

17

than the width of the subsampling confidence intervals.
The increase is also large in magnitude. Recall that average partisanship is the posterior that a
neutral observer expects to assign to a speaker’s true party after hearing a single phrase. Figure 3
extends this concept to show the expected posterior for speeches of various lengths. An average
one-minute speech in our data contains around 33 phrases (after pre-processing). In 1874, an
observer hearing such a speech would expect to have a posterior of around 0.54 on the speaker’s
true party, only slightly above the prior of 0.5. By 1990, this value increased slightly to 0.57.
Between 1990 and 2008, however, it leaped up to 0.73.
Figure 4 presents the out-of-sample validation exercise described in Section 4.5 for the MLE,
leave-out, and penalized estimators. We find that the MLE greatly overstates partisanship relative
to its out-of-sample counterpart. Based on the in-sample estimate one would expect an observer
to be able to infer a speaker’s party with considerable accuracy, but when tested out of sample the
predictive power turns out to be vastly overstated. In contrast, both the leave-out and penalized
estimators achieve values quite close to their out-of-sample counterparts, as desired.
In Figure 2, the penalized estimates in Panel B imply lower partisanship than the leave-out
estimates in Panel A. Sampling experiments in the Online Appendix show that the bias in the
leave-out estimator is slightly positive, likely due to excluding controls for covariates, and that the
bias in the penalized estimator is negative, possibly due to conservative overpenalization.
The Online Appendix presents a range of alternative series based on variants of our baseline
model, estimator, and sample. Removing covariates leads to greater estimated partisanship while
adding more controls or speaker random effects leads to lower estimated partisanship, though all of
these variants imply a large rise in partisanship following the 1990s. Dropping the South from the
sample does not meaningfully change the estimates, nor does excluding data from early decades.
Using only the early decades or holding constant the number of congresspeople in each session
somewhat increases our estimates of partisanship and bias, leaving the difference between the real
and random series in line with our preferred estimates.

6
6.1

Unpacking Partisanship
Partisan Phrases

Our model provides a natural way to define the partisanship of an individual phrase. For an observer with a neutral prior, the expected posterior that a speaker with characteristics xit is Repub18

lican is

1
2

=

1
2


qtR (xit ) + qtD (xit ) · ρ t (xit ). If, unbeknownst to the observer, phrase j is removed

from the vocabulary, the change in the expected posterior is
1 1
−
2 2 k6∑
=j

qRkt (xit )
qD
kt (xit )
+
R
1 − q jt (xit ) 1 − qDjt (xit )

!
ρkt (xit ).

We define the partisanship ζ jt of phrase j in session t to be the average of this value across all
active speakers i in session t. This measure has both direction and magnitude: positive numbers
are Republican phrases, negative numbers are Democratic phrases, and the absolute value gives
the magnitude of partisanship.
Table 1 lists the ten most partisan phrases in every tenth session plus the most recent session.
The Online Appendix shows the list for all sessions. These lists illustrate the underlying variation
driving our measure, and give a sense of how partisan speech has changed over time. In the Online
Appendix, we argue in detail that the top phrases in each of these sessions align closely with
the policy positions and narrative strategies of the parties, confirming that our measure is indeed
picking up partisanship rather than some other dimension that happens to be correlated with it. In
this section, we highlight a few illustrative examples.
The 50th session of Congress (1887-88) occurred in a period where the cleavages of the Civil
War and Reconstruction Era were still fresh. Republican phrases like “union soldier” and “confeder soldier” relate to the ongoing debate over provision for veterans, echoing the 1888 Republican platform’s commitment to show “[the] gratitude of the Nation to the defenders of the Union.”
The Republican phrase “color men” reflects the ongoing importance of racial issues. Many Democratic phrases from this Congress (“increase duti,” “ad valorem,” “high protect,” “tariff tax,” “high
tariff”) reflect a debate over reductions in trade barriers. The 1888 Democratic platform endorses
tariff reduction in its first sentence, whereas the Republican platform says Republicans are “uncompromisingly in favor of the American system of protection.”
The 80th session (1947-1948) convened in the wake of the Second World War. Many Republicanleaning phrases relate to the war and national defense (“arm forc,” “air forc,” “coast guard,” “stop
communism,” “foreign countri”), whereas “unit nation” is the only foreign-policy-related phrase
in the top ten Democratic phrases in the 80th session. The 1948 Democratic Party platform advocates amending the Fair Labor Standards Act to raise the minimum wage from 40 to 75 cents
an hour (“labor standard,” “standard act,” “depart labor,” “collect bargain,” “concili servic”).19 By
19 The

Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service was created in 1947 and was “given the mission of preventing

19

contrast, the Republican platform of the same year does not mention the Fair Labor Standards Act
or the minimum wage.
Language in the 110th session (2007-2008) follows familiar partisan divides. Republicans
focus on taxes (“tax increas,” “rais tax,” “tax rate”) and immigration (“illeg immigr”), while
Democrats focus on the aftermath of the war in Iraq (“war iraq”, “troop iraq”) and social domestic policy (“african american,” “children health,” “middl class”). With regards to energy policy,
Republicans focus on the potential of American energy (“natural gas,” “american energi,” “outer
continent,” “continent shelf”), while Democrats focus on the role of oil companies (“oil compani”).
The phrases from the 114th session (2015-2016) relate to current partisan cleavages and echo
themes in the 2016 presidential election. Republicans focus on terrorism, discussing “al qaeda”
and using the phrase “radic islam,” which echoes Donald Trump’s use of the phrase “radical Islamic terrorism” during the campaign (Holley 2017). Democrats focus on climate change (“climat
chang”), civil rights issues (“african american,” “vote right”), and gun control (“gun violenc”).
When discussing public health, Republicans focus on mental health (“mental health”) in correspondence to the Republican-sponsored “Helping Familes in Mental Health Crisis Act of 2016,”
while Democrats focus on public health more broadly (“public health”), health insurance (“afford
care”), and women’s health (“plan parenthood”).
6.2

Partisanship within and between Topics

Our baseline measure of partisanship captures changes both in the topics speakers choose to discuss
and in the phrases they use to discuss them. Knowing whether a speech about taxes includes the
phrases “tax relief” or “tax breaks” will help an observer to guess the speaker’s party; so, too, will
knowing whether the speech is about taxes or about the environment. To separate these, we present
a decomposition of partisanship into within- and between-topic components using our 22 manually
defined topics.
We define between-topic partisanship to be the posterior that a neutral observer expects to
assign to a speaker’s true party when the observer knows only the topic a speaker chooses, not
the particular phrases chosen within the topic. Partisanship within a specific topic is the expected
posterior when the vocabulary consists only of phrases in that topic. The overall within-topic
partisanship in a given session is the average of partisanship across all topics, weighting each topic
or minimizing the impact of labor-management disputes on the free flow of commerce by providing mediation,
conciliation and voluntary arbitration” (see https://www.fmcs.gov/aboutus/our-history/ accessed on April 15, 2017).

20

by its frequency of occurrence.
Figure 5 shows that the rise in partisanship is driven mainly by divergence in how the parties
talk about a given substantive topic, rather than by divergence in which topics they talk about.
According to our estimates, choice of topic encodes much less information about a speaker’s party
than does choice of phrase within a topic.
Figure 6 shows estimated partisanship for phrases within each of the 22 topics. Partisanship
has increased within many topics in recent years, with the largest increases in the immigration,
crime, and religion topics. Other topics with large increases include taxes, environmental policy,
and minorities. Not all topics have become increasingly partisan in recent years. For example,
alcohol was fairly partisan in the Prohibition Era but is not especially partisan today. Figure 6 also
shows that the partisanship of a topic is not strongly related in general to the frequency with which
the topic is discussed. For example, the world wars are associated with a surge in the frequency of
discussion of defense, but not with an increase in the partisanship of that topic.
To illustrate the underlying variation at the phrase level, Figure 7 shows the evolution of the
partisanship of the four most Republican and Democratic phrases in the “tax,” “immigration,” and
“labor” topics. The plots show that the most partisan phrases become more informative about a
speaker’s party over time. Some phrases, such as “american taxpay,” have been associated with
one party since the 1950s. Others, like “tax relief” and “minimum wage,” switch between parties
before becoming strongly informative about one party during the 1990s and 2000s. A third group,
including “immigr reform” and “job creator,” is partisan only for a short period when it is relevant
to congressional debate. The Online Appendix presents similar plots for the other 19 topics.

7

Discussion

What are we to make of the dramatic increase in the partisanship of speech? The pattern we observe
suggests our language-based measure captures something quite different from ideological polarization as usually defined. In Figure 8, we compare our speech-based measure of partisanship to
the standard measure of ideological polarization based on roll-call votes (Carroll et al. 2015a). The
latter is based on an ideal-point model that places both speakers and legislation in a latent space;
polarization is the distance between the average Republican and the average Democrat along the
first dimension. Panel A shows that the dynamics of these two series are very different: though
both indicate a large increase in recent years, the roll-call series is about as high in the late nine-

21

teenth and early twentieth century as it is today, and its current upward trend begins around 1950
rather than 1990. This finding reinforces our expectation that speech and roll-call votes respond
to different incentives and constraints. Roll-call votes may be shaped by strategic considerations
related to the passage of legislation, and may therefore not reflect legislators’ sincere policy preferences. Speech may reflect party differences in values, goals, or persuasive tactics that are distinct
from positions on specific pieces of legislation. And, related to our discussion below, speech may
reflect innovations in rhetoric that have no counterpart in roll-call votes.
Panel B of Figure 8 shows that a measure of the Republican-ness of an individual’s speech from
our model and the individual Common Space DW-NOMINATE scores from the roll-call voting
data are positively correlated in the cross section. Across all sessions, the correlation between
speech and roll-call based partisanship measures is 0.537 (p = 0.000). After controlling for party,
the correlation is 0.129 and remains highly statistically significant (p = 0.000).20 Thus, members
who vote more conservatively also use more conservative language on average, even though the
time-series dynamics of voting and speech are very different. As another way to validate this
relationship, we show in the Online Appendix that average partisanship exhibits a discontinuity
in vote margin analogous to the discontinuity in vote margin of the non-Common-Space DWNOMINATE scores (Lee et al. 2004; Carroll et al. 2015b). The Online Appendix also shows
that the divergence in speech between parties in recent years is not matched by an equally large
divergence in speech between the more moderate and more extreme wings within each party.
What caused the dramatic increase in the partisanship of speech beginning in the 1990s? We
cannot provide a definitive answer, but the timing of the change shown in Panel A of Figure 9 suggests two natural hypotheses: innovation in political persuasion coinciding with the 1994 Republican takeover of the House of Representatives, and changes in the media environment including the
introduction of live broadcasts of congressional proceedings on the C-SPAN cable network.
The inflection point in the partisanship series occurs around the 104th session (1995-1996), the
first following the 1994 midterm election. This election was a watershed event in the history of
the US Congress. It brought a Republican majority to the House for the first time in more than
forty years, and was the largest net partisan gain since 1948. It “set off a political earthquake that
[would] send aftershocks rumbling through national politics for years to come” (Jacobson 1996).
The Republicans were led by future Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich, who succeeded in uniting
20 These

correlations are 0.685 (p = 0.000) and 0.212 (p = 0.000), respectively, when we use data only on speakers
who speak an average of at least 1000 phrases across the sessions in which they speak.

22

the party around a platform called the Contract with America. It specified the actions Republicans
would take upon assuming control, focusing the contest around a set of domestic issues including
taxes, crime, and government efficiency.
Innovation in language and persuasion was, by many accounts, at the center of this victory.
Assisted by the consultant Frank Luntz—who was hired by Gingrich to help craft the Contract with
America, and became famous in significant part because of his role in the 1994 campaign—the
Republicans used focus groups and polling to identify rhetoric that resonated with voters (Bai
2005).21 Important technological advances used by Luntz included instant feedback “dials” that
allowed focus group participants to respond to the content they were hearing in real time.22 Asked
in an interview whether “language can change a paradigm,” Luntz replied:
I don’t believe it—I know it. I’ve seen it with my own eyes. . . . I watched in
1994 when the group of Republicans got together and said: “We’re going to do this
completely differently than it’s ever been done before.” . . . Every politician and every
political party issues a platform, but only these people signed a contract (Luntz 2004).
A 2006 memorandum written by Luntz and distributed to Republican congressional candidates
provides detailed advice on the language to use on topics including taxes, budgets, social security,
and trade (Luntz 2006).
We can use our data to look directly at the importance of the language in the Contract with
America. We extract all phrases that appear in the text of the Contract and treat them as a single
“topic,” computing both their frequency and their partisanship in each session. Panel B of Figure
9 reports the results. As expected, the frequency of these phrases spikes in the 104th session
(1995-1996). Their partisanship rises sharply in that year and continues to increase even as their
frequency declines.23
In the years after 1994, Democrats sought to replicate what they perceived to have been a
highly successful Republican strategy. George Lakoff, a linguist who advised Democrats, writes:
21 By

his own description, Luntz specializes in “testing language and finding words that will help his clients . . . turn
public opinion on an issue or a candidate” (Luntz 2004). A memo called “Language: A Key Mechanism of Control”
circulated in 1994 to Republican candidates under a cover letter from Gingrich stating that the memo contained
“tested language from a recent series of focus groups” (GOPAC 1994).
22 Luntz said, “[The dial technology is] like an X-ray that gets inside [the subject’s] head . . . it picks out every single
word, every single phrase [that the subject hears], and you know what works and what doesn’t” (Luntz 2004).
23 According to the metric defined in Table 1, the most Republican phrases in the 104th session (1995-1996) that
appear in the Contract are “american peopl,” “tax increas,” “term limit,” “lineitem veto,” “tax relief,” “save account,” “creat job,” “tax credit,” “wast fraud,” and “fiscal respons.” We accessed the text of the Contract at
http://wps.prenhall.com/wps/media/objects/434/445252/DocumentsLibrary/docs/contract.htm on May 18, 2016.

23

“Republican framing superiority had played a major role in their takeover of Congress in 1994. I
and others had hoped that . . . a widespread understanding of how framing worked would allow
Democrats to reverse the trend” (Lakoff 2014).
The new attention to crafting language coincided with attempts to impose greater party discipline in speech. In the 101st session (1989-1991), the Democrats established the “Democratic
Message Board” which would “defin[e] a cohesive national Democratic perspective” (quoted from
party documents in Harris 2013). The “Republican Theme Team” formed in the 102nd session
(1991-1993) sought likewise to “develop ideas and phrases to be used by all Republicans” (Michel
1993 and quoted in Harris 2013). Many scholars of the US Congress find that, over the last few
decades, the two parties have increasingly aimed to have a disciplined and centralized strategy
for public communication (Sinclair 2006; Malecha and Reagan 2012; Lee 2016a). A quantitative
signal of this trend, displayed in Panel A of Figure 9, is the increasing fraction of Congressional
leadership staff dedicated to communications roles, a fact that Lee (2016a) attributes in part to
majority control of the chambers becoming more contested.
Consistent with a trend towards greater party discipline in language, the Online Appendix
shows that the recent increase in partisanship is concentrated in a small minority of highly partisan
phrases. The figure plots quantiles of the estimated average value of the partisanship of all individual phrases in each session. The plot shows a marked increase in the partisanship of the highest
quantiles, while even the quantiles at 0.9 and 0.99 remain relatively flat.
In a similar vein, the Online Appendix shows that a vocabulary consisting of neologisms—which
we define to be phrases first spoken in our data after 1980 (the 96th session)—exhibits very high
and sharply rising partisanship. The figure also shows that a large increase in partisanship remains
even when we exclude neologisms from the choice set.
Changes in the media environment may also have contributed to the increase in partisanship.24
Prior to the late 1970s, television cameras were only allowed on the floor of Congress for special
hearings and events. With the introduction of the C-SPAN cable network to the House in 1979,
and the C-SPAN2 cable network to the Senate in 1986, every speech was recorded and broadcast
live. While live viewership of these networks has always been limited, they created a video record
of speeches that could be used for subsequent press coverage and in candidates’ advertising. This
plausibly increased the return to carefully crafted language, both by widening the reach of success-

24 Our

discussion of C-SPAN is based on Frantzich and Sullivan (1996).

24

ful sound bites, and by dialing up the cost of careless mistakes.25 The subsequent introduction of
the Fox News cable network and the increasing partisanship of cable news more generally (Martin
and Yurukoglu 2017) may have further increased this return.
The timing shown in Figure 9 is inconsistent with the C-SPAN networks being the proximate
cause of increased partisanship. But it seems likely that they provided an important complement
to linguistic innovation in the 1990s. Gingrich particularly encouraged the use of “special order”
speeches outside of the usual legislative debate protocol, which allowed congresspeople to speak
directly for the benefit of the television cameras. The importance of television in this period is
underscored by Frantzich and Sullivan (1996): “When asked whether he would be the Republican
leader without C-SPAN, Gingrich . . . [replied] ‘No’ . . . C-SPAN provided a group of media-savvy
House conservatives in the mid-1980s with a method of . . . winning a prime-time audience.”
The hypothesis that technological change strengthened the incentive for party discipline in
language offers a possible explanation for the very different dynamics of inter-party differences in
speech and in roll-call voting exhibited in Figure 8.

8

Conclusion

A consistent theme of much prior literature is that political partisanship today—both in Congress
and among voters—is not that different from what existed in the past (Glaeser and Ward 2006;
Fiorina and Abrams 2008; McCarty et al. 2015). We find that language is a striking exception:
Democrats and Republicans now speak different languages to a far greater degree than ever before.
The fact that partisan language diffuses widely through media and public discourse (Gentzkow and
Shapiro 2010; Greenstein and Zhu 2012; Jensen et al. 2012; Martin and Yurukoglu 2017) implies
that this could be true not only for congresspeople but for the American electorate more broadly.
Does growing partisanship of language matter? Although measuring the effects of language
is beyond the scope of this paper, existing evidence suggests that these effects could be profound.
Laboratory experiments show that varying the way political issues are “framed” can have large effects on public opinion across a wide range of domains including free speech (Nelson et al. 1997),
immigration (Druckman et al. 2013), climate change (Whitmarsh 2009), and taxation (Birney et al.
2006; Graetz and Shapiro 2006). Politicians routinely hire consultants to help them craft messages
for election campaigns (Johnson 2015) and policy debates (Lathrop 2003), an investment that only
25 Mixon

et al. (2001) and Mixon et al. (2003) provide evidence that the introduction of C-SPAN changed the nature
of legislative debate.

25

makes sense if language matters. Field studies reveal effects of language on outcomes including
marriage (Caminal and Di Paolo 2019), political preferences (Clots-Figueras and Masella 2013),
and savings and risk choices (Chen 2013).
Language is also one of the most fundamental cues of group identity, with differences in language or accent producing own-group preferences even in infants and young children (Kinzler et
al. 2007). Imposing a common language was a key factor in the creation of a common French identity (Weber 1976), and Catalan language education has been effective in strengthening a distinct
Catalan identity within Spain (Clots-Figueras and Masella 2013). That the two political camps in
the US increasingly speak different languages may contribute to the striking increase in inter-party
hostility evident in recent years (Iyengar et al. 2012).
Beyond our substantive findings, we propose a method that can be applied to the many settings
in which researchers wish to characterize differences in behavior between groups and the space
of possible choices is high-dimensional. To illustrate the range of such settings in the political
domain, the Online Appendix uses survey data to characterize the bias in plug-in estimates of the
partisanship of respondents’ choice of residential location, websites, and television programs, for
various sample sizes.

26

References
Alcalde-Unzu, J., and M. Vorsatz (2013): Measuring the cohesiveness of preferences: An axiomatic analysis. Social Choice and Welfare 41(4): 965–988.
Allen, R., S. Burgess, R. Davidson, and F. Windmeijer (2015): More reliable inference for the
dissimilarity index of segregation. Econometrics Journal 18(1): 40–66.
Amer, M. L. (1993): The Congressional Record; content, history, and issues. Washington DC:
Congressional Research Service. CRS Report No. 93-60 GOV.
Andrews, W., and L. Buchanan (2016): Mass shooting or terrorist attack? Depends on your party.
New York Times, June 13, 2016. Accessed at
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/06/13/us/politics/politicians-respond-to-orlandonightclub-attack.html> on June 24, 2016.
Antweiler, W., and M. Z. Frank (2004): Is all that talk just noise? The information content of
internet stock message boards. Journal of Finance 59(3): 1259–1294.
Bai, M. (2005): The framing wars. New York Times, July 17, 2005. Accessed at
<http://www.nytimes.com/2005/07/17/magazine/the-framing-wars.html> on June 16, 2016.
Baker, S. G. (1994): The multinomial-Poisson transformation. The Statistician: 495-504.
Ball, M. (2013): Don’t call it ’gun control’. The Atlantic, January 16, 2013. Accessed at
<https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2013/01/dont-call-it-gun-control/267259/> on
July 23, 2018.
Ballester, C., and M. Vorsatz (2014): Random walk-based segregation measures. Review of Economics and Statistics 96(3): 383–401.
Bayer, P., R. McMillan, and K. Rueben (2002): An equilibrium model of sorting in an urban
housing market: A study of the causes and consequences of residential segregation. NBER
Working Paper No. 10865.
Bertrand, M., and E. Kamenica (2018): Coming apart? Cultural distances in the United States over
time. University of Chicago mimeo.
Birney, M., M. J. Graetz, and I. Shapiro (2006): Public opinion and the push to repeal the estate
tax. National Tax Journal 59(3): 439-461.
Blei, D. M., and J. D. Lafferty (2007): A correlated topic model of science. The Annals of Applied
Statistics: 17-35.
Caminal, R., and A. Di Paolo (2019): Your language or mine? The noncommunicative benefits of
language skills. Economic Inquiry 57(1): 726-750.
Carrington, W. J., and K. R. Troske (1997): On measuring segregation in samples with small units.
Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 15(4): 402–409.
Carroll, R., J. Lewis, J. Lo, N. McCarty, K. Poole, and H. Rosenthal (2015a): “Common Space”

27

DW-NOMINATE scores with bootstrapped standard errors. Accessed at
<http://www.voteview.com/dwnomin joint house and senate.htm> on November 18, 2016.
— (2015b): DW-NOMINATE scores with bootstrapped standard errors. Accessed at
<http://www.voteview.com/dwnomin.htm> on March 30, 2017.
Chandra, A., D. Cutler, and Z. Song (2012): “Who ordered that? The economics of treatment
choices in medical care,” in Handbook of Health Economics, vol. 2, Mark V. Pauly, Thomas
G. McGuire, and Pedro P. Barros, eds. (Amsterdam: Elsevier).
Chatterjee, A., and S. N. Lahiri (2011): Bootstrapping lasso estimators. Journal of the American
Statistical Association 106(494): 608-625.
Chen, M. K. (2013): The effect of language on economic behavior: Evidence from savings rates,
health behaviors, and retirement assets. American Economic Review 103(2): 690-731.
Chong, D., and J. N. Druckman (2007): Framing public opinion in competitive democracies.
American Political Science Review 101(4): 637–655.
Clots-Figueras, I., and P. Masella. (2013): Education, language and identity. The Economic Journal 123(570): F332-F357.
Cortese, C. F., R. F. Falk, and J. K. Cohen (1976): Further considerations on the methodological
analysis of segregation indices. American Sociological Review 41(4): 630–637.
Cutler, D. M., E. L. Glaeser, and J. L. Vigdor (1999): The rise and decline of the American ghetto.
Journal of Political Economy 107(3): 455–506.
D’Haultfœuille, X., and R. Rathelot (2017): Measuring segregation on small units: A partial identification analysis. Quantitative Economics 8: 39-73.
Davis, D., J. I. Dingel, J. Monras, and E. Morales (Forthcoming): How segregated is urban consumption? Journal of Political Economy.
Druckman, J. N., E. Peterson, and R, Slothuus (2013): How elite partisan polarization affects
public opinion formation. American Political Science Review 107(1): 57-79.
Echenique, F., and R. G. Fryer Jr (2007): A measure of segregation based on social interactions.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(2): 441–485.
Economist (2013): The war of the words. The Economist, July 13, 2013. Accessed at
<https://www.economist.com/united-states/2013/07/13/the-war-of-the-words> on July 23, 2018.
Ellison, G., and E. L. Glaeser (1997): Geographic concentration in US manufacturing industries:
A dartboard approach. Journal of Political Economy 105(5): 889–927.
Fiorina, M. P., and S. J. Abrams (2008): Political polarization in the American public. Annual
Review of Political Science 11: 563-588.
Flaxman, S., S. Goel, and J. Rao (2016): Filter bubbles, echo chambers, and online news consumption. Public Opinion Quarterly, 80: 298-320.
Fossett, M. (2011): Generative models of segregation: Investigating model-generated patterns
28

of residential segregation by ethnicity and socioeconomic status. Journal of Mathematical
Sociology 35(1–3): 114–145.
Frankel, D. M., and O. Volij (2011): Measuring school segregation. Journal of Economic Theory
146(1): 1–38.
Frantzich, S., and J. Sullivan (1996): The C-SPAN revolution. Norman OK: University of Oklahoma Press.
Gentzkow, M., and J. M. Shapiro (2010): What drives media slant? Evidence from U.S. daily
newspapers. Econometrica 78(1): 35–71.
— (2011): Ideological segregation online and offline. Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(4):
1799–1839.
Gentzkow, M., J. M. Shapiro, and M. Taddy (2017): Measuring polarization in high-dimensional
data: Method and application to congressional speech. NBER Working Paper No. 22423.
Gentzkow, M., B. T. Kelly, and M. Taddy (Forthcoming): Text as data. Journal of Economic
Literature.
Groseclose, T., and J. Milyo (2005): A measure of media bias. Quarterly Journal of Economics
120(4): 1191-1237.
Gingrich, N., and D. Armey (1994): Contract with America.
Glaeser, E. L., and B. A. Ward (2006): Myths and realities of American political geography. The
Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(2): 119-144.
GOPAC (1994): Language: A key mechanism of control. Memo. Accessed at
<http://fair.org/extra/language-a-key-mechanism-of-control/> on March 30, 2017.
Graetz, M. J., and I. Shapiro (2006): Death by a thousand cuts: The fight over taxing inherited
wealth. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Greenstein, S., and F. Zhu (2012): Is Wikipedia biased? American Economic Review: Papers and
Proceedings. 102(3): 343-348.
Grimmer, J. (2010): A Bayesian hierarchical topic model for political texts: Measuring expressed
agendas in Senate press releases. Political Analysis 18(1): 1–35.
Haberman, S. J. (1973): Log-linear models for frequency data: Sufficient statistics and likelihood
equations. Annals of Statistics 1(4): 617–632.
Haas, K. L. (2015): Rules of the House of Representatives — one hundred fourteenth Congress.
Accessed at <http://clerk.house.gov/legislative/house-rules.pdf> on March 1, 2017.
Harris, D. B. (2013): Let’s play hardball: Congressional partisanship in the television era. In
Politics to the extreme: American political institutions in the twenty-first century, ed. Scott A.
Frisch and Sean Q. Kelly, 93-115. New York: Palgrave MacMillan.
Holley, P. (2017): ‘Radical Islamic terrorism’: Three words that separate Trump from most of
Washington. Washington Post, March 1, 2017. Accessed at
29

<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2017/02/28/radical-islamic-terrorismthree-words-that-separate-trump-from-most-of-washington/?utm term=.055e7d927bcf> on May
15, 2017.
Issenberg, S. (2012): The death of the hunch. Slate, May 22, 2012. Accessed at consistently
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news and politics/victory lab/2012/05/obama campaign ads
how the analyst institute is helping him hone his message .html> on June 16, 2016.
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR) and C. McKibbin (1997):
Roster of United States congressional officeholders and biographical characteristics of members of the United States Congress, 1789-1996: merged data. ICPSR07803-v10. ICPSR
Study No. 7803. Accessed at <http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ICPSR/studies/7803>
on March 1, 2017.
Iyengar, S., G. Sood, and Y. Lelkes (2012): Affect, not ideology a social identity perspective of
polarization. Public Opinion Quarterly 76(3): 405-431.
Jacobson, G. C. (1996): The 1994 House elections in perspective. Political Science Quaterly
111(2): 203–223.
Jensen, J., S. Naidu, E. Kaplan, and L. Wilse-Samson (2012): Political polarization and the dynamics of political language: Evidence from 130 years of partisan speech. Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity: 1–81.
Johnson, C. W. (1997): House rules and manual—one hundred fifth Congress. Washington DC:
U.S. Government Printing Office. H. Doc. no. 104-272.
Johnson, D. W. (2015): Political consultants and American elections: Hired to fight, hired to win.
Routledge.
Kim, I. S., J, Londregan, and M. Ratkovic (2018): Estimating ideal points from votes and text.
Political Analysis 26(2): 210-229.
King, G. (1995): Elections to the United States House of Representatives, 1898-1992. ICPSR
version. Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research. Accessed at
<http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ICPSR/studies/6311> on April 7, 2017.
Kinzler, K. D., E. Dupoux, and E. S. Spelke (2007): The native language of social cognition.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104(30): 12577-12580.
Lakoff, G. (2003): Framing the issues: UC Berkeley professor George Lakoff tells how conservatives use language to dominate politics. UC Berkeley News, October 27, 2003. Accessed at
<http://www.berkeley.edu/news/media/releases/2003/10/27 lakoff.shtml> on June 16, 2016.
— (2004): Don’t think of an elephant! Know your values and frame the debate the essential guide
for progressives. White River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green.
— (2014): The all new don’t think of an elephant!: Know your values and frame the debate. White
River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green.
30

Lathrop, D. A. (2003): The campaign continues: How political consultants and campaign tactics
affect public policy. ABC-CLIO.
Lauderdale, B. E., and A. Herzog (2016): Measuring political positions from legislative speech.
Political Analysis 24(3): 374-394.
Laver, M., K. Benoit, and J. Garry (2003): Extracting policy positions from political texts using
words as data. American Political Science Review 97(2): 311–331.
Lee, D. S., E. Moretti, and M. J. Butler (2004): Do voters affect or elect policies? Evidence from
the U.S. House. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 119(3): 807–859.
Lee, F. (2016a): Legislative parties in an era of alternating majorities. Chapter. In Governing in a
Polarized Age: Elections, Parties, and Political Representation in America, edited by Alan S.
Gerber and Eric Schickler, 115-42. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
— (2016b): Insecure Majorities: Congress and the Perpetual Campaign. Chicago, IL: University
of Chicago Press.
Logan, J. R., A. Foster, J. Ke, and F. Li (2018): The uptick in income segregation: Real trend or
random sampling variation? American Journal of Sociology 124(1): 185-222.
Luntz, F. I. (2004): Interview Frank Luntz. Frontline, November 9, 2004. Accessed at
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/persuaders/interviews/luntz.html>
on June 16, 2016.
— (2006): The new American lexicon. Luntz Research Companies. Accessed at
<https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B 2I29KBujFwNWY2MzZmZjctMjdmOS00ZGRhLWEy
Y2MtMGE1MDMyYzVjYWM2/view> on June 16, 2016.
Malecha, G. L., and D. J. Reagan (2012): The Public Congress: Congressional Deliberation in a
New Media Age. New York, NY: Routledge.
Martin, G. J., and A. Yurukoglu (2017): Bias in cable news: Persuasion and polarization. American
Economic Review 107(9): 2565-2599.
Martis, K. C. (1989): The Historical Atlas of Political Parties in the United States Congress, 17891989. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company.
McCardell, J. M., Jr (2004): Reflections on the Civil War. Sewanee Review 122(2): 295-303.
McCarty, N., K. Poole, and H. Rosenthal (2015): The polarization of congressional parties. Voteview, March 21, 2015. Accessed at
<http://voteview.com/political polarization 2014.html> on June 16, 2016.
Mele, A. (2013): Poisson indices of segregation. Regional Science and Urban Economics 43(1):
65–85.
— (2017): A structural model of segregation in social networks. Econometrica 85(3): 825-850.
Michel, R. H. (1993): The theme team. Accessed at
<http://www.robertmichel.name/RHM blueprint/blueprint Theme%20Team.pdf> on June 16,
31

2016.
Mixon, F. G., Jr., D. L. Hobson, and K. P. Upadhyaya (2001): Gavel-to-gavel congressional television coverage as political advertising: The impact of C-SPAN on legislative sessions. Economic Inquiry 39(3): 351-364.
Mixon, F. G., Jr., M. T. Gibson, and K. P. Upadhyaya (2003): Has legislative television changed
legislator behavior? C-SPAN2 and the frequency of Senate filibustering. Public Choice
115(1): 139-162.
Mosteller, F. and D. L. Wallace (1963): Inference in an authorship problem. Journal of the American Statistical Association 58(302): 275–309.
Nelson, T. E., R. A. Clawson, and Z. M. Oxley (1997): Media framing of a civil liberties conflict
and its effect on tolerance. American Political Science Review 91(3): 567–583.
Orwell, G. (1946): Politics and the English language. Horizon 13(76): 252–265.
Palmgren, J. (1981): The Fisher information matrix for log linear models arguing conditionally on
observed explanatory variables. Biometrika 68 (2): 563-566.
Peterson, A., and A. Spirling (2018): Classification accuracy as a substantive quantity of interest:
Measuring polarization in Westminster systems. Political Analysis 26: 120-128.
Politis, D. N., J. P. Romano, and M. Wolf (1999): Subsampling. New York: Springer series in
statistics.
Poole, K. T., and H. Rosenthal (1985): A spatial model for legislative roll call analysis. American
Journal of Political Science 29(2): 357–384.
Porter, M. (2009): The English (Porter2) stemming algorithm. Accessed at
<http://snowball.tartarus.org/algorithms/english/stemmer.html> on March 31, 2017.
Rathelot, R. (2012): Measuring segregation when units are small: A parametric approach. Journal
of Business & Economic Statistics 30(4): 546–533.
Reardon, S. F., and G. Firebaugh (2002): Measures of multigroup segregation. Sociological
Methodology 32(1): 33–67.
Santos Silva, J. M. C., and S. Tenreyro (2010): On the existence of the maximum likelihood
estimates in Poisson regression. Economics Letters 107(2): 310–312.
Sinclair, B. (2006): Party Wars: Polarization and the Politics of National Policy Making. Norman,
OK: University of Oklahoma Press.
Taddy, M. (2013): Multinomial inverse regression for text analysis. Journal of the American
Statistical Association 108(503): 755–770.
— (2015): Distributed multinomial regression. The Annals of Applied Statistics 9(3): 1394-1414.
Tetlock, P. C. (2007): Giving content to investor sentiment: The role of media in the stock market.
Journal of Finance 62(3): 1139–1168.
Tibshirani, R. (1996): Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal of the Royal
32

Statistical Society, Series B (Methodological) 58(1): 267–288.
Weber, E. (1976): Peasants into Frenchmen: The modernization of rural France 1870-1914. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
White, M. J. (1986): Segregation and diversity measures in population distribution. Population
Index 52(2): 198–221.
Whitmarsh, L. (2009): What’s in a name? Commonalities and differences in public understanding
of “climate change” and “global warming”. Public Understanding of Science 18(4): 401-420.
Yan, H., S. Das, A. Lavoie, S. Li, and B. Sinclair (2018): The congressional classification challenge: Domain specificity and partisan intensity. Washington University of St. Louis Working
Paper. Accessed at
<https://www.cse.wustl.edu/∼sanmay/papers/partisanship-from-text.pdf> on January 11, 2019.
Zou, H., T. Hastie, and R. Tibshirani (2007): On the “degrees of freedom” of the lasso. Annals of
Statistics 35(5): 2173–2192.

33

Table 1: Most Partisan Phrases by Session
Session 50 (1887-1888)
Republican
sixth street
union soldier
color men
railroad compani
great britain
confeder soldier
other citizen
much get
paper claim
sugar trust

#R
22
33
27
85
121
18
13
12
9
16

#D
0
13
10
70
107
4
0
1
0
7

Democratic
cutleri compani
labor cost
increas duti
cent ad
public domain
ad valorem
feder court
high protect
tariff tax
high tariff

Session 60 (1907-1908)
#R
0
11
11
35
20
61
11
6
11
6

#D
72
37
34
54
39
78
25
18
23
16

Republican
postal save
census offic
reserv balanc
war depart
secretari navi
secretari agricultur
pay pension
boat compani
twelfth census
forestri servic

Session 70 (1927-1928)
Republican
war depart
take care
foreign countri
muscl shoal
steam plant
nation guard
air corp
creek dam
cove creek
american ship

#R
97
105
54
97
25
39
32
25
30
29

#D
63
72
28
71
3
18
12
6
13
12

Democratic
pension also
american peopl
radio commiss
spoken drama
civil war
trade commiss
feder trade
wave length
imperi valley
flowag right

#R
35
26
11
23
13
21
45
14
14
11

#D
20
14
0
12
2
11
35
4
4
1

Democratic
human right
unit nation
men women
world war
feder reserv
million american
arm forc
high school
gun control
air pollut

#D
163
91
44
30
54
46
45
25
28
20

Republican
depart agricultur
foreign countri
steam plant
coast guard
state depart
air forc
stop communism
nation debt
pay roll
arm forc

#R
87
77
147
44
34
34
132
33
32
26

#D
20
20
105
10
3
7
106
8
8
4

Democratic
dog coalit
war iraq
african american
american peopl
oil compani
civil war
troop iraq
children health
nobid contract
middl class

Democratic
canal zone
also petit
standard oil
indirect contempt
bureau corpor
panama canal
nation govern
coal mine
revis tariff
feet lake

#R
18
0
4
0
5
23
12
9
8
0

#D
66
47
25
19
24
41
30
27
26
17

#R
67
49
34
34
117
88
22
43
34
63

#D
31
22
7
9
93
69
3
25
17
47

Democratic
unit nation
calumet region
concili servic
labor standard
depart labor
collect bargain
standard act
polish peopl
budget estim
employ servic

#R
119
0
3
16
24
15
11
4
22
25

#D
183
30
31
41
46
35
31
20
38
41

Session 100 (1987-1988)
#R
7
49
20
57
26
15
25
19
10
18

#D
44
75
34
71
39
27
37
30
22
29

Republican
judg bork
freedom fighter
state depart
human right
minimum wage
reserv object
demand second
tax increas
pay rais
plant close

#D
90
78
62
278
65
45
39
42
24
39

Republican
american peopl
al qaeda
men women
side aisl
human traffick
colleagu support
religi freedom
taxpay dollar
mental health
radic islam

Session 110 (2007-2008)
Republican
tax increas
natur gas
reserv balanc
rais tax
american energi
illeg immigr
side aisl
continent shelf
outer continent
tax rate

#D
3
2
12
39
39
36
2
8
0
7

Session 80 (1947-1948)
#R
0
51
8
0
27
19
19
6
12
5

Session 90 (1967-1968)
Republican
job corp
trust fund
antelop island
treasuri depart
federalaid highway
tax credit
state depart
oblig author
highway program
invest act

#R
39
31
36
62
62
58
20
24
14
20

#R
226
36
59
101
37
23
13
20
21
37

#D
14
8
35
78
19
8
1
10
11
28

Democratic
persian gulf
contra aid
star war
central american
aid contra
nuclear wast
american peopl
interest rate
presid budget
feder reserv

#R
30
12
1
17
17
14
97
24
11
12

#D
47
28
14
30
30
27
109
35
21
22

Session 114 (2015-2016)
#R
0
18
6
230
20
17
11
17
0
15

#R
327
50
123
133
60
123
34
47
59
22

#D
205
7
83
93
26
89
4
19
32
0

Democratic
homeland secur
climat chang
gun violenc
african american
vote right
public health
depart homeland
plan parenthood
afford care
puerto rico

#R
96
23
3
11
2
24
48
66
40
42

#D
205
94
74
71
62
83
93
104
77
79

Notes: Calculations are based on our preferred specification in Panel B of Figure 2. The table shows the Republican
and Democratic phrases with the greatest magnitude of estimated partisanship ζ jt , as defined in Section 6.1, alongside
the predicted number of occurrences of each phrase per 100,000 phrases spoken by Republicans or Democrats. Phrases
with positive values of ζ jt are listed as Republican and those with negative values are listed as Democratic.

34

Figure 1: Average Partisanship and Polarization of Speech, Plug-in Estimates

Panel A: Partisanship from Maximum Likelihood Estimator (π̂tMLE )
real

0.64

random

Average partisanship

0.62

0.60

0.58

0.56

0.54
1870

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

Panel B: Polarization from Jensen et al. (2012)
real

Standardized polarization

3

random

2

1

0

−1

1870

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

Notes: Panel A plots the average partisanship series from the maximum likelihood estimator π̂tMLE defined in Section 4.1. “Real” series is from
actual data; “random” series is from hypothetical data in which each speaker’s party is randomly assigned with the probability that the speaker is
Republican equal to the average share of speakers who are Republican in the sessions in which the speaker is active. The shaded region around each
series represents a pointwise confidence interval obtained via subsampling (Politis et al. 1999). Specifically, we randomly draw speakers without
replacement to create 100 subsamples each containing (up to integer restrictions) one-tenth of all speakers and, for each subsample k, we compute
the MLE estimate π̂tk . Let τk be the number of speakers in the kth √
subsample and let τ be the number
√ of speakers in the full sample. Then the
confidence interval on the MLE is 12 + (exp[log(π̂t − 12 ) − (Qtk )(90) / τ], exp[log(π̂t − 21 ) − (Qtk )(11) / τ]), where (Qtk )(b) is the bth order statistic

√
1
l ] − 1 ) . Panel B plots the standardized measure of polarization from Jensen et al. (2012). Polarization
of Qtk = τk log(π̂tk − 12 ) − log([ 100
∑100
l=1 π̂t 
2


in session t is defined as ∑ m jt ρ jt ∑mlt where ρ jt = corr ci jt , 1i∈Rt ; the series is standardized by subtracting its mean and dividing by its
j

l

standard deviation. “Real” series reproduces the polarization series in Figure 3B of Jensen et al. (2012) using the replication data for that paper;
“random” series uses the same data but randomly assigns each speaker’s party with the probability that the speaker is Republican equal to the
average share of speakers who are Republican in the sessions in which the speaker is active.

35

Figure 2: Average Partisanship of Speech, Leave-out and Penalized Estimates

Panel A: Partisanship from Leave-out Estimator (π̂tLO )
real

0.54

random

Average partisanship

0.53

0.52

0.51

0.50

0.49
1870

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

Panel B: Partisanship from Preferred Penalized Estimator (π̂t∗ )
0.514

real

random

Average partisanship

0.512
0.510
0.508
0.506
0.504
0.502
0.500
1870

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

Notes: Panel A plots the average partisanship series from the leave-out estimator π̂tLO defined in Section 4.2. Panel B plots the average partisanship
series from our preferred penalized estimator π̂t∗ defined in Section 4.3. In each plot, the “real” series is from actual data and the “random” series is
from hypothetical data in which each speaker’s party is randomly assigned with the probability that the speaker is Republican equal to the average
share of speakers who are Republican in the sessions in which the speaker is active. The shaded region around each series represents a pointwise
confidence interval obtained via subsampling (Politis et al. 1999). Specifically, we randomly draw speakers without replacement to create 100
subsamples each containing (up to integer restrictions) one-tenth of all speakers and, for each subsample k, we compute the leave-out estimate π̂tk
and the penalized estimate π̂t∗k . Let τk be the number of speakers in the kth√subsample and let τ√be the number of speakers in the full sample.
Then the confidence interval on the leave-out estimator is (π̂tLO − (Qtk )(90) / τ, π̂tLO − (Qtk )(11) / τ), where (Qtk )(b) is the bth order statistic of

√
√
1
1
1
1
l
∗
∗k
∗
Qtk = τk π̂tk − 100
∑100
l=1 π̂t . The confidence interval on the penalized estimator is 2 + (exp[log(π̂t − 2 ) − (Qt )(90) / τ], exp[log(π̂t − 2 ) −
√
√
1
1
1
100 ∗l
∗k
∗k
∗k
∗k
(Qt )(11) / τ]) where (Qt )(b) is the bth order statistic of Qt = τk log(π̂t − 2 ) − log([ 100 ∑l=1 π̂t ] − 2 ) .

36

Figure 3: Informativeness of Speech by Speech Length and Session

1.0

1873−1874
1989−1990
2007−2008

One minute
of speech

Expected posterior

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5
0

20

40
60
Number of phrases

80

100

Notes: For each speaker i and session t we calculate, given characteristics xit , the expected posterior that an
observer with a neutral prior would place on a speaker’s true party after hearing a given number of phrases
drawn according to our preferred specification in Panel B of Figure 2. We perform this calculation by Monte
Carlo simulation and plot the average across speakers for each given session and length of speech. The
vertical line shows the average number of phrases in one minute of speech. We calculate this by sampling
95 morning-hour debate speeches across the 2nd session of the 111th Congress and the 1st session of the
114th Congress. We use https://www.c-span.org/ to calculate the time-length of each speech and to obtain
the text of the Congressional Record associated with each speech, from which we obtain the count of phrases
in our main vocabulary following the procedure outlined in Section 2. The vertical line shows the average
ratio, across speeches, of the phrase count to the number of minutes of speech.

37

Figure 4: Out-of-sample Validation

Panel A: Maximum Likelihood Estimator

Average partisanship

0.65

in−sample

out−of−sample

0.60

0.55

0.50
1870

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

1990

2010

1990

2010

Panel B: Leave-out Estimator
0.54

in−sample

out−of−sample

Average partisanship

0.53

0.52

0.51

0.50
1870

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

Panel C: Penalized Estimator

Average partisanship

0.515

in−sample

out−of−sample

0.510

0.505

0.500
1870

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

ρ t (S), q̂tR (S), and q̂tD (S) be functions estimated using the maximum likelihood estimator on a sample of speakers S. Let ρ̂
ρ t∗ (S),
Notes: Let ρ̂
∗R
∗D
q̂t (S), and q̂t (S) be functions estimated using our preferred penalized estimator on sample S and evaluated at the sample mean of the covariates in session t and sample S. Let S = ∪t (Rt ∪ Dt ) be the full sample of speakers and let S k for k = 1, ..., K denote K = 5 mutually
exclusive partitions (“folds”) of S, with S −k = S \ S k denoting the sample excluding the kth fold. For P ∈ {R, D}, denote Pk,t = S k ∩ Pt and


q̃tP S k = |P1 | ∑i∈Pk,t q̂i,t S k . The lines labeled “in-sample” in Panels A, B, and C present the in-sample estimated partisanship using the maxk,t
imum likelihood estimator, leave-out estimator, and our preferred penalized estimator. These are the same as in Figure 1 and Figure 2. The line
labeled “out-of-sample”
A presents
the average,
across folds,
 1 R in Panel



 of the out-of-sample estimated partisanship using the maximum likelihood
ρ t S −k + 12 q̂tD S k · 1 − ρ̂
ρ t S −k . The line labeled “out-of-sample” in Panel B presents the average, across
estimator: K1 ∑K
k=1 2 q̂t S k · ρ̂
1 R




ρ t S −k + 12 q̃tD S k · 1 − ρ̂
ρ t S −k , which
folds, of the out-of-sample estimated partisanship using the leave-out estimator: K1 ∑K
k=1 2 q̃t S k · ρ̂

ρ −i,t S in the in-sample leave-out with its counterpart calculated on the sample excluding the kth fold. The line labeled
is derived by replacing ρ̂
“out-of-sample”
in
Panel C presents
across folds,


 1 Dthe average,

 of the out-of-sample estimated partisanship using our preferred penalized estimator:
1 K
1 R
ρ∗
ρ∗
.
K ∑k=1 2 q̂t S k · ρ̂ t S −k + 2 q̂t S k · 1 − ρ̂ t S −k

38

Figure 5: Partisanship within and between Topics
overall
within

between

Average partisanship

0.524

0.518

0.512

0.506

0.500
1870

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

Notes: “Overall” average partisanship is from our preferred specification in Panel B of Figure 2. The other
two series are based on the same parameter estimates and use the vocabulary of phrases contained in one of
our manually defined topics. Between-topic average partisanship is defined as the expected posterior that
an observer with a neutral prior would assign to a speaker’s true party after learning which of our manuallydefined topics a speaker’s chosen phrase belongs to. Average partisanship within a topic is defined as average
partisanship if a speaker is required to use phrases in that topic. Within-topic average partisanship is then
the mean of average partisanship across topics, weighting each topic by its total frequency of occurrence
across all sessions.

39

Figure 6: Partisanship by Topic

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

0.50 0.54 0.58

business

0.50 0.54 0.58
1870

Freq.

Avg.
partisanship

budget

0.50 0.54 0.58

alcohol

1870

0.001
0.000

1890

1910

1950

1970

1990

2010

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

1890

1910

1930

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

1890

1910

1890

1910

1950

1970

1990

2010

1910

1930

1950

1870

0.004
0.000

1970

1990

2010

0.010
0.000

2010

1970

1990

2010

1970

1990

2010

1970

1990

2010

1970

1990

2010

1970

1990

2010

1970

1990

2010

0.009
0.000

1930

1950

0.004
0.000

1890

1910

1930

1950

0.019
0.000

1890

1910

1930

1950

0.013
0.000

minorities

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

1870

0.003
0.000

1890

1910

1930

1950

0.005
0.000

tax

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

1870

0.001
0.000

1890

1910

1930

1950

0.011
0.000

0.50 0.54 0.58

other

0.50 0.54 0.58
1890

1910

all topics

0.50 0.54 0.58

trade

1870

1990

0.50 0.54 0.58
1870

0.016
0.000

1950

justice

0.50 0.54 0.58
1910

1930

religion

0.50 0.54 0.58

1890

1970

0.025
0.000

0.50 0.54 0.58
1870

0.017
0.000

money

1870

1870

0.009
0.000

0.50 0.54 0.58
1890

1890

mail

0.50 0.54 0.58

labor

1870

2010

0.50 0.54 0.58
1870

0.028
0.000

1990

government

0.50 0.54 0.58
1910

1910

immigration

0.50 0.54 0.58

1890

1970

0.50 0.54 0.58
1870

0.020
0.000

health

1870

1870

0.004
0.000

0.50 0.54 0.58
1890

1890

foreign

0.50 0.54 0.58

federalism

1870

1950

0.50 0.54 0.58
1870

0.011
0.000

1930

environment

0.50 0.54 0.58
1910

1870

0.028
0.000

elections

0.50 0.54 0.58

1890

1910

0.50 0.54 0.58
1870

0.005
0.000

education

1870

1890

economy

0.50 0.54 0.58
1870

1870

0.015
0.000

defense

0.50 0.54 0.58

crime

1930

1870

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

0.129
0.000

1870

1890

1910

1930

1950

0.918
0.000

Notes: Calculations are based on our preferred specification in Panel B of Figure 2. Each panel corresponds to a
topic. In each panel, for each session the top (line) plot shows estimated average partisanship for the given topic,
and the bottom (bar) plot shows the share of all speech that is accounted for by phrases in the given topic. Average
partisanship within a topic is defined as average partisanship if a speaker is required to use phrases in that topic. “All
topics” includes all phrases classified into any of our substantive topics; “other” includes all phrases not classified into
any of our substantive topics.

40

Figure 7: Partisanship over Time for Phrases within Topics

Panel A: Tax
0.2

tax increas
tax break

rais tax
tax upon

tax relief
tariff tax

●

american taxpay
tax loophol

●

●

●
●

Phrase partisanship

0.1
●

●

●
●
●

0

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

−0.1

−0.2
1872

1952

1960

1968

1976

1984

1992

2000

2008

2016

Panel B: Immigration
0.2

illeg immigr
immigr reform

border patrol
comprehens immigr

●

●

●

border secur
immigr natur

across border
foreign languag

Phrase partisanship

0.1
●
●

0

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

−0.1

−0.2
1872

1952

1960

1968

1976

1984

1992

2000

2008

2016

Panel C: Labor
0.3

job creation
minimum wage

creat job
unemploy insur

●

job creator
pension also

pay roll
unemploy benefit

0.2
Phrase partisanship

●

0.1
●

0

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

−0.1

−0.2

−0.3
1872

1952

1960

1968

1976

1984

1992

2000

2008

2016

Notes: Calculations are based on our preferred specification in Panel B of Figure 2. Panel A shows 1,000 times the
estimated value of phrase partisanship ζ jt , as defined in Section 6.1, for the four Republican (Democratic) phrases in
the “tax” topic that have the highest (lowest) average phrase partisanship across all sessions. The legend lists phrases
in descending order of the magnitude of average phrase partisanship across all sessions. Panels B and C show the same
for the “immigration” and “labor” topics.

41

Figure 8: Partisanship vs. Roll-Call Voting

Panel A: Over Time
0.512

average partisanship (speech)
distance between parties (roll−call voting)

0.90
0.85

0.510

0.80
0.508
0.75
0.506

0.70
0.65

0.504

0.60
0.502
0.55
0.500

0.50
1870

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

Panel B: Across Speakers
.56
Democrat
Republican
.54

Partisanship

.52

.5

.48

.46

.44

−1.0

−0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

NOMINATE

Notes: Panel A shows our preferred estimate of average partisanship from Panel B of Figure 2 and the difference between the average Republican and the average Democrat in the first dimension of the Common Space DW-NOMINATE
score from McCarty et al. (2015). Panel B plots each speaker’s posterior probability ρ̂i of being Republican based
on speech against the first dimension of the Common Space DW-NOMINATE score (McCarty et al. 2015). We drop
observations for which we cannot match a DW-NOMINATE score to the speaker. To compute ρ̂i , we first define
ρ t∗ (xit ), where we recall that q̂it = cit /mit are the empirical phrase frequencies for speaker i in session t
ρ̂it = q̂it · ρ̂
ρ t∗ (xit ) as the estimated value of ρ t (xit ) from our baseline penalized estimates. We then let
and where we define ρ̂
ρ̂i = |T1i | ∑t∈Ti ρ̂it where Ti is the set of all sessions in which speaker i appears. Nine outliers are excluded from the plot.
The solid black line denotes the linear best fit among the points plotted.

42

Figure 9: Possible Explanations for the Rise in Partisanship

Panel A: Partisanship Post-1961 with Key Events
0.512
C−SPAN

C−SPAN2

Contract with America

30

Average partisanship

0.508

20

15
0.504

10

Communications staff (% of total)

25

5

average partisanship
communications staff
0.500

0
1960

1964

1968

1972

1976

1980

1984

1988

1992

1996

2000

2004

2008

2012

2016

Panel B: Partisanship and the Contract with America
Contract with
America

Average partisanship

0.53

0.52

0.51

0.50
1964

1968

1972

1976

1980

1984

1988

1992

1996

2000

2004

2008

2012

2016

0.018

Freq.

1960

0.000

Notes: Calculations are based on our preferred specification in Panel B of Figure 2. Panel A shows average
partisanship starting from 1961, the “Communications staff (% of total)” series from Lee (2016a, b) which
plots (from 1961 through 2015) the share of House leadership staffers working in communications, and line
markers for select events. Panel B quantifies partisanship of phrases in the Contract with America. The
top (line) plot shows estimated average partisanship if a speaker is required to use phrases contained in the
Contract with America (1994). The bottom (bar) plot shows the share of all speech that is accounted for by
phrases in the Contract in a given session.

43

Rate of Convergence of Penalized Maximum Likelihood Estimator
α t , γ t , ϕ t ), and write θ 0 for its true value. Let C be a
Let θ be a vector that stacks the parameters (α
matrix that stacks the matrices Ct , adding a row of zeros for speakers who are inactive in a given
session. The matrix C then has dimension NT × J, where N is the number of unique speakers, T
is the number of unique sessions, and recall that J is the number of unique phrases. All limits are
with respect to N.
Define the negative log likelihood for (1) and (2) as
N

T

"

L (θθ , C) = ∑ ∑ mit log
i=1 t=1

∑ exp

ui jt

!


j

#
− ∑ ci jt ui jt .
j

Now define θ̂θ to minimize the objective
L (θθ , C) + ∑ λN j ∑ ϕ jt
j

t

where λN j ≥ 0 is a data-dependent penalty. Let
FN = L00 (θθ 0 , C)
be the matrix of second derivatives of the negative log likelihood evaluated at the true value θ 0 .
√ p
Proposition 1. If (i) FN /N → F for some positive definite matrix F, and (ii) λN j / N → λ0 j ≥ 0
for all j, then

√ 
d
N θ̂θ − θ 0 → θ̃
where θ̃ is a random variable with a non-degenerate distribution.
Proof. The proof follows Knight and Fu (2000). Let a denote a vector whose dimensions match
θ . We will write aϕ jt to denote the element matching ϕ jt . Now define a data-dependent function
VN () with
h 

i
√
VN (a) = L θ 0 + a/ N, C − L (θθ 0 , C)


√
0
0
+ ∑ λN j ∑ ϕ jt + aϕ jt / N − ϕ jt .
j

t

The function VN (a) is minimized at
â =


√ 
N θ̂θ − θ 0 .
44

By (i), the first term in VN (a) converges in distribution to
1
a0 w − a0 Fa
2
where
w ∼ N (0, F) .
By (ii), the second term in VN (a) converges in probability to
h
i

0
∑ λ0 j ∑ aϕ jt sgn ϕ jt 1ϕ 0 6=0 + aϕ jt 1ϕ 0 =0 .
jt

t

j

jt

Therefore
d

VN (a) → V (a)
where
1
V (a) = a0 w − a0 Fa
2h
i

+ ∑ λ0 j ∑ aϕ jt sgn ϕ 0jt 1ϕ 0 6=0 + aϕ jt 1ϕ 0 =0 .
jt

t

j

jt

Because VN () is convex and V () has a unique minimum, we have that

√ 
d
N θ̂θ − θ 0 → arg min V (a)
a

which is nondegenerate as desired.
Corollary 2. Write average partisanship π t (θθ ) as a function of the parameter θ . Then under the
conditions of Proposition 1, for each t

√   
d
θ
θ
N π t θ̂ − π t (θ 0 ) → π̃
where π̃ is a random variable with a non-degenerate distribution that depends on t.
p

Proof. First note that Proposition 1 implies that θ̂θ → θ 0 . Because π t () is continuous and differentiable we can write that
 


π t θ̂θ − π t (θθ 0 ) = ∇θ π t θ̂θ − θ 0
where θ is a mean value. The rest follows from standard limit results.
 
Remark 3. Corollary 2 implies that π t θ̂θ satisfies Assumption 2.2.1 of Politis et al. (1999), with
√
τN = N. It then follows by Theorem 2.1.1 and Remark 2.2.1 of Politis et al. (1999) that if we
45

 
choose subsets of size B → ∞ with B/N → 0, subsampling-based confidence intervals on π t θ̂θ
will have asymptotically correct coverage.

46

