                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 PRODUCT MIX AND FIRM PRODUCTIVITY RESPONSES TO TRADE COMPETITION

                                      Thierry Mayer
                                      Marc J. Melitz
                                  Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano

                                     Working Paper 22433
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22433


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2016




This research has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the Grant
Agreement No. 313522 and 789049. For many helpful comments and suggestions we thank Pol
Antras, Nick Bloom, Paola Conconi, Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, Eduardo Morales,
Matthieu Parenti, Jean-Marc Robin, Dan Trefler, John Van Reenen; as well our discussants Mary
Amiti, Volker Nocke and Peter Schott; and participants at many seminars and conferences. We
thank Xiang Ding for superb research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Thierry Mayer, Marc J. Melitz, and Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Product Mix and Firm Productivity Responses to Trade Competition
Thierry Mayer, Marc J. Melitz, and Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano
NBER Working Paper No. 22433
July 2016
JEL No. D24,F12

                                          ABSTRACT

We document how demand shocks in export markets lead French multi-product exporters to re-
allocate the mix of products sold in those destinations. In response to positive demand shocks,
those French firms skew their export sales towards their best-performing products; and also
extend the range of products sold to that market. We develop a theoretical model of multiproduct
firms and derive the specific demand conditions needed to generate these product-mix
reallocations. These demand conditions are associated with endogenous price elasticities that
satisfy Marshall’s Second Law of Demand (the price elasticity of demand decreases with
consumption). Under these demand conditions, our theoretical model highlights how the
increased competition from demand shocks in export markets – and the induced product mix
reallocations – induce productivity changes within the firm. We then empirically test for this
connection between the demand shocks and the productivity of multi-product firms exporting to
those destinations. We find that the effect of those demand shocks on productivity is substantial –
and explain an important share of aggregate productivity fluctuations for French manufacturing.

Thierry Mayer                                    Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano
Sciences-Po, Paris                               Department of Economics
Department of Economics                          Bocconi University
28 rue des Saints-Peres                          Via Roentgen 1
75007 Paris                                      20136 Milan
France                                           Italy
and CEPII, and CEPR                              and Bocconi University
thierry.mayer@sciences-po.fr                     gianmarco.ottaviano@unibocconi.it

Marc J. Melitz
Department of Economics
Harvard University
215 Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mmelitz@harvard.edu
1    Introduction

Ever since Krugman (1980), the C.E.S./monopolistic competition model has been the workhorse
model of new trade theory. It combines intra-industry trade, imperfect competition, and returns-
to-scale in a general equilibrium setting; and it has been extended in myriads of directions (with
much of this research still ongoing). However, this very tractable analytical framework has a major
drawback: it cannot be used to investigate “competitive” effects of trade. Price elasticities for all
goods are constant, and there can be no markup responses to the trading environment.
    In order to analyze competitive effects (response of markups to trade, market size, and geogra-
phy), trade theory in parallel has developed models with endogenous price elasticities. Maintaining
monopolistic competition in general equilibrium, an early approach followed by Dixit and Stiglitz
(1977, section II: “Variable Elasticity Case”) and Krugman (1979) has been to consider preferences
featuring Marshall’s Second Law of Demand (MSLD) – according to which the price elasticity of
demand falls with quantity consumed.1 These models then predict pro-competitive effects of trade:
Falling markups in response to trade integration, as highlighted by Krugman (1979).2 The welfare
gains from these pro-competitive effects are further amplified when firms are heterogeneous. Dhin-
gra and Morrow (2019) show that the pro-competitive reallocations generate an additional channel
that magnify the welfare gains from any given trade liberalization.3
    These models have also played a crucial role in explaining aggregate empirical patterns that are
incompatible with the workhorse C.E.S./monopolistic competition model: Incomplete pass-through
of cost shocks to prices and pricing to market (most prominently for the adjustment to exchange
rate shocks; see Burstein and Gopinath, 2014, for a recent survey); Increasing trade elasticities with
lower trade volumes;4 And tougher selection (and higher firm turnover rates) in larger markets.5 At
   1
     Marshall (1936, Book 3, Chapter 4, Section 2) argues that this is normal behavior of demand: “The elasticity of
demand is great for high prices, and great, or at least considerable, for medium prices; but it declines as the price falls;
and gradually fades away if the fall goes so far that satiety level is reached. This rule appears to hold with regard to
nearly all commodities and with regard to the demand of every class;[...]”. We thank Peter Neary for bringing this
terminology to our attention.
   2
     Pro-competitive effects of trade have also been extensively studied using oligopoly models. These models also
feature endogenous price elasticities, and further share many similar equilibrium properties with monopolistic com-
petition/MSLD models.
   3
     The contribution of these reallocations to welfare are first-order whereas they are second-order in the C.E.S. case
(because the market equilibrium is then efficient). Arkolakis et al. (2018) also analyze the gains from trade in models
with endogenous markups. They focus on the measurement of those gains as a function of the trade volume generated
by a given trade liberalization.
   4
     See Novy (2013) and Arkolakis et al. (2018). Novy (2013) uses translog preferences, which satisfy MSLD;
Arkolakis et al. (2018) use a general family of preferences with endogenous price elasticities and estimate coefficients
that validate MSLD.
   5
     See Syverson (2004), Campbell and Hopenhayn (2005), and Asplund and Nocke (2006). MSLD is sufficient for the
induced maximized profit function to exhibit all the properties postulated by Asplund and Nocke (2006) in order to


                                                             1
the microeconomic level, there is a long literature documenting a strong positive correlation between
firm/plant/product performance and markups; and how those markups and associated pass-through
rates respond to trade shocks.6 In our theory section, we describe how all these empirical patterns are
intrinsically linked to MSLD and thus cannot be reconciled with C.E.S./monopolistic competition.
    The first contribution of our paper is to derive new testable implications of MSLD using sales
data at the finest level of disaggregation (by market, firm, and product). In contrast, the other
microeconomic ways of testing for MSLD entail substantially more onerous data requirements.
Data on firm-product prices or quantities (which are typically very noisy) are needed in order to
estimate the shape of demand directly. And the recovery/estimation of marginal cost shocks to
measure markups entails additional functional form assumptions for demand and/or production.7
In this paper we develop and implement a new complementary methodology for testing MSLD
based on trade-induced reallocations across products (measured in terms of changes in revenue
shares) and their impact on firm productivity. In so doing, we introduce a flexible theoretical
framework with general additive separable preferences and multi-product firms to highlight how
certain properties of demand – which relate to the curvature of demand and marginal revenue curves
underpinning MSLD – are crucial in generating predictions for reallocations that are consistent with
the data. Empirically, we show that the reallocations induced by destination-level trade shocks are
quantitatively important at the level of the firm (aggregating across destinations). Thus they have
the potential to influence firm-level productivity (as confirmed by our theoretical model). Our
second contribution is to document a very large impact of those trade shocks on multi-product firm
productivity.
    The emphasis on multi-product firms is crucial. Measuring the direct impact of trade on re-
allocations across firms is a very hard task. On the one hand, shocks that affect trade are also
likely to affect the distribution of market shares across firms. On the other hand, changes in market
shares across firms likely reflect many technological factors (not related to reallocations). Looking
at reallocations across products within firms obviates many of these problems. Recent theoretical
models of multi-product firms highlight how trade induces a similar pattern of reallocations within
explain the empirical relationship between market size and firm turnover that they document (in a dynamic setting).
   6
     See De Loecker et al. (2016) and Dhyne et al. (2017) for recent evidence on the strong positive correlation between
product-level markups and performance (within firms); there is also a long literature estimating this correlation at
the firm-level. Berman, Martin and Mayer (2012), Li, Ma and Xu (2015), Amiti, Itskoki, and Konings (2014), and
Chatterjee, Dix-Carneiro, and Vichyanond (2013) all find evidence of incomplete pass-through at the producer level.
   7
     See DeLoecker and Goldberg (2014) for a survey of this literature and a discussion of these data and func-
tional form requirements. One significant exception is the work by Atkin et al. (2015) who directly obtain markup
information via a firm survey. They also find a very strong positive correlation between firm size and markups.



                                                           2
firms as it does across firms (see the recent survey by Bernard et al, 2018b). Our theoretical model
fits within this literature. In order to focus on the impact of competition on within-firm product
reallocations and productivity, we abstract from economies of scope (across products) and cannibal-
ization effects (see Bernard et al, 2011, Dhingra, 2013, Eckel and Neary, 2010, Nocke and Yeaple,
2014). In our empirical work, we directly check that such firm-wide interactions do not affect our
main results on product reallocations.
   On the empirical side, measuring reallocations within multi-product firms has several advantages:
Trade shocks that are exogenous to individual firms can be identified much more easily than at a
higher level of aggregation; Controls for any technology changes at the firm-level are also possible;
and reallocations can be measured for the same set of narrowly defined products sold by the same
firm across destinations or over time. In addition, impediments to factor reallocations are likely to
be substantially higher across firms than across product lines within firms. Moreover, multi-product
firms dominate world production and trade flows.
   For all these reasons, reallocations within multi-product firms have the potential to generate large
changes in aggregate productivity. We find very strong empirical confirmation for this link between
trade shocks in export markets (which induce the reallocations) and productivity for multi-product
French exporters. Although we measure firm productivity using deflated sales (value-added), we
recover the changes in real productivity at the industry and aggregate level using the observed
changes in firm-level employment. We show counter-factual predictions for the impact of the trade
shocks on real output per worker at the industry-level. This impact is very large: between 1995-
2005, the trade shocks account for a 1 percent yearly average increase in French manufacturing
productivity.
   Our paper is also related to the empirical literature on trade-induced reallocations. In a previous
paper, Mayer, Melitz and Ottaviano (2014), we investigated the mechanics of product reallocations
within multi-product firms across export destination markets. We used the term ‘skewness’ to
refer to the concentration of the export market shares of different products in any destination and
showed that this skewness consistently varied with destination characteristics such as GDP and
geography: French firms sold relatively more of their best performing products in bigger, more
centrally-located destinations (where competition from other exporters and domestic producers
is tougher). Baldwin and Gu (2009), Bernard, Redding and Schott (2011), and Iacovone and
Javorcik (2010) analyze similar reallocations over time for Canada, Mexico, and the United States
following CUSFTA/NAFTA liberalization. They find that multi-product firms in all three countries


                                                  3
reduced the number of products they produce following liberalization. Baldwin and Gu (2009) and
Bernard, Redding and Schott (2011) further report that CUSFTA induced a significant increase
in the skewness of production across products. Iacovone and Javorcik (2010) separately measure
the skewness of Mexican firms’ export sales to the United States. They report an increase in this
skewness following NAFTA: They show that Mexican firms expanded their exports of their better
performing products (higher market shares) significantly more than those for their worse performing
exported products during the period of trade expansion from 1994 − 2003. Relative to these papers
(including our previous one), a significant innovation in our current paper is to directly connect
the evidence on trade-induced reallocations to the empirical validity of MSLD and to measure the
impact of those reallocations on firm-level productivity.
    These findings have important consequences for the nascent literature analyzing the increasing
concentration of market share amongst industry-leading firms (see Autor et al. 2020 for a recent
example). Our model explains how rising concentration may not stem from changes in competition
regimes (linked to anti-trust policies) but can alternatively come from demand-side growth, including
access to new or growing export markets.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces our dataset on French exporters
and provides novel evidence on reallocations over time with a special emphasis on the skewness effect.
It shows that positive demand shocks in any given destination market induce French exporters to
skew their product level export sales to that destination towards their best performing products.
These demand shocks also lead to strong positive responses in both the intensive and extensive
margins of export sales to that destination. Section 3 introduces our flexible theoretical framework
with multi-product firms and shows how MSLD can rationalize this empirical evidence (along with
the prior evidence we just described). It also shows how MSLD implies that positive demand shocks
engender increases in multi-product firm productivity as firms reallocate market and labor shares
toward better performing products. Sections 4 and 5 take these predictions to the data and measure
large responses in multi-product firm productivity to demand shocks in export markets.


2   Reallocations Over Time

We now document how changes within a destination market over time induce a similar pattern of
reallocations as the ones we previously described (holding across destinations). More specifically, we
show that demand shocks in any given destination market induce firms to skew their product level
export sales to that destination towards their best performing products. In terms of first moments,

                                                   4
we show that these demand shocks also lead to strong positive responses in both the intensive and
extensive margins of export sales to that destination.


2.1     Data

We measure firm-product-destination export sales using French customs data spanning the period
1995-2005. All firms operating in the French metropolitan territory must report their export sales
according to the following criteria: Exports to each EU destination whenever within-EU exports
exceeds 100,000 Euros;8 and exports to non-EU country whenever exports to that destination ex-
ceeds 1,000 Euros or a ton. Despite these limitations, the database is nearly comprehensive. For
instance, in 2005, 103,220 firms report exports across 234 destination countries (or territories) for
9873 products. This represents data on over 2.2 million shipments.
      We restrict our analysis to firms whose main activity is classified as manufacturing to ensure
that firms take part in the production of the goods they export.9 This leaves us with data covering
more than a million shipments by firms across all manufacturing sectors.10
      Matched balance-sheet data provide us with information on variables that are needed to assess
firm productivity such as turnover, value added, employment, investment, raw material use and
capital. However, we can only measure product reallocations in terms of sales in export markets as
the breakdown of sales across products for the domestic market is not available to us. We will have
to take this into account in designing our estimation strategy. The balance-sheet data we have access
to comes in two sources where the official identification number of the firm can be matched with
customs information. The first source is the EAE, produced by the national statistical institute, and
exhaustive for manufacturing firms with size exceeding 20 employees. The second is BRN, which
comes from tax authorities, and includes a broader coverage of firms, since it is based on the firm’s
legal tax regime and a relatively low sales threshold. Whenever firm data is available from both
    8
      If this threshold is not met, firms can choose to report under a simplified scheme without supplying separate
EU export destinations. However, in practice, many firms under the threshold report their exports by destination.
During our sample period, the threshold increased from 38,050 Euros (250,000 French Francs) to 100,000 Euros in
2001. We have checked that all our results are robust to using only the 1996-2001 subsample (a sample period that
also features a more stable product classification schedule; See Pierce and Schott, 2012).
    9
      Some large distributors such as Carrefour account for a disproportionate number of annual export shipments.
The online appendix to this paper replicates our main empirical results for the set of firms with wholesale or retail
trade as their main activity (except the ones on productivity, which is notoriously more difficult to measure for those
firms). Results are very comparable to the ones regarding manufacturing.
   10
      In a robustness check, we also drop observations for firms that report an affiliate abroad. This avoids the issue
that multinational firms may substitute exports of some of their best performing products with affiliate production in
the destination country (affecting our measurement of product reallocations). Results are quantitatively very similar
in all regressions.




                                                          5
sources, we give precedence to the EAE data (which is more closely monitored by the statistical
authorities).11 Table 1 provides some descriptive statistics relevant to the match between customs
and balance sheet data. The overall match is not perfect but covers between 88 and 95 percent
of the total value of French exports. The match with firms declaring manufacturing as their main
activity is still very good although there is a clear trend of declining quality of match, particularly
after 2000. This is also visible in the aggregate growth rate of exports in our sample (column
5) that overall provide a quite good match of the overall exports growth rate in column (4), but
deteriorating over time. Our investigations suggest that the increasing propensity of large French
manufacturers to declare their main activity as retail or some other service activity might provide
part of that explanation.12 Overall our matched dataset is very comparable to recent papers using
the same primary sources as in by Eaton et al. (2011), Berman et al. (2012) or di Giovanni et al.
(2014) for instance.

                Table 1: Aggregate Exports, Production, Employment, and Productivity

                                 Exports
                  Value       Share         Growth Rate        VA        Emp.          VA/Emp.
         Year     B Eur    Match    Mfg     Full      Mfg     B Eur    M work.      K Eur     Growth
         1995      211.3    94.9    74.0                       177.1     2.903        61.0
         1996      219.6    93.5    73.2     3.9       2.8     178.6     2.918        61.2         0.3
         1997      252.7    92.8    72.6    15.1      14.2     188.0     2.899        64.8         6.0
         1998      267.1    92.0    72.1     5.7       4.9     193.3     2.914        66.3         2.3
         1999      277.5    91.1    71.7     3.9       3.3     198.9     2.870        69.3         4.5
         2000      319.4    90.8    71.9    15.1      15.4     209.5     2.924        71.6         3.4
         2001      324.6    89.9    69.0     1.6      -2.3     199.4     2.932        68.0        -5.1
         2002      321.7    90.4    68.4    -0.9      -1.8     198.0     2.865        69.1         1.7
         2003      314.3    90.4    65.3    -2.3      -6.7     187.3     2.633        71.1         2.9
         2004      335.0    88.4    64.6     6.6       5.4     193.2     2.577        75.0         5.4
         2005      350.8    88.0    62.9     4.7       1.9     194.9     2.505        77.8         3.8
         Column (1): Total value of exports from customs data. Column (2): Export share of firms
         matched with balance-sheet data from BRN/EAE. Column (3): Export share of matched firms
         with main activity classified as manufacturing. Columns (4) and (5): Export growth rates for
         customs data and subset of manufacturing firms. Columns (6) to (8): Aggregate value added,
         employment, and their ratio for the subset of manufacturing firms. Column (9): Growth rate of
         labor productivity from previous column.


  11
     The correlations between variables reported both in EAE and BRN (value added, employment, exports, capital
stock) are very high: between .91 and .99 in all cases.
  12
     This is another reason why we check all our results against the early 1996-2001 sub-sample.




                                                       6
2.2      Measuring Export Demand Shocks

Consider a firm i exporting a number of products s in industry I to destination d in year t. We
measure industries (I) at the 3-digit ISIC level (35 different classifications across French manu-
facturing). We consider several measures of demand shocks that affect this export flow. At the
most aggregate level we use the variation in GDP in d, log GDPd,t . At the industry level I, we use
total imports into d excluding French exports, log Md,t
                                                    I . We can also use our detailed product-level


shipment data to construct a firm i-specific demand shock:


       log trade shockIi,d,t ≡ log Md,t
                                    s     for all products s ∈ I exported by firm i to d in year t0 ,            (1)


       s represents total imports into d (again, excluding French exports) for product s and
where Md,t
the overline represents the (unweighted) mean. For world trade, the finest level of product level of
aggregation is the HS-6 level (from UN-COMTRADE and CEPII-BACI)13 , which is more aggregated
than our NC8 classification for French exports (roughly 5,300 HS products per year versus 10,000
NC8 products per year). The construction of the last trade shock is very similar to the one for
                                I , except that we only use imports into d for the precise product
the industry level imports log Md,t
categories that firm i exports to d.14 In order to ensure that this demand shock is exogenous to the
firm, we use the set of products exported by the firm in its first export year in our sample (1995,
or later if the firm starts exporting later on in our sample), and then exclude this year from our
subsequent analysis. Note that we use an un-weighted average so that the shocks for all exported
products s (within an industry I) are represented proportionately.15
                                                     I , M s , we compute the first difference as
       For all of these demand shocks Xt = GDPd,t , Md,t  d,t

the Davis-Haltiwanger growth rate: ∆X
                                   ˜ t ≡ (Xt − Xt−1 ) / (.5Xt + .5Xt−1 ). This measure of the

first difference preserves observations when the shock switches from 0 to a positive number, and
ranges between −2 and 2. This is mostly relevant for our measure of the firm-specific trade shock,
where the product-level imports into d, Md,t
                                         s can often switch between 0 and positive values. When-


ever Xt−1 , Xt > 0, ∆X
                    ˜ t is monotonic in ∆ log Xt and approximately linear for typical growth
  13
     See Gaulier and Zignago (2010).
  14
     There is a one-to-many matching between the NC8 and HS6 product classifications, so every NC8 product is
                                                            s
assigned a unique HS6 classification. We use the same Md,t     data for any NC8 product s within the same HS6
classification.
  15
     Thus, positive idiosyncratic demand shocks to high market-share products (which mechanically contribute to
increase the skewness of product sales) are given the same weight as positive idiosyncratic shocks to low market-
share products (which mechanically contribute to decrease the skewness of product sales); and vice-versa for negative
shocks.



                                                         7
rates (|∆ log Xt | < 2).16 We thus obtain our three measures of demand shocks in first differences:

     d,t , ∆Md,t , ∆Md,t . From here on out, we refer to these three shocks, respectively, as GDP
˜
∆GDP       ˜ I ˜ s

shock, trade shock – ISIC, and trade shock. Note that this last firm-level shock, ∆M
                                                                                  ˜ s , represents
                                                                                     d,t

the un-weighted average of the growth rates for all products exported by the firm in t − 1.


2.3     The Impact of Demand Shocks on Trade Margins and Skewness

Before focusing on the effects of the demand shocks on the skewness of export sales, we first show
how the demand shocks affect firm export sales at the intensive and extensive margins (the first
moments of the distribution of product export sales). Table 2 reports how our three demand shocks
(in first differences) affect changes in firm exports to destination d in ISIC I (so each observation
represents a firm-destination-ISIC combination). We decompose the firm’s export response to each
shock into an intensive margin (average exports per product) and an extensive margin (number of
exported products). We clearly see how all three demand shocks induce very strong (and highly
significant) positive responses for both margins. This confirms that our demand shocks capture
important changes in the local demand faced by French exporters.17

                                  Table 2: Demand Shocks and Local Exports

         Dependent Variable            ∆ log Exports per Product             ∆ log # Products Exported
         ˜ GDP Shock
         ∆                             0.493a                               0.149a
                                       (0.048)                              (0.016)
         ˜ trade shock
         ∆                                         0.277a                              0.076a
                                                   (0.009)                             (0.004)
         ˜ trade shock - ISIC
         ∆                                                       0.039a                               0.014a
                                                                 (0.005)                              (0.002)
         Observations                  401575      407520        407520     401575      407520        407520
                                           c         b           a
         Standard errors in parentheses: < 0.1, < 0.05, < 0.01. All regressions include year dummies,
         and standard errors clustered at the level relevant for the variable of interest: destination country
         for columns (1) and (4), firm-destination for columns (2) and (5) and ISIC-destination for columns
         (3) and (6).


      We now investigate the consequences of those demand shocks for the skewness of export sales
   16
      Switching to first difference growth rates measured as ∆ log Xt (and dropping products with zero trade in the
trade shock average) does not materially affect any of our results.
   17
      Specifications using the log levels of the shocks and firm-destination-ISIC fixed-effects yield similar results. Other
specifications including the three covariates show that those demand shocks are different enough to be estimated
jointly while each keeping its positive sign and statistical significance. We also have experimented with the addition
of a control for a worldwide shock (aggregated from the destination-specific shocks using the firm’s prior year export
shares). This captures firm-wide scale effects that are not specific to any particular destination. The effect of this
additional control on the destination-specific coefficient is negligible, thus confirming that worldwide shocks do not
influence the coefficients presented in Table 2.


                                                             8
(independent of the level of product sales). In Mayer, Melitz and Ottaviano (2014), we focused on
those effects in the cross-section across destinations. Here, we examine the response of skewness
within a destination over time using our new demand shocks. In order to avoid capturing effects
driven by income shocks which could affect the demand for quality, we focus on the trade shocks
and add income per capita as a control. We rely on the Theil index as our measure of skewness due
to its aggregation properties:18 We will later aggregate the export responses at the destination-ISIC
level up to the firm-level – in order to generate predictions for firm-level productivity. Thus, our
measure of skewness for the distribution of firm i’s exports to destination d in industry I, xsi,d,t , is
the Theil index (computed over all Nidt
                                    I products s that firm i exports to d in year t):


                                               s         s                                  s
                                      1 X xi,d,t         xi,d,t
                                                                                     P
                                                                                         s∈I xidt
                             I
                           Ti,d,t   ≡ I         I
                                                    log         ,       x̄Iidt   ≡                .                  (2)
                                     Nidt s∈I x̄idt      x̄Iidt                            I
                                                                                         Nidt

    Table 3 reports regressions of this skewness measure on both export demand shocks at the firm-
destination-ISIC level. In the first two columns, we use a specification in (log) levels (FE), and
use firm-destination-ISIC fixed effects to isolate the variation over time. In the next two columns,
we return to our specification in first differences (FD). In the last two columns we add the firm-
destination-ISIC fixed effects to this specification in first differences (FD-FE). This controls for any
trend growth rate in our demand shocks over time. All specifications include a control for income
per capita (not reported). Across all three specifications, we see that positive export demand shocks
induce a highly significant increase in the skewness of firm export sales to a destination.19
    Table 3 focuses on the contemporaneous response of skewness to the demand shocks. In Figure
1, we show the dynamic response of skewness by including two years of leads and lags for the
demand shocks. The figure shows the regression coefficients for each lead and lag along with its
95% confidence interval. This regression framework requires us to drop the first and last two years
in our sample in order to measure the response of skewness 2 years before and after the demand
shock. This is why our contemporaneous coefficients (along the vertical dotted line) are different
   18
      As we do throughout the paper, we use skewness as an index of inequality for the distribution of product sales.
This is distinct from the statistical definition of skewness as a measure of asymmetry. Hence, all of our empirical
measures for skewness will be based on entropy indices (such as the Theil and Atkinson inequality measures).
   19
      Just as we did for the impact of the destination-specific trade shocks on the first moment of exports (extensive
and intensive margins), we experimented with the addition of controls for firm-wide global shocks. One control for
global scale effects is the same worldwide trade shock that we used as a control in Table 2. Another control for
firm-wide product interactions (such as complementarities in production) is a measure of skewness based on global
(to the world) exports, based again on the Theil index (this global index is described in greater detail section 5). The
effects of these additional global controls on the destination-specific coefficients are negligible, thus confirming that
worldwide shocks – including production complementarities – do not influence the coefficients presented in Table 3.




                                                           9
                                      Table 3: Demand shocks and local skewness

         Dependent Variable                       I
                                                Ti,d,t         I
                                                             Ti,d,t                                       I
                                                                                                       ∆Ti,d,t
         Specification                           FE           FE                FD          FD            FD-FE          FD-FE
         log trade shock                       0.048a
                                               (0.003)
         log trade shock - ISIC                          0.001a
                                                         (0.000)
         ˜ trade shock
         ∆                                                                    0.038a                      0.034a
                                                                              (0.004)                     (0.005)
         ˜ trade shock - ISIC
         ∆                                                                                0.007a                         0.006a
                                                                                          (0.002)                        (0.002)
         Observations                          450620    450620               401541      401541          375033         375033
                                                    c    b                a
         Standard errors in parentheses: < 0.1, < 0.05, < 0.01. FE refers to firm-destination-ISIC fixed
         effects. All regressions include year dummies, with standard errors clustered at the level relevant
         for the variable of interest: Firm-destination for trade shock and ISIC-destination for trade shock
         - ISIC. All regressions include a control for income per capita shocks in the destination country.


than those reported in Table 3.20 Figure 1 shows that there are no significant pre-trends associated
with the response of skewness to the demand shock. The bulk of the response is contemporaneous,
and remains significant for only a single year following the shock.
    We now return to the contemporaneous response of skewness and investigate its robustness to
alternate measurement methods. The first column of Table 4 replicates the FD-FE specifications
from 3 using our Theil measure for skewness. This is our most demanding specification. Each entry
in Table 4 represents a separate regression with the same additional controls that we previously
described. The next three columns of Table 4 explore alternative measures of skewness using
the Atkinson index. This index was developed to allow for greater flexibility in quantifying the
contribution of different parts of the distribution to overall inequality. It is defined as:
                                                                          1
                                                                                                         s
                                         h                            i                         P
                                                                          1−η                       s∈I xidt
                                  1           1          s 1−η                       x̄Iidt ≡                  , for 0 ≤ η 6= 1
                                                    P
                         1 −
                         
                                                 s∈I (xidt )                    ,
                                x̄Iidt        I
                                             Nidt                                                     I
                                                                                                    Nidt
            AI,η     ≡                                                                                                             (3)
             i,d,t                                   N1I
                                  1             s                                                                for η = 1
                         1 −
                                        Q
                                x̄Iidt
                                               x
                                            s∈I idt
                                                       idt ,




The parameter η is often called the inequality aversion parameter as higher values put more weight
on the low end of the distribution. When η gets close to 0, more weight is given to high values,
in our case to the firm’s best performing products. As η increases, more weight is given to the
distribution of the firm’s worse performing products relative to the best performing ones. This
  20
     The differences are most notable for the ISIC trade shock: the coefficients are substantially larger once we drop
those first and last 2 years from our sample.



                                                                      10
                                 Figure 1: Demand shocks and local skewness - leads and lags
        .07




                                                                        .005 .01 .015 .02 .025 .03 .035
                         Coef. FE                                                                              Coef. FE
                         Coef. FD                                                                              Coef. FD
        .06



                         Coef. FDFE                                                                            Coef. FDFE
        .05
        .04
        .03
        .02
        .01




                                                                        -.01 -.005 0
        0
        -.02 -.01




                    -2         -1              0           1   2                                          -2         -1              0           1   2
                                    # of years since shock                                                                # of years since shock


                                (a) trade shock                                                                   (b) trade shock - ISIC


Atkinson index is also equal to one minus the ratio of the generalized (C.E.S.) mean over the
arithmetic mean. Different values of η provide different special cases of the generalized mean: with
η = 2, it is the harmonic mean, whereas with η = 1 it is the geometric mean. In the limit, when
η = 0, it is the arithmetic mean, in which case there can never be any inequality (AI,η
                                                                                    i,d,t ≡ 0 for

any distribution of product sales xsidt ). Table 4 reproduces our skewness results for a wide range of
inequality parameters η, starting with a low value of η = .5 along with the special cases of η = 1
and η = 2.21 Those results, reported in columns (2-4), clearly show that the effect of the demand
shocks on skewness do not rely on the Theil functional form nor on a specific weighing scheme for
the Atkinson index.
       All the skewness measures so far in Table 4 combine changes to both the intensive product mix
margin (the relative sales of different products exported in both t − 1 and t), and the extensive
margin (products sold in one period but not the other). In the next set of columns, we isolate
the skewness response that is driven only by the intensive product mix margin. To do this, we
recompute the same skewness measures on the restricted subset of products that are exported in
both t − 1 and t (denoted by T̄ and Ā). Results using these intensive margin skewness measures
are reported in the following 4 columns of Table 4. Across all those different skewness metrics,
there remains a positive and significant (beyond the 1% level) response of skewness at the intensive
  21
    This range of parameters is also consistent with that advocated by Atkinson and Brandolini (2010) for the
evaluation of income inequality.



                                                                   11
                                Table 4: Skewness and Shocks: Robustness
                                                                                     Intensive Margin Only
 RHS                            I
                             ∆Ti,d,t    ∆AI,.5
                                          i,d,t    ∆AI,1
                                                     i,d,t     ∆AI,2
                                                                 i,d,t
                                                                              I
                                                                          ∆T̄i,d,t     ∆ĀI,.5
                                                                                          i,d,t   ∆ĀI,1
                                                                                                     i,d,t   ∆ĀI,2
                                                                                                                i,d,t
 ˜ trade Shock
 ∆                           0.034a     0.014a     0.019a      0.018a     0.013a       0.007a     0.010a     0.009a
                             (0.005)    (0.002)    (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.003)      (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.003)
 ˜ trade Shock - ISIC
 ∆                           0.006a     0.003a     0.004a      0.004a     0.005a       0.002a     0.004a     0.004a
                             (0.002)    (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.002)      (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)
 Notes: This table presents the results of individual regressions where the columns give the LHS and the rows give
 the RHS variables. FE refers to firm-destination-ISIC fixed effects. All regressions include a control for income per
 capita shocks in the destination country and year dummies. Standard errors clustered at the level relevant for the
 variable of interest: Firm-destination for trade shock and ISIC-destination for trade shock - ISIC.


margin: within a constant set of exported products, positive demand shocks skew market shares
towards better performing products.


3   Theoretical Framework

In the previous section we documented the pattern of product reallocations in response to demand
shocks in export markets. We now develop a theoretical model of multi-product firms that highlights
the specific demand conditions needed to generate this pattern. These demand conditions imply
MSLD and generate all of the micro-level evidence on firm/product selections, prices, and markups
presented in the introduction. In particular, those demand conditions highlight how demand shocks
lead to changes in competition for exporters in those markets (which lead to the observed realloca-
tions). Those reallocations, in turn, generate changes in firm productivity. We directly investigate
the empirical connection between demand shocks and productivity in the following sections.
    Our theoretical model contributes to the growing literature emphasizing demand systems with
variable price elasticities for models of monopolistic competition, such as Zhelebodko et al. (2012),
Bertoletti and Epifani (2014), Fabinger and Weyl (2014), Mrazova and Neary (2017), and Parenti,
Ushchev, and Thisse (2017). Our main point of departure relative to those papers is that we seek to
connect the demand conditions on variable elasticities (and MSLD) directly to the evidence on the
product reallocations that we document; and our additional goal of empirically connecting those to
firm-level productivity. In this spirit, our paper is most closely related to Arkolakis et al. (2018)
and Asplund and Nocke (2006), who also directly connect their theoretical modeling of endogenous
markups with empirical moments: Arkolakis et al. (2018) focus on the implications for the welfare
gains from trade; and Asplund and Nocke (2006) focus on the implications for firm turnover in a



                                                        12
dynamic setting.
      We use the same class of separable preferences as Zhelebodko et al. (2012) which allow for
both MSLD and non-MSLD demand. We then show how the restriction to the MSLD subset is
both necessary and sufficient for consistency with the empirical evidence. We first start with the
same closed economy setup as Zhelebodko et al. (2012) but then extend the model to incorporate
multi-product firms and asymmetric countries in an open-economy.


3.1     Closed Economy

To better highlight the role played by the properties of the demand system, we initially start with
a closed economy and analyze the impact of demand shocks on product reallocations. We then
develop an open economy version of our model that meshes more closely with our empirical setup.
We show how demand shocks in an export market induce very similar product reallocations as in
the closed economy (but for exporters to that market). We develop both a general equilibrium
(with a single differentiated good sector for the whole economy) and a partial equilibrium version
focusing on a single sector among many in the economy. In the latter, we also introduce a short-run
version where entry is restricted (general equilibrium is inherently a long-run scenario). We show
how demand shocks induce the same skewness pattern in all of these modeling alternatives. This
highlights the critical role of the demand system in shaping the pattern of reallocations.


Multi-Product Production with Additive Separable Utility

We consider a sector with a single productive factor, labor. We will distinguish between two scenar-
ios. The first is the standard general equilibrium (GE) setup with a single sector. The exogenous
labor endowment L indexes both the number of workers Lw (with inelastic supply) and consumers
Lc . The endogenous wage is set to one by choosing labor as the numeraire. Aggregate expenditures
are then given by the exogenous labor endowment. In our partial equilibrium (PE) scenario, we
focus on the sector as a small part of the economy. We take the number of consumers Lc as well as
their individual expenditures on the sector’s output as exogenously given. The supply of labor Lw
to the sector is perfectly elastic at an exogenous economy-wide wage. We choose units so that both
this wage and the exogenous expenditure per-consumer is equal to 1. This involves a normalization
for the measure of consumers Lc and the choice of labor as numeraire: Aggregate accounting then
implies that this normalized number of consumers Lc represents a fraction of the labor endowment



                                                 13
L.22 In both scenarios, we model a demand shock as an increase in the number of consumers Lc .
This increases aggregate expenditures one-for-one, given our assumptions of unitary consumer in-
come. In our GE scenario, this increase is associated with a proportional increase in labor supplied
Lw . In our PE scenario, the labor supply response is left unrestricted, isolating the demand-side
effects.
       In both scenarios each consumer’s utility is assumed to be additively separable over a continuum
of imperfectly substitutable products indexed by i ∈ [0, M ] where M is the measure of products
available. The representative consumer then solves the following utility maximization problem:

                                            Z   M                   Z    M
                                    max             u(qi )di s.t.            pi qi di = 1,
                                    qi ≥0   0                        0


where u(qi ) is the sub-utility associated with the consumption of qi units of product i. We assume
that this sub-utility exhibits the following properties:


                           (A1) u(0) = 0; u0 (qi ) > 0 and u00 (qi ) < 0 for qi ≥ 0.


The first order condition for the consumer’s problem determines the inverse residual demand func-
tion (per consumer):
                                                                u0 (qi )
                                                     p(qi ) =            ,                                      (4)
                                                                   λ
              RM
where λ =      0   u0 (qi )qi di > 0 is the marginal utility of income. Given our assumption of separable
preferences, this marginal utility of income λ is the unique endogenous aggregate demand shifter:
Higher λ shifts all residual demand curves inward ; we refer to this as an increase in competition for
a given level of market demand Lc . Concavity of u(qi ) ensures that the chosen consumption level
from (4) also satisfies the second order condition for the consumer’s problem. This residual demand
curve (4) is associated with a marginal revenue curve

                                                         u0 (qi ) + u00 (qi )qi
                                            φ(qi ) =                            .                               (5)
                                                                   λ
  22
    As we will restrict our analysis to additively separable preferences – which are non-homothetic – changes in
consumer income will have different effects than changes in the number of consumers Lc . We focus on this functional
form for tractability and do not wish to emphasize its properties for income elasticities. As first highlighted by
Deaton and Muellbauer (1980), additively separable preferences imply a specific relationship between price and
income elasticities. We emphasize the properties of demand for those price elasticities. Thus, we analyze changes in
the number of consumers Lc holding their income fixed. This is akin to indexing the preferences to a given reference
income level.




                                                             14
Let εp (qi ) ≡ −p0 (qi )qi /p(qi ) and εφ (qi ) ≡ −φ0 (qi )qi /φ(qi ) denote the elasticities of inverse demand
and marginal revenue. Thus εp (qi ) ≥ 0 is the inverse price elasticity of demand (less than 1 for
elastic demand). Although the demand and marginal revenue curves are residual (they depend on
λ), their elasticities are nonetheless independent of λ. These preferences nest the C.E.S. case where
the elasticities εp (qi ) and εφ (qi ) are constant; using the additively separable functional form for
C.E.S., the marginal utility of income λ is then an inverse monotone function of the C.E.S. price
index.
       Products are supplied by firms that may be single- or multi-product. Market structure is mo-
nopolistically competitive as in Mayer, Melitz and Ottaviano (2014): each product is supplied by a
single firm and each firm supplies a countable number of products (among the continuum of con-
sumed products). Technology exhibits increasing returns to scale associated with a fixed overhead
cost, along with a constant marginal cost of production. We assume that the fixed cost f is common
for all products while the marginal cost v (variety level cost) is heterogeneous. For a given firm,
products are indexed in increasing order m of marginal cost from a ‘core product’ indexed by m = 0.
Firm entry incurs a sunk cost f e . After this cost is incurred, entrants randomly draw the marginal
cost for their core product from a common continuous differentiable distribution Γ(c) with support
over [0, ∞); we refer to this cost draw as the firm’s core competency.23 This gives an entrant the
exclusive blueprint used to produce a countable range of additional products indexed by the integer
m (potentially zero) at marginal cost v(m, c) ≡ cz(m) with z(0) = 1 and z 0 (m) > 0.24


Product-Level Performance and Selection

A firm owning the blueprint for product i with marginal cost v and facing demand conditions λ
chooses the optimal output per consumer q(v, λ) to maximize total product-level profits Lc [p(qi )qi − vqi ]−
f , so long as those profits are non-negative; or does not produce product i otherwise.25 The first
order condition whenever production occurs equalizes marginal revenue with marginal cost:


                                                  φ(q(v, λ)) = v.                                                 (6)
  23
     This assumption of infinite support is made for simplicity in order to rule out the possibility of an equilibrium
without any firm selection. We could also introduce an upper-bound cost draw so long as this upper-bound is high
enough that the equilibrium features selection (some firms do not produce).
  24
     The assumption z 0 (m) > 0 will generate the within-firm ranking of products discussed in the introduction. In
the limit case when z 0 (m) is infinite, all firms only produce a single product.
  25
     As we have assumed that any firm’s set of products is of measure zero relative to the set of available products
M , there is no product inter-dependence in the firm’s pricing/output decision (no cannibalization).




                                                         15
In order to ensure that the solution to this maximization problem exists (for at least some v > 0)
and is unique, we further restrict our choice of preferences to satisfy:


                                      (A2) 2u00 (qi ) + u000 (qi )qi < 0.


This assumption ensures that marginal revenue φ(qi ) is decreasing for all output levels and positive
for at least some output levels. This ensures elastic demand along a top portion of the demand
curve.
   The profit maximizing price associated with the output choice (6) can be written in terms of
the chosen markup µ(qi ) ≡ 1/ (1 − εp (qi )):


                                         p(q(v, λ)) = µ(q(v, λ))v.                                   (7)


Those output and price choices are associated with the following product-level revenues and oper-
ating profits per-consumer :


               r(v, λ) = p(q(v, λ))q(v, λ)        and        π(v, λ) = [p(q(v, λ)) − v] q(v, λ).


Total product-level sales are then given by Lc r(v, λ) while total product net profits are Lc π(v, λ)−f .
Using the first order condition for profit maximization (6) and our derivations for marginal revenue
(5) and markup (7), the elasticities for all these product-level performance measures can be written
in term of the elasticities of demand and marginal revenue:

                                1                  1 − εp                       1 − εp
                      εq,v = −    ,      εr,v = −         ,            επ,v = −        ,
                               εφ                    εφ                            εp
                                                                                                     (8)
                                1                  1 − εp                       1
                      εq,λ   =− ,        εr,λ   =−         − 1,        επ,λ   =− ,
                               εφ                    εφ                         εp

where we use the elasticity notation εg,x to denote the elasticity of the function g with respect to
x. All of the elasticities with respect to the product marginal cost v are negative, indicating that
lower marginal cost is associated with higher output, sales, and profit (both operating and net).
As expected, an increase in competition λ (for any given level of market demand Lc ) will result in
lower output, sales, and profit for all products.
   Since operating profit is monotonic in a product’s marginal cost v, the production decision




                                                        16
associated with non-negative net profit will lead to a unique cutoff cost level v̂ satisfying


                                                         π(v̂, λ)Lc = f.                                      (9)


All products with cost v ≤ v̂ will be produced. Since v(0, c) = c (recall that v(m, c) = cz(m); z(0) =
1) any firm with core competency c ≤ v̂ will produce at least its core (m = 0) product. Thus,
ĉ = v̂ will be the firm-level survival cutoff. Those surviving firms (with c ≤ ĉ) will produce
M (c) = max {m | cz(m) ≤ v̂} additional products (potentially none, and then M (c) = 0) and earn
firm-level net profits:
                                                         M (c)
                                                         X
                                         Π(c, λ) =               [π (cz(m), λ) Lc − f ] .
                                                         m=0

Since επ,v and επ,λ are both negative, increases in competition λ – holding market demand Lc
constant – will be associated with lower cutoffs v̂ = ĉ. Tougher competition thus leads to tougher
selection: the least productive firms exit and all surviving firms shed (weakly) their worst performing
products.


Free Entry in the Long-Run

In the long-run when entry is unrestricted, the expected profit of the prospective entrants adjusts
to match the sunk cost:

                                              ∞
                                                    (Z                                          )
                 Z    c
                      b                       X              c/z(m)
                                                             b
                          Π(c, λ)dΓ(c) =                                             c
                                                                      [π (cz(m), λ) L − f ] dΓ(c)   = f e.   (10)
                  0                           m=0        0


This free entry condition, along with the zero cutoff profit condition (9) jointly determine the
equilibrium cutoffs v̂ = ĉ along with the competition level λ. The number of entrants N e is then
determined by the consumer’s budget constraint:

                                             ∞
                                         (     "Z                                   #)
                                             X          c/z(m)
                                                        b
                                 N   e
                                                                 r(cz(m), λ)dΓ(c)        = 1.                (11)
                                          m=0       0


These conditions hold in both our GE and PE scenarios.
   Since labor is the unique factor and numeraire, we can convert the firms’ costs (both per-
unit production costs and the fixed costs) into employment. Aggregating over all firms yields the




                                                                   17
aggregate labor demanded:

                                         ∞
                                               (Z                                                 )!
                                         X           c/z(m)
                                                     b
                    Lw = N e      fe +                        [cz(m)q (cz(m), λ) Lc + f ] dΓ(c)
                                         m=0     0


As the free entry condition (10) entails no ex-ante aggregate profits (aggregate revenue is equal to
the payments to all workers, including those employed to cover the entry costs), this aggregate labor
demand Lw will be equal to the number of consumers Lc . This ensures labor market clearing in
our GE scenario. In our PE scenario, this implies that the endogenous labor supply adjusts so that
it equalizes the normalized number of consumers (recall that this is an exogenous fraction of the
economy-wide labor endowment).26
       In these long-run scenarios, the impact of an increase in demand Lc on the cutoffs will depend on
some further assumptions on demand, which we discuss in detail following the introduction of our
short-run scenario. However, we note that the impact for the level of competition λ is unambiguous:
higher demand leads to increases in competition λ.27


Short-Run Scenario

We now consider an alternative short-run situation in which the number of incumbents is fixed
at N̄ in the PE scenario (with the same exogenous distribution of core competencies Γ(c)). In
this case, free entry (10) no longer holds: firms with core competencies below the profit cutoff in
(9) produce while the remaining firms shut-down. However, the budget constraint (11) still holds
with the exogenous number of incumbents N̄ now replacing the endogenous number of entrants
N e . Together with the zero cutoff profit (9), those two conditions jointly determine the endogenous
cutoffs v̂ = ĉ and competition level λ.
       As was the case in the long-run scenarios with free-entry, an increase in demand Lc must lead
to an increase in competition λ.28 However, the response of the cutoffs is now unambiguous: the
  26
      This sector-level adjustment for labor supply is very similar to the case of C.E.S. product differentiation within
sectors and Cobb-Douglas preferences across sectors. In the latter case, the sector’s labor supply adjusts so that it
is equal (as a fraction of the aggregate labor endowment) to the exogenous Cobb-Douglas expenditure share for the
sector. See Melitz and Redding (2014) for an example of those preferences with firm heterogeneity.
   27
      Competition λ must strictly increase for the free entry condition to hold. If λ decreased (even weakly), then net
profit for a given variety π(v, λ)Lc − f should strictly increase (given dLc > 0 and επ,λ < 0). The cutoffs v̂ = ĉ must
then strictly increase (given 9); along with the average firm profit (the left-hand-side) in the free-entry condition (10).
Thus, this condition could not hold if λ weakly decreased.
   28
      Competition λ must strictly increase in order to satisfy the budget constraint (11) with a fixed number of
incumbents. As we argued in a previous footnote (27), λ weakly decreasing would imply a strict increase in the
cutoffs v̂ = ĉ. This would entail both a strict increase in the number of products consumed as well as a weak increase
in expenditures per-product r(v, λ) for each consumer (recall that εr,λ < 0). This would necessarily violate the



                                                               18
increase in demand must raise profits for all products (given their cost v) since there is no induced
response in entry; leading to an increase in the cutoffs v̂ = ĉ.29 In this short-run scenario, it is the
production of these new varieties (previously unprofitable) that generates the increased competition.
In the long run, the increased competition is driven by the entry of new firms (and the varieties
they produce).


Curvature of Demand

Up to now, we have placed very few restrictions on the shape of the residual demand curves that the
firms face, other than the conditions (A1)-(A2) needed to ensure a unique monopolistic competition
equilibrium. In particular, the rates of change of the elasticities of residual demand and marginal
revenue (the signs of ε0p (qi ) and ε0φ (qi )) were left unrestricted. We now show how further restrictions
on those rates of change (or alternatively the curvature of demand and marginal revenue) are
intrinsically tied to product-level reallocations – in addition to their better known consequences for
prices, markups and pass-through. After we develop the open economy version of our model in
the next section, we highlight the reverse connection from the pattern of product reallocations we
documented in Section 2 back to their necessary conditions for demand. Throughout, we assume
that conditions (A1)-(A2) hold in our monopolistic competition equilibrium. Thus, a necessary
condition for an empirical pattern is an additional condition that must hold (to generate that
empirical prediction) conditional on those initial assumptions.
    The further restrictions on the shapes of demand and marginal revenue are both related to
MSLD:
              (MSLD) ε0p (qi ) > 0 for qi ≥ 0          and       (MSLD’) ε0φ (qi ) > 0 for qi ≥ 0.

Figure 2 depicts a log-log graph of the inverse demand and marginal revenue curves satisfying those
restrictions. Under (MSLD) demand becomes more inelastic with consumption.30 It is a necessary
consumer’s budget constraint.
  29
     Note that with a fixed number of incumbents, the budget constraint (11) implies an increasing relationship
between the cutoff ĉ and the level of competition λ (which reduces product-level revenues r(v, λ) for all products).
  30
     (MSLD) is equivalent to the assumption by Arkolakis et al. (2018) that the demand function of any product is
log-concave in log-prices. In the terminology of Mrazova and Neary (2017) it defines the “sub-convex” case demand
case. In the terminology of Zhelobodko et al (2012), this class of preferences exhibits increasing “relative love of
variety” (RLV) as consumers care more about variety when their consumption level is higher. In the terminology of
Kimball (1995), this class of preferences exhibits a positive superelasticity of demand. Bertoletti and Epifani (2014)
refer to this case as “decreasing elasticity of substitution”. The “Adjustable pass-through” (APT) class of demand
functions proposed by Fabinger and Weyl (2012) also satisfies (MSLD). Mrazova and Neary (2019) show that when
demand is weakly “super-convex” (the opposite case to MSLD: ε0p (qi ) ≤ 0), then the firm profit function is super-
modular in marginal cost and a multiplicative cost-shifter. This relationship is both necessary and sufficient when
considering log-supermodularity of the operating profit function. And conversely, (MSLD) is necessary and sufficient



                                                         19
and sufficient condition for better performing products (lower v) to have higher markups and for
tougher competition (higher λ) to lower markups for any given product (given a cost v).31 Thus,
the evidence discussed in the introduction linking better product and firm performance to higher
markups implies that (MSLD) must hold. It is also consistent with the estimates of Arkolakis et
al. (2018) for bilateral trade demand. In our model with monopolistic competition, (MSLD) is
also equivalent to an alternate condition that the pass-through elasticity from marginal cost to
price θ ≡ ∂ ln p(q(v, λ))/∂ ln v = εp /εφ is less than 1 (see appendix A for proof). Thus, the vast
empirical evidence on incomplete pass-through (see the survey by Burstein and Gopinath, 2014)
also requires this demand condition (MSLD). Most importantly, we will show that (MSLD) is a
necessary condition for the evidence we documented on product reallocations for French exporters.
This provides an independent confirmation for this demand condition that does not rely on the (very
noisy) measurement of product prices and the estimation of markups (or alternatively marginal
costs).

                           log p, log mr




                                                                    MR       D
                                                                                    log qi

                      Figure 2: Graphical Representation of Demand Assumptions

    Assumption (MSLD’) is more restrictive than (MSLD): in the appendix, we show how (MSLD’)
implies (MSLD). If only (MSLD) holds, then the log demand curve would have the shape shown
in Figure 2, but the log marginal revenue curve would need not be globally concave. However,
it would still have to be everywhere steeper than log demand: εφ (qi ) > εp (qi ) for all qi ≥ 0 (see
appendix). In the following section, we show that (MSLD’) is a sufficient condition for the product
for the operating profit to be log-submodular.
  31
     Since both higher cost v and higher λ is associated with lower output q(v, λ); See (8).



                                                         20
reallocations we previously described for French exporters, in addition to all the evidence from the
existing literature on prices, markups, and pass-through.32
       Lastly we note that conditions (MSLD) and (MSLD’) exclude the C.E.S. case, where the deriva-
tive of the elasticities ε0p (qi ) and ε0p (qi ) are zero. In this limiting case, the inverse demand and
marginal revenue in Figure 2 are linear. Nevertheless, (MSLD) and (MSLD’) are consistent with
most of the functional forms that have been used to explore endogenous markups in the theoretical
trade literature.33


Demand Shocks and Product Reallocations

We have already described how an increase in demand Lc induces an increase in the toughness of
competition λ in both the long-run (GE and PE) and the short-run. We now highlight how the
demand conditions (MSLD) and (MSLD’) generate a link between increases in the toughness of
competition and product reallocations towards better performing products.
       First, we note that the increase in competition λ induces a downward shift in output sales
q(v, λ) per-consumer (though not necessarily overall as the number of consumers is increasing).
This decrease in output sales q(v, λ) in turn generates changes in the price and marginal revenue
elasticities εp and εφ , which depend on conditions (MSLD) and (MSLD’). Changes in those two
elasticities then determine the changes in the elasticities of output, sales, and profit with respect to
marginal cost v (see 8), which govern the reallocation of output, sales, and profit across firms with
different costs v. We can now determine exactly how conditions (MSLD) and (MSLD’) affect these
reallocations:

Proposition 1. (MSLD) is a necessary and sufficient condition for a positive demand shock to
reallocate operating profits to better performing products: π(v1 , λ)/π(v2 , λ) increases whenever v1 <
v2 .

Proof. |επ,v | increases for all products v whenever λ increases if and only if εp (qi ) is increasing (see
8)

Proposition 2. (MSLD’) is a necessary and sufficient condition for a positive demand shock to
reallocate output to better performing products: q(v1 , λ)/q(v2 , λ) increases whenever v1 < v2 .
   32
      We will also show how the necessary condition for the French exporters evidence on product reallocations is
slightly less restrictive than (MSLD’).
   33
      Those functional forms include quadratic (linear demand), Bulow-Pfleiderer, CARA, and bipower preferences.
In the online appendix, we review those functional forms and describe the parameter restrictions associated with
conditions (MSLD) and (MSLD’).


                                                       21
Proof. |εq,v | increases for all products v whenever λ increases if and only if εφ (qi ) is increasing (see
8)

Proposition 3. (MSLD’) is a sufficient condition for a positive demand shock to reallocate revenue
to better performing products: r(v1 , λ)/r(v2 , λ) increases whenever v1 < v2 . The necessary condition
is that [1 − εp (qi )] /εφ (qi ) is decreasing.

Proof. |εr,v | increases for all products v whenever λ increases if and only if [1 − εp (qi )] /εφ (qi ) is
decreasing (see 8). (MSLD’) implies that [1 − εp (qi )] /εφ (qi ) is decreasing.34

       We have derived these reallocations using the per-consumer measures of performance, but since
they are all evaluated as ratios, multiplying those by the number of consumers Lc would lead to
identical outcomes (even though Lc is changing). Thus, we see that (MSLD’) is a sufficient condition
for all performance measures (profit, output, revenue) to be reallocated toward better performing
products. In this case, an increase in competition (higher λ) induces a steeper relationship between
a product’s cost v and its profit, output, and revenue outcome (higher elasticities |επ,v |,|εq,v |,|εr,v |).
A given percentage reduction in cost v then translates into a higher percentage increase in those
performance outcomes. In the case of C.E.S. preferences, all those performance elasticities would be
constant, and hence changes in demand (and corresponding changes in competition λ) would have
no effect on the relative performance of products (conditional on selection into production).
       The reallocation of output towards better performing products has a direct consequence for firm
productivity: the allocation of firm employment to products must respond proportionately to the
product-level output changes. Thus, for a given set of products, average productivity (an employ-
ment weighted average of product productivity 1/v) must increase whenever output is reallocated
towards better performing products.


Selection

In the short-run, we have already discussed how an increase in demand Lc and the corresponding
increase in competition λ induces an increase in the cutoffs ĉ = v̂. In this scenario, net profit
per-product Lc π(v, λ) − f is increasing for the high cost products with cost v close to the cutoff,
even though the operating profit per-consumer π(v, λ) is decreasing for all products (the increase
in demand Lc dominates the negative impact of the increase in competition λ). Condition (MSLD)
  34
    Bertoletti and Epifani (2014) derive a similar expression for the reallocation of revenue. However, they do not
show how that condition is implied by assumption (MSLD’) and requires (MSLD) to hold.



                                                        22
then implies that the profits for the better performing products (with lower cost v) increase dispro-
portionately relative to the high cost products. Thus, net operating profit per-product increases for
all products.
      In the long-run, we mentioned that the change in the cutoffs in response to an increase in demand
could not be determined without making additional assumptions on demand. Under (MSLD), such
a demand increase induces a disproportionate increase in operating profits for the best performing
products; thus, total firm profit Π(c, λ) becomes steeper (as a function of firm competency c). The
free entry condition (10) then requires a single crossing of the new steeper total firm profit Π(c, λ)
curve with the old flatter one (ensuring that average profit in both cases is still equal to the constant
entry cost f e ). This crossing defines a new profitability cutoff c̃ whereby better performing firms
with c < c̃ enjoy a profit increase whereas worse performing firms with c > c̃ suffer a profit loss.
Hence, the zero profit cutoff ĉ (and the associated product-level cutoff v̂) decreases, leading to the
exit of the worse performing firms (and the worse performing products for all firms). The product-
level net-profit curve Lc π(v, λ) − f (as a function of product cost v) rotates in a similar fashion to
the firm-level profit curve: profits for the best performing products increase while they decrease for
the worse performing products. For those high performing products with low cost v, the increase in
demand Lc dominates the effect of tougher competition (higher λ) on per-consumer profits π(v, λ);
whereas the opposite holds for the low performing products.
      We further note that (MSLD) is also a necessary condition for this selection effect in the long
run: If (MSLD) were violated then the profit curves would rotate in the opposite direction, reducing
(increasing) profits for the best (worst) performing firms and products. This would result in an
increase in the cutoffs ĉ = v̂. In the limiting C.E.S. case, the cutoffs would be unaffected by changes
in demands: the increase in demand Lc is exactly offset by the increase in competition leaving
net-profits Lc π(v, λ) − f unchanged for all products.


3.2     Open Economy

With our empirical findings in mind, we consider a simplified three-country economy consisting
of a Home country (H: France) and a Foreign country (F : Rest of World) both exporting to a
Destination country (D). We focus on the equilibrium in this destination D, characterized by a
demand level LcD . For simplicity, we assume that this destination market is ‘small’ with respect to
economy-wide outcomes in H and F , in the sense that changes in destination D-specific variables do




                                                   23
not affect those equilibrium outcomes (apart from those related to exports to D).35 In particular,
this entails that the number of entering firms in H and F , NH
                                                             e and N e , do not respond to changes in
                                                                    F

demand LcD in D. (Naturally, the number of entrants ND
                                                     e into D will respond to demand conditions


LcD in the long-run.)
       Since we are interested in highlighting the impact of demand changes in destination D for
competition there, we make one further simplification: We assume that firms in D do not export
to either H or F . In this case, trade is necessarily unbalanced so we restrict our analysis to the
PE case and assume an exogenous unitary wage. In the appendix, we show how to extend the
equilibrium conditions to the GE and PE cases where firms in D export; and highlight how this
would not change any of the qualitative results regarding the impact of demand shocks in D.
       Exports from l ∈ {H, F } into D incur both a per-unit iceberg cost τlD > 1 as well as a
fixed export cost flD . In order to streamline the analysis of the production decisions for domestic
producers selling in D along with exporters into D, we use the notation fDD < flD to denote the
smaller fixed cost faced by domestic producers and introduce τDD ≡ 1. Lastly, we can allow for
arbitrary technology differences across countries l ∈ {H, F, D} in terms of the product ladder cost
zl (m), the entry cost fle , and the firm distribution of core competencies Γl (c).


Product-Level Performance and Selection

We now consider the production decisions for sales into D. Since the marginal cost of production is
constant and there are no cross-market or cross-product cost synergies, firms will make independent
market-level decisions per-product. Any product i sold in D will face the residual inverse demand
(4) with a unique endogenous competition level λD for that market. Any firm from l ∈ {H, F, D}
owning the blueprint for product i with marginal cost v faces a constant delivered marginal cost
τlD v for market D. All these firms therefore solve the same profit maximization problem with
respect to this delivered cost, associated with the same first order condition (6) as in the closed
economy. Thus, we can use the same optimal output, operating profit, and revenue functions as
in the closed economy to evaluate the performance of a product in destination D: q(τlD v, λD ),
π(τlD v, λD ), r(τlD v, λD ) capture those performance metrics (per-consumer in D) for a product with
delivered cost τlD v. Producers from l ∈ {H, F, D} will sell a product with cost v in D so long as
the associated profits are non-negative. This leads to three (for each origin) new zero-profit cutoff
  35
   This small open economy setup with monopolistic competition follows closely the development in Demidova and
Rodrigues-Clare (2013) for the case of C.E.S. preferences.



                                                     24
conditions:
                                        π(τlD v̂lD , λD ) = flD , l ∈ {H, F, D} .                             (12)

All products from l with cost v ≤ v̂lD will be sold in D. Since we have assumed that the fixed
export cost is higher than the domestic market fixed cost (flD > fDD for l ∈ {H, F }), the marginal
exported product will have a lower delivered cost than the marginal domestically produced product:
τlD v̂lD < v̂DD ; and it will therefore feature strictly higher performance measures (in terms of
operating profit, output, and revenues).
   These product-level cutoffs will also be equal to the firm-level cutoffs for the sale of any product
in D: Only firms with core competency c ≤ ĉlD = v̂lD will operate (sell) in market D. When
l ∈ {H, F }, those cutoffs represent the firm-level export cutoff into D. When l = D, the cutoff
represents the production (survival) cutoff for domestic firms in D.


Free Entry in the Long Run

The free entry conditions for markets H and F are irrelevant for destination D, due to our as-
sumption of the latter being “small’ relative to the former two. In the long run, free entry into D
equalizes the expected profits for prospective entrants with the sunk entry cost. Thus, this new free
entry condition is identical to the one for the closed economy; except for the labeling of country-D
specific variables:

                       ∞
                         "Z                                                                        #
                       X            cDD /zD (m)
                                    b
                                                  [π (czD (m), λD ) LcD                           e
                                                                               − fDD ] dΓD (c) = fD .         (13)
                       m=0      0


As in the closed economy case, this free entry condition, along with the zero cutoff profit condition
(12, for l = D) jointly determine the equilibrium cutoffs v̂DD = ĉDD along with the level of
competition λD . The export cutoffs v̂lD for l ∈ {H, F } are then determined by their matching zero
cutoff profit condition in (12) given the competition level λD .
   In the open economy, consumers in D spread their income over all the domestically produced
and imported products. Since the number of entrants into H and F are exogenous with respect to
country D, the budget constraint for consumers in D can still be used to directly determine the
endogenous number of entrants into D (as was the case for the closed economy):

                                           ∞
                                       (     "Z                                                #)!
                       X                   X            clD /zl (m)
                                                        b
                                Nle                                   r(τlD czl (m), λD )dΓl (c)       = 1.   (14)
                      l=H,F,D            m=0        0




                                                                      25
Short-Run Equilibrium

In the short-run, the number of incumbents in D is fixed at N̄D (with the same exogenous distri-
bution of core competencies ΓD (c)); and the free entry condition for firms in D no longer holds.
The budget constraint (14) still holds with the exogenous number of incumbents N̄D replacing the
endogenous number of entrants ND
                               e . Together with the three cutoff-profit conditions (12), these


four equilibrium conditions determine the competition level λD along with the three cutoffs for
l ∈ {H, F, D}.


Demand Shocks and Product Reallocations

Using the same reasoning as previously developed for the closed economy case, we can show that
an increase in demand LcD will result in an increase in competition λD in D for both the long-run
and short-run.36 Thus, all of our previous results regarding the impact of such a demand shock
on the reallocation of profits, output, and revenue towards better performing products still hold
(Propositions 1-3). Thus, for exporters to D, we can connect demand conditions (MSLD) and
(MSLD’) to the reallocation of export sales and profits (in market D) towards better performing
products.


Selection

Again using a similar reasoning to our analysis of the closed economy case, demand condition
(MSLD) is sufficient for the demand shock to increase the net profit for the sales of the best
performing products in D (the profits generated by sales in D) in both the long-run and short-run.
Thus, so long as the fixed export cost fHD is high enough, all exported products from H will fall
into this category and experience a profit increase following the increase in demand. This, in turn,
implies that an increase in demand leads to a fall in the export cutoffs v̂HD : Existing exporters
from H increase their range of exported products to D, and some firms from H start exporting to
D.
       In the long-run, condition (MSLD) is also necessary for the demand shock to induce the selection
of newly exported products from H to D (so long as the fixed export cost fHD is high enough).
Similar to the closed economy case, a violation of condition (MSLD) would imply a reduction in the
  36
    Once again, a (weak) decrease in competition λD would necessarily lead to a violation of the free entry condition
in the long-run, or the budget constraint in the short-run.




                                                         26
profits of the best performing products to D, thus reversing the predicted consequences for export
market selection.


3.3      Connecting Back to Empirical Measures of Product Reallocations in Export
         Markets

We have just shown how our open economy model with demand condition (MSLD’) can explain
all of the evidence on the response of French exporters to demand shocks that we documented in
Section 2. It explains how positive demand shocks induce the entry of new exported products and
the reallocation of output and revenues towards the best performing products. The reallocation
of output contributes positively to a firm’s productivity (by shifting employment shares towards
products with higher marginal products).37 And the reallocation of revenues generates an increase
in the skewness of a firm’s export sales to that destination.38 Demand condition (MSLD’) and
the weaker version (MSLD) are also directly connected to the empirical evidence on firm/product
markups and pass-through. In the limiting case of C.E.S. preferences, demand shocks in export
market would have no impact on the skewness of export sales; markups are constant across products;
and pass-through is complete (equal to 1) for all products.
       On its own, the evidence on the positive relationship between demand shocks and export skew-
ness requires that [1 − εp (qi )] /εφ (qi ) is decreasing over the range of exported output qi that we
observe. We have pointed out that condition (MSLD’) (εφ (qi ) increasing) is sufficient for this out-
come. However, since it is not a necessary condition, our evidence for the skewness of exports does
not imply that (MSLD’) must hold. On the other hand, we show in the appendix that the weaker
condition (MSLD) (εp (qi ) increasing) must nevertheless hold. In particular, we show that even if
(MSLD) were violated over a portion of the relevant demand curve (εp (qi ) decreasing over some
range), then this would result in a reverse prediction for export skewness over this portion of the
demand curve. This result also fits with what we know about the limiting case of C.E.S. preferences,
where demand shocks have no impact on the skewness of export sales.
       Thus, our empirical evidence on the impact of demand shocks for export skewness provides an
independent confirmation for the empirical relevance of this critical property of demand – without
relying on the measurement of prices and markups.
  37
    We document the strong empirical connection between demand shocks and firm productivity in Section 5.
  38
    We showed how the ratio of export sales for any two products (with the better performing product in the
numerator) increases in response to a demand shock. This clearly increases the skewness of export sales. In the
online appendix, we confirm that such an increase in skewness is reflected in the Theil and Atkinson indices that we
use in our empirical work.


                                                        27
4    Trade Competition and Product Reallocations at the Firm-Level

Our theoretical model highlights how our measured demand shocks induce increases in competi-
tion for exporters to those destinations; and how the increased competition generates increases in
productivity by shifting market shares and employment towards better performing products. We
seek to directly measure this connection between demand shocks and productivity. Since we cannot
measure the productivity associated with products sold to a particular destination, we need to show
that the connection between demand shocks and product reallocations aggregates to the firm-level –
before examining the link with firm-level productivity changes (which we can directly measure). Our
results in section 2 highlighted how demand shocks lead to reallocations towards better performing
products at the destination-industry level. In this section, we show how the destination-industry
demand shocks can be aggregated to the firm-level – and this firm-level demand shock strongly
predicts product reallocations towards better performing products (higher market shares) at the
firm-level ; that is, changes in skewness to the firm’s global product mix (the distribution of product
sales across all destinations).
    Intuitively, since there is a stable ranking of products at the firm level (better performing prod-
ucts in one market are most likely to be the better performing products in other markets – as we
previously discussed), then reallocations towards better performing products within destinations
should also be reflected in the reallocations of global sales/production towards better performing
products; and the strength of this link between the skewness of sales at the destination and global
levels should depend on the importance of the destination in the firm’s global sales. Our chosen
measure of skewness, the Theil index, makes this intuition precise. It is the only measure of skew-
ness that exhibits a stable decomposition from the skewness of global sales into the skewness of
destination-level sales (see Jost 2007).39 Specifically, let Ti,t be firm i’s Theil index for the skewness
of its global exports by product xsi,t ≡     d xi,d,t (the sum of exports for that product across all
                                           P s

destinations).40 Then this global Theil can be decomposed into a market-share weighted average
of the within-destination Theils Ti,d,t and a “between-destination” Theil index Ti,d,t
                                                                                  B that measures

  39
     This decomposition property is similar – but not identical – to the within/between decomposition of Theil indices
across populations. In the latter, the sample is split into subsamples. In our case, the same observation (in this case,
product sales) is split into “destinations” and the global measure reflects the sum across “destinations”.
  40
     The Theil index is defined in the same way as the destination level Theil in (2). We return to our notation xsi,d,t
to denote firm i’s exports of product s to destination d in year t, which we use throughout our empirical analysis.
In terms of our theoretical model, this corresponds to the export revenues generated for a product m by a firm with
core competency c to destination D.




                                                          28
differences in the distribution of product-level market shares across destinations:41

                                                X xi,d,t                    X xi,d,t
                                      Ti,t =                     Ti,d,t −                  B
                                                                                         Ti,d,t ,                 (15)
                                                          xi,t                    xi,t
                                                  d                          d


where xi,d,t ≡         s       and xi,t ≡                  represent firm i’s total exports to d, and across destina-
                 P                          P
                    s xi,d,t                d xi,d,t

tions to the world (global exports). The between-destination Theil Ti,d,t
                                                                     B is defined as


                                                                                              !
                                                  X xsi,d,t                 xsi,d,t /xi,d,t
                                         B
                                       Ti,d,t =                     log                           .
                                                      s
                                                           xi,d,t             xsi,t /xi,t

Note that the weights used in this decomposition for both the within- and between-destination
Theils are the firm’s export shares xi,d,t /xi,t across destinations d. The between-destination Theil
  B measures the deviation in a product’s market share in a destination d, xs /x
Ti,d,t                                                                      i,d,t i,d,t , from that

product’s global market share xsi,t /xi,t and then averages these deviations across destinations. It is
positive and converges to zero as the distributions of product market shares in different destination
become increasingly similar.
       To better understand the logic behind (15), note that it implies that the average of the within-
destination Theil indices can be decomposed into the sum of two positive elements: the global
Theil index, and the between-destination Theil index. This decomposition can be interpreted as
a decomposition of variance/dispersion. The dispersion observed in the destination level product
exports must be explained either by dispersion in global product exports (global Theil index), or by
the fact that the distribution of product sales varies across destinations (between-destination Theil
index).
       A simple example helps to clarify this point. Take a firm with 2 products and 2 destinations.
In each destination, exports of one product are x, and exports of the other product are 2x. This
leads to the same value for the within-destination Theil indices of (1/3) ln (1/3) + (2/3) ln(2/3), and
hence the same value for the average within-destination Theil index. Hence, if the same product
is the better performing product in each market (with 2x exports), then the distributions will be
synchronized across destinations and the between-destination Theil will be zero: all of the dispersion
is explained by the global Theil index, whose value is equal to the common value of the two within-
destination Theil indices. On the other hand, if the opposite products perform better in each
market, global sales are 3x for each product. There is thus no variation in global product sales,
  41
     For simplicity, we omit the industry referencing I for the destination Theils. The decomposition across industries
follows a similar pattern.


                                                                    29
and the global Theil index is zero. Accordingly, all of the variation in the within-destination Theil
indices is explained by the between-destination Theil.
   The theoretical model of Bernard, Redding and Schott (2011) with C.E.S. demand predicts that
the between-destination Theil index would be exactly zero when measured on a common set of
exported products across destinations. With linear demand, Mayer, Melitz and Ottaviano (2014)
show (theoretically and empirically) that this between-destination index would deviate from zero
because skewness varies across destinations. We have shown earlier that this result holds for a
larger class of demand systems such that the elasticity and the convexity of inverse demand increase
with consumption. Yet, even in these cases, the between-destination Theil is predicted to be small
because the ranking of the product sales is very stable across destinations. This leads to a prediction
that the market-share weighted average of the destination Theils should be strongly correlated with
the firm’s global Theil. Empirically, this prediction is strongly confirmed as shown in the firm-level
scatter plot (across all years) in Figure 3.




           Figure 3: Correlation Between Global Skewness and Average Local Skewness

   This high correlation between destination and global skewness of product sales enables us to move
from our previous predictions for the effects of the demand shocks on skewness at the destination-
level to a new prediction at the firm-level. To do this, we aggregate our destination-industry
measures of demand shocks to the firm-level using the same weighing scheme by the firms’ export


                                                  30
shares across destinations. We thus obtain our firm-level demand shock in (log) levels and first
difference:

                               X xIi,d,t                                                  X xIi,d,t−1
            log shocki,t ≡                 0
                                               × log   shockIi,d,t ,        ˜
                                                                            ∆shocki,t =
                                                                                                           ˜
                                                                                                         × ∆shockI
                                                                                                                 i,d,t ,
                                      xi,t0                                                     xi,t−1
                                d,I                                                       d,I


where xi,t ≡               xIi,d,t represents firm i’s total exports in year t. As was the case for the construction
                  P
                     d,I

of our firm-level destination shock (see equation 1), we only use the firm-level information on
exported products and market shares in prior years (the year of first export sales t0 for the demand
shock in levels and lagged year t − 1 for the first difference between t and t − 1). This ensures
the exogeneity of our constructed firm-level demand shocks (exogenous to firm-level actions in year
t > t0 for levels, and exogenous to firm-level changes ∆t for first differences). In particular, changes
in the set of exported products or exported market shares are not reflected in the demand shock.42
       From here on out, we focus exclusively on our trade shock constructed with the product level
export flows and drop the version constructed using the ISIC industry-level flows. Once we aggregate
the destination trade shocks to the firm-level, we have found that the explanatory power of this ISIC
shock is greatly reduced (its explanatory power at the destination level was also always lower than
the product level trade shock version). In addition, the trade shock using the product-level trade is
the only shock that exhibits variation across firms within a destination; a feature that we will use
for some robustness checks later on. The first three columns of Table 5 report the regression of the
firms’ global skewness (global Theil Ti,t ) on this firm-level trade shock. We see that this trade shock
has a very strong and significant (well beyond the 1% significance level) impact on the skewness of
global exports.

            Table 5: The Impact of Demand Shocks on the Global Product Mix (Firm Level)

       Dependent Variable              Ti,t               ∆Ti,t              Exp. Intensi,t          ∆ Exp. Intensi,t
       Specification                    FE         FD           FD-FE             FE               FD           FD-FE
       log trade shock                0.045a                                    0.010a
                                      (0.009)                                   (0.003)
       ˜ trade shock
       ∆                                         0.064a         0.056a                           0.019a          0.017a
                                                 (0.011)        (0.013)                          (0.003)         (0.004)
       Observations                   117987     117987         117987          111863           109052          109052
                                                                                                                 c            b
       FE refers to firm-level fixed effects. Standard errors (clustered at the firm level) in parentheses:          < 0.1,       <
       0.05, a < 0.01.
  42
    Lileeva and Trefler (2010), Hummels et al (2014), and Bernard et al (2018a) use a similar strategy to construct
firm-level trade-related shocks.



                                                                       31
         Our global Theil measure Ti,t measures the skewness of export sales across all destinations,
but it does not entirely reflect the skewness of production levels across the firm’s product range.
That is because we cannot measure the breakdown of product-level sales on the French domestic
market. Ultimately, it is the distribution of labor allocation across products (and the induced
distribution of production levels) that determines a firm’s labor productivity – conditional on its
technology (the production functions for each individual product). As highlighted by our theoretical
model, the export market demand shocks generate two different types of reallocations that both
contribute to an increased skewness of production levels for the firm: reallocations within the set of
exported products, which generate the increased skewness of global exports that we just discussed;
but also reallocations from non-exported products towards the better performing exported products
(including the extensive margin of newly exported products that we documented at the destination-
level). Although we cannot measure the domestic product-level sales, we can measure a single
statistic that reflects this reallocation from non-exported to exported goods: the firm’s export
intensity. We can thus test whether the demand shocks also induce an increase in the firm’s export
intensity. Those regressions are reported in the last three columns of Table 5, and confirm that
our firm-level trade shock has a very strong and highly significant positive impact on a firm’s
export intensity.43 Thus, our firm-level trade shock predicts the two types of reallocations towards
better performing products that we highlighted in our theoretical model (as a response to increased
competition in export markets).


5        Trade Competition and Productivity

We just showed that our firm-level trade shock predicts increases in the skewness of global exports,
and increases in export intensity. Holding firm technology fixed (the productivity of each individual
product), this increase in the skewness of global production will generate productivity increases
for the firm as they reallocate their factors of production towards products with higher produc-
tivity. Empirically, product skewness is affected by many different types of shocks. In particular,
technological changes to individual products will induce both skewness and productivity changes at
the firm-level that have nothing to do with the demand-side mechanism that is highlighted by our
theoretical model. Thus, we do not test for a direct relationship between skewness and productivity.
Instead, we test for a connection between the demand-driven trade shock and productivity at the
    43
    Since the export intensity is a ratio, we do not apply a log-transformation to that variable. However, specifications
using the log of export intensity yield very similar results.



                                                           32
firm-level. We show that there is a strong and significant response of productivity to this demand
shock; and that the dynamics of this response closely mirror the dynamic response of skewness to
the demand shock.
    We obtain our measure of firm productivity by merging our firm-level trade data with firm-level
production data. This latter dataset contains various measures of firm outputs and inputs. As
we are interested in picking up productivity fluctuations at a yearly frequency, we focus on labor
productivity. We then separately control for the impact of changes in factor intensities and returns
to scale (or variable utilization of labor) on labor productivity.
    We compute labor productivity at the firm-level as deflated value added per worker assuming
a sector-specific price deflator P I . Note that this measure aggregates to the overall deflated value-
added per worker for manufacturing. This aggregate productivity measure accurately tracks a
welfare-relevant quantity index – even though we do not have access to firm-level prices: The effect
of pure markup changes at the industry level are netted-out of our productivity measure.44
    More formally, we can write the welfare-relevant aggregate industry labor productivity – the
ratio of industry deflated value-added (VAI /P I ) over industry employment LI – as the labor share
weighted average of firm productivity using that same industry price deflator P I for firm revenue:

                                                VAI /P I   X Li VAi /P I
                                        ΦI ≡             =                                                          (16)
                                                  LI         LI   Li
                                                                i∈I


In other words, the revenue-based firm productivity measure VAi /P I /Li aggregates up to a
                                                                    

quantity-based industry measure, using the empirically observed firm labor shares Li /LI and with-
out any need for a quantity-based output or productivity measure at the level of the firm (which
would require measures of firm-product-level prices and qualities). This implicitly assumes the exis-
tence of an industry price aggregator P I , though its functional form is left completely unrestricted.
Consequently, we run all of our specifications with sector-time (2 digit NACE) fixed effects, thus
eliminating the need for any direct measures of those sector-level deflators.45 Our productivity
results therefore capture within-sector effects of the demand shocks, over-and-above any contribu-
tion of the sector deflator to a common productivity change across firms. We will thus report a
   44
      At the firm-level, an increase in markups across all products will be picked-up in our firm productivity measure
– even though this does not reflect a welfare-relevant increase in output. But if this is the case, then this firm’s labor
share will decrease, and its productivity will carry a smaller weight in the aggregate index.
   45
      We have also experimented with an alternative procedure using deflated value-added per worker (the value added
deflator coming from EUKLEMS dataset for France) and year fixed-effects (dropping the industry-year combined
fixed effects). The differences in the results are negligible.




                                                           33
welfare-relevant aggregate productivity change by aggregating our firm-level productivity changes
using the observed changes in labor shares.
       Our firm-level trade shock only aggregates across export destinations. It therefore does not
incorporate a firm’s exposure to demand shocks in its domestic (French) market. This is not
possible for two reasons: most importantly, we do not observe the product-level breakdown of
the firms’ sales in the French market (we only observe total domestic sales across products); in
addition, world exports into France would not be exogenous to firm-level technology changes in
France. Therefore, we need to adjust our trade shock using the firm’s export intensity to obtain an
overall firm-level demand shock relevant for overall production and hence productivity:

                                 xi,t0                                                           xi,t−1
log shock_intensi,t =                      ×log shocki,t ,        ˜
                                                                  ∆shock_intens i,t =
                                                                                                              ˜
                                                                                                             ×∆shocki,t ,
                           xi,t0 + xi,F,t0                                                 xi,t−1 + xi,F,t−1

where xi,F,t denotes firm i’s total (across products) sales to the French domestic market in year
t (and the ratio thus measures firm i’s export intensity).46 Once again, we only use prior year’s
information on firm-level sales to construct this overall demand shock. Note that this adjustment
using export intensity is equivalent to assuming a demand shock of zero in the French market and
including that market in our aggregation by market share relative to total firm sales xi,t + xi,F,t .


5.1      Impact of the Trade Shock on Firm Productivity

In this section, we investigate the direct link between this firm-level demand shock and firm pro-
ductivity. Our measure of productivity is the log of value-added per worker. All regressions include
industry-year fixed effects, that will capture in particular different evolutions of price indexes across
industries. In order to control for changes in capital intensity, we use the log of capital per worker.
We also control for unobserved changes in labor utilization and returns to scale by using the log
of raw materials (including energy use). Then, increases in worker effort or higher returns to scale
will be reflected in the impact of raw materials use on labor productivity. As there is no issue with
zeros for all these firm-level variables, we directly measure the growth rate of those variable using
simple first differences of the log levels.
       We begin with a graphical representation of the strong positive relationship between firm-level
productivity and our constructed demand shock. Figure 4 illustrates the correlation between those
  46
     Since xi,F,t is only available in the firm balance sheet data (and not in the customs data), we use the reported firm
total export figure xi,t from the same balance sheet data to compute this ratio. This ensures a consistent measurement
for the firm’s export intensity. The correlation between this firm total export figure and the one reported by customs
is .95 (very high, though exhibiting some differences between the two data sources).


                                                           34
variables in first differences for the largest French exporters (representing 50% of French exports
in 1996). Panel (a) is the unconditional scatter plot for those variables, while panel (b) shows the
added-variable plot for the first-difference regression of productivity on the trade shock, with addi-
tional controls for capital intensity, raw materials (both in log first-differences) and time dummies.
Those figures clearly highlight the very strong positive response of the large exporters’ productivity
to changes in trade competition in export markets (captured by the demand shock).


   Figure 4: Exporters Representing 50% of French Trade in 1996: First Differences 1996-2005
                     1




                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                    cond. change in ln labour productivity
    change in log labor productivity
                                .5




                                                                                                                                  .5
                       0




                                                                                                                          0
             -.5




                                                                                                               -.5
     -1




                                                                                                       -1
                     -1.5




                                                                                                                         -1.5




                                       -.2         -.1          0           .1            .2                                                      -.2        -.1          0           .1              .2
                                                     change in log trade shock                                                                            cond. change in ln trade shock
                                       regression line: coef = .614, se = .174, N = 977                                                        regression line: coef = .756, se = .23, N = 974
                                       168 firms representing 50% of French exports in 1996                                                    168 firms representing 50% of French exports in 1996
                                       standard errors clustered by firm                                                                       standard errors clustered by firm


                                                 (a) Unconditional                                                                                         (b) Conditional


   Table 6 shows how this result generalizes to our full sample of firms and our three different
specifications (FE, FD, FD-FE). Our theoretical model emphasizes how a multi-product firm’s
productivity responds to the demand shock via its effect on competition and product reallocations
in the firm’s export markets. Thus, we assumed that the firm’s technology at the product level (the
marginal cost v(m, c) for each product m) was exogenous (in particular, with respect to demand
fluctuations in export markets). However, there is a substantial literature examining how this
technology responds to export market conditions via various forms of innovation or investment
choices made by the firm. We feel that the timing dimension of our first difference specifications –
especially our FD-FE specifications which nets out any firm-level growth trends – eliminates this
technology response channel: It is highly unlikely that a firm’s innovation or investment response
to the trade shock in a given year (especially with respect to the trade shock’s deviation from trend
growth in the FD-FE specification) would be reflected contemporaneously in the firm’s productivity.


                                                                                               35
However, we will also show some additional robustness checks that address this potential technology
response.
       The first three columns of Table 6 show that, across our three timing specifications, there is
a stable and very strong response of firm productivity to the trade shock. Since our measure of
productivity as value added per worker incorporates neither the impact of changes in input intensities
nor the effects of non-constant returns to scale, we directly control for these effects in the next set of
regressions. In the last 3 columns of Table 6, we add controls for capital per worker and raw material
use (including energy). Both of these controls are highly significant: not surprisingly, increases in
capital intensity are reflected in labor productivity; and we find that increases in raw materials use
are also associated with higher labor productivity. This would be the case if there are increasing
returns to scale in the value-added production function, or if labor utilization/effort increases with
scale (in the short-run). However, even when these controls are added, the very strong effect of the
trade shock on firm productivity remains highly significant well beyond the 1% significance level
(from here on out, we will keep those controls in all of our firm-level productivity regressions).47
       Table 6 focuses on the contemporaneous response of productivity to the firm-level demand shock.
In Figure 5, we show the dynamic response of productivity by including two years of leads and lags for
the demand shock (in a very similar way to our dynamic specification for the response of skewness
to the demand shock at the firm-destination level). The contemporaneous coefficients along the
vertical dotted line replicate the regressions from the last 3 columns of Table 6 dropping the first
and last 2 years of our sample.48 Figure 5 shows that there are no significant pre-trends associated
with the response of productivity to the demand shock. All of the response is contemporaneous,
and quickly returns to its baseline level the following year. This dynamic pattern closely mirrors
the response of skewness (to the same trade shock), re-enforcing the case for a connection from the
latter to the former that we previously argued for.
       We now describe several robustness checks that further single out our theoretical mechanism
operating through the demand-side product reallocations for multi-product firms. In the next table
  47
      A separate concern is a potential selection bias if firms with unobserved characteristics leading to higher produc-
tivity growth self-select into destinations with positive aggregate destination shocks – which would then be reflected
in our trade shock. In order to eliminate this possibility, we generate a version of our trade shock that is purged
(demeaned) of any industry-destination-year effects (trends for the FD-FE specification). Using this purged measure
instead of our original one strengthens the impact of the trade shock on firm productivity (but leaves the impact of the
other controls virtually un-changed). We have also checked that a potential correlation between export and import
destinations is not driving the impact of the trade shock on productivity (which would then capture the impact of
lower production costs driven by demand shocks in the import destinations). Both of these robustness checks are
reported in the appendix.
   48
      As was the case with the response of skewness to the trade shock, the response of productivity to the trade shock
at the firm-level is significantly strengthened when those four years are dropped from our sample.


                                                           36
              Table 6: Baseline Results: Impact of Trade Shock on Firm Productivity

   Dependent Variable                     log prod.           ∆ log prod.       log prod.          ∆ log prod.
   Specification                             FE            FD       FD-FE          FE              FD    FD-FE
   log trade shock_intens                  0.061a                                0.051a
                                           (0.016)                               (0.016)
   ˜ trade shock_intens
   ∆                                                    0.106a      0.106a                    0.112a     0.113a
                                                        (0.019)     (0.023)                   (0.020)    (0.024)
   log capital stock per worker                                                  0.117a
                                                                                 (0.004)
   log raw materials                                                             0.086a
                                                                                 (0.003)
   ∆ log capital stock per worker                                                             0.125a     0.133a
                                                                                              (0.005)    (0.006)
   ∆ log raw materials                                                                        0.092a     0.090a
                                                                                              (0.003)    (0.003)
   Observations                            213001       185688      185688       203977       175619     175619
   FE refers to firm-level fixed effects. All regressions also include industry-year dummies. Standard errors
   (clustered at the firm level) in parentheses: c < 0.1, b < 0.05, a < 0.01.


we regress our capital intensity measure on our trade shock; the results in Table 7 show that there
is no response of investment to the trade shock. This represents another way to show that the
short-run timing for the demand shocks precludes a contemporaneous technology response: if this
were the case, we would expect to see some of this response reflected in higher investment (along
with other responses along the technology dimension).

                    Table 7: Capital Intensity Does Not Respond to Trade Shocks

                     Dependent Variable             ln K/L       ∆ ln K/L        ∆ ln K/L
                     Specification                    FE            FD            FD-FE
                     log trade shock_intens          0.029
                                                    (0.021)
                     ˜ trade shock_intens
                     ∆                                              0.015           0.002
                                                                   (0.022)         (0.027)
                     Observations                    218073        190512          190512
                     FE refers to firm fixed effects. All regressions also include industry-year
                     dummies. Standard errors (clustered at the firm level) in parentheses:c <
                     0.1, b < 0.05, a < 0.01.


   Next we use a different strategy to control for the effects of non-constant returns to scale or
variable labor utilization: in Table 8, we split our sample between year intervals where firms in-
crease/decrease employment. If the effects of the trade shock on productivity were driven by scale



                                                         37
                Figure 5: Impact of Trade Shock on Firm Productivity - leads and lags




                   .3
                               Coef. FE
                               Coef. FD


                   .25
                               Coef. FDFE
                   .2
                   .15
                   .1
                   .05
                   0
                   -.05
                   -.1




                          -2                -1               0                1                2
                                                  # of years since shock




effects or higher labor utilization/effort, then we would expect to see the productivity responses
concentrated in the split of the sample where firms are expanding employment (and also expanding
more generally). Yet, Table 8 shows that this is not the case: the effect of the trade shock on pro-
ductivity is just as strong (even a bit stronger) in the sub-sample of years where firms are decreasing
employment; and in both cases, the coefficients have a similar magnitude to our baseline results in
Table 6.49

                                      Table 8: Robustness to Scale Effects

           Sample                                  Employment Increase            Employment Decrease
           Dependent Variable                       ∆ log productivity             ∆ log productivity
           Specification                                   FD                             FD
           ˜ trade shock_intens
           ∆                                                0.128a                       0.170a
                                                            (0.034)                      (0.033)
           ∆ log capital stock per worker                   0.108a                       0.104a
                                                            (0.006)                      (0.006)
           ∆ log raw materials                              0.100a                       0.096a
                                                            (0.004)                      (0.004)
           Observations                                      69881                        65739
           All regressions include industry-year dummies. Standard errors (clustered at the firm
           level) in parentheses: c < 0.1, b < 0.05, a < 0.01.
  49
    Since we are splitting our sample across firms, we no longer rely on the two specifications with firm fixed-effects
and only show results for the FD specification.



                                                          38
       In order to further single-out our theoretical mechanism operating through the demand-side
product reallocations for multi-product firms, we now report two different types of falsification tests.
Our first test highlights that the link between productivity and the trade shocks is only operative
for multi-product firms. Table 9 reports the same regression (with controls) as our baseline results
from Table 6, but only for single-product exporters. This new table clearly shows that there is
no evidence of this link among this subset of firms. Next, we show that this productivity-trade
link is only operative for firms with a substantial exposure to export markets (measured by export
intensity). Similarly to single-product firms, we would not expect to find a significant productivity-
trade link among firms with very low export intensity. This is indeed the case. In Table 10, we
re-run our baseline specification using the trade shock before it is interacted with export intensity.
The first three columns report the results for the quartile of firms with the lowest export intensity,
and highlight that there is no evidence of the productivity-trade link for those firms. On the other
hand, we clearly see from the last three columns that this effect is very strong and powerful for the
quartile of firms with the highest export intensity.50
       The firms with high export intensity therefore have a response of productivity to trade shocks
estimated around 10% (columns 5 and 6 of Table 10). How should we interpret this number in
terms of the impact of our mechanism on the productivity of the French economy as a whole? In
appendix D, we show how we can use this 10% coefficient to compute a counter-factual contribution
of the trade shocks to physical labor productivity at the industry and overall manufacturing levels –
aggregating over those firms with the highest export intensity using (16). This aggregation uses the
firms’ observed labor shares, which magnifies the contribution of firms with growing labor shares
and conversely reduces the contribution for those with shrinking labor shares.51 The contribution
of each sector is reported in appendix Table D.1, along with the contribution to aggregate French
manufacturing. This contribution is substantial – accounting for a 1.2% average productivity growth
rate for the entire French manufacturing sector (working only through the productivity linkages for
the firms with the highest export intensities; by construction, the contribution of all firms in the
  50
      Since the trade shock has not been interacted with export intensity, the coefficients for this top quartile represent
significantly higher magnitudes than the average coefficients across the whole sample reported in Table 6 (since export
intensity is always below 1). This is also confirmed by a specification with the interacted trade shock restricted to
this same top quartile of firms. We have also experimented with dropping any firm that could potentially impact
rest-of-world exports – and hence break the exogeneity of that variable with respect to firm-level decisions. We have
used several different threshold market share levels. One of them drops any firm with an average product-destination
market share (for any year) exceeding 10%. Those exclusions either leave our key coefficients on the trade shock
unaffected or raise them.
   51
      Empirically, we find that the firm-level contributions to aggregate productivity are magnified because firms
exposed to positive shocks tend to increase their labor shares. This magnification could go in the opposite direction
– reducing the impact of the firm-level contributions if this condition were reversed.


                                                            39
                          Table 9: Robustness: Single Product Firms
                   Dependent Variable            log prod.    ∆ log prod.
                   Specification                               FE           FD       FD-FE
                   log trade shock_intens                    -0.050
                                                            (0.047)
                   log capital stock per worker             0.180a
                                                            (0.013)
                   log raw materials                        0.085a
                                                            (0.007)
                   ˜ trade shock_intens
                   ∆                                                      0.038       0.012
                                                                         (0.044)     (0.066)
                   ∆ log capital stock per worker                        0.214a      0.260a
                                                                         (0.013)     (0.019)
                   ∆ log raw materials                                   0.103a      0.100a
                                                                         (0.007)     (0.011)
                   Observations                              33198        25519       25519
                   FE refers to firm fixed effects. All regressions also include industry-year
                   dummies. Standard errors (clustered at the firm level) in parentheses:
                   c
                     < 0.1, b < 0.05, a < 0.01.


lowest 3 quartiles of export intensity are set to zero). This amounts to a 12% productivity gain over
our ten year sample period from 1995-2005.


6   Conclusion

This paper uses detailed firm-level data to assess the relevance and magnitude of demand shocks
in export markets for product reallocations within firms and ultimately for multi-product firm
productivity. We find that the impact of those shocks on both reallocations (French firms skew
their market shares towards better performing products) and productivity is substantial. We show
that this evidence on reallocations provides a new test and validation for endogenous price elasticities
that satisfy Marshall’s Second Law of Demand (price elasticities decrease with consumption). There
is a large literature finding evidence for markup responses consistent with this type of demand. In
contrast to this literature, our test only uses data on sales (albeit at a very disaggregated level
across products, firms, and destinations) and does not require data on either firm-product prices
or quantities (which are typically very noisy), and the recovery/estimation of marginal cost shocks
based on functional form assumptions for demand and/or production.
    By measuring product reallocations and productivity responses within firms, we can control for
many alternative explanations that might be correlated with foreign demand shocks – a strategy



                                                       40
                           Table 10: Robustness: Low/High Export Intensity

   Sample                                   exp. intens. quartile # 1                     exp. intens. quartile # 4
   Dependent Variable                     log prod.      ∆ log prod.                    log prod.      ∆ log prod.
   Specification                              FE          FD            FD-FE              FE                FD       FD-FE
   log trade shock                           0.003                                       0.072a
                                            (0.006)                                      (0.011)
   log capital stock per worker             0.117a                                       0.104a
                                            (0.009)                                      (0.007)
   log raw materials                        0.070a                                       0.111a
                                            (0.005)                                      (0.006)
   ˜ trade shock
   ∆                                                     0.004           0.006                              0.092a    0.101a
                                                        (0.008)         (0.009)                             (0.014)   (0.016)
   ∆ log capital stock per worker                       0.125a          0.129a                              0.107a    0.114a
                                                        (0.011)         (0.013)                             (0.008)   (0.010)
   ∆ log raw materials                                  0.084a          0.081a                              0.108a    0.104a
                                                        (0.006)         (0.007)                             (0.006)   (0.007)
   Observations                             38806        30909           30909           57267               48716     48716
                                                                   c            b             a
   Standard errors (clustered at the firm level) in parentheses:       < 0.1,       < 0.05,       < 0.01.


that would not be possible when evaluating the effects across firms. Our baseline results shows
that the elasticity of labor productivity to trade shocks is between 5 and 11 %. This order of
magnitude is very robust to controls for short-run investment by the firm, scale effects, and possibly
correlated import shocks. Our measured productivity effect for single product firms is nil, further
highlighting the importance of changes in product mix for multi-product firms. We also show that
this productivity response is concentrated within the quartile of exporters with the highest export
intensities. Taking into account the weight of those firms in the whole economy, we calculate that
the average annual increase in French manufacturing productivity – in response to growth in world
trade – over our 10 year sample (from 1995-2005) is slightly over 1 percent per year.


References


Amiti, Mary, Oleg Itskhoki, and Jozef Konings. 2014. “Importers, Exporters, and Exchange Rate
   Disconnect.” American Economic Review 104 (7): 1942–78.

Atkin, David, Azam Chaudhry, Shamble Chaudry, Amit K. Khandelwal and Eric Verhoogen .
    2015. “Mark-up and Cost Dispersion Across Firms: Direct Evidence from Producer Surveys in
    Pakistan.’’ American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings, 105(5), 537–544.

Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, Dave Donaldson, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. 2018. “The
   Elusive Pro-Competitive Effects of Trade.” The Review of Economic Studies 86(1): 46-80.


                                                        41
Asplund, Marcus, and Volker Nocke. 2006. “Firm Turnover in Imperfectly Competitive Markets.”
   Review of Economic Studies 73 (2): 295–327.

Atkinson, Anthony B. and Andrea Brandolini. 2010. “On Analyzing the World Distribution of
    Income.” World Bank Economic Review 24 (1): 1-37.

Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence F. Katz, Christina Patterson, and John Van Reenen. 2020.
   “The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
   Forthcoming

Baldwin, John R. and Wulong Gu. 2009. “The Impact of Trade on Plant Scale, Production-Run
    Length and Diversification.” In Producer Dynamics: New Evidence from Micro Data, edited
    by T. Dunne, J.B. Jensen, and M.J. Roberts. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Berman, Nicolas, Philippe Martin, and Thierry Mayer. 2012. “How Do Different Exporters React
   to Exchange Rate Changes?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (1): 437-492.

Bernard, Andrew B., Andreas Moxnes, and Karen Helene Ulltveit-Moe. 2018a. “Two-Sided Het-
    erogeneity and Trade.” Review of Economics and Statistics 100(3): 424-439.

Bernard, Andrew B., Stephen J. Redding and Peter K. Schott. 2011. “Multi-product Firms and
    Trade Liberalization.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (3): 1271-1318.

Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott. 2012. “The
    Empirics of Firm Heterogeneity and International Trade.” Annual Review of Economics 4 (1):
    283–313.

Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding and Peter K. Schott. 2007. “Firms
    in International Trade.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 21 (3): 105-130.

Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott. 2018b. “Global
    Firms.” Journal of Economic Literature, 56(2): 565–619.

Bertoletti, Paolo, and Paolo Epifani. 2014. “Monopolistic Competition: CES Redux?” Journal of
    International Economics 93 (2): 227–38.

Burstein, Ariel, and Gita Gopinath. 2014. “International Prices and Exchange Rates.” In Handbook
   of International Economics, edited by Kenneth Rogoff, Gita Gopinath, and Elhanan Helpman,
   Volume 4:391–451. Elsevier.

Campbell, Jeffrey R. and Hugo A. Hopenhayn. 2005. “Market Size Matters.” The Journal of
   Industrial Economics, 53(1),1—25.

Chatterjee, Arpita, Rafael Dix-Carneiro, and Jade Vichyanond. 2013. “Multi-Product Firms and
   Exchange Rate Fluctuations.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5 (2): 77–110.

Deaton, Angus, and John Muellbauer. 1980. Economics and Consumer Behavior. Cambridge
   University Press.

De Loecker, Jan, and Pinelopi Goldberg. 2014. “Firm Performance in a Global Market.” The
   Annual Review of Economics, 6, 201–227.

De Loecker, Jan, Penny Goldberg, Amit Khandelwal and Nina Pavcnik. 2016. “Prices, Markups
   and Trade Reform.” Econometrica 84(2):445–510.

                                               42
Demidova, Svetlana and Andres Rodríguez-Clare. 2013. “The Simple Analytics of the Melitz Model
   in a Small Economy.” Journal of International Economics, 90 (2): 266–272.

Dhingra, Swati. 2013. “Trading Away Wide Brands for Cheap Brands”. American Economic
   Review, 103 (6): 2554–2584.

Dhingra, Swati, and John Morrow. 2019. “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product
   Diversity Under Firm Heterogeneity.” Journal of Political Economy 127(1): 196–232.

Dhyne, Emmanuel, Amil Petrin, Valerie Smeets, and Frederic Warzynski. 2017. “Multi-Product
   Firms, Import Competition, and the Evolution of Firm-product Technical Efficiencies.” Na-
   tional Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 23637.

Eckel, Carsten, and J. Peter Neary. 2010. “Multi-Product Firms and Flexible Manufacturing in
    the Global Economy”. The Review of Economic Studies, 77 (1): 188 –217.

Fabinger, Michal, and E. Glen Weyl. 2014. “A Tractable Approach to Pass-Through Patterns with
    Applications to International Trade,” University of Chicago.

Gaulier, Guillaume and Soledad Zignago. 2010. “BACI: International Trade Database at the
   Product-Level. The 1994-2007 Version.” CEPII Working Paper, N° 2010-23.

Harrison, Ann E. 1994. “Productivity, Imperfect Competition and Trade Reform : Theory and
    Evidence.” Journal of International Economics 36 (1-2): 53-73.

Hummels, David, Rasmus Jorgensen, Jakob Munch, and Chong Xiang. 2014. “The Wage Effects of
   Offshoring: Evidence from Danish Matched Worker-Firm Data.” American Economic Review
   104 (6): 1597–1629.

Iacovone, Leonardo, and Beata S. Javorcik. 2010. “Multi-Product Exporters: Product Churning,
    Uncertainty and Export Discoveries.” The Economic Journal 120 (544): 481–99.

Jost, Lou. 2007. “Partitioning Diversity into Independent Alpha and Beta Components.” Ecology
    88 (10): 2427–39.

Kimball, Miles S. 1995. “The Quantitative Analytics of the Basic Neomonetarist Model.” Journal
   of Money, Credit, and Banking 27 (4): 1241.

Levinsohn, James A. 1993. “Testing the Imports-as-market-discipline Hypothesis.”       Journal of
    International Economics 35 (1-2): 1-22.

Li, Hongbin, Hong Ma, and Yuan Xu. 2015. “How Do Exchange Rate Movements Affect Chinese
    Exports? — A Firm-Level Investigation.” Journal of International Economics 97 (1): 148–61.

Lileeva, Alla, and Daniel Trefler. 2010. “Improved Access to Foreign Markets Raises Plant-Level
    Productivity. . . For Some Plants.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (3): 1051–99.

Mayer, Thierry and Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano. 2008. “The Happy Few: The Internationalisation
   of European Firms.” Intereconomics 43 (3): 135-148.

Mayer, Thierry, Marc J. Melitz, and Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano. 2014. “Market Size, Competition,
   and the Product Mix of Exporters” , American Economic Review 104 (2): 495–536.

Marshall, Alfred. 1936. Principles of Economics (8th ed.). London: Macmillan and co.

                                              43
Melitz, Marc J. and Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano. 2008. “Market Size, Trade and Productivity.”
    Review of Economic Studies 75 (1): 295 -316.

Melitz, Marc J., and Stephen J. Redding. 2014. “Heterogeneous Firms and Trade.” In Handbook
    of International Economics, edited by Elhanan Helpman, Kenneth Rogoff, and Gita Gopinath,
    4:1–54. Elsevier.

Melitz, Marc J., and Stephen J. Redding. 2015. “Heterogeneous Firms and Trade.” In , edited by
    Elhanan Helpman, Kenneth Rogoff, and Gita Gopinath, 4:1–54. Handbook of International
    Economics 4. Elsevier.

Mrázová, Monika and Peter J Neary. 2017. “Not so demanding: Demand structure and firm
   behavior.” American Economic Review 107(12): 3835-74.

Mrázová, Monika and Peter J Neary. 2019. “Selection effects with heterogeneous firms.” forthcom-
   ing Journal of the European Economic Association.

Nocke, Volker, and Stephen Yeaple. 2014. “Globalization and Multiproduct Firms”. International
   Economic Review, 55: 993–1018.

Parenti, Matthieu, Peter Ushchev, and Jacques-François Thisse. 2017. “Toward a theory of mo-
    nopolistic competition” Journal of Economic Theory, 167: 86—115.

Syverson, Chad. 2004. “Market Structure and Productivity: A Concrete Example.’’ Journal of
    Political Economy, 112(6), 1181–1222.

Zhelobodko, Evgeny, Sergey Kokovin, Mathieu Parenti and Jacques-François Thisse. 2012. “Mo-
    nopolistic Competition: Beyond the Constant Elasticity of Substitution.” Econometrica 80
    (6): 2765-2784.




                                              44
                                            Appendix
A     Demand Conditions (MSLD) and (MSLD’)

We restrict our attention to the range of quantities with positive marginal revenue (elastic demand)
consistent with profit maximizing output choices on the firm side. Given our assumption of de-
creasing marginal revenue (A2), this quantity range will consist of all non-negative quantities up to
a threshold value (potentially infinite if marginal revenue remains positive). Within this quantity
range, 0 ≤ εp (qi ) < 1 and εφ (qi ) > 0. The definitions of inverse demand (4) and marginal revenue
(5) further imply that these elasticities must satisfy:

                                         ε0p (qi )qi
                                                     = εφ (qi ) − εp (qi ).                            (17)
                                        1 − εp (qi )

Thus, we see that εp (qi ) is increasing (decreasing) if and only if εφ (qi ) is above (below) εp (qi ).
Thus, demand condition (MSLD) (εp (qi ) increasing) holds if and only if the pass-though elasticity
θ ≡ ∂ ln p(q(v, λ)/∂ ln v = εp /εφ is less than 1 (pass-through is incomplete).
    We now show that demand condition (MSLD’) implies (MSLD) and that [1 − εp (qi )] /εφ (qi )
decreasing also implies (MSLD). To show this, we impose one further – but very mild – condition
on the convexity of demand at qi = 0: limqi →0 ε0p (qi )qi ≥ 0. This just rules out an extreme form
of demand convexity at zero consumption (though, implicitly, this assumption also relies on the
continuity of demand for qi ≥ 0). It can only be violated if limqi →0 ε0p (qi ) = −∞ and in addition
requires ε0p (qi ) to decrease to −∞ faster than −1/qi as qi → 0. So long as this condition holds, then
εφ (0) ≥ εp (0) with equality if ε0p (0) ≤ 0.


A.I    (MSLD’) Implies (MSLD)

Assume (MSLD’) holds: ε0φ (qi ) > 0. Given (17), ε0p (qi ) ≤ 0 implies εp (qi ) ≥ εφ (qi ) over that range
for qi . Given our assumption that εp (0) ≤ εφ (0), this can only happen after εp (qi ) cuts εφ (qi ) from
below (or at qi = 0). This in turn would imply that εp (qi ) is strictly increasing at the intersection
point qi = q̄: εp (q̄) ≥ εφ (q̄) > 0. This contradicts (17) which requires ε0p (q̄) = 0. Thus, εp (qi ) must
be strictly below εφ (qi ) for all qi > 0. Given (17), this entails ε0p (qi ) ≥ 0 with the inequality strict
for qi > 0. Thus, εp (qi ) must be strictly increasing.




                                                       45
A.II    [1 − εp (qi )] /εφ (qi ) Decreasing Implies (MSLD)

If [1 − εp (qi )] /εφ (qi ) is decreasing, then εp (qi ) and εφ (qi ) cannot both be decreasing. However
ε0p (qi ) < 0 would imply that εφ (qi ) is also decreasing and thus represents a violation. More formally,
the average ε0φ (qi ) over any interval [0, q̄] must then be negative (given (17) and ε0p (qi ) < 0):

                                      Z   q̄
                                 1
                         ε0φ   =               ε0 (qi )dqi = εφ (q̄) − εφ (0) ≤ εp (q̄) − εp (0) < 0.
                                 q̄   0


This highlights that ε0φ (qi ) ≥ 0 cannot hold over the entire interval [0, q̄]. So εφ (qi ) is decreasing on
average, and must be decreasing over a subset of [0, q̄] for any q̄ > 0. This reasoning also applies to
cases where εp (qi ) is initially increasing then decreasing. Say that εp (qi ) is decreasing starting at
q1 > 0. Then, the average ε0φ < 0 over any interval [q1 , q2 ]. (Since the εφ and εp curves must cross
at q1 where εp (q1 ) = 0.)


B      Allowing for the Destination Country to Export

In the main text we simplified our analysis by assuming that firms in D do not export. In the short-
run, allowing for such exporting opportunities would have no impact on the equilibrium outcome
for D. In the long-run, the free entry condition for D would change, reflecting the average exporting
profits for a prospective entrant:

                               ∞
                                   (Z                                                                 )!
                 X             X               ĉDl /zD (m)
                                                              [π (τDl cz(m), λl ) Lcl   − fDl ] dΓD (c)       e
                                                                                                           = fD ,
               l=F,H,D     m=0            0


where τDl and fDl represent the export costs from D to l = H, F ; Lcl and λl represent market
size and competition in export market l (exogenous due to the ‘small’ country assumption); and
ĉDl represent the export cutoffs. Although those cutoffs are endogenous, they only depend on the
exogenous demand conditions in l (along with the exogenous export costs). Thus, those cutoffs do
not depend on demand conditions in D (either LcD or λD ). Thus, the average export profits in the
condition above can be written in terms of variables that are exogenous to those demand conditions;




                                                                      46
moving those average profits to the right-hand side, we obtain:

    ∞
      "Z                                                              #
    X          cDD /zD (m)
               b
                             [π (czD (m), λD ) LcD − fDD ] dΓD (c) =
    m=0    0
                                                   ∞
                                                         (Z                                                         )!
                                           X       X           ĉDl /zD (m)
                                     e
                                    fD −                                      [π (τDl cz(m), λl ) Lcl − fDl ] dΓD (c)     .
                                           l=F,H   m=0    0


The left-hand side of this free entry condition is identical to the one we derived in (13) for the case
where there are no exports from D. Since the right-hand side does not depend on market conditions
in D, all of our comparative statics with respect to those conditions will remain unchanged (it is
as-if we changed the level of the entry cost for D to this new right-hand side level).


C    Robustness Tables

Table C.1 replicates Table 6 using a trade shock that is purged (demeaned) of any industry-
destination-year effects (trends for the FD-FE specification).

                      Table C.1: Impact of Purged Trade Shock on Firm Productivity

    Dependent Variable                        log prod.          ∆ log prod.            log prod.       ∆ log prod.
    Specification                                 FE            FD      FD-FE               FE         FD      FD-FE
    log trade shock_intens–purged               0.118a                                    0.101a
                                               (0.021)                                   (0.021)
    ˜ trade shock_intens–purged
    ∆                                                         0.128a      0.134a                     0.136a     0.141a
                                                              (0.023)     (0.027)                    (0.024)    (0.028)
    log capital stock per worker                                                         0.117a
                                                                                         (0.004)
    log raw materials                                                                    0.086a
                                                                                         (0.003)
    ∆ log capital stock per worker                                                                   0.125a     0.133a
                                                                                                     (0.005)    (0.006)
    ∆ log raw materials                                                                              0.092a     0.090a
                                                                                                     (0.003)    (0.003)
    Observations                               213001         185688      185688         203977      175619     175619
    FE refers to firm-level fixed effects. All regressions also include industry-year dummies. Standard errors
    (clustered at the firm level) in parentheses: c < 0.1, b < 0.05, a < 0.01.


    Table C.2 adds control for demand shocks in a firm’s import destinations. We construct a
symmetric set of variables that weight changes in exports (to the world except France) from a given
product/country by the firm-level import shares from that product/country. Those new variables
are introduced into our baseline specification from Table 6. Although import shocks have a separate

                                                          47
large and very significant effect, they do not affect our main effect of interest in any major way.

                                Table C.2: Robustness to Import Shocks

   Dependent Variable                    log prod.       ∆ log prod.         log prod.       ∆ log prod.
   Specification                             FE         FD      FD-FE            FE         FD      FD-FE
   log trade shock_intens                  0.068a                              0.056a
                                          (0.020)                             (0.019)
   log import trade shock_intens           0.078a                              0.065b
                                          (0.029)                             (0.028)
   ˜ trade shock_intens
   ∆                                                  0.110a     0.111a                   0.129a     0.133a
                                                      (0.022)    (0.026)                  (0.022)    (0.027)
   ˜ import trade shock_intens
   ∆                                                  0.225a     0.245a                   0.197a     0.218a
                                                      (0.034)    (0.041)                  (0.033)    (0.041)
   log capital stock per worker                                               0.095a
                                                                              (0.004)
   log raw materials                                                          0.090a
                                                                              (0.004)
   ∆ log capital stock per worker                                                         0.107a     0.115a
                                                                                          (0.005)    (0.006)
   ∆ log raw materials                                                                    0.091a     0.090a
                                                                                          (0.003)    (0.003)
   Observations                           133382      152171     152171       129517      144938     144938
   FE refers to firm-level fixed effects. All regressions also include industry-year dummies. Standard errors
   (clustered at the firm level) in parentheses: c < 0.1, b < 0.05, a < 0.01.




                                                       48
D    Aggregate Productivity Impact

We start with the coefficient on the trade shock for the high export-intensity quartile βq4 for the
specifications in first differences (reported in Table 10, column 5). This gives us the percentage
productivity response to a 1% trade shock for the firms in the fourth quartile. We assume that
there is no response of productivity for the firms in the remaining 3 quartiles. We can then use
each firm’s measured trade shock to calculate an induced percentage productivity change for each
firm in the fourth quartile. Aggregating those using the observed changes in the firms’ labor shares
yields the overall contribution to aggregate physical productivity changes from the observed trade
shocks (at the sector or total manufacturing level). Since equation (16) aggregates productivity in
levels, we calculate the counterfactual productivity level for each firm in period t + 1 by applying
this productivity change to the firm’s observed productivity in period t. We then compute the ratios
of the counterfactual aggregate productivity level for t + 1 and the observed aggregate productivity
level in period t.
    The percentage changes reported in column 1 of Table D.1 are the yearly averages of those ratios.
This table uses the βq4 = .092 coefficient from the FD specification (the results for βq4 = .101 for
the FD-FE specification would be roughly 10% higher). We use the same aggregation method to
obtain sector and total manufacturing level changes in the trade shock – only for the firms in the
fourth quartile (the trade shock for all remaining firms is set to 0). Those aggregate changes in the
trade shock are reported in column 2. The labor shares used to compute those aggregate changes
in columns 1 and 2 are based on total employment across all export intensity quartiles (not just as
a fraction of employment in the fourth quartile). Those reported changes are therefore diluted by
the zero contributions for all firms in the bottom three quartiles. Column 3 reports the employment
share for those firms in the fourth quartile, while column 4 reports the overall employment share (all
quartiles) for the sector (as with the first two columns those numbers are yearly averages). Taking
the ratio of the annual 1.2% productivity gain to the 6.2% trade shock change, we see that the .092
firm-level elasticity obtained in Table 10 is doubled to .193 for aggregate productivity. This reflects
the contribution of labor share reallocations towards firms with relatively higher trade shocks.




                                                  49
                 Table D.1: Quantification of Trade Shock Effect on Productivity

Industry                                           prod.   trade shock     % high exp.intens.   % mfg. emp.
Wearing Apparel                                     3.38          5.21                  27.36           2.26
Wood                                                3.37          6.34                  20.36           1.70
Tobacco                                             3.22         43.60                   0.48           0.16
Printing and publishing                             2.81          8.48                   5.36           3.31
Radio, television and communication                 1.80          4.94                  59.77           4.31
Leather and footwear                                1.79          3.59                  26.86           1.21
Textiles                                            1.69          1.99                  33.04           3.29
Motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers          1.62          9.80                  52.39           7.82
Machinery                                           1.32          5.54                  45.40           9.12
Manufacturing nec                                   1.19          5.94                  22.72           3.56
Pulp and paper                                      1.18          3.67                  30.62           2.82
Chemicals                                           1.15          6.58                  40.55           9.63
Fabricated metal                                    0.94          7.04                  17.41           8.81
Medical, precision and optical instruments          0.85          5.84                  46.82           3.53
Rubber and plastics                                 0.80          5.75                  36.97           7.18
Electrical machinery                                0.73          5.83                  53.12           5.17
Basic metals                                        0.70          6.27                  58.91           4.06
Food and beverages                                  0.66          6.20                  14.12          11.88
Other transport equipment                           0.65          7.25                  69.14           4.30
Office machinery                                    0.64          3.70                  42.55           1.09
Other Non-Metallic Mineral                          0.46          3.89                  35.52           3.86
Coke, ref. petr. and nuclear fuel                  -0.18          5.12                  25.54           0.93
Total mfg                                           1.17          6.20                  36.66        100.00
Columns (1) and (2) provide average percentage changes over the 1996-2005 period.




                                                     50
                                   Online Appendix
I      Properties of different skewness measures

In this appendix, we characterize the conditions under which tougher competition (a larger λ)
increases the “skewness” of a firm’s product mix (for a given product range) when “skewness” is
measured in terms of the Ratio, the Atkinson or the Theil indexes.


I.i    Preliminary Results

Consider a firm supplying M products indexed m = 0, ..., M − 1 in increasing order of distance
from its core product (i.e. in increasing order of marginal cost vm ). For product m, the elasticity
of output per consumer qm with respect to competition λ can be expressed as

                                           dqm λ        1
                                                  =−          ,
                                            dλ qm    εφ (qm )

while the elasticity of its markup µm can be written as

                      dµm λ                          dqm λ     εφ (qm ) − εp (qm )
                             = (εφ (qm ) − εp (qm ))        =−                     .
                       dλ µm                          dλ qm         εφ (qm )

As marginal cost vm is constant, the sum of these two elasticities determines the elasticity of revenue
per consumer rm = pm qm = µm vm qm as
                                                                     
                          drm λ    dµm λ    dqm λ        1 − εp (qm )
                                 =        +        =− 1+                .                      (OA.1)
                           dλ rm    dλ µm    dλ qm         εφ (qm )

I.ii    Ratio Index

Consider two products, m and m0 with 0 ≤ m < m0 ≤ M − 1. The Ratio Index is defined as the
ratio of their revenues
                                       rm    p m qm     µ m v m qm
                                           =         =                  ,
                                       rm0   pm0 qm0   µ m 0 v m 0 qm 0

which is larger than 1 under (A1)-(A2). All bilateral ratios between any two products m and
m0 with m < m0 increase when λ increases if and only if (drm /dλ) (λ/rm )is increasing in qm , or
equivalently if and only if [1 − εp (qm )] /εφ (qm ) is decreasing in qm .




                                                       i
I.iii   Atkinson Index

Define the Atkinson Index of the firm’s revenues across products as

                                   η                               1                          η    "                  #    1
                                                        1−η
                                      P                                                                             1−η
                                              m (pm qm )
                                                                  1−η
                          1       1−η                                                1       1−η       X       1−η
            A=1−                                P                          =1−                              sR
                                                                                                             m                  ,
                          M                       m p m qm                           M                  m

where sR
       m is the revenue share of product m:


                                                p m xm       µm vm xm
                                        srm = PM −1      = PM −1         .
                                               m=0 pm xm    m=0 µm vm xm

                                                                                                                                    η
To streamline the subsequent derivations, apply the monotonic transformation AM = − (A − 1) M 1−η
so that AM decreases (A increases) as the revenue distribution becomes more concentrated (‘skewed’).
                                                   η
We can rearrange AM = − (A − 1) M 1−η to obtain

                                                                  "                           #    1
                                         X                            X                           1−η

                                  AM           µm vm x m =                 (µm vm xm )1−η               ,
                                          m                           m


which in turn can be differentiated to yield

                         dAM λ     X µm vm xm  dµm λ            dxm λ
                                                                        
                                +       P                      +
                          dλ AM     m      m µm vm x m   dλ µm    dλ xm
                                          1−η
                               Pµm vm xm                            
                         X      m µm vm xm           dµm λ    dxm λ
                       =    P  µm vm xm 1−η               +
                               m               P      dλ µm    dλ xm
                                          m        m   µm vm xm


Given the definition of srm and (OA.1), we can then rewrite

                                         "                   #
                              dAM λ    X
                                            r    (srm )1−η     1 − εp (xm )
                                     =     sm − P        1−η
                               dλ AM   m
                                                       r
                                                 m (sm )
                                                                 εφ (xm )

with

                                                                      !
                                               (sr )1−η
                                        srm − P m 1−η                      < 0 for small srm
                                                    R
                                               m (sm )
                                                                      !
                                               (sr )1−η
                                        srm − P m 1−η                      > 0 for large srm
                                                    r
                                               m (sm )


so that d ln AM /d ln λ < 0 (d ln A/d ln λ > 0) requires that [1 − εp (qm )] /εφ (qm ) is decreasing in qm .


                                                                      ii
I.iv   Theil Index

Define the Theil Index of the firm’s revenues across products as

                                        p x       p x
                                       P m m log P m m =
                                 X                       X
                          T ≡                              srm log srm
                                  m
                                          p x
                                        m m m       p x
                                                  m m m  m


To streamline the subsequent derivations, define T M = −T so that T M decreases (T increases)
as the sales distribution becomes more concentrated (‘skewed’). Given pm xm = µm vm xm , we can
rearrange T M = −T to obtain

               X                       X                             X                  X
          TM       µm vm xm = −            µm vm xm log µm vm xm +       µm vm xm log       µ m vm xm ,
               m                       m                             m                  m


which can be differentiated to yield

                   dT M λ    X µm vm xm  dµm λ                  
                                                         dxm λ
                           +                           +
                    dλ T M
                                 P
                             m      m µm vm x m dλ µm     dλ xm
                                                          
                      1 X vm xm µ m        dµm λ    dxm λ          µm vm xm
                 = − M     P                      +          log P
                     T   m   m µ m vm xm    dλ µm    dλ xm         m µm vm x m


Using the definitions of srm and T M then gives

                          dT M λ    X       srm log srm
                                                           
                                        r                    1 − εp (xm )
                                M
                                  =    sm − P r          r
                           dλ T     m        m sm log sm       εφ (xm )

with

                                     srm log srm
                                                   
                                 srm
                                  −P R            R
                                                      < 0 for small srm ,
                                     m ms  log  s m
                                       r log sr
                                                   
                                     s
                                r
                               sm − P rm       m
                                                  r
                                                      > 0 for large srm ,
                                     m sm log sm


so that d ln T r /d ln λ < 0 (more concentration) requires [1 − εp (qm )] /εφ (qm ) to be decreasing in qm .




                                                       iii
II      Specific demand system functional forms

II.i    Bulow-Pfleiderer, Linear and CES (Fabinger and Weyl, 2014)

In our setup, this family of functional forms is associated with the sub-utility

                                                                β
                                              u(qi ) = αqi +       (qi )1−γ
                                                               1−γ

which has the appealing feature of nesting both CES demand and linear demand as special cases.
The first order condition for the corresponding utility maximization problem

                                Z   M                                  Z M
                                                     β
                       max                  αqi +       (qi )1−γ di s.t.     pi qi di = 1,
                        qi ≥0   0                   1−γ                   0

is
                            α + β (qi )−γ                             M
                                                                  Z       h                i
                       pi =               , with λ =                       αqi + β (qi )1−γ di,
                                 λ                                0

where λ > 0 is the marginal utility of income. This demand paramatrization includes CES demand
as a special case for α = 0, β = 1 − γ and γ = 1/σ ∈ (0, 1) (where σ > 1 is the price elasticity of
demand). It also includes linear demand as another special case for α > 0, β < 0 and γ = −1. More
generally, u(qi ) is increasing and concave if and only if β < 0 and γ < 0. Moreover, conditional
on u(qi ) being increasing and concave, our assumption (MSLD), i.e. ε0p (qi ) > 0, holds if and only
if α > 0. The same applies to assumption (MSLD’): conditional on u(qi ) being increasing and
concave, ε0φ (qi ) > 0 holds if and only if α > 0. Accordingly, functional forms of the Bulow-Pfleiderer
family with α > 0, β < 0 and γ < 0 (and thus the special case of linear demand) are consistent
with our observed reallocation and productivity effects while CES is not.


II.ii      Constant Absolute Risk Aversion (CARA, Behrens and Murata 2007)

In our setup, this family of functional forms is associated with the sub-utility


                                             u(qi ) = 1 − e−αqi with α > 0.


For α > 0 this sub-utility is increasing, concave with ε0p (qi ) > 0 and ε0φ (qi ) > 0. Accordingly,
functional forms of the CARA family are consistent with our observed reallocation and productvity
effects.



                                                             iv
II.iii    Bipower Preferences, Bulow-Pfleiderer, IES and CES (Mrazova and Neary,
          2016)

In our setup, bipower preferences (Mrazova and Neary, 2016) are associated with the sub-utility

                                   α (qi )1−η   β (qi )1−θ
                        u(qi ) =              +            with 0 < 1 − η < 1 − θ ≤ 1,
                                     1−η          1−θ

which encompasses:

      • IES (‘increasing elasticity of substitution’, Bertoletti et al, 2008)

                                                 (qi )ρ (qi )γ
                                      u(qi ) =         +       with 0 < ρ < γ ≤ 1
                                                   ρ      γ

         for α = β = 1, ρ = 1 − η and γ = 1 − θ;

      • Bulow-Pfleiderer for α < 0 and η = 0 or β < 0 and θ = 0;

      • CES for α = 0 or β = 0.

      For 0 < ρ < γ ≤ 1 this sub-utility is increasing and concave. It also features ε0p (qi ) > 0 if
and only if αβ < 0 we never have. The same condition is necessary and sufficient for ε0φ (qi ) > 0.
Accordingly, functional forms of the bipower family with αβ < 0 (and thus the special case of
Bulow-Pfleiderer and linear demand discussed above) are consistent with our observed reallocation
and productvity effects while CES and IES are not.


III      Results for wholesale and retail trade firms

This appendix replicates our baseline results for the sample of firms in the wholesale and retail trade
sectors. The reason why there are excluded from the main analysis is that measuring productivity
for this set of firms is much more complex than for manufacturers. We therefore restrict analysis to
how trade shocks affect export values and counts of products (Table OA.1) and skewness (Tables
OA.2 and OA.3).




                                                         v
          Table OA.1: Demand shocks and local exports, wholesale and retail trade firms

       Dependent Variable            ∆ log Exports per Product                     ∆ log # Products Exported

       ˜ GDP Shock
       ∆                             0.399a                                       0.141a
                                     (0.065)                                      (0.027)
       ˜ trade shock
       ∆                                         0.219a                                      0.071a
                                                 (0.010)                                     (0.005)
       ˜ trade shock - ISIC
       ∆                                                             0.012b                            0.018a
                                                                    (0.005)                            (0.003)
       Observations                  236828        242772           242772        236828     242772    242772
                                         c          b               a
       Standard errors in parentheses: < 0.1, < 0.05, < 0.01. All regressions include year dummies,
       and standard errors clustered at the level relevant for the variable of interest: destination country
       for columns (1) and (4), firm-destination for columns (2) and (5) and ISIC-destination for columns
       (3) and (6).



         Table OA.2: Demand shocks and local skewness, wholesale and retail trade firms

       Dependent Variable                I
                                       Ti,d,t         I
                                                    Ti,d,t                                I
                                                                                       ∆Ti,d,t
       Specification                    FE           FE                 FD          FD  FD-FE          FD-FE
       log trade shock                0.030a
                                      (0.007)
       log trade shock - ISIC                      0.003a
                                                   (0.000)
       ˜ trade shock
       ∆                                                            0.034a                   0.032a
                                                                    (0.007)                  (0.008)
       ˜ trade shock - ISIC
       ∆                                                                           0.005b               -0.001
                                                                                  (0.002)              (0.003)
       Observations                   246796       246796           236800        236800     215974    215974
                                          c             b               a
       Standard errors in parentheses: < 0.1, < 0.05, < 0.01. FE refers to firm-destination-ISIC
       fixed effects. All regressions include year dummies, with standard errors clustered at the level of the
       destination country. All regressions include a control for income per capita shocks in the destination
       country.



Table OA.3: The Impact of Demand Shocks on the Global Product Mix (Firm Level), non mfg
firms

   Dependent Variable           Ti,t               ∆Ti,t                    Exp. Intensi,t      ∆ Exp. Intensi,t
   Specification                FE            FD      FD-FE                      FE            FD       FD-FE
   log trade shock            0.031a                                           0.006a
                              (0.007)                                         (0.002)
   ˜ trade shock
   ∆                                      0.043a            0.050a                           0.012a       0.012a
                                          (0.009)           (0.011)                          (0.003)      (0.003)
   Observations               107075      107075            107075              93279         88209        88209
                                                                                                          c            b
   FE refers to firm-level fixed effects. Standard errors (clustered at the firm level) in parentheses:       < 0.1,       <
   0.05, a < 0.01.



                                                               vi
References


Behrens, Kristian and Yasusada Murata . 2007. “General Equilibrium Models of Monopolistic
   Competition: A New Approach”, Journal of Economic Theory, 136(1), 776-787.

Bertoletti Paolo, Eileen Fumagalli and Clara Poletti. 2008. “Price-Cost Margins and Firm Size
    under Monopolistic Competition: The Case of IES Preferences”, IEFE Working Paper, No.15.

Fabinger, Michal and E. Glen Weyl. 2014. “A Tractable Approach to Pass-Through Patterns with
    Applications to International Trade,” University of Chicago.

Mrazova, Monika, and J. Peter Neary. 2016. “Not So Demanding: Preference Structure, Firm
   Behavior, and Welfare.” CEPR Discussion Paper, No.11119.




                                             vii
