                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DISENTANGLING THE CONTEMPORANEOUS AND DYNAMIC EFFECTS OF
        HUMAN AND HEALTH CAPITAL ON WAGES OVER THE LIFE CYCLE

                                    Donna B. Gilleskie
                                       Euna Han
                                    Edward C. Norton

                                    Working Paper 22430
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w22430


                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   July 2016




We are grateful for the comments from seminar participants at Elon, Georgia, Georgia State,
McGill, NYU, Rochester, Washington University at St. Louis, UNC-Greensboro, Vanderbilt,
Virginia Commonwealth, Virginia Tech, William & Mary, Yale, the Human Capital and
Inequality Conference, the Annual Health Econometrics Workshop, the Carolina Population
Center, and the Triangle Health Economics Workshop. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Donna B. Gilleskie, Euna Han, and Edward C. Norton. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Disentangling the Contemporaneous and Dynamic Effects of Human and Health Capital on
Wages over the Life Cycle
Donna B. Gilleskie, Euna Han, and Edward C. Norton
NBER Working Paper No. 22430
July 2016
JEL No. I12,J12,J13

                                            ABSTRACT

In this study we quantify the life-cycle effects of human and health capital on the wage
distribution of females, with a focus on health measured by body mass. We use NLSY79 data on
women followed annually up to twenty years during the time of their lives when average annual
weight gain is greatest. We allow body mass to explain variation in wages contemporaneously
conditional on observed measures of human capital and productivity histories (namely, education,
employment experience, marital status, and family size) and dynamically over the life cycle
through its impact on the endogenous histories of behaviors that determine wages. We find
significant differences in the contemporaneous effect and the dynamic effect of body mass on
wages, both across females of different races and over the distribution of wages.


Donna B. Gilleskie                             Edward C. Norton
Department of Economics                        Department of Health Management and Policy
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill      Department of Economics
CB #3305, 6B Gardner Hall                      University of Michigan
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3305                     School of Public Health
donna_gilleskie@unc.edu                        1415 Washington Heights, M3108 SPHII
                                               Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2029
Euna Han                                       and NBER
Associate Professor                            ecnorton@umich.edu
College of Pharmacy
Yonsei University
162-1 Songdo-Dong
Yeosu-Gu
Incheon, South Korea
eunahan@yonsei.ac.kr
1       Introduction
It is common for economists to evaluate the contemporaneous effects of policy and behavioral
variables on human capital outcomes such as education, employment, and wages. With
increasing interest lately, researchers are studying the effect of early life (and in utero)
exposures on these later life outcomes (Heckman, et al., 2013). However, what is lacking in
the literature is a dynamic analysis of life-cycle impacts of evolving variables on time-varying
outcomes. For example, economists may examine the impact of early life health (e.g., birth
weight, childhood illness, mother’s smoking behavior while pregnant) on later life outcomes
(e.g., adult weight, human capital accumulation, mortality) but, generally, are unable to
demonstrate the mechanisms through which variation in early life health affects later life
outcomes. This omission often stems from lack of data on individuals at multiple times in
their lives over a long period. In addition to the fact that the outcome of interest may vary
over the life cycle, the explanatory variable itself (e.g., health) may evolve over time as a
dynamic process. Hence, as initial health impacts subsequent health, time-varying health
may impact the outcome of interest over time. Additionally, causality may run in both
directions: for example, health impacts employment and employment impacts subsequent
health.1 Thus, it is important to model the endogeneity of both time-varying variables and
to capture the dynamic impacts of each on each other.
        In this study we quantify the life-cycle effects of human and health capital on wages
of females, with a focus on health measured by body mass. We use data on women followed
annually up to twenty years during the time of their lives when average annual weight gain
is greatest. We allow body mass to explain variation in wages contemporaneously condi-
tional on observed measures of human capital and productivity histories (namely, education,
employment experience, marital status, and family size) and dynamically over the life cycle
through its impact on the endogenous histories of behaviors that determine wages.
        It has been shown that the body mass of females is negatively correlated with wages
(Cawley, 2004). The evidence in much of the literature reflects the contemporaneous rela-
tionship between current body mass and current wages. Even in the cases where longitudinal
    1
    Employment may impact health directly through injury or work-related stress or indirectly through
income and consumption of health inputs.



                                                 1
observations on individuals have been available, researchers focus on the impact of current
weight status on current earnings, and ignore the evolutionary process of weight gain.2 While
theory suggests avenues through which the history of an individual’s body mass may impact
wages in the present (e.g., through educational attainment and work experience), the causal
relationship between past health (body mass) and accumulation of human capital is rarely
included in published analyses of weight on wages.3 In our effort to understand how wages
vary with a determinant of productivity such as body mass that evolves over time, we argue
that it is important to consider the effects of this characteristic on other decisions made
jointly with employment over the life cycle. Using a long panel of observations on young
women as they approach middle age, we capture the influence of an evolving body mass on
life-cycle decisions pertaining to schooling, employment, marital status, and family size. The
history of these decisions, as well as one’s body mass history, define cumulative measures of
human capital and other productivity measures that explain variation in observed wages. In
turn, these behaviors may also impact the evolution of body mass over the life cycle.
       Even after accounting for the effect of an evolving body mass on the productive de-
terminants of wages that accumulate over the life cycle (e.g., educational attainment, work
experience, marital status, and family size), variations in contemporaneous body mass may
still explain observed variation in contemporaneous wages. A significant contemporaneous
effect may reflect wage penalties associated with lower productivity (i.e., through reduced
health) conditional on other observed measures of productivity. That is, the variables that
traditionally summarize one’s human capital may not fully capture productivity. Alterna-
tively, a contemporaneous effect of body mass may reflect employer preference for employees
with a particular outward appearance due to concerns about high expected medical care ex-
penditure affecting firm health insurance costs or consumer distaste for obesity. Finally,
employers may simply discriminate (either statistically or based on own tastes) against
women with higher body mass. In this paper, we establish the existence (or not) of a con-
temporaneous wage penalty of body mass while also measuring the dynamic impact of body
   2
     Only a few papers, to our knowledge, consider the effects of current and past body mass on current
earnings (Chen, 2012; Pinkston, 2015). Chen includes body mass from a decade prior and Pinkston includes
body mass from one year ago. Pinkston’s use of lagged wages to explain current wages and twice lagged
wages as instruments allows for indirect life-cycle body mass effects.
   3
     Han, et al. (2011) find an indirect wage penalty of body weight in one’s late teens through its effect on
education and occupation outcomes measured in the late thirties.

                                                      2
mass on wages; we do not differentiate between individual productivity, employer preference,
or employer discrimination as explanations for the contemporaneous effect. Admittedly, they
each may partially explain the current market value (i.e., wage), or marginal productivity,
of an individual’s time.
       Our contribution is the careful, quantifiable distinction between the wage effects of body
mass characterized by life-cycle human capital differences (i.e., the indirect or dynamic effect)
and those reflecting additional differences in current valuations of market work (i.e., the direct
or contemporaneous effect). To disentangle these life-cycle and contemporaneous effects
we use a multiple equation, dynamic empirical model to capture the annual employment
decisions and wage distribution of women aged 18 to 45 while jointly explaining education,
marital, and family size histories, and the evolution of body mass, over time.
       Three potential sources of bias compromise measurement of the role of health capital
(i.e., body mass) in explaining wages: selection, endogeneity, and measurement error.4 First,
observed wages of employed individuals reflect accepted wage offers, yet we want to measure
the labor market’s valuation of particular individual wage determinants unconditional on the
observed employment decision. Individuals who chose to work in the formal labor market
are a self-selected group: only those who receive wage offers above an individual reservation
wage are observed to work. Estimation using the self-selected sample will result in biased
coefficients on explanatory variables for wages if non-random selection into employment is
not modeled jointly with the observed wages.5 Thus, we model non-, part-time, and full-time
employment over the life cycle jointly with wages conditional on employment, allowing the
observed employment outcome and wages to be correlated through common unobservables.
Second, the human capital and other productivity characteristics that determine pay for
work reflect life-cycle decisions of an individual. These wage determinants include educa-
tional attainment, work experience, marital status, number of children in household, and
   4
     These same biases impact evaluation of human capital and other endogenous wage determinants, which
we also measure.
   5
     In addition to the effects of body mass on the wage distribution, the probability of receiving an employ-
ment offer may be impacted by one’s weight, thus influencing accumulation of work experience over the life
cycle. Much of the literature on weight and wages ignores this employment selection.




                                                      3
health (measured by body mass in this paper). Endogeneity suggests that unobserved char-
acteristics that explain these (time-varying) decisions may also explain differences in wages.6
Thus, we use a flexible, latent factor approach to model the permanent and time-varying
unobserved heterogeneity (UH) that is correlated with wages and their endogenous deter-
minants. Third, the measurement error (i.e., reporting, subjectivity, and rounding errors)
that accompanies self-reported individual-level characteristics (e.g., weight and height) can
lead to inconsistent estimates.7 Our latent factor method that accounts for individual-level
unobservables addresses potential attenuation bias.
       We extend the literature in several dimensions. First, we analyze the effects of body
mass on wages using yearly observations on a cohort of women followed for twenty con-
secutive years (National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) 1979 cohort). Our research
sample includes annual observations from the ages of 18-26 in 1983 through the ages of 37-45
in 2002. These twenty years of data on the same individuals provide a quite comprehensive
picture of life changes from young adulthood to middle age. This point of reference allows
for a better understanding of both body mass and wage dynamics and provides a perspective
that differs from (repeated) cross-sectional analyses. We are able to quantify the effects of
(and determinants of) body mass as an individual ages, and broaden the interpretation from
one of aggregate time effects to individual behaviors. Second, we jointly model, along with
the evolution of body mass and wages, several individual behaviors that may be affected by
body mass and that also explain observed wage variation. Hence, we are able to decompose
the correlation between body mass and wages reported in the literature into life-cycle effects
captured through human capital variables and contemporaneous (direct) influences. Third,
we apply dynamic estimation techniques that go beyond traditional methods to better cap-
ture impacts of interest over time and across the impacted distribution and to eliminate
   6
      For example, a permanent individual trait that may affect both body mass and wages (conditional on
body mass) is self-confidence, which is often unobserved in survey data. Although used infrequently in this
literature, first-differenced methods and panel data can address endogeneity that may bias the measured
weight/wage relationship. Receiving even less attention has been the role of time-varying unobservables that
affect both body mass and employment or wages. For example, an unobserved temporary negative health
event (e.g., a broken leg) may lead to weight gain as well as a reduction in observed wages if the researcher
cannot fully account for accumulation (or depreciation) of human capital (e.g., work absences).
    7
      There is evidence in the literature that women understate their weight (Lakdawalla and Philipson, 2002;
Chen, 2012). Some authors in this literature have re-scaled self-reported height and weight following Cawley
(2004); others have used different measures of adiposity (Burkhauser and Cawley, 2008).



                                                     4
bias in both the observed and unobserved dimensions. More specifically, we make few dis-
tributional assumptions about the jointly-correlated unobservables; rather, we discretize the
distributions and estimate the event-specific impacts, mass points, and weights of these un-
observed factors using a flexible, discrete factor random effects method. We also seek to
understand the impact of body mass on the full support of wages, not just the first moment.
That is, we allow body mass (and other variables) to influence wages differently at different
points of support of the wage distribution by modeling the density of wages without im-
posing a distributional assumption. Similarly, we allow determinants of body mass to have
different effects at different points of the support of the body mass distribution. We estimate
the conditional densities for wages and body mass jointly with endogenous behaviors that
determine both wages and body mass, allowing permanent and time-varying observed and
unobserved heterogeneity to affect all outcomes.
     Using our research sample consisting of twenty years of annual observations on the
same individuals, we have replicated, with similar specifications and estimation techniques,
the results in the literature. The biased findings suggest that current body mass, measured
by the conventional body mass index (BMI), has a statistically significant negative effect on
the current wages of white women. We find a smaller, but statistically significant effect on
the wages of black women in the most sparse specifications. When we take advantage of
the longitudinal nature of the data, and estimate a model with fixed individual effects, the
upwardly-biased significant effect of BMI on wages of white women falls, but is still signifi-
cant. The effect for black women in a model that allows for permanent individual unobserved
heterogeneity actually reverses signs. We move beyond the standard approaches in the liter-
ature to jointly estimate 17 equations that capture the dynamic life-cycle behavior described
above and that allow for selection into employment, endogeneity of several determinants of
wages, and measurement error. Here, calculation of the marginal effect of BMI on wages is
not so straightforward because of its contemporaneous and life-cycle effects captured by the
dynamic model. We quantify those marginal effects through simulation using the estimated
model. We find a different effect of BMI at different levels of wages, which is captured by the
conditional density estimation procedure. More specifically, the impact of a contemporane-
ous improvement in body mass on wages of white women is positive and increases over the


                                              5
support of the distribution of wages. That is, the largest impacts occur at the highest deciles
of wages. For black women, the contemporaneous weight-related wage penalty is smaller and
is actually negative at lower wages, yet approaches that of white women at higher wages.
When we account for the impact of better health (i.e., a lower body mass) over the life cycle
on other determinants of wages, we find that the total effect on wages is slightly smaller
than that implied by the contemporaneous effect. The life-cycle impact of body mass (which
includes the contemporaneous effect) is significantly different from zero for all women over
the support of wages.



2     Review of the Relevant Literature
The economics literature examining wage determinants and wage disparities is large. Rather
than discuss this literature, we focus on research that explores the impact of health on wages,
with health specifically measured by body mass. We also briefly discuss the relationship
between body mass and other determinants of employment and wages (Cawley and Ruhm,
2012).



2.1      Measured Associations between Body Mass and Wages

An association between obesity and labor market outcomes, particularly wages, has been
documented in the economic literature. The majority of these studies estimate a reduced-
form static model of the relationship between body mass and wages. A few exceptions
explore the underlying mechanisms behind the relationship (Harper, 2000; Baum and Ford,
2004; Bhattacharya and Bundorf, 2004; Carpenter, 2006; Han, Norton, and Stearns, 2009;
Han, Norton, and Powell, 2009). Harper (2000) shows a positive effect of being physically
attractive on the probability of working in managerial or professional specialty and clerical
occupations for women. However, physical attractiveness is not found to be associated with
sorting into customer-oriented occupations and also no wage differences are found between
non-attractive and attractive women in customer-oriented jobs in the same study. Baum
and Ford (2004) examine four potential pathways linking obesity to labor market outcomes:
less productivity due to health problems from obesity (measured by health limitations), less

                                              6
investment in human capital by obese workers (measured by work experience), employer
distaste for obese employees due to high health care cost (measured by employer provision
of health insurance), and consumer distaste for obese workers (measured by classification of
occupation as customer-related). Bhattacharya and Bundorf (2004) report no statistically
significant wage differential between obese and non-obese individuals by employer provided
health insurance coverage. Carpenter (2006) shows that the employment rate increased four
percent for obese women and two percent for obese men compared to their respective non-
obese counterparts after a 1993 court case (Cook vs. Rhode Island) in which a federal appeals
court ruled that obesity is covered under the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the Americans
with Disabilities Act. Han, Norton, and Stearns (2009) report larger negative relationships
between adult contemporaneous body mass and wages in occupations requiring interpersonal
skills. Han, Norton, and Powell (2009) examine the direct effect of body mass on wages and
the indirect effects operating through education and occupation choice. They find that body
weight in the upper tail of the distribution significantly affects educational and occupational
outcomes of men and women, which in turn have significant effects on wages. The 11 percent
adult wage penalty of obesity during a woman’s late teen years can be partly attributed to
the effect of body mass on human capital accumulation. While almost all empirical work
on this subject estimates ordinary least squares models with or without attempts to address
endogeneity of body mass, Johar and Katayama (2012) use quantile regression to assess the
role of body mass at different wage levels. They find that the body mass wage penalty is
larger at higher wages for white women and at median wages for white males.
     Regardless of the estimation techniques in the previous economic studies, most studies
report gender differences in the association between obesity and wages. Women consistently
show a statistically significant negative association of BMI or obesity with hourly wages
(Averett and Korenman 1996; Cawley 2004; Baum and Ford 2004; Conley and Glauber
2005; Han, Norton, and Stearns 2009). BMI is also associated with women’s total household
income by affecting their spouses’ earnings and occupational prestige (Conley and Glauber,
2005). Some studies also report racial differences in the association between body mass and
labor market outcomes for women. For example, Cawley (2004) reports that only white
women’s hourly wages are causally associated with their body mass.


                                              7
2.2    Endogenous Body Mass

Only a few of the studies attempt to address the potential endogeneity of body mass, typically
measured by BMI or an obesity indicator (Averett and Korenman, 1996; Pagan and Davila,
1997; Behrman and Rosenzweig, 2001; Cawley, 2004; Baum and Ford, 2004; Conley and
Glauber, 2005; Norton and Han, 2008; Johar and Katayama, 2012; Sabia and Rees, 2012;
and Pinkston, 2015). Instrumental variable estimation techniques require a variable that is
correlated with body mass in the current period but uncorrelated with wages in the current
period. Instrumental variables (IVs) used in this literature include a lag of respondents’ own
body weight or BMI (Averett and Korenman, 1996; Conley and Glauber, 2005), or siblings’
or children’s BMI (Cawley, 2000; Cawley, 2004; Johar and Karayama, 2012). The lag of
current BMI is not a valid instrument if there is any serial or inter-temporal correlation in
the wage residuals. Likewise, children’s body weight is not a valid instrument if unobserved
heterogeneity in the wage residual is associated with both children’s body weight and the
mother’s employment behavior. Also, siblings’ BMI is not a valid instrument if siblings share
unobserved endowment factors that influence earnings. Norton and Han (2008) use genetic
variation among young adults to identify their model (using multiple instruments). They find
no statistically significant effect of adolescents’ BMI on wages in young adulthood. There are
potential limitations of using own genetic information as IVs for own behavioral outcomes
given that genes that predict body weight outcomes are related to brain chemistry and, thus,
are likely to affect labor market outcomes such as wages via various channels. Pinkston
(2015) estimates the impacts of current and lagged BMI on wages using a differenced GMM
estimator which relies on additional lags of body mass as identifying instruments.



2.3    Body Mass and Other Outcomes

The growing interest among economists in the dynamic effects of body mass on many socio-
economic outcomes (e.g, employment, schooling, marriage) emphasizes the importance of
understanding the effects of body mass on the accumulated determinants of wages (i.e.,
human capital and productivity) over the life cycle. Some studies assess the association of
obesity with labor market outcomes at the extensive margin by measuring its effect on the


                                              8
probability of employment or the different effect by different job sectors. Cawley (2000)
finds no statistically significant effect of obesity on the amount of paid work and limitations
on types of paid work. Morris (2007) estimates a negative relationship between obesity
and the probability of employment for British people for both genders. Paraponaris and
colleagues (2005) report that a one standard deviation increase of BMI from the mean at
age 20 raises the percentage of time spent unemployed during the working years and lowers
the probability of employment after a period of unemployment for both genders. Pagan
and Davila’s (1997) study reports that both obese men and women are less likely to sort
into managerial, professional and technical occupations among fourteen Census occupation
categories.
       There are also a few papers estimating the effect of obesity on educational achievement.
Some studies report no effect of obesity on grade point average among adolescents (Cros-
noe and Muller, 2004), scores on Peabody Individual Achievement Tests among pre-teen
children (Kaestner and Grossman, 2009), and grade progression and drop out status (Kaest-
ner, Grossman, and Yarnoff, 2009) among adolescents. In contrast, Sabia (2007) reports
that white female adolescents have a grade point average penalty for being obese, whereas
non-white female and male adolescents do not.8
       The role of body mass on marriage behavior has received much attention from economists.
Using a model of the marriage market, Chiappori, et al. (2012) estimate the trade-offs (in
terms of income and education) that men and women are willing to accept to compensate
for body mass penalties. Malcolm and Kaya (2014) argue that an observed negative cor-
relation between BMI and marriage is not the only consequence of a lower desirability for
individuals with higher BMI, which reduces their competitiveness in the marriage market.
They demonstrate that individuals with higher BMI who marry do so at a younger age.
Averett, et al. (2013) show that the direction of causality also flows in the reverse direction;
that is, marriage impacts the health of individuals. Lin et al.(2014) show that sex ratios are
correlated with body mass.
   8
     Sabia’s work provides another example of attempts to account for endogneous BMI. He uses parent-
reported self-classification of own obesity as an IV for adolescent BMI, which is not likely to be a valid
IV if the parents’ self-classification reflects the level of their self-esteem or time preference which may also
influence their children’s educational achievement.




                                                       9
2.4      Measurement of Body Mass

The body mass index is a simple means for classifying sedentary individuals by weight:
underweight, ideal weight, overweight, and obese.9 The original proponents of this index
stressed its advantageous use in making population comparisons. They warned against
using it for individual health diagnosis. BMI, as a function of weight and height, does not
allow one to distinguish between fat mass and fat-free mass (such as muscle and bone).
It may overestimate adiposity in those with more lean body mass (e.g., athletes), while
underestimating adiposity on those with less lean body mass (e.g., the elderly).
        Different methods of assessing overweight and obesity may allow researchers to capture
adiposity (or body weight) as it relates to productivity versus appearance. For example, fat
mass can be measured by percentage of body fat (using skinfold, underwater weighing, or
fat-free mass techniques) or by measures that account for mass and volume location (waist
and arm circumference and the body volume index). Johansson, et al. (2009) and Wada
and Tekin (2010) show that the measure of adiposity affects analysis of the obesity wage
penalty. Burkhauser and Cawley (2008) find that obesity measured by BMI is only weakly
correlated with obesity defined by other measures of fatness. Unfortunately, however, many
data sets that contain information on employment and wages contain only measures of height
and weight that can be used to construct the body mass index. Another concern is that
the data on height and weight are often self-reported. These self-reports are likely to suffer
from reporting error, subjectivity error, and rounding error. Because it is necessary for us
to rely on the traditional BMI index to measure adiposity, we use an estimation technique
that addresses potential measurement errors.



3       Description of the Research Sample
The National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) provides data on a 1979 cohort of
12,686 individuals aged 14 to 22 followed annually through 1994. These individuals continue
to be followed every two years after 1996 (with data available currently through 2012). Our
    9
     Specifially, BMI equals weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared. A BMI less than or
equal to 18.5 indicates underweight; between 18.5 and 25, normal weight; greater than or equal to 25 and
less than 30, overweight; and 30 or greater, obese.


                                                  10
research sample includes those who have not attrited by 1983 and who have responses for
important variables in our analysis. Because the literature on the relationship between body
mass and wages has detected a wage effect that differs between black and white females,
we restrict our analysis in this paper to women of these races. We drop sample-eligible
individuals who report an Asian race or Hispanic ethnicity. From 1983, we follow 3,213
females through 2002 or until they attrit from the NLSY survey. Table 1 displays the
research sample size by year and the percent of individuals who attrit each year.10 The
research sample contains 51,884 person-year observations.

                            Table 1
                            Empirical Distribution of Research Sample

                            Year       Sample       Attriters      Attrition
                                         Size                       Rate


                            1983         3,213            -             -
                            1984         3,213            67          2.09
                            1985         3,146            81          2.57
                            1986         2,065           101          3.30
                            1987         2,964            97          3.27
                            1988         2,867            52          1.81
                            1989         2,815            57          2.02
                            1990         2,758            46          1.67
                            1991         2,712            60          2.21
                            1992         2,652            35          1.32
                            1993         2,617            39          1.49
                            1994         2,578           134          5.20
                            1995         2,444            78          3.19
                            1996         2,366           102          4.31
                            1997         2,264            70          3.09
                            1998         2,194            58          2.64
                            1999         2,136           114          5.34
                            2000         2,022            42          2.08
                            2001         1,980           102          5.15
                            2002         1,878            -             -

                            Person-year observations: 51,884


  10
    We restrict the initial 1983 sample to include individuals who are observed for at least two consecutive
periods. Hence, attrition does not occur between 1983 and 1984. In fact, the 1983 data serve as initial
conditions for the subsequent period of observation. Additionally, we have no need to model attrition at the
end of 2002 since this is the last year of data that we use.



                                                    11
       The NLSY data provide a unique understanding of individual body mass dynamics over
time because the survey follows the same individuals for such a long time (e.g., over 20 years
in some cases) relative to most data sets.11 Since the evolution of body mass as individuals
age is important in this study, we depict the trends in body mass over time in Figure 1.
Average body mass increases by age for women of both races, with the mean increasing from
21.5 and 22.7 at age 20 to 25.9 and 29.8 at age 40, for white and black females respectively.
More importantly, the value of the 75th percentile of the BMI distribution is increasing and
the right tail of the distribution is larger as individuals age. .12 Across all ages, one-year
body mass deviations (not pictured) average 0.21 and 0.32 BMI units for white and black
females respectively. For an average height female (i.e., 5’ 4”), this amounts to an increase
of 1.2 to 1.9 pounds per year. Despite the fact that much of the interquartile range of BMI
deviations from one year to another lies above zero at each age, the median BMI deviation
is zero.
       Since we intend to explore how wages vary with body mass, we emphasize that body
mass increases with age, on average, in the 18 to 45 year age range. It is also the case that
the strongest predictors of wages — education and work experience — also increase with age.
In general, while additional education may be obtained at any age, it is often completed in
the early twenties. Work experience, however, accumulates over the life cycle. If individuals
gain weight as they age, but are also gaining work experience as they age, a depiction of
wages by age will almost surely reveal that those with larger body mass also have higher
wages. Hence, it is important to control for human capital variables (i.e., education and
work experience) that increase with age, as well as other cumulative variables that influence
productivity (i.e., marital status and tenure, number of children in the household, and body
mass). Because these important wage determinants may be influenced by body mass and,
  11
     Weight and height are observed in the NLSY79 data in most years with the exception of 1983, 1984,
1991, and the non-survey years of 1995, 1997, 1999, and 2001. We linearly interpolate or extrapolate values
of weight in years that we do not observe weight. We assume that height is the same across all years an
individual is observed. Using these height and weight values, we construct the body mass index for each
year an individual is in our research sample.
  12
     The horizontal lines in Figure 1 indicate upper thresholds for underweight (18.5), normal (25), and over-
weight (30) with a BMI greater than 30 indicating obese. The dark shaded regions indicate the interquartile
range. The light shaded regions extend up to 1.5 times the interquartile range. Points on either side of the
shaded areas represent remaining outliers.




                                                     12
Figure 1: Distribution of Body Mass as Females Age, by Race




                            13
inversely, influence body mass, we model their dynamic evolutions jointly while allowing for
common observed and unobserved heterogeneity over the life cycle.
       Educational attainment and work experience are determined by schooling and work
behaviors at each age. Figure 2 displays these probabilities by age and by predominant
body mass status.13 We model the probability of part-time employment or non-employment
relative to full-time employment, and depict full-time employment probabilities by race and
weight status in this figure.




       Figure 2: Schooling and Employment Statistics by Age, Race, and Body Mass


       Marital status and fertility may change as one ages. These annual behaviors define
accumulated stocks (namely, marital tenure and number of children in the household) that
  13
    These graphs are based on those individuals in the research sample who are observed every year from
age 25 to age 40. The normal and overweight distinction reflects the body mass status of an individual in
more than half of those 16 years.


                                                   14
may shift preferences for schooling and employment. They may also impact productivity at
work conditional on employment, which may be reflected in wages. Rather than focus only
on births as a mechanism by which household size may change, we broaden the process to in-
clude increases through birth, adoption, and blended families and reductions through death,
marriage dissolution, removal, and matriculation. In addition to the effects children in the
household may have on employment behavior and productivity, children may impact body
mass of the parents. Most obviously, childbearing imposes physical changes in a woman’s
body mass that may not be temporary. Additionally, children impose both time and finan-
cial requirements that may alter caloric intake and expenditure of their caregivers. Figure 3
describes marriage and child accumulation probabilities for females by predominant body
mass status.




        Figure 3: Marriage and Children Statistics by Age, Race, and Body Mass



                                             15
4     Empirical Framework
Our empirical framework is motivated by a theoretical model of life-cycle decisionmaking
and health production: per-period decisions regarding education, employment, marriage,
and children with uncertain future wages and body mass transitions. The theory allows us
to derive choice probabilities that we approximate using dynamic, non-linear functions of
the information available (to an individual) at the beginning of each decisionmaking period.
The theory also describes how these period-by-period decisions affect the production of
health (or evolution of body mass) over time and the implied distribution of wages. We
then estimate the approximated demand and production equations jointly, and allow for
both permanent and time-varying individual unobserved heterogeneity (UH) through the
use of discrete factor random effects (Heckman and Singer, 1983 and Mroz, 1999). Rather
than estimate the conditional mean of wages and body mass, we estimate the conditional
density of these observed outcomes using a conditional density estimation (CDE) technique
(Gilleskie and Mroz, 2004).
     This multi-faceted empirical approach enables us to consider aspects of the problem
that may not be computationally-feasible with full-solution and estimation of the dynamic
optimization problem. We 1.) include several endogenous explanatory variables that provide
a detailed description of the histories of individual decisions over the life cycle, 2.) consider
the continuous evolution of body mass rather than discrete categories, and 3.) explore the
possibility that variables of interest may have different marginal effects at different points of
support of the wage and body mass distributions. We seek to evaluate the causal pathways
of body mass on wages of women (either directly or indirectly through other life-cycle de-
terminants) and to distinguish the contemporaneous effect from that generated by life-cycle
behaviors influenced by body mass.




                                               16
4.1     Timing and Notation

In each year t after age 18, an individual obtains a wage offer drawn from the population
distribution of wages. The individual also observes her spouse’s wage if married.14 The wage
a female would receive if she worked, wt , depends on education and employment experience,
as described by Mincer (1974). We argue that these human capital variables may not fully
capture a person’s productivity at work. Her productivity, or effort, might be influenced by
her health or her time demands. Thus, we include body mass (Cawley, 2004), marital status
(Korenman and Neumark, 1991), and number of children in the household entering period t
as determinants of the wage distribution.15
       Each period the individual then jointly decides 1.) whether or not to attend school,
2.) whether to be non-employed, part-time employed, or full-time employed, 3.) whether or
not to be married, and 4.) whether or not to acquire (or lose) a child (or children) living
in the household. We let indicator variables (lower case) define the alternatives. That is,
st = 1 if the individual attends school in period t and st = 0, otherwise. The employment
indicator takes on the value et = 0 if the individual does not work in period t, et = 1 if he
works part time (less than 1375 hours per year), and et = 2 if he works full time (1375 hours
or more per year). We indicate the marriage decision by mt = 1 if the individual is married
in year t, and mt = 0, otherwise. The number of children in the household may increase or
decrease due to pregnancy (singleton or multiples), marriage, divorce, age of child, or child
mortality.16 The variable kt = 0 indicates that there is no change in the number of children
  14
     Spouse income is treated as exogenous. While we model the marriage decision, which may be influenced
by body mass, we do not model the correlation between an individual’s body mass and her potential spouse’s
income (Chiappori, et al., 2012).
  15
     We recognize that body mass is an imperfect measure of health, and may not fully capture the role that
health plays in one’s productivity. Instead, or additionally, it may signal expected medical care expenditures
(which may be compensated by the employer and hence affect offered wages) or reflect an employer’s tastes
based on appearance. We cannot distinguish these roles in estimation.
  16
     Some reasons for a change in number of children in the household are available in the data. For example,
the survey records whether a child was born, died, was adopted, etc. Additionally, a comparison of the
number of children in the household from year to year reveals additions and losses of more than one child in
a non-trivial number of cases. The changes could be due to birth by the sample female as well as children
acquired (or lost) through other channels (e.g., adoption, marriage, divorce, aging out, and death). Because
of the large number of ways household size can change, we are motivated to focus only on the change in
number of children in the household rather than the channel. A larger household size, regardless of channel,
places demands on time, finances, and energy, which may impact per-period decisionmaking.




                                                     17
in the household in year t, and values of kt = 1 and kt = −1 indicate that at least one child
is acquired or lost in year t.
       These yearly decisions (i.e., school attendance, employment, marriage, and children)
produce stock variables upon entering period t that summarize the history of the decisions.
The vectors of these history variables (upper case) are denoted: educational history (St ),
work experience (Et ), marital history (Mt ), and household child accumulation (Kt ). These
vectors include both duration values as well as indicators of behavior or outcomes in the
last period (t − 1) and polynomials of the continuous values. These histories up to period t
influence the value of each period t schooling, employment, marriage, and child alternative.17
We allow the vector of variables that capture body mass history up to the beginning of a
period (Bt ) to affect current schooling, employment, marital status and child accumulation
decisions.
       Other information known at the beginning of year t that may influence preferences,
constraints, or expectations includes exogenous individual characteristics (e.g., age, gender,
race, urbanicity, region) and exogenous aggregate business cycle indicators (e.g., calendar
year trend variables) denoted by the vector Xt . Variables that capture known price and sup-
ply conditions such as average tuition, wage and employment information, welfare amounts,
restaurant sales, and costs of different food items are denoted by the vector Pt . We use
unique superscripts to denote, for descriptive purposes only, the variables in Pt that are
related to particular endogenous behaviors and outcomes; that is, Pt = (PtS , PtE , PtM , PtK ,
PtB ). We recognize, however, that the optimal demand functions for each behavior may de-
pend on own and cross prices. The vector of individual information known at the beginning
of period t is denoted Ωt = (Bt , St , Et , Mt , Kt , Xt , Pt ).
       As forward-looking decisionmakers, the individuals face uncertainty about future wages.
Wages depend on educational attainment, work experience, and marital and child histo-
ries. In addition to these human capital variables, wages may also be influenced by body
mass, which explains variation in wages caused by health impacts on productivity or em-
ployer preferences about appearance. Future body mass is also uncertain. Having made the
  17
    We are not explicit about how these variables may impact preferences or the budget constraint because
we do not estimate the primitive parameters of the decisionmaking optimization problem. However, these
variables, because they are a part of the information set when evaluating alternatives, are arguments of the
non-linear demand functions resulting from optimization.


                                                     18
“beginning-of-period” decisions (i.e., education, employment, marriage, and child accumula-
tion) that affect the per-period budget and time constraints, we assume that individuals then
allocate income and time to the daily activities of caloric intake and caloric expenditure (i.e.,
eating and exercising) denoted ci∗t and ce∗t . Theoretically, the density that describes possible
values of next period’s body mass, Bt+1 , depends on body mass this period and these daily
caloric input and output behaviors during the period. Unfortunately, these latter activities
are not observed in our data. The daily input decisions depend on market and time prices of
food and exercise, PtB , as well as the less frequently changed behaviors regarding education,
employment, marital, and child accumulation. Substituting in the determinants of caloric
intake and expenditure, expectations of body mass transition are, indirectly, a function of
the period t behaviors, the resulting income (own wages and spouse’s wages if married), and
relevant prices (PtB ).
      The timeline below depicts the observed and unobserved outcomes per period (e.g.,
one year), and the exogenous and endogenous information available at the beginning of each
period.

    beginning                                                                                                    beginning
       of t                                                                  unobserved demand for
                                                                                                                  of t + 1
                    unobserved                                                 caloric intake and
                    wage draw       st , et ,mt , kt             wt           caloric expenditure     Bt+1

                        wt∗       observed demand for        observed wage        ci∗t , ce∗t         observed
                                 schooling, employment,       if employed                            body mass
                                 marriage, and family size                                           evolution



     Ωt = (Bt ,                                                                                            Ωt+1 = (Bt+1 ,
  St , Et , Mt , Kt ,                                                                                St+1 , Et+1 , Mt+1 , K1t+1 ,
       Xt , Pt )                                                                                             Xt+1 , Pt+1 )
          -                                                                                                         -


      Variables that explain the observed outcomes are described in Tables 2, 3 and 4 for our
research sample. The endogenous variables are summarized over all person-observations in
the sample over the 1984-2002 period (Table 2). We begin by describing the variables that
capture the history of one’s body mass, Bt . In estimation, we use moments of the continuous
index of body mass (BMI) rather than categories of adiposity (i.e., underweight, normal
weight, overweight, and obese). We report summary statistics for both for informational

                                                                19
purposes. We also use time-varying indicators of ever overweight or ever obese to capture
the contemporaneous effects of past weight issues on current behaviors and wages conditional
on current BMI. Finally, we include a variable representing how different a person’s BMI
is from women of the same race in each year. This measure may reflect social capital, as
deviations from the norm in body mass among a specific group capture social perceptions
of effort or commitment.18 An individual’s education history, St , is captured by enrollment
last period to capture state dependence and the number of years of schooling attainment.
We avoid having to include additional equations for degree attainment (available in the
NLSY data) by constructing indicators of at least 12 years of schooling and at least 16
years of schooling to approximate high school and college degrees, respectively. An indicator
for the 13th year of schooling captures potential “freshman fifteen” effects on weight gain.
The employment history vector, Et , includes indicators of previous employment states and
years of experience, separated by full and part time status. The marital history vector,
Mt , includes the previous marriage state, years married if married in the previous period,
and years single if ever married and single in the previous period. Finally, the variables
summarizing the history of children in the household, Kt , includes the number of children
in the household entering the period, an indicator of whether that number increased or
decreased in the previous period (e.g., whether the female gained or lost a child), and an
indicator of whether a child addition was within the last 5 years. Because nearly 90 percent
of child additions are births, we interpret this variable as an indicator of having a child in
the household who is less than 6 years of age.
       The exogenous time-invariant individual variables are summarized for the 3213 females
in our research sample in 1984, while the exogenous time-varying variables are summarized
over all person-years (Table 3). Own citizenship and parental information are used to identify
initially-observed values of endogenous variables (discussed in Section 4.6). Moments and
interactions of variables are included in estimation. While we do not allow for a structural
shift in variables per- and post- the 1993 Cook vs. Rhode Island federal policy change, we
  18
     Teh NLSY79 does not include, ever wave, other measures of health that would allow us to measure
variations in wages by body mass conditional on other measured health indicators (i.e., perhaps a beauty
effect vs. a health effect).




                                                  20
Table 2
Description of Endogenous Individual Explanatory Variables

                                                  White (N=1,951)    Black (N=1,262)
Variable name                                     Mean Std Dev       Mean Std Dev


Endogenous individual variables over all person-years

Body mass Bt
  BMI in t                                         23.92      5.06    26.56     6.10
  Underweight: BMI in t ≤ 18.5                      0.05      0.22     0.03     0.16
  Normal weight: 18.5 ≤ BMI in t < 25               0.65      0.48     0.46     0.50
  Overweight: 25 ≤ BMI in t < 30                    0.19      0.40     0.27     0.44
  Obese: BMI in t ≥ 30                              0.11      0.31     0.24     0.43
  Ever overweight prior to t                        0.39      0.49     0.57     0.50
  Ever obese prior to t                             0.14      0.35     0.28     0.45
  Weight in pounds at t                           142.27     31.14   155.88    36.44
  Height in inches at t                            64.66      2.59    64.26     2.90
  Standardized deviations from mean BMI in t        0.00      1.00     0.00     1.00

Education history St
  Enrolled in t-1                                   0.09      0.29     0.08     0.27
  Years enrolled in school entering t              13.23      1.95    12.70     1.73
  Years enrolled < 12 entering t                    0.09      0.28     0.17     0.38
  Years enrolled ≥ 12 entering t                    0.91      0.28     0.83     0.38
  Years enrolled ≥ 16 entering t                    0.15      0.36     0.07     0.26
  Freshmen year of college in t                     0.02      0.13     0.02     0.13

Employment history Et
  Employed in t-1                                   0.85      0.36     0.79     0.41
  Employed full time in t-1                         0.69      0.46     0.71     0.45
  Employed part time in t-1                         0.31      0.46     0.29     0.45
  Years employed entering t                        10.34      5.47     8.94     5.80
  Years full time employed entering t               6.42      5.15     5.43     5.31
  Years part time employed entering t               3.92      3.00     3.51     2.70

Marital history Mt
  Married in t-1                                    0.63      0.48     0.31     0.46
  Years married entering t if married in t-1        8.00      5.21     6.64     4.87
  Years single entering t if single in t-1          1.64      3.15     1.67     3.56

Child history Kt
  Number of children in hh entering t               1.12      1.16     1.42     1.29
  Acquire any children in hh in t-1                 0.09      0.28     0.09     0.28
  Lose any children from hh in t-1                  0.02      0.12     0.03     0.17
  Any children under age 6 in t-1                   0.35      0.48     0.39     0.49




                                           21
do allow for a cubic in the time trend, which may capture this change if it is statistically
relevant.

        Table 3
        Description of Exogenous Individual and Aggregate Explanatory Variables

                                                         White (N=1,951)         Black (N=1,262)
        Variable name                                    Mean Std Dev            Mean Std Dev


        Time-invariant individual variables in year 1984

            AFQT score minus median                      19.23        25.47      -11.57       19.81
            AFQT score missing                            0.03         0.16        0.02        0.12
            Non-US citizenship at birth                   0.03         0.15        0.03        0.17
            Non-US citizenship at age 14                  0.01         0.07        0.01        0.10
            Mother is non-US citizen                      0.04         0.20        0.03        0.17
            Father is non-US citizen                      0.14         0.35        0.03        0.16
            Years of education of mother                 12.06         2.38       10.81        2.55
            Mother’s education missing                    0.03         0.18        0.07        0.25
            Years of education of father                 12.39         3.16       10.23        3.52
            Father’s education missing                    0.08         0.27        0.28        0.45

        Time-varying individual variables over all person-years

            Age in years                                 30.28         6.11       30.19        6.08
            Rural residence                               0.26         0.44        0.17        0.37
            Residence type missing                        0.05         0.23        0.04        0.20
            Northeast region                              0.20         0.40        0.14        0.35
            North central region                          0.34         0.47        0.18        0.39
            West region                                   0.16         0.37        0.07        0.25
            South region (omitted category)               0.30         0.46        0.60        0.49
            State of residence missing                    0.01         0.08        0.01        0.10

        Trend and Interval Variables
                                                         Mean     Std Dev          Min         Max
            Time trend (1=1984)                           9.16        5.40            1          19
            Interval measure for density estimation      -1.42        0.68        -2.20        0.00




       The exogenous price and supply-side variables vary by state or county and time, and
are described in Table 4.19        While there are several sources of statistical identification in
  19
    We obtain variation at the state, county (if available), and year levels. Average tuition rates are from
the Higher Education General Information Survey (www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ICPSR/series/30)
and vary by state and year. Employment data and retail, food, and restaurant sales data are from
the Woods and Poole Economics Database (www.woodsandpoole.com) and vary by state and county
and year. We use state and year level variation in the average Aid to Families with Dependent Chil-
dren (AFDC) payment (Bernal and Keane, 2010). Yearly population data are from the Census Bureau


                                                    22
our model (discussed in Section 4.6), these exogenous time-varying variables serve as classic
identification variables since they are included in theoretically-relevant demand (behavior)
equations and excluded from the body mass production function conditional on included
endogenous behaviors (as described in more detail in the next section).




(www.census.gov/popest/data/historical) with total population at the county level and sex ratios at
the state level. Food, alcohol, and cigarette prices, from the Council for Community and Economic Re-
search (formerly the American Chamber of Commerce Research Association or ACCRA), are aggregated to
the county level by year (www.c2er.org). The food price consists of weighted prices of frying chicken (per
pound), chunk light tuna (5 ou.), half gallon of whole milk, a dozen eggs, margarine (1 lb.), grated parmesan
cheese (8 ou.), potatoes (10 lb.), bananas (per pound), iceberg lettuce, and white bread. The junk food price
is the average price of a McDonald’s quarter pound cheeseburger, a thin crusted cheese pizza at Pizza Hut
or Pizza Inn, and fried chicken at KFC or Church’s.

                                                     23
Table 4
Description of Exogenous Price and Supply-Side Variables

Variable name                                       Mean    Std Dev    Min     Max


Schooling variables PtS
   Two year college semester tuition in 000s        1.483     0.842   0.127    5.027
   Four year college semester tuition in 000s       2.338     0.986   0.339    6.868
   Graduate school semester tuition in 000s         2.644     1.139   0.518    7.076

Employment variables PtE
  Unemployment rate                                  6.86      2.26    1.90    17.70
  Total employment per capita                        0.58      0.11    0.38     1.34
  Ratio of manuf empl to total empl                  0.13      0.05    0.02     0.26
  Ratio of service empl to total empl                0.28      0.05    0.18     0.48
  Total earnings per employee                       41.18      8.08   27.41    77.16
  Ratio of manuf earnings to total earnings          0.18      0.08    0.02     0.39
  Ratio of service earnings to total earnings        0.24      0.05    0.13     0.42

Marriage and Children variables PtM and PtK
  Total population in 000,000s                      51.07     56.35    4.54   350.25
  White gender ratio: male, 20-60/female, 15-50      1.05      0.07    0.92     1.64
  Black gender ratio: male, 20-60/female, 15-50      0.89      0.09    0.75     1.79
  Household income in 000s                          59.62     12.29   36.97   106.29
  AFDC per month per family of four in 00s           5.23      1.96    1.47    11.87

Body Mass variables PtB
  Mean price of food                                 1.85      0.15    1.51     2.76
  Mean price of junk food                            4.69      0.32    3.57     6.79
  Mean price of carton of cigarettes                19.59      6.67   10.03    47.64
  Mean price of 6-pack of beer                       4.87      1.04    3.46     8.18
  Mean price of bottle of wine                       6.28      0.90    3.93    10.47
  Mean price of liter of liquor                     17.41      4.25    8.63    26.20
  Ratio of food sales to total retail sales          0.18      0.03    0.08     0.25
  Ratio of restaurant sales to total retail sales    0.10      0.03    0.06     0.32
  Indicator of missing price data                    0.06      0.24    0.00     1.00


Note: Data presented are means over 50 states and the District of Columbia for the
years 1984-2002. Dollar amounts are in year 2000 dollars.




                                          24
4.2      Behaviors: Schooling, Employment, Marriage, Children

Below we describe the dynamic demand functions derived from the joint schooling, em-
ployment, marriage, and children decisions and represented by probabilities of the observed
outcomes. While theory suggests that these decisions are jointly made (among 36 mutually
exclusive combinations of the four behaviors), we empirically model the derived demand as
four equations and allow the equations to be correlated through time-invariant and time-
varying observed and unobserved heterogeneity. The error terms that capture the unobserved
determinants of each equation e, uet , are decomposed into a permanent individual compo-
nent (µ), a time-varying individual component (νt ), and an idiosyncratic component (t );
specifically, uet = ρe µ + ω e νt + et . Factor loadings (ρ and ω) in each equation (and for each
outcome in each equation) indicate the relative importance of the associated type of hetero-
geneity for that equation or outcome. The serially-uncorrelated idiosyncratic terms (et ) are
Extreme Value distributed each period, producing logit and multinomial logit probabilities
of observed decision outcomes.
       The log odds ratio of being enrolled in school in period t (st = 1) relative to not being
in school (st = 0) is
                  
         p(st = 1)
    ln               = α0 f S (Bt , St , Et , Mt , Kt , Xt , PtS , PtE , PtM , PtK , PtB ) + ρS µ + ω S νt .   (1)
         p(st = 0)
The log odds ratio of being non-employed (et = 0) or employed part-time (et = 1) relative
to being employed full-time (et = 2) in period t is
               
      p(et = d)
 ln               = βd0 f E (Bt , St , Et , Mt , Kt , Xt , PtS , PtE , PtM , PtK , PtB ) + ρE      E
                                                                                            d µ + ωd νt d = 0, 1 .
      p(et = 2)
                                                                                                               (2)
The log odds ratio of being married in period t (mt = 1) relative to not being married
(mt = 0) is
                
       p(mt = 1)
  ln               = γ 0 f M (Bt , St , Et , Mt , Kt , Xt , PtS , PtE , PtM , PtK , PtB ) + ρM µ + ω M νt .    (3)
       p(mt = 0)
The log odds ratio of a change in the number of children in the household by at least j
children in period t (kt = j) relative to no change (kt = 0) is
              
     p(kt = j)
ln               = δj0 f K (Bt , St , Et , Mt , Kt , Xt , PtS , PtE , PtM , PtK , PtB ) + ρK      K
                                                                                           j µ + ωj νt j = −1, 1 .
     p(kt = 0)
                                                                                                              (4)

                                                        25
       Note that these four probabilities are functions of the same vector of explanatory vari-
ables since the decisions that produce the observed outcomes are jointly made. Additionally,
because the schooling, employment, marriage, and child accumulation decisions (st , et , mt
and kt ) are made jointly at the beginning of the period, all the variables representing supply
side conditions (PtS , PtE , PtM , PtK ) appear in each of Equations 1-4 in order to capture own-
and cross-price effects. Similarly, individuals are forward looking and anticipate making
optimal daily caloric intake and caloric expenditure decisions within the period, and these
decisions depend on the known exogenous vector PtB . The equations are also correlated
through both the permanent unobserved individual heterogeniety (µ) and the time-varying
unobserved individual heterogeneity (νt ), which enter each equation with different effects (ρe
and ω e , e = S, E, M, and K).



4.3     Body Mass Evolution

We assume that body mass transitions are captured by a production function that depends
on caloric intake, ci∗t , and caloric expenditure , ce∗t : behaviors chosen by an individual but
unobserved in our data. Specifically,

          Bt+1 = b(Bt , ci∗t , ce∗t , Xt , uB
                                            t )

                 ' φ0 f B (Bt , St+1 , Et+1 , Mt+1 , Kt+1 , wt , PtB , Xt ) + ρB µ + ω B νt + B
                                                                                               t .     (5)

After substituting in the determinants of caloric intake and expenditure, body mass tran-
sition at the end of the period is a function of the observed endogenous decisions during
the period, reflected by the vector of updated (t + 1) history variables.20 Conditional on the
observed behavior during period t, only the supply-side variables (PtB ) that affect body mass
inputs affect the body mass transition at the end of period t. Note that the unobserved per-
manent and time-varying individual UH that affects the schooling, employment, marriage,
and children demand equations also influences body mass at the end of period t.
  20
    Theory suggests that non-earned income (including spouse income where marital status is modeled as
endogenous) and earned income (e.g., wages which are modeled as endogenous) should be included in the
body mass evolution equation since the determinants of caloric intake and expenditure include one’s income.
However, we found the total household income measures in the NLSY to be fairly noisy and frequently
missing. Rather than include own wages only, we have chosen to replace wages with their reduced form
determinants in estimation of the body mass equation.


                                                    26
4.4     Distribution of Wages

Theory states that individuals receive a wage offer each period and, conditional on this
wage, they evaluate the value of each set of alternative behaviors and choose the one that
maximizes their discounted lifetime utility. Future wages are uncertain, so individuals must
evaluate future utility unconditional on future wages (i.e., integrate over the distribution of
wages). Empirically, we (the econometricians) do not observe wage offers. We only observe
her accepted wage, conditional on choosing employment in period t. It is appropriate to
address the potential bias in the marginal effects of explanatory determinants of the un-
conditional wage distribution by modeling the UH that impacts selection into employment
(Equation 2) as well as wages. According to Mincer’s seminal work, wages are a function of
observed human capital, typically captured by educational attainment and work experience.
Wages may also vary by productivity differences at the same levels of education and expe-
rience. Productivity is generally not observed, and certainly difficult to measure. We might
imagine that productivity is influenced by employee characteristics as well as employer or
job characteristics.21 In particular, we allow productivity at work to differ by an employee’s
marital status and number of children in the household. Productivity may also be influenced
by one’s physical health; our only health measure is body mass. Significance of variation in
body mass in explaining variation in wages may also reflect preferences by employers.
       For these reasons our period t wage equation includes variables summarizing the his-
tory of education, employment, marriage, and children as well as body mass entering the
current period. Each of these variables is endogenous, and we address potential bias stem-
ming from the endogeniety of these wage determinants by modeling the UH that impacts the
determinants (Equations 1-5) as well as the wages. We also include as wage determinants
characteristics of the demand-side of the employment market at the state level (denoted
PtE ), aggregate trends (captured by a cubic function of the continuous year variable), and
geographical region-year interactions to pick up variation in skill prices over locations and
  21
    We observe an individual’s occupation if she works, but few other employer characteristics. We could
model occupational choice and include occupation indicators in the wage equation. Because this would add
a large multinomial choice equation and many parameters, we do not jointly model occupation. We also do
not include occupation indicators and treat them as exogenous. Rather, theory tells us that the occupation
demand function is a function of the same variables that determine each of the jointly chosen behaviors
that we do model. Hence, we assume that the endogenous human capital and productivity histories explain
occupation.


                                                   27
time. If we wished to explain how the mean of the wage distribution varied by its determi-
nants, we could estimate log wages conditional on being employed as is typical in the labor
literature. That is, observed log wages in period t, conditional on being employed in period
t, would be specified as

           ln(wt | et 6= 0) = η 0 f W (Bt , St , Et , Mt , Kt , Xt , PtE ) + ρW µ + ω W νt + W
                                                                                              t        (6)

where W
       t is a serially-uncorrelated error term. Rather than use OLS to explain average

log wages, we estimate the entire density of wages conditional on explanatory variables
(explained in the next section below).



4.5    Conditional Density Estimation of Wages and Body Mass

As explained above, future wages and body mass are uncertain when individuals are making
their period t decisions. Thus, we seek to estimate the marginal effects of theoretically-
relevant variables on the density of these outcomes rather than simply the first moment, or
expected value. To do so, we estimate the density of wages (and of body mass) conditional on
observable and unobservable variables. We use the conditional density estimation technique
(Gilleskie and Mroz, 2004), which allows the effect of an explanatory variable to be different
at different points of support of the wage (body mass) distribution.
      Specifically, we begin by splitting the sample observations into K intervals. That is, we
discretize the support of the dependent variable. We do this by choosing boundary points
                                                                                1
that place an equal number of observations in each interval (i.e.,              k
                                                                                  th   of the sample falls
into each bin or interval) such that wk is the wage that represents the kth percentile of the
ordered wages. Figure 4 displays the histogram of wages with cut points associated with
K = 10.
      The probability of an individual’s wage offer being from the kth interval (bounded by
cutoff wages wk−1 and wk ), conditional on the explanatory variables x, is
                                                 Z wk
                         p[wk−1 ≤ W ≤ wk |x] =        f (w|x)dw .
                                                          wk−1




                                                   28
               Figure 4: Histogram of Observed Wages with Interval Cut Points

We can define the discrete time hazard function capturing the probability of being in the
kth interval conditional on not being in a previous interval as
                                                             R wk
                                                                           wk−1
                                                                               f (w|x)dw
               λ(k, x) = p[wk−1 ≤ W ≤ wk |x, W ≥ wk−1 ] =                   Rw                   .
                                                                      1   − w0k−1    f (w|x)dw

Using this hazard representation, we re-write the probability of a wage falling in the kth
interval as
                                                               k−1
                                                               Y
                          p[wk−1 ≤ W ≤ wk |x] = λ(k, x)              [1 − λ(j, x)] .
                                                               j=1

We can recover any moment of the distribution once we have estimated this hazard func-
tion (which allows us to form the density). For example, the expected value of the wage
conditional on the explanatory variables is
                                         K
                                         X                     k−1
                                                               Y
                            E[W |x] =          w(k|K)λ(k, x)         [1 − λ(j, x)]
                                         k=1                   j=1


where w(k|K) is the mean of the observed wages, w, within the kth interval.22
  22
    Note that it is important to estimate the employment outcome jointly with the conditional density of
wages (as we do) in order to account for selection that may bias the estimated marginal effects of explanatory
variables when we only observe the accepted wages of employed individuals.


                                                     29
      It remains to estimate the conditional hazard, λ(k, x). First, we replicate each of
the person-year observations K − 1 times. We then define a dependent variable indicating
whether or not the wage of a particular person in year t falls into each of the K − 1 intervals.
(The indicator is undefined for intervals greater than the observed wage.) We know that the
unconditional probability of an observed wage being in the kth interval given that it is not
                               1
in an earlier interval is   K−(k−1)
                                      based on the way we created the intervals. Next, we define
a transformation of the interval counter as ik = −ln(K − k) for k < K. It follows that the
                                                                    eik
logit probability for each indicator ik , λ(k, i) = logit(ik ) =   1+eik
                                                                         ,   gives us the unconditional
probability of the observed wage being in the kth interval (given that it is not in a previous
interval) exactly because of the way we have defined the interval counter transformation. To
estimate the conditional hazard (i.e., conditional on variables x), we interact the transformed
interval counter (i.e., the variable ik ) fully with the wage determinants.
      The hazards for wages and body mass are jointly estimated with other equations in
our full model (i.e., Equations 1-4 and the attrition and initial conditions equations) and
correlated through the permanent and time-varying UH whose distributions we also estimate.
Once the conditional hazard is estimated we can use it to recover the mean wage and body
mass conditional on the observables (and unobservables, in our case). The marginal effects
of the explanatory variables on the mean wage (body mass) account for differences in effects
at different points of support of the wage (body mass) distribution.



4.6    Attrition and Initial Condition Equations

In order to correctly estimate the distribution of permanent and time-varying UH, we must
account for the fact that individuals attrit from our research sample over time. We include,
in the jointly estimated set of equations, an equation for the probability of attrition at the
end of the period. This probability depends on updated history variables, reflecting the
period t decisions, and the UH.
      Our analysis of individual behavior begins in 1984 when some of the endogenous vari-
ables are non-zero. We cannot explain the variation in these observed initial conditions using
the dynamic specification of behaviors described above because we do not model the history
of one’s decisions prior to 1984 (i.e., we have restricted the model to explaining behavior

                                                  30
after age 18). For this reason we specify reduced-form equations that depend on exoge-
nous characteristics, including variables that do not influence the subsequent per-period
outcomes (conditional on the endogenous history variables). These initial condition equa-
tions are jointly estimated with the subsequent dynamic demand and outcome equations and
correlated through the permanent individual UH. The endogenous state variables entering
the first period (1984), when individuals are 18-26 years old, include: years of schooling
(continuous variable: 7-16), marital state (logit variable: 0,1), years married if married (con-
tinuous variable: 1-4), years single if single (continuous variable: 1-4), number of children
(continuous variable: 0-7), employment state (multinomial logit variable: full-time, part-
time, not employed), years of full time experience (continuous variable: 0-5), years of part
time experience (continuous variable: 0-5), and BMI (continuous variable). Identification of
these initial conditions is achieved by inclusion of exogenous time-varying variables (Pt when
t = 0) and other individual characteristics (e.g., mother’s and father’s years of education
and indicators of mother’s, father’s, and child’s (at birth and age 14) non-U.S. citizenship).
      Additionally, we observe wages of those individuals who are employed in period t.
However, in the NLSY data, wages are missing for some employed individuals. In a typical
year, about 6 percent of wages are missing. We include an equation to represent any non-
randomness in missing wages. In 1995, 1997, 1999, and 2001, however, wages are missing for
all individuals in the sample because they were not surveyed in these years.23 Table 5 below
summarizes the jointly estimated set of equations and their determinants.



5     Empirical Results

5.1     Replication of Previous Literature

In order to convince the reader that our preferred model addresses omissions in the literature
(namely dynamics and UH bias correction), we first estimate models similar to those in the
  23
     We are able to construct values for demand behaviors during these non-surveyed years given observed
behaviors in surveyed years. For example, while we do not observe whether someone was married in 1995,
we do observe their marital status in 1994 and 1996. We make assumptions during years with missing data
for only a small number of person-years. If the assumptions required to fill in these missing years are too
strict we delete that individual from our research sample.


                                                    31
  Table 5
  Summary of Equation Specifications in Jointly Estimated System

                                                             Explanatory Variables
                                                                                                    Unobserved
  Outcome              Estimator           Endogenous                      Exogenous               Heterogeneity

  Enrolled st             logit     Bt , St , Et , Mt , Kt      Xt , PtS , PtE , PtM , PtK , PtB    ρS µ, ω S νt , St

  Employed et            mlogit     Bt , St , Et , Mt , Kt      Xt , PtS , PtE , PtM , PtK , PtB   ρE µ, ω E νt , E
                                                                                                                   t

  Married     mt          logit     Bt , St , Et , Mt , Kt      Xt , PtS , PtE , PtM , PtK , PtB   ρM µ, ω M νt , M
                                                                                                                   t

  4 Kids in hh kt        mlogit     Bt , St , Et , Mt , Kt      Xt , PtS , PtE , PtM , PtK , PtB   ρK µ, ω K νt , K
                                                                                                                   t



  Wage if emp wt         CDE        Bt , St , Et , Mt , Kt      Xt , PtE                           ρW µ, ω W νt , W
                                                                                                                   t

  Body Mass Bt+1         CDE        Bt                          Xt , PtB                           ρB µ, ω B νt , , B
                                                                                                                     t
                                    St+1 , Et+1 , Mt+1 , Kt+1

  Attrition   At+1        logit     Bt+1                        Xt                                  ρA µ, ω A νt , A
                                                                                                                    t
                                    St+1 , Et+1 , Mt+1 , Kt+1

  Initially observed     2 logit                                X1 , P1 , Z1                            ρI µ, I1
    state variables       7 ols




literature using our research sample. Table 6 presents coefficient estimates and marginal
effects of BMI on wages as we consider different right hand side specifications (Models 1-
3). That is, Model 1 is a very sparse model of log wages on BMI and several demographic
variables. We find that a contemporaneous reduction in body mass from overweight status
(BMI = 27.5) to normal weight status (BMI = 24) results in a $0.31 increase in hourly wages
for white women and a $0.12 increase in the hourly wages of black women, where increases
for black women are statistically significant.24 Put differently, a five percent decrease in
BMI (i.e., equivalent to about a seven pound annual weight loss for a 5’ 4” female) leads
to an $0.11 increase in hourly wages for white females and a $0.02 increase in hourly wages
for black females.25 When we include (in Model 2) variables representing human capital
(but treat them as exogenous), the marginal effect of moving from overweight to normal
weight is a $0.27 and $0.14 increase in wages, respectively. (A five percent decrease in BMI
  24
      If we do not control for deviations from the mean BMI by race, BMI impacts on wages are statistically
significant for both races (as the literature reports with this simple biased specification).
   25
      To report marginal effects in level dollars we transform from logs to levels assuming normality and
homoskedasticity of the wage error term.



                                                        32
results in an estimated $0.09 and $0.04 increase, respectively.) When we control for demand
side wage shifters (Model 3) the marginal effect of body mass changes very little. In the
latter two cases, the impact of body mass on the wages of white and black women are less
precisely estimated. Model 4 of Table 6 presents the estimates and marginal effects when
the model is estimated with individual fixed effects. These fixed effects purge the coefficient
estimates of bias associated with permanent individual UH that might be correlated with
wages and body mass (as well as education, work experience, marriage, and children). The
resulting marginal effect of body mass on wages of white women is much smaller ($0.07) and
is significantly estimated at the one percent level. The effect of a reduction in weight on
wages of black women becomes negative, costing $0.05 (for a reduction from overweight to
normal weight).26 We find that the large reduction in impact after controlling for permanent
heterogeneity is consistent with the literature. However, the results after introduction of a
variable to capture deviation from the average BMI of individuals of one’s same race suggest
that these smaller impacts are statistically significant.
       We also calculate the marginal effects using a quantile regression (QR) estimator in or-
der to determine whether the marginal effect of a change in BMI is different at different levels
of wages, as was examined by Johar and Katayama (2012).27 Displayed in Table 7, we find
that a reduction from overweight to normal weight among females leads to a smaller average
increase in hourly wages in the bottom quartile of the distribution than in higher quartiles.
On average, the wage increases are $0.26 and $0.15 for white and black women, respectively.
These findings are qualitatively similar to those of Johar and Katayama; they are larger
because we do not account for the endogeneity of BMI in these exploratory replications with
our data. The conditional density estimation (CDE) approach is more general and flexible
than the QR approach, and is easier to use in more complicated models that involve correc-
tion for selection (into employment) and endogeneity (of relevant explanatory variables such
as BMI, education, experience, and productivity proxies). Estimating a single equation for
wages using the CDE approach, we find average wage effects of the over- to normal-weight
  26
     A five percent decrease in weight leads to an increase in wages of white women on $0.02 and a decrease
in wages of black women of almost $0.04.
  27
     These authors account for the endogeneity of BMI using an IV approach. They control for, but treat
as exogenous, educational attainment, type of employment, work experience, marital status, and number of
biological children. They do not control for selection into employment.



                                                    33
Table 6
Replicated Results from Literature: Estimated Effects of Body Mass on Wages

Variable                               Model 1              Model 2              Model 3              Model 4

                                                                                         (0.005)              (0.005)
BMI in t                           -0.008      (0.006)   -0.008     (0.005)   -0.009        ∗∗     -0.016      ∗∗∗
                                               (0.009)
BMI in t × Black race              -0.015          ∗     -0.007     (0.008)   -0.006     (0.008)   0.002      (0.008)
                                                                                                              (0.028)
White: std devs from mean BMI      -0.002      (0.026)   0.004      (0.023)   0.015      (0.023)   0.073       ∗∗∗
                                               (0.039)              (0.035)              (0.034)              (0.032)
Black: std devs from mean BMI       0.117       ∗∗∗      0.067         ∗∗     0.071         ∗∗     0.097       ∗∗∗

Estimation                          OLS on lnWt          OLS on lnWt          OLS on lnWt          OLS on lnWt
Method:                              clustered std err    clustered std err    clustered std err    clustered std err

                                                                                                     fixed effects


Model                                   Xt , Bt               Xt , Bt              Xt , Bt              Xt , Bt
Includes:                                                St , Et , Mt , Kt    St , Et , Mt , Kt    St , Et , Mt , Kt
                                                                                     Pte                  Pte

R-squared                                 0.28                 0.40                 0.42                 0.34


Marginal Effect ($) of a change from Overweight to Normal Weight (at the point estimates)

 White                                    0.31                 0.27                 0.26                0.07
 Black                                    0.12                 0.14                 0.14                -0.05


Note: Coefficients are reported in the top panel; marginal effects are simulated in order
to account for interactions. Models 1-3 treat endogenous histories as exogenous.
All models include a cubic time trend and time trend ∗ regional location interactions.




                                                    34
reduction to be $0.22 and $0.14. With CDE (estimated coefficients not shown in table),
we find that the coefficients on BMI variables interacted with the continuous wage interval
indicator are statistically significant for whites and blacks, suggesting that body mass has
different effects across the support of the distribution of wages. These findings are consistent
with the reported marginal effects from the QR framework above. It remains to explore how
these results change when additional controls for selection, endogeneity, and measurement
error are incorporated. Importantly, our multiple equation dynamic framework allows body
mass to influence behaviors, as individuals age, that also determine wages, allowing us to
capture the contemporaneous and life-cycle effects of an evolving body mass on wages.
          Table 7
          Estimated Effects of Body Mass across the Support of Wages

                                                 Quantiles from Quantile Regression (QR)
          Variable                                25th            50th             75th

                                                        (0.039)              (0.041)            (0.066)
          BMI in t                           -0.106     ∗∗∗       -0.190     ∗∗∗       -0.240   ∗∗∗
          BMI in t × Black race               0.019     (0.050)   -0.027     (0.050)   -0.065   (0.057)
                                                                             (0.186)            (0.313)
          White: std devs from mean BMI       0.289     (0.184)   0.576      ∗∗∗       0.715      ∗∗
                                                        (0.161)              (0.151)            (0.268)
          Black: std devs from mean BMI       0.343       ∗∗      1.076      ∗∗∗       1.526    ∗∗∗

          Model                                                        Xt , Bt
          Includes                                                St , Et , Mt , Kt
                                                                         Pte


          Calculated Contemporaneous Effect
          of Change from Overweight to Normal Weight (at the point estimates)

          QR Average                        White: 0.26        Black: 0.15
          CDE Average                       White: 0.22        Black: 0.14


          Note: Coefficients are reported in the top panel; marginal effects are simulated
          in order to account for interactions. Models treat endogenous histories as exogenous.
          Models include a cubic time trend and time trend ∗ regional location interactions.
          Note: QR = quantile regression; CDE = conditional density estimator




                                                   35
5.2     Results from our Preferred Model

Graphical Fit of Model’s Ability to Capture Dynamic Behavior

Appendix Tables A1-A6 present coefficient estimates from our dynamic multiple equation
model that accounts for both permanent and time-varying individual UH and allows for
different effects across the distributions of body mass and wages.28 We begin by depicting, in
Figure 6 and 7, outcomes from our data generating process (i.e., the jointly-estimated wage,
demand, and production equations) with the observed data. We simulate behavior from the
first period forward, using the simulated values of endogenous explanatory variables updated
each period based on the estimated dynamic equations. The updated simulations from the
model with heterogeneity suggest that the model captures well the dynamics associated with
the modeled behaviors.29


Calculation of Model Implications

Examination of the coefficient estimates is not sufficient for understanding the dynamic role
of body mass on wages over time. In order to calculate the contemporaneous and dynamic
marginal effects of variables of interest on outcomes of interest, we simulate behavior over
time using the estimated parameters on observed variables, the estimated distribution of
UH, and assumed distributions of the remaining i.i.d unobservables. For example, we might
desire to know how an improvement in body mass affects wages. But, is that a one time
decrease in body mass at age 18? Or a decrease each year? And do we care about the
average effect on wages over the life cycle, or at age 18, or at age 40? Any change in body
mass at a particular age will have an effect on wages at every subsequent age.
  28
     Estimates for the initial conditions equations are available from the authors. We have verified that the
variables we include in the initial condition equations as identifying variables are statistically significant and
can be excluded from the main equations conditional on the inclusion of the endogenous variables. Similarly,
to test our exclusions restrictions in the dynamic equations, we have estimated a model where we include
variables in equations for which theory suggests they should be excluded. Tests of statistical significance
confirm that these identifying variables can be excluded after conditioning on the endogenous variables that
they do explain.
  29
     Likelihood ratio tests suggest that a model with six estimated discrete mass points for the permanent UH
distribution [0.00 (0.02), 0.27 (0.10), 0.45 (0.19), 0.61 (0.34), 0.79 (0.27), 1.00, (0.08)] and three estimated
discrete mass points for the time-varying UH distribution [0.00 (0.08), 0.60 (0.92), 1.00 (0.01)] provides the
best statistical fit. Mass point values are listed with probability weights in parentheses.




                                                       36
Figure 5: Comparison of Observed Data to Model Predictions




                           37
Figure 6: Comparison of Observed Data to Model Predictions




                           38
     Since our goal is to understand the dynamic role of body mass on wages, we focus our
attention here on understanding these marginal effects, and we encourage the reader to take
note of the statistical significance of estimated parameters (available in Tables A1-A6). Note
that we report impacts on both the conditional (on employment) and unconditional wage
distribution (while also conditioning on observed wage determinants). First, we calculate
the effect of an improvement in body mass from overweight (BMI=27.5) to normal weight
(BMI=24) on contemporaneous wages. That is, if one’s body mass currently was normal
weight rather than overweight (all else equal), how might the hourly wage distribution differ?
We call this the contemporaneous effect. This effect does not include the effect on human
capital formation and accumulation (which also affect wages this year) of the changes in
evolutionary body mass that may have precipitated the current change. Figure 8 plots
the estimated wage differences across deciles for our preferred model with UH (solid lines),
which addresses endogeneity, selection, and measurement error; it also displays the associated
results for a model without UH (dotted lines), which represents biased impacts. The no UH
estimates reflect gains similar to those described previously by our replications of models
used in the literature. Our preferred model that includes UH suggests that, on average,
the unbiased contemporaneous wage impacts are smaller; white women experience a $0.07
increase in hourly wages and black women experience a small decrease of $0.02. These
averages reflect increases in wages at all deciles for whites while blacks experience reductions
in wages that fall in the first six deciles, but improvements at higher wages.
     We can compare the contemporaneous effect of body mass on wages with that of human
capital and productivity variables. One year increases in education lead to contemporaneous
increases in hourly wages of $0.79 and $0.66 for white and black females, respectively. One
additional year of full time employment experience leads to increases of $0.26 and $0.21,
respectively. The associated reduction of body mass by one BMI point leads to increases in
contemporaneous wages of $0.05 for white women and decreases of $0.01 for black women,
on average.
     Now we want to calculate the dynamic effect (or life-cycle effect) of an improvement in
body mass from overweight to normal weight. That is, we simulate schooling, employment,




                                              39
Figure 7: Contemporaneous Effect of Body Mass Improvement on Wages




                               40
marriage, and family size behaviors of individuals if they were normal or overweight through-
out their lives (ages 18 through 45) and compare the predicted wages for each body mass
type each period. Note that this calculation includes both the change in contemporaneous
wages (via body mass) as well as the changes in wages caused by the effects of body mass on
human capital (via education and experience) and productivity (via marriage and children).
     Figure 9 depicts the average differences in wages associated with an improvement in
body mass at different deciles of the wage distribution contemporaneously (solid line) and
including the indirect, life-cycle impacts (dotted line). The life-cycle effect for white females
is an average increase in hourly wages of $0.04. Black females experience a decline of $0.07
on average. Recall that the contemporaneous effects averaged $0.07 and $-0.02 for white
and black females, respectively. These results suggest that the permanent reduction in body
mass (from overweight to normal weight) led to changes in human capital and productivity
behaviors over the life cycle that generated additional contributions to wages that reflect a
smaller total life-cycle body mass impact. In general, a weight improvement results in the
greatest nominal wage increase for white and black women in the highest deciles of wages.
However, black women are likely to experience a wage reduction in the wage deciles where
they are more likely to be observed.
     For comparison, the life-cycle impact of a one year increase in schooling is $1.16 and
$1.03 for white and black women, respectively (Figure 9). Increases are larger at higher
wages. A one year increase in full-time work experience increases wages by $0.40 and $0.41
for white and black women. The life-cycle effect of a one unit decrease in BMI on wages, on
average, is $0.04 for white women and $-0.01 for black women.
     Given our rich model, we can explicitly trace the avenues through which this simulated
reduction in body mass suggests differences in the contemporaneous and life-cycle wage ef-
fects. We observe in Figure 10 that the marginal effects of a body mass improvement on
school attendance by age is positive during typical schooling ages (i.e., under age 28). The
health improvement increases part-time employment over the life cycle, but reduces full-time
employment (with particularly stronger effects on black women). Body mass improvements
increase marriage rates at younger ages for white women more so than that for older white




                                               41
Figure 8: Life-Cycle Effect of Body Mass Improvement on Wages




                             42
              a.) Impact of one additional year of schooling




      b.) Impact of one additional year of full-time work experience

Figure 9: Life-Cycle Effects of Human Capital on Wages, by Age and Decile




                                   43
women. Black women, however, while experiencing increases in marriage rates with a re-
duction in body mass, see the largest gains after their late twenties. Reductions in body
mass lead to lower rates of adding children to the household for white women, while black
women’s rate of child accumulation, while initially lower, actually increases slightly after age
28.




      Figure 10: Life-Cycle Effects of Body Mass Improvement on Behaviors, by Age


      Figure 11 displays the simulated wage differences of a permanent body mass improve-
ment from overweight to normal weight at every age over the life cycle on average wages.
Panel a. depicts wages unconditional on employment and panel b. conditions on being em-
ployed full- or part-time in both body mass simulations (i.e., normal and overweight).
      To quantify these distributional impacts of wages across the life cycle, we examine the
impact of different life-cycle body mass trajectories on wages between the ages of 25 and




                                              44
          a.) Unconditional on Employment                 b.) Conditional on Being Employed

           Figure 11: Effect of Body Mass Improvement on Average Wages by Age

40.30 First, for each individual in the estimation sample replicated 50 times, we simulate
their behavior each year regarding education, employment, marriage, and children, as well
as body mass and wages. We call this our baseline, which represents the wage outcomes
associated with endogenous behaviors and body mass evolution over the life cycle. We then
force a body mass trajectory on each replicated individual. For example, we may force the
individual to be normal weight over the age range (e.g., age 18 to 45). Table 10 describes
the differences in average wages and total earnings over the ages of 25 through 40 for each
of the imposed body mass trajectories.
       In the baseline model simulation, body mass and behaviors are determined by the model
estimates endogenously and updated each period. Thus, body mass is allowed to fluctuate as
individuals age. In the simulations that follow, we force body weight to be a specified level
each period, but continue to let behaviors and wages be determined endogenously according
to the dynamic model. The average of the sum of wage draw differences when body mass
is normal (BMI=24) at age 25 through age 40 relative to the baseline (when body mass is
freely determined at each age) is negative.31 However, what is relevant for our analysis is the
  30
     Ostbye, et al. (2011) use the NLSY79 data to classify individuals into groups characterized by their BMI
trajectory. These epidemiologists identify four trajectory groups: normal weight, overweight, late adulthood
obesity, and early adulthood obesity. Grouping individuals together by gender, race, and cohort, they report
membership rates of 35.0, 41.2, 19.7, and 4.2 percent for the four trajectory groupings, respectively. Males,
blacks and those in the younger age cohort (aged 18 to 20 years in 1981) were more likely to be in the
overweight, late overweight, and early overweight trajectory groups relative to the normal weight group.
  31
     Note that the wage values in these calculations are draws from the wage distribution conditional on
an individual’s histories of human and health capital, regardless of employment decision (column one). In
column two we average the sum of the wage differences conditional on choosing to work.



                                                     45
     Table 10
     Cumulative Average Wage and Total Earnings Differences by Simulated Body Mass Trajectory

                                                  Average Cumulative Difference      Average Cumulative Difference
                                                        in Hourly Wages                    in Total Earnings
                                                  unconditional      conditional     unconditional       conditional
                                                 on employment on employment        on employment on employment


     White Females
     Baseline(weight determined by model)                  12.60            13.42          403,301          383,294
        Always normal weight                               -1.97            -1.64           -3,936           -3,273
        Always overweight                                  -2.80            -2.69           -5,604           -5,379
        Always obese                                       -3.90            -3.84           -7,810           -7,681
        Early normal weight                                -2.20            -1.88           -4,410           -3,760
        Early overweight                                   -3.45            -3.17           -6,892           -6,344




46
     Always overweight vs always normal weight             -0.83            -1.04           -1,668           -2,083
     Always obese vs always normal weight                  -1.93            -2.17           -3,874           -4,341

     Black Females
     Baseline(weight determined by model)                  10.73            11.78          343,411          343,674
        Always normal weight                               -0.34            -0.04             -678              -75
        Always overweight                                   0.68             0.32            1,360              635
        Always obese                                        0.28            -0.13              556             -252
        Early normal weight                                -0.04            -0.19              -88             -380
        Early overweight                                    0.52             0.01            1,045               11
     Always overweight vs always normal weight              1.01             0.37            2,038              732
     Always obese vs always normal weight                   0.62            -0.09            1,234             -170

     Note: Always refers to body mass from age 18 through age 40. Early refers to body mass up to age 25.
     Total earnings calculations are based on full time (40 hours/week), full year (50 weeks per year)
     employment over the 16 years between age 25 through age 40.
size of this difference when body mass is simulated to be overweight (BMI = 27.5) or obese
(BMI = 32) relative to that difference when body mass is normal. For white females, the
loss in hourly wages grows as body mass increases. Translated into total earnings over ages
25 through 40, we estimate a $1,668 reduction over 16 years if a white female is overweight
versus normal weight throughout that age span (row three minus row two). If she is obese,
she loses $3,874 (row four minus row two). These figures (column three) are based on the
wage draws she receives. In column four, we report analogous values conditional on working
(i.e., taking the offer).
      Being normal weight (or overweight) from age 18 to age 25 (and then letting body
mass evolve according to the model) vs being normal weight until age 40 is an additional
penalty of $474 (row five minus row two) and $2,956 (row six minus row two), respectively.
Finally, for white females, the reduction in total potential earnings (i.e., based on offered
wages each period) for overweight (obese) body mass relative to normal body mass (rows
seven and eight, respectively) from age 18 to 40 is $1,668 ($3,874). These wage penalties
associated with body mass can reach as high as two percent of total earnings over this age
range.
      The lower panel of Table 10 reports these numbers for black females. The positive av-
erage wage difference between always overweight (row three) and always normal weight (row
two) reflects the higher wages among overweight women, which characterizes black females in
this age group. However, being obese (row five) and black results in lower wages than being
overweight (row four) and black. Obesity among black women who choose to work amounts
to a $170 loss in total earnings when she chooses to be employed (row eight). The wage
penalties (or gains) for black women are tiny relative to total earnings over this age range.
Recall, however, that these figures represent averages over the entire wage distribution. The
wage penalties at the high end of the wage distribution are large and significant for both
white and black women.




                                             47
6    Conclusion
We find significant differences in the contemporaneous effect and the dynamic effect of body
mass on wages, both across females of different races and over the distribution of wages.
We highlight several differences between our model and those models frequently used in this
literature: we use a richer incorporation of body mass, we account for selection into employ-
ment, we model endogenous body mass transitions, we jointly model endogenous variables
(related to the history of schooling, employment, marriage, and children) that impact wages
over time, we use random effects vs fixed effects to capture permanent heterogeneity which
allows us to retain non-time-varying wage determinants, we include both permanent and
time-varying individual unobserved heterogeneity, and we estimate the impact of determi-
nants on the density of wages and body mass rather than simply the mean. Our model
enables us to disentangle these two effects of interest. It also allows us to understand the
mechanisms over the life cycle that contribute to these differences.




                                             48
References

Averett, S., L. Argys, and J. Sorkin. 2013. “In Sickness and In Health: An Examination
of Relationship Status and Health Using Data from the Canadian National Public Health
Survey.” Review of Economics of the Household 11(4): 599-633.

Averett, S. and S. Korenman S. 1996. “The economic reality of the beauty myth.” Journal
of Human Resources 31: 304-330.

Baum, C.L. and W.F. Ford. 2004. “The wage effects of obesity: a longitudinal study.”
Health Economics 13: 885-899.

Bernal, R. and M. Keane. 2011. “Child Care Choices and Childrens Cognitive Achievement:
The Case of Single Mothers.” Journal of Labor Economics 29(3): 459-512.

Bhattacharya, J. and M.K. Bundorf. 2005. “The incidence of the health care costs of
obesity”. NBER Working Paper # 11303.

Burkhauser, R. and J. Cawley. 2008. “Beyond BMI: The value of more accurate measures of
fatness and obesity in social science research.” Journal of Health Economics 27(2): 519-529.

Carpenter, C.S. 2006. “The effects of employment protection for obese people.” Industrial
Relations 45(3): 393-415.

Cawley, J. 2000. “An instrumental variables approach to measuring the effect of body weight
on employment disability.” Health Services Research 35(5): 1159-1179.

Cawley, J. 2004. “The Impact of Obesity on Wages.” The Journal of Human Resources
39(2): 451-474.

Cawley, J. and C. Ruhm. 2012. “The Economics of Risky Health Behaviors.” in Handbook of
Health Economics Vol. 2 Book Series: Handbooks in Economics, edited by Pauly, M.,
McGuire, T., and Barros, P., p. 95-199.

Chen, A. 2012. “When Does Weight Matter Most?” Journal of Health Economics 31(1):
285-295.




                                            49
Chiappori, P., S. Oreffice, and C. Quintana-Domeque. 2012. “Fatter Attraction: Anthropo-
metric and Socioeconomic Matching on the Marriage Market.” Journal of Political Economy
120(4): 659-695.

Conley, D. and G. Glauber. 2005. “Body mass and economic status.” NBER working paper
# 11343.

Crosnoe, R. and C. Muller. 2004. “Body mass index, academic achievement, and school
context: examining the educational experience of adolescents at risk of obesity.” Journal of
Health and Social Behavior 45(4): 393-407.

Gilleskie, D. and T.A. Mroz. (2004).“A Flexible Approach for Estimating the Effects of
Covariates on Health Expenditures.” Journal of Health Economics 23(2): 391-418.

Grossman, M. 2009. “Effects of Weight on Children’s Educational Achievement”. Economics
of Education Review Forthcoming.

Han E., E.C. Norton, and S.S. Stearns. 2009. “Weight and wages: Fat versus lean pay-
checks.” Health Economics 18(5): 535-548.

Han E., E.C. Norton, and L.M. Powell. 2009. “Direct and indirect effects of teenage body
weight on adult wages.” NBER working paper #15027.

Han, E., E. Norton, and L. Powell. 2011. “Direct and Indirect Effect of Body Weight on
Adult Wages.” Economics and Human Biology 9(4): 381-392.

Harper B. 2000. “Beauty, Structure and the Labour Market: A British Cohort Study.”
Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 62: 771-800.

Heckman, James, Rodrigo Pinto, and Peter Savelyev. 2013. “Understanding the Mecha-
nisms through Which an Influential Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult Outcomes.”
American Economic Review 103(6): 2052-86.

Heckman, J. and B. Singer. 1983. “A Method for Minimizing the Impact of Distributional
Assumptions in Econometric Models for Duration Data.” Econometrica 52: 271-320.

Johansson, E., P. Bocherman, U. Kiiskinen, M. Heliovaara. 2009. “Obesity and Labour
Market Success in Finland: The Difference between Having a High BMI and being Fat.”
Economics and Human Biology 7: 36-45.

                                            50
Johar, M. and H. Katayama. 2012. “Quantile Regression Analysis ff Body Mass and Wages.”
Health Economics 21(5): 597-611.

Kaestner, R., M. Grossman, and B. Yarnoff. 2009. “Effects of Weight on Adolescent Edu-
cational Achievement”. NBER working paper #14994.

Korenman, S. and D. Neumark. 1991. “Does Marriage Really Make Men More Productive?”
The Journal of Human Resources 26(2): 282-307.

Lin, W., K. McEvilly, and J. Pantano. 2014.“Obesity and Sex Ratios in the U.S.”, working
paper.

Malcolm, M. and K. Ilker. 2014. “Selection Works Both Ways: BMI and Marital Formation
Among Young Women.” Review of Economics of the Household, forthcoming; published
online (DOI 10.1007/s11150-014-9247-8).

Mincer, J. 1974. Schooling, Experience, and Earnings. NBER and Columbia Press.

Morris, S. 2007. “The Impact of Obesity on Employment.” Labour Economics 14: 413-433.

Mroz, T.A. 1999. “Discrete Factor Approximation in Simultaneous Equation Models: Esti-
mating the Impact of a Dummy Endogenous Variable on a Continuous Outcome.” Journal
of Econometrics 92: 233-74.

Norton, E.C. and E. Han. 2008. “Genetic Information, Obesity, and Labor Market Out-
comes.” Health Economics 17: 1089-1104.

Ostbye, T., R. Malhotra, and L. R. Landerman. 2011. “Body Mass Trajectories Through
Adulthood: Results from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 Cohort (19812006)”
International Journal of Epidemiology (2011) 40 (1): 240-250.

Pagan, J.A. and A. Davila. 1997. “Obesity, Occupational Attainment, and Earnings.” Social
Science Quarterly 78(3): 756-770.

Paraponaris, A., B. Saliba, and B. Ventelou. 2005. “Obesity, weight status and employa-
bility: empirical evidence from a French National Survey.” Economics and Human Biology
3(2): 241-258.




                                           51
Pinkston, J. 2015. “The Dynamic Effects of Obesity on the Wages of Young Workers.”
working paper.

Sabia, J.J. 2007. “The Effect of Body Weight on Adolescent Academic Performance.” South-
ern Economic Journal 73(4): 871-900.

Sabia, J.J. and D. Rees. 2012. “Body Weight and Wages: Evidence from Add Health.”
Economics and Human Biology 10(1): 14-19.

Wada, R. and E. Tekin. 2010. “Body composition and Wages.” Economics and Human
Biology 8(2):242-254.




                                          52
Table A1
Estimation Results: Wages (Conditional Density Estimation)

Variable name                                                      Coeff   Std Error


   Constant                                                       10.221   0.963   ***
   BMI in t                                                       -0.231   0.047   ***
   BMI in t × Black race                                           0.193   0.061   ***
   White: standardized deviations from mean BMI in t               1.286   0.247   ***
   Black: standardized deviations from mean BMI in t               0.465   0.365
   Height in inches (- 64 inches)                                 -0.077   0.014   ***
   Height in inches (- 64 inches) squared/100                      0.030   0.033
   Interval × BMI in t                                            -0.163   0.028   ***
   Interval × BMI in t × Black race                                0.118   0.038   ***
   Interval × White: standardized deviations from mean BMI in t    0.850   0.136   ***
   Interval × Black: standardized deviations from mean BMI in t    0.447   0.194    **
   Interval × Height in inches (- 64 inches)                      -0.024   0.007   ***
   Interval × Height in inches (- 64 inches) squared/100          -0.001   0.017

   Enrolled in t-1                                                 0.258   0.136     *
   Enrolled in t-1 × Black race                                    0.141   0.335
   Years enrolled in school entering t                            -0.769   0.050   ***
   Years enrolled in school entering t × Black race                0.206   0.084    **
   Years enrolled ≥ 12 entering t                                  1.196   0.319   ***
   Years enrolled ≥ 12 entering t × Black race                    -2.754   0.534   ***
   Years enrolled ≥ 16 entering t                                  0.943   0.196   ***
   Years enrolled ≥ 16 entering t × Black race                    -0.521   0.407

   Employed in t-1                                                 0.417   0.534
   Employed in t-1 × Black race                                    0.731   0.656
   Employed part time in t-1                                      -0.807   0.117   ***
   Employed part time in t-1 × Black race                          0.072   0.258
   Years employed entering t                                      -0.175   0.025   ***
   Years employed entering t × Black race                         -0.087   0.039    **
   Years part time employed entering t                            -0.008   0.018
   Years part time employed entering t × Black race               -0.079   0.031   ***

   Married in t-1                                                 -0.218   0.221
   Married in t-1 × Black race                                     0.313   0.603
   Years married entering t if married in t-1                      0.046   0.017   ***
   Years married entering t if married in t-1 × Black race        -0.041   0.048
   Years single entering t if single in t-1                        0.045   0.023    **
   Years single entering t if single in t-1 × Black race          -0.094   0.031   ***

   Number of children in hh entering t                             0.136   0.071     *
   Number of children in hh entering t × Black race                0.020   0.131
   Acquire any children in hh in t-1                               0.025   0.239
   Acquire any children in hh in t-1 × Black race                 -0.052   0.620
   Lose any children from hh in t-1                               -0.052   0.478
   Lose any children from hh in t-1 × Black race                  -0.038   0.599
   Any children under age 6 in t-1                                -0.079   0.178
   Any children under age 6 in t-1 × Black race                    0.114   0.391

- continues on next page




                                           53
Table A1 - continued
Estimation Results: Wages (Conditional Density Estimation)

Variable name                                                               Coeff    Std Error


   Interval   ×   Enrolled in t-1                                           -0.104   0.081
   Interval   ×   Enrolled in t-1 × Black race                               0.112   0.188
   Interval   ×   Years enrolled in school entering t                       -0.147   0.028   ***
   Interval   ×   Years enrolled in school entering t × Black race           0.143   0.048   ***
   Interval   ×   Years enrolled ≥ 12 entering t                             0.477   0.166   ***
   Interval   ×   Years enrolled ≥ 12 entering t × Black race               -1.267   0.272   ***
   Interval   ×   Years enrolled ≥ 16 entering t                             0.429   0.116   ***
   Interval   ×   Years enrolled ≥ 16 entering t × Black race               -0.188   0.235

   Interval   ×   Employed in t-1                                            0.913   0.276   ***
   Interval   ×   Employed in t-1 × Black race                               0.132   0.330
   Interval   ×   Employed part time in t-1                                 -0.794   0.066   ***
   Interval   ×   Employed part time in t-1 × Black race                     0.071   0.139
   Interval   ×   Years employed entering t                                 -0.001   0.013
   Interval   ×   Years employed entering t × Black race                    -0.034   0.021     *
   Interval   ×   Years part time employed entering t                       -0.061   0.010   ***
   Interval   ×   Years part time employed entering t × Black race          -0.024   0.018

   Interval   ×   Married in t-1                                            -0.153   0.130
   Interval   ×   Married in t-1 × Black race                                0.208   0.340
   Interval   ×   Years married entering t if married in t-1                 0.020   0.010     *
   Interval   ×   Years married entering t if married in t-1 × Black race   -0.024   0.027
   Interval   ×   Years single entering t if single in t-1                   0.012   0.014
   Interval   ×   Years single entering t if single in t-1 × Black race     -0.043   0.019    **

   Interval   ×   Number of children in hh entering t                       -0.032   0.042
   Interval   ×   Number of children in hh entering t × Black race           0.054   0.073
   Interval   ×   Acquire any children in hh in t-1                          0.066   0.140
   Interval   ×   Acquire any children in hh in t-1 × Black race            -0.092   0.345
   Interval   ×   Lose any children from hh in t-1                          -0.206   0.273
   Interval   ×   Lose any children from hh in t-1 × Black race              0.026   0.331
   Interval   ×   Any children under age 6 in t-1                           -0.034   0.105
   Interval   ×   Any children under age 6 in t-1 × Black race               0.124   0.221

- continues on next page




                                                54
Table A1 - continued
Estimation Results: Wages (Conditional Density Estimation)

Variable name                                                Coeff    Std Error


   Black race                                                -4.348   1.134   ***
   Age in years - 18                                          0.096   0.026   ***
   Black × age                                                0.045   0.041
   Rural residence                                            0.124   0.083
   Residence type missing                                    -0.793   0.239   ***
   Northeast region                                          -0.589   0.178   ***
   North central region                                      -0.351   0.176    **
   West region                                               -0.566   0.174   ***
   AFQT score minus median                                   -0.006   0.003     *
   AFQT score squared                                        -0.001   0.001
   AFQT score cubed                                           0.000   0.000
   AFQT score missing                                        -1.193   0.335   ***
   Interval × Black race                                     -3.225   0.865   ***
   Interval × Age in years - 18                               0.040   0.013   ***
   Interval × Black × age                                     0.014   0.022
   Interval × Rural residence                                -0.012   0.048
   Interval × Residence type missing                         -0.457   0.137   ***
   Interval × Northeast region                                0.066   0.086
   Interval × North central region                           -0.068   0.079
   Interval × West region                                    -0.086   0.076
   Interval × AFQT score minus median                         0.002   0.002
   Interval × AFQT score squared                             -0.001   0.001
   Interval × AFQT score cubed                                0.000   0.000
   Interval × AFQT score missing                             -0.431   0.196    **
   Unemployment rate                                          0.058   0.013   ***
   Total employment per capita                                2.139   0.567   ***
   Ratio of manuf empl to total empl                         -1.621   2.286
   Ratio of service empl to total empl                       11.515   1.692   ***
   Total earnings per employee                               -0.035   0.009   ***
   Ratio of manuf earnings to total earnings                  4.397   1.668   ***
   Ratio of service earnings to total earnings              -14.934   1.625   ***
   Interval × Unemployment rate                               0.014   0.008     *
   Interval × Total employment per capita                     0.999   0.341   ***
   Interval × Ratio of manuf empl to total empl              -2.086   1.303
   Interval × Ratio of service empl to total empl            -6.880   1.174   ***
   Interval × Total earnings per employee                     0.013   0.005   ***
   Interval × Ratio of manuf earnings to total earnings       1.825   0.966     *
   Interval × Ratio of service earnings to total earnings     1.763   1.086
   Time trend (1=1984)                                       -0.282   0.031   ***
   Time trend squared/100                                     1.227   0.317   ***
   Time trend cubed/1000                                     -0.216   0.106    **
   Time trend × Northeast region                             -0.019   0.007   ***
   Time trend × North central region                         -0.026   0.007   ***
   Time trend × West region                                  -0.008   0.008
   Interval measure for density estimation                    7.504   0.700   ***
   Interval squared                                           0.472   0.151   ***
   Interval cubed                                             0.313   0.043   ***
   UH Factor loading: permanent                               7.478   0.149   ***
   UH Factor loading: time-varying                            8.294   0.682   ***




                                       55
Table A2
Estimation Results: Employment Status (relative to full time)

                                                            Part time           Non-employed
Variable name                                             Coeff Std Err         Coeff Std Err


   Constant                                               2.286   1.010    **   -5.875   2.245   ***
   BMI in t                                               0.269   0.127    **    0.200   0.141
   BMI squared/100 in t                                  -1.009   0.455    **   -0.819   0.541
   BMI cubed/1000 in t                                    0.107   0.048    **    0.096   0.056     *
   BMI in t × Black race                                 -0.543   0.137   ***   -0.325   0.166     *
   BMI squared/100 in t × Black race                      1.462   0.487   ***    0.646   0.631
   BMI cubed/1000 in t × Black race                      -0.140   0.054   ***   -0.058   0.070
   Ever overweight prior to t                            -0.048   0.048          0.000   0.073
   Ever obese prior to t                                  0.063   0.080          0.108   0.124
   White: standardized deviations from mean BMI in t      0.123   0.154          0.060   0.257
   Black: standardized deviations from mean BMI in t      0.430   0.173   ***    0.593   0.309     *
   Height in inches (- 64 inches)                        -0.015   0.005   ***   -0.013   0.008
   Height in inches (- 64 inches) squared/100            -0.004   0.011          0.013   0.015
   Enrolled in t-1                                        0.067   0.052         -0.610   0.090   ***
   Years enrolled in school entering t                   -0.124   0.017   ***   -0.114   0.026   ***
   Years enrolled ≥ 12 entering t                         0.092   0.060         -0.159   0.085     *
   Years enrolled ≥ 16 entering t                         0.048   0.073          0.219   0.121     *
   Employed in t-1                                       -2.894   0.073   ***   -6.750   0.099   ***
   Employed part time in t-1                              2.188   0.034   ***    3.287   0.073   ***
   Years employed entering t                             -0.080   0.006   ***   -0.119   0.009   ***
   Years part time employed entering t                    0.125   0.006   ***    0.029   0.010   ***
   Married in t-1                                         0.367   0.047   ***    0.515   0.076   ***
   Years married entering t if married in t-1            -0.001   0.005         -0.023   0.008   ***
   Years single entering t if single in t-1               0.005   0.007         -0.006   0.011
   Number of children in hh entering t                   -0.015   0.018         -0.067   0.026   ***
   Acquire any children in hh in t-1                      0.022   0.056          0.239   0.075   ***
   Lose any children from hh in t-1                       0.033   0.112          0.033   0.189
   Any children under age 6 in t-1                        0.288   0.040   ***    0.490   0.060   ***

- continues on next page




                                                  56
Table A2 – continued
Estimation Results: Employment Status (relative to full time)

                                                        Part time              Non-employed
Variable name                                         Coeff Std Err            Coeff Std Err


   Black race                                          6.113    1.080   ***    4.571   1.360   ***
   Age in years - 18                                  -0.305    0.045   ***   -0.075   0.061
   Age - 18 squared/100                                0.267    0.038   ***    0.136   0.052   ***
   Age - 18 cubed/1000                                -0.063    0.009   ***   -0.035   0.013   ***
   Rural residence                                    -0.021    0.040          0.057   0.058
   Residence type missing                              0.129    0.093          0.143   0.149
   Northeast region                                    0.326    0.136    **    0.365   0.208     *
   North central region                                0.171    0.143          0.165   0.147
   West region                                         0.097    0.095         -0.024   0.192
   AFQT score minus median                             0.000    0.001         -0.004   0.002    **
   AFQT score squared                                  0.001    0.000   ***    0.003   0.001   ***
   AFQT score cubed                                    0.000    0.000          0.000   0.000     *
   AFQT score missing                                  0.265    0.143    *     0.260   0.253
   Two year college semester tuition in 000s           0.061    0.053          0.037   0.060
   Four year college semester tuition in 000s         -0.081    0.050         -0.121   0.066     *
   Graduate school semester tuition in 000s            0.042    0.036          0.021   0.062
   Unemployment rate                                   0.004    0.010          0.049   0.013   ***
   Total employment per capita                        -2.151    0.710   ***   -3.669   0.869   ***
   Ratio of manuf empl to total empl                   0.028    0.959         -0.960   0.947
   Ratio of service empl to total empl                -1.954    0.944    **   -1.621   1.051
   Total earnings per employee                        -0.005    0.010         -0.005   0.012
   Ratio of manuf earnings to total earnings           0.000    0.908          0.304   0.838
   Ratio of service earnings to total earnings         1.092    0.927          2.356   1.054    **
   Total population in 000,000s                       -0.004    0.001   ***   -0.007   0.002   ***
   Total population in 000,000s squared/100            0.001    0.000   ***    0.002   0.001   ***
   White gender ratio: male, 20-60/female, 15-50      -0.042    0.751          0.648   0.795
   Black gender ratio: male, 20-60/female, 15-50       0.512    0.762          1.313   0.856   ***
   AFDC per month per family of four in 00s           -0.014    0.018         -0.031   0.029
   Household income in 000s                            0.010    0.006     *    0.016   0.008    **
   Mean price of liter of liquor                       0.032    0.009   ***    0.035   0.013   ***
   Mean price of 6-pack of beer                        0.031    0.047         -0.075   0.067     *
   Mean price of bottle of wine                       -0.041    0.026         -0.019   0.040
   Mean price of carton of cigarettes                  0.004    0.010         -0.004   0.014
   Mean price of food                                 -0.262    0.408         -0.264   0.771
   Mean price of junk food                             0.012    0.176         -0.168   0.297
   Ratio of food sales to total retail sales          -0.551    1.005         -2.069   1.096   ***
   Ratio of restaurant sales to total retail sales     8.751    1.141   ***   11.542   1.439   ***
   Indicator of missing state of residence            -0.334    0.796          1.348   0.920
   Indicator of missing price data                     0.143    0.820         -1.189   0.867
   Time trend (1=1984)                                 0.049    0.063         -0.006   0.080
   Time trend squared/100                             -1.318    0.727     *   -0.816   0.894
   Time trend cubed/1000                               0.512    0.252    **    0.520   0.311    **
   UH Factor loading: permanent                        0.615    0.085   ***    0.677   0.162   ***
   UH Factor loading: time-varying                    -1.682    0.177   ***   16.538   2.200   ***




                                                 57
Table A3
Estimation Results: School Enrollment and Marital Status

                                                             Enrolled                Married
Variable name                                              Coeff Std Err          Coeff Std Err


   Constant                                                -2.625   1.017   ***   -7.606   0.995   ***
   BMI in t                                                -0.285   0.141    **    0.351   0.146    **
   BMI squared/100 in t                                     1.166   0.568    **   -0.714   0.674
   BMI cubed/1000 in t                                     -0.122   0.064     *    0.055   0.075
   BMI in t × Black race                                    0.411   0.137   ***   -0.094   0.147
   BMI squared/100 in t × Black race                       -1.385   0.540   ***    0.313   0.673
   BMI cubed/1000 in t × Black race                         0.143   0.063    **   -0.032   0.080
   Ever overweight prior to t                              -0.007   0.077         -0.225   0.068   ***
   Ever obese prior to t                                   -0.124   0.152         -0.324   0.148    **
   White: standardized deviations from mean BMI in t       -0.303   0.262         -0.284   0.357
   Black: standardized deviations from mean BMI in t       -0.255   0.335         -0.337   0.412
   Height in inches (- 64 inches)                          -0.004   0.008         -0.001   0.007
   Height in inches (- 64 inches) squared/100               0.005   0.017         -0.020   0.016
   Enrolled in t-1                                          2.731   0.050   ***   -0.400   0.072   ***
   Years enrolled in school entering t                      0.207   0.024   ***    0.114   0.023   ***
   Years enrolled ≥ 12 entering t                          -0.251   0.105    **   -0.003   0.081
   Years enrolled ≥ 16 entering t                          -0.319   0.090   ***   -0.161   0.097     *
   Employed in t-1                                         -0.272   0.085   ***    0.004   0.077
   Employed part time in t-1                                0.258   0.060   ***    0.076   0.055
   Years employed entering t                                0.023   0.012     *    0.030   0.009   ***
   Years part time employed entering t                     -0.016   0.012         -0.020   0.009    **
   Married in t-1                                          -0.157   0.072    **    4.686   0.060   ***
   Years married entering t if married in t-1              -0.005   0.010          0.102   0.008   ***
   Years single entering t if single in t-1                 0.021   0.012     *    0.007   0.009
   Number of children in hh entering t                      0.149   0.035   ***    0.015   0.025
   Acquire any children in hh in t-1                       -0.222   0.100    **    0.157   0.082    *
   Lose any children from hh in t-1                         0.264   0.913         -0.075   0.150
   Any children under age 6 in t-1                         -0.383   0.071   ***    0.025   0.060

- continues on next page




                                                58
Table A3 – continued
Estimation Results: School Enrollment and Marital Status

                                                       Enrolled                Married
Variable name                                        Coeff Std Err          Coeff Std Err


   Black race                                        -3.771   1.009   ***    0.193   1.004
   Age in years - 18                                 -0.329   0.058   ***    0.047   0.057
   Age - 18 squared/100                               0.178   0.055   ***   -0.076   0.049
   Age - 18 cubed/1000                               -0.039   0.015   ***    0.017   0.012
   Rural residence                                   -0.132   0.065    **    0.156   0.056   ***
   Residence type missing                             0.046   0.145          0.055   0.141
   Northeast region                                   0.039   0.194          0.063   0.177
   North central region                              -0.050   0.170         -0.089   0.155
   West region                                        0.290   0.144    **   -0.224   0.147
   AFQT score minus median                            0.013   0.002   ***    0.002   0.002
   AFQT score squared                                -0.002   0.001   ***    0.000   0.001
   AFQT score cubed                                   0.000   0.000          0.000   0.000
   AFQT score missing                                -0.012   0.358          0.283   0.160     *
   Two year college semester tuition in 000s         -0.026   0.080          0.040   0.067
   Four year college semester tuition in 000s         0.036   0.078         -0.007   0.066
   Graduate school semester tuition in 000s          -0.031   0.063          0.009   0.063
   Unemployment rate                                 -0.010   0.014         -0.006   0.013
   Total employment per capita                        0.676   0.972         -0.772   0.849
   Ratio of manuf empl to total empl                 -1.553   0.987          0.625   0.987
   Ratio of service empl to total empl               -2.945   1.048   ***    0.835   1.042
   Total earnings per employee                        0.031   0.013    **    0.002   0.013
   Ratio of manuf earnings to total earnings          1.777   0.964     *   -1.932   0.962    **
   Ratio of service earnings to total earnings        3.559   1.031   ***   -3.456   1.026   ***
   Total population in 000,000s                       0.000   0.002          0.000   0.002
   Total population in 000,000s squared/100           0.000   0.001          0.000   0.001
   White gender ratio: male, 20-60/female, 15-50      1.246   0.953          1.565   0.945     *
   Black gender ratio: male, 20-60/female, 15-50      1.577   0.900     *    1.620   0.893     *
   AFDC per month per family of four in 00s          -0.011   0.027          0.004   0.025
   Household income in 000s                          -0.027   0.009   ***   -0.004   0.008
   Mean price of liter of liquor                     -0.003   0.012          0.000   0.012
   Mean price of 6-pack of beer                      -0.136   0.081     *   -0.059   0.070
   Mean price of bottle of wine                      -0.005   0.040         -0.022   0.036
   Mean price of carton of cigarettes                 0.059   0.015   ***   -0.001   0.014
   Mean price of food                                 0.064   0.905          0.089   0.863
   Mean price of junk food                           -0.250   0.302          0.039   0.322
   Ratio of food sales to total retail sales          2.379   1.037    **   -1.474   0.998
   Ratio of restaurant sales to total retail sales   -4.876   1.163   ***   -1.486   1.009
   Indicator of missing state of residence            1.667   0.917     *   -0.075   0.948
   Indicator of missing price data                   -0.833   0.944         -0.017   0.887
   Time trend (1=1984)                               -0.019   0.075         -0.003   0.076
   Time trend squared/100                             1.394   0.932         -0.195   0.875
   Time trend cubed/1000                             -0.904   0.354   ***    0.071   0.309
   UH Factor loading: permanent                      -0.034   0.120         -0.426   0.110   ***
   UH Factor loading: time-varying                   -0.415   0.143   ***   -0.127   0.145




                                                59
Table A4
Estimation Results: Child Accumulation (relative to none)

                                                                 Gain                   Lose
Variable name                                               Coeff Std Err          Coeff Std Err


   Constant                                                 -5.865   1.009   ***    0.851   1.031
   BMI in t                                                  0.408   0.145   ***   -0.298   0.176     *
   BMI squared/100 in t                                     -0.817   0.675          0.845   0.763
   BMI cubed/1000 in t                                       0.053   0.076         -0.081   0.083
   BMI in t × Black race                                    -0.267   0.138     *    0.417   0.166   ***
   BMI squared/100 in t × Black race                         0.571   0.674         -1.217   0.765
   BMI cubed/1000 in t × Black race                         -0.044   0.082          0.127   0.086
   Ever overweight prior to t                               -0.099   0.059     *    0.075   0.125
   Ever obese prior to t                                    -0.226   0.136     *   -0.023   0.144
   White: standardized deviations from mean BMI in t        -0.173   0.369          0.039   0.536
   Black: standardized deviations from mean BMI in t         0.050   0.387         -0.284   0.642
   Height in inches (- 64 inches)                            0.002   0.007         -0.003   0.013
   Height in inches (- 64 inches) squared/100               -0.008   0.014         -0.047   0.028     *
   Enrolled in t-1                                          -0.762   0.081   ***    0.318   0.230
   Years enrolled in school entering t                       0.046   0.022    **   -0.254   0.067   ***
   Years enrolled ≥ 12 entering t                           -0.167   0.071    **   -0.103   0.191
   Years enrolled ≥ 16 entering t                           -0.061   0.090         -0.162   0.557
   Employed in t-1                                          -1.169   0.062   ***    0.369   0.112   ***
   Employed part time in t-1                                 0.727   0.050   ***   -0.101   0.091
   Years employed entering t                                 0.049   0.009   ***   -0.002   0.010
   Years part time employed entering t                      -0.022   0.009    **    0.010   0.013
   Married in t-1                                            1.517   0.056   ***   -0.142   0.117
   Years married entering t if married in t-1               -0.088   0.008   ***   -0.033   0.010   ***
   Years single entering t if single in t-1                  0.046   0.010   ***    0.005   0.010
   Number of children in hh entering t                      -0.363   0.026   ***    0.548   0.030   ***
   Acquire any children in hh in t-1                        -0.484   0.062   ***    0.514   0.105   ***
   Lose any children from hh in t-1                          1.035   0.104   ***    0.308   0.162     *
   Any children under age 6 in t-1                           0.548   0.051   ***    0.173   0.083    **

- continues on next page




                                                 60
Table A4 – continued
Estimation Results: Child Accumulation (relative to none)

                                                           Gain                   Lose
Variable name                                         Coeff Std Err           Coeff Std Err


   Black race                                          4.799   1.008   ***    -3.576   0.998   ***
   Age in years - 18                                  -0.006   0.058          -0.308   0.118   ***
   Age - 18 squared/100                               -0.010   0.052           0.329   0.084   ***
   Age - 18 cubed/1000                                -0.008   0.014          -0.066   0.019   ***
   Rural residence                                     0.038   0.047           0.166   0.084    **
   Residence type missing                              0.089   0.124           0.357   0.162    **
   Northeast region                                    0.221   0.147          -0.057   0.500
   North central region                                0.153   0.130          -0.064   0.309
   West region                                         0.129   0.134          -0.410   0.443
   AFQT score minus median                             0.000   0.002          -0.003   0.003
   AFQT score squared                                  0.001   0.001   **     -0.002   0.001    **
   AFQT score cubed                                    0.000   0.000    *      0.000   0.000
   AFQT score missing                                  0.245   0.121   **     -0.363   0.691
   Two year college semester tuition in 000s           0.094   0.056    *     -0.013   0.020
   Four year college semester tuition in 000s         -0.087   0.059           1.154   1.019
   Graduate school semester tuition in 000s            0.067   0.055          -4.953   1.807   ***
   Unemployment rate                                  -0.002   0.012         -10.189   2.294   ***
   Total employment per capita                        -0.659   0.800          -0.003   0.019
   Ratio of manuf empl to total empl                   0.061   0.950           0.858   1.352
   Ratio of service empl to total empl                 1.954   1.045     *     9.244   1.956   ***
   Total earnings per employee                        -0.005   0.011           0.092   0.095
   Ratio of manuf earnings to total earnings          -0.931   0.883          -0.024   0.114
   Ratio of service earnings to total earnings        -3.695   1.022   ***    -0.032   0.079
   Total population in 000,000s                       -0.002   0.002          -0.002   0.003
   Total population in 000,000s squared/100            0.001   0.001     *     0.001   0.001
   White gender ratio: male, 20-60/female, 15-50       0.044   0.817           1.519   0.966
   Black gender ratio: male, 20-60/female, 15-50      -0.967   0.823           0.375   0.936
   AFDC per month per family of four in 00s           -0.042   0.023     *     0.018   0.060
   Household income in 000s                            0.005   0.007          -0.019   0.010    *
   Mean price of liter of liquor                      -0.017   0.010           0.006   0.021
   Mean price of 6-pack of beer                       -0.030   0.067           0.032   0.067
   Mean price of bottle of wine                       -0.036   0.032          -0.033   0.087
   Mean price of carton of cigarettes                  0.005   0.012           0.028   0.017
   Mean price of food                                 -0.121   0.789           0.336   0.610
   Mean price of junk food                             0.004   0.288           0.072   0.297
   Ratio of food sales to total retail sales          -4.344   1.023   ***    -0.419   1.119
   Ratio of restaurant sales to total retail sales     2.431   1.179    **    -5.268   1.717   ***
   Indicator of missing state of residence            -3.002   0.879   ***    -1.817   0.957     *
   Indicator of missing price data                    -0.730   0.891           1.985   0.972    **
   Time trend (1=1984)                                 0.211   0.075   ***    -0.085   0.117
   Time trend squared/100                             -2.710   0.884   ***    -0.264   0.953
   Time trend cubed/1000                               0.798   0.321   ***     0.082   0.306
   UH Factor loading: permanent                       -0.352   0.105   ***     0.812   0.384    **
   UH Factor loading: time-varying                    -0.139   0.116           0.353   0.495




                                                 61
Table A5
Estimation Results: Body Mass Index at t + 1 (Conditional Density Estimation)

Variable name                                                Coeff    Std Err


   Constant                                                -153.183     5.403   ***
   BMI in t                                                  13.467     0.447   ***
   BMI squared/100 in t                                     -35.735     1.197   ***
   BMI cubed/1000 in t                                        2.757     0.104   ***
   BMI in t × Black race                                      3.279     0.510   ***
   BMI squared/100 in t × Black race                        -10.422     1.441   ***
   BMI cubed/1000 in t × Black race                           1.102     0.132   ***
   Ever overweight prior to t                                -0.091     0.191
   Ever obese prior to t                                     -0.854     0.136   ***
   Height in inches (- 64 inches)                            -0.012     0.008
   Height in inches (- 64 inches) squared/100                -0.073     0.017   ***
   Interval × BMI in t                                        5.656     0.189   ***
   Interval × BMI squared/100 in t                          -11.353     0.540   ***
   Interval × BMI cubed/1000 in t                             0.695     0.051   ***
   Interval × BMI in t × Black race                           0.724     0.197   ***
   Interval × BMI squared/100 in t × Black race              -1.901     0.591   ***
   Interval × BMI cubed/1000 in t × Black race                0.161     0.062   ***
   Interval × Ever overweight prior to t                      0.115     0.115
   Interval × Ever obese prior to t                          -0.611     0.124   ***
   Interval × Height in inches (- 64 inches)                 -0.011     0.005    **
   Interval × Height in inches (- 64 inches) squared/100     -0.037     0.011   ***
   Enrolled in t                                             -0.067     0.121
   Years enrolled in school at end of t                      -0.002     0.017
   Freshmen year of college in t                              0.393     0.822
   Employed in t                                              0.125     0.066     *
   Employed part time in t                                   -0.060     0.060
   Married in t                                              -0.235     0.077   ***
   Years married at end of t if married in t                  0.017     0.007    **
   Years single at end of t if single in t                   -0.001     0.008
   Number of children in hh at end of t                      -0.003     0.026
   Acquire any children in hh in t                            0.154     0.092    *
   Lose any children from hh in t                            -0.284     0.401
   Any children under age 6 in t-1                            0.143     0.061    **
   Interval × Enrolled in t                                  -0.072     0.069
   Interval × Years enrolled in school at end of t           -0.012     0.010
   Interval × Freshmen year of college in t                   0.260     0.442
   Interval × Employed in t                                   0.030     0.040
   Interval × Employed part time in t                         0.003     0.036
   Interval × Married in t                                    0.019     0.046
   Interval × Years married at end of t if married in t      -0.001     0.004
   Interval × Years single at end of t if single in t         0.003     0.006
   Interval × Number of children in hh at end of t           -0.016     0.016
   Interval × Acquire any children in hh in t                 0.050     0.055
   Interval × Lose any children from hh in t                 -0.203     0.248
   Interval × Any children under age 6 in t-1                 0.031     0.037

- continues on next page




                                        62
Table A5 - continued
Estimation Results: Body Mass Index at t + 1 (Conditional Density Estimation)

Variable name                                                    Coeff    Std Err


   Black race                                                   -34.480     5.814   ***
   Age in years - 18                                              0.017     0.010     *
   Black × age                                                    0.012     0.009
   Rural residence                                                0.034     0.059
   Residence type missing                                         0.014     0.126
   Northeast region                                              -0.019     0.109
   North central region                                           0.002     0.084
   West region                                                    0.110     0.136
   AFQT score minus median                                        0.000     0.002
   AFQT score squared                                             0.000     0.001
   AFQT score cubed                                               0.000     0.000
   AFQT score missing                                             0.071     0.260
   Interval × Black race                                         -8.823     2.229   ***
   Interval × Age in years - 18                                   0.009     0.006
   Interval × Black × age                                         0.004     0.005
   Interval × Rural residence                                     0.019     0.035
   Interval × Residence type missing                              0.057     0.075
   Interval × Northeast region                                    0.005     0.057
   Interval × North central region                                0.076     0.041     *
   Interval × West region                                         0.120     0.066     *
   Interval × AFQT score minus median                            -0.001     0.001
   Interval × AFQT score squared                                  0.000     0.000
   Interval × AFQT score cubed                                    0.000     0.000
   Interval × AFQT score missing                                  0.006     0.151
   Mean price of liter of liquor                                  0.026     0.009   ***
   Mean price of 6-pack of beer                                  -0.045     0.043
   Mean price of bottle of wine                                   0.064     0.038     *
   Mean price of carton of cigarettes                             0.014     0.008     *
   Mean price of food                                             0.162     0.700
   Mean price of junk food                                       -0.215     0.266
   Ratio of food sales to total retail sales                      1.023     0.895
   Ratio of restaurant sales to total retail sales               -1.440     0.890
   Indicator of missing state of residence                        0.457     0.683
   Indicator of missing price data                                0.409     0.808
   Interval × Mean price of liter of liquor                       0.016     0.005   ***
   Interval × Mean price of 6-pack of beer                       -0.037     0.027
   Interval × Mean price of bottle of wine                        0.034     0.022
   Interval × Mean price of carton of cigarettes                  0.002     0.005
   Interval × Mean price of food                                  0.338     0.390
   Interval × Mean price of junk food                            -0.102     0.160
   Interval × Ratio of food sales to total retail sales           0.838     0.614
   Interval × Ratio of restaurant sales to total retail sales    -1.555     0.647    **
   Interval × Indicator of missing state of residence             0.184     0.402
   Interval × Indicator of missing price data                     0.618     0.486
   Time trend (1=1984)                                           -0.155     0.028   ***
   Time trend squared/100                                         1.539     0.326   ***
   Time trend cubed/1000                                         -0.457     0.116   ***
   Time trend × Northeast region                                  0.005     0.005
   Time trend × North central region                              0.008     0.004   **
   Time trend × West region                                       0.007     0.006
   Interval measure for density estimation                      -79.514     2.222   ***
   Interval squared                                               3.148     0.337   ***
   Interval cubed                                                 2.260     0.086   ***
   UH Factor loading: permanent                                  -0.059     0.040
   UH Factor loading: time-varying                               -0.134     0.062    **


                                          63
Table A6
Estimation Results: Attrition at end of t + 1

Variable name                                   Coeff    Std Err


   Constant                                     -2.444     0.394   ***
   BMI in t                                     -0.018     0.012
   BMI in t × Black race                         0.019     0.012
   Ever overweight prior to t                    0.056     0.083
   Ever obese prior to t                        -0.244     0.121    **
   Height in inches (- 64 inches)                0.013     0.011
   Height in inches (- 64 inches) squared/100   -0.030     0.025
   Enrolled in t                                 0.814     0.088   ***
   Employed in t                                -0.709     0.077   ***
   Employed part time in t                       0.037     0.083
   Married in t                                 -0.049     0.065
   Number of children in hh at end of t         -0.069     0.032    **
   Acquire any children in hh in t              -0.334     0.126   ***
   Lose any children from hh in t               -0.265     0.566
   Any children under age 6 in t-1              -0.229     0.076   ***
   Black race                                   -0.267     0.320
   Age in years - 18                             0.172     0.079    **
   Age - 18 squared/100                         -0.117     0.066     *
   Age - 18 cubed/1000                           0.023     0.016
   Rural residence                               0.001     0.073
   Residence type missing                       -0.818     0.210   ***
   Northeast region                             -0.023     0.083
   North central region                         -0.050     0.075
   West region                                   0.190     0.089    **
   AFQT score minus median                       0.003     0.002
   AFQT score squared                           -0.003     0.001   ***
   AFQT score cubed                              0.000     0.000     *
   AFQT score missing                            0.406     0.382
   Indicator of missing state of residence       0.981     0.401    **
   Time trend (1=1984)                          -0.204     0.078   ***
   Time trend squared/100                        2.543     0.942   ***
   Time trend cubed/1000                        -0.700     0.323    **
   UH Factor loading: permanent                 -0.355     0.211     *
   UH Factor loading: time-varying              -0.468     0.335




                                  64
