NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRODUCTION FUNCTION ESTIMATION AND CAPITAL MEASUREMENT ERROR
Allan Collard-Wexler
Jan De Loecker
Working Paper 22437
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22437

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2016, Revised October 2020

This paper was initially circulated under the title Production function estimation wit measurement
error in inputs. De Loecker gratefully acknowledges support from the FWO Odysseus Grant
(G0F7216N). We thank Steve Berry, Penny Goldberg, John Haltiwanger, Matt Masten,
Shakeeb Khan, Ariel Pakes, John Sutton, Mark Schankerman, Jo Van Biesebroeck, Chad
Syverson, and Daniel Xu, and participants at NBER SI, Carnegie-Mellon, Chicago, Zurich,
LSE, Imperial Collwege, and the Cornell-Penn State Econometrics workshop for helpful
conversations, and Daniel Ackerberg for sharing his code. Sherry Wu and Yiling Jiang
provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Allan Collard-Wexler and Jan De Loecker. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Production Function Estimation and Capital Measurement Error
Allan Collard-Wexler and Jan De Loecker
NBER Working Paper No. 22437
July 2016, Revised October 2020
JEL No. D2,L1,O4
ABSTRACT
We look into the impact of measurement error in capital on the estimation of production
functions. We introduce an identification scheme and an estimation procedure that jointly deals
with measurement error in capital and the standard simultaneity bias due to unobserved
productivity shocks. We use lagged investment to instrument for potentially mis-measured capital
stock, while conditioning on the part of productivity that is persistent. Our estimation routine
nests standard approaches in the literature, such as Ackerberg, Caves, and Frazer (2015). It
requires no additional data as investment is usually collected with other producer level data. We
show through Monte-Carlo experiments that a 40 percent measurement error in capital yields
capital coefficients that are biased downward by a factor of two. We illustrate our approach using
data for three distinct economies: China, India and Chile; which experienced radically different
processes of capital and productivity dynamics. We find capital coefficients that are typically two
times larger than those using standard approaches that only control for simultaneity.
Allan Collard-Wexler
Department of Economics
Duke University
233 Social Sciences
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
allan.collard-wexler@duke.edu
Jan De Loecker
Economics Department
KU Leuven
School of Economics and Business
Naamsestraat 68
3000 Leuven
Belgium
and KU Leuven and CEPR
and also NBER
jan.deloecker@kuleuven.be

1

Introduction

Production functions are a central component in a variety of economic analyses. However,
these often first need to be estimated using data on individual production units, and there is
a vast literature on how to deal with the challenges of measurement of output and inputs, and
the identification in the presence of unobserved productivity shocks.1 While it is well known
by practitioners that the measurement of capital assets poses a problem for the estimation of
production functions, there is scant evidence on the severity of this problem, and in addition
how to address it.2 There is reason to believe that, more than any other input in the production
process, there are severe errors in the recording of a producer’s capital stock. These errors can
be potentially large and extremely difficult to reduce through improved collection efforts since
the errors pile up over time through the capital accumulation process.
The role of measurement error in capital in forming conclusions about the drivers of productivity growth is perhaps well-known by economists, but they have not been the focus of
much analysis. Two separate JEL articles have been (partly) dedicated to discuss productivity
measurement, and the role of measurement error in inputs – see Bartelsman and Doms (2000)
and Syverson (2011). But there is unfortunately not much guidance for empirical work in how
to deal with it. This paper shows that commonly used estimation techniques in the productivity
literature fail in the presence of plausible amounts of measurement error in capital. We propose
a simple solution that requires no additional data, while nesting the most common approaches
in the literature, and hereby allowing to correctly measure the role of capital accumulation as
a major potential driver of productivity growth (at the aggregate and producer level).
The presence of measurement error in capital is, perhaps indirectly, reflected in the welldocumented fact that when estimating production functions with firm fixed-effects, capital
coefficients are extremely low, and sometimes even negative.3 Another interpretation is that
capital is a fixed factor of production, and, therefore, the variation left in the time series is essentially noise. However, this also implies that changes in capital, which capture depreciation, is
1

See Olley and Pakes (1996); Levinsohn and Petrin (2003); Ackerberg, Caves, and Frazer (2015) for some
famous examples.
2
Griliches and Mairesse (1998); Becker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, Klimek, and Wilson (2006) for instance.
3
Griliches and Mairesse (1998) state, “In empirical practice, the application of panel methods to microdata produced rather unsatisfactory results: low and often insignificant capital coefficients and unreasonably low
estimates of returns to scale.”.

2

potentially contaminated by measurement error. Indeed, in an in-depth study of measurement
issues related to capital, Becker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, Klimek, and Wilson (2006) find that different ways of measuring capital that ought to be equivalent, such as using perpetual inventory
methods or inferring capital investment from the capital producing sectors, lead to different
results for a variety of outcomes, such as parameter estimates of the production function, and
the investment and capital patterns.
Recent advances in econometric modelling and estimation techniques have introduced control functions methods whereby unobserved productivity is replaced by a function of inputs,
including capital, other inputs and productivity shifters (Ackerberg, Benkard, Berry, and Pakes,
2005). This function is unknown, and therefore has to be estimated alongside the production
function. This greatly limits the joint-treatment of the endogeneity of inputs and measurement
error of inputs, in one internally consistent framework (see Kim, Petrin, and Song (2016) for
a treatment of measurement error in such a setting). Furthermore, the control function approach fundamentally relies on the productivity shock to be orthogonal to the capital stock.
The intuition being that capital is slow to respond, and can not be adjusted within a period.
Therefore, any (potential) measurement error in capital is captured in the empirical measure
of the productivity shock, violating the orthogonality condition, leading to a bias in the capital
coefficient.
The point of departure of this paper is to revisit the impact of measurement error in the
capital stock, while preserving the main features of the control function approach. In doing
so, we make two contributions. First we exploit the implicit (log) linearity of the production
function and the underlying productivity process, present in the most common approaches, to
deal with both the simultaneity bias and measurement error in inputs. Using control function
techniques allows us to isolate the productivity shock, on which we can form moments for
estimation. The moment conditions can be formed in a very flexible way to account for both
measurement error in inputs, here capital, and various model specifications, including the speed
of adjustment of inputs and, the market structure of output and input markets. Second, we
propose to use (lagged) investment to identify the marginal product of capital, rather than
the year-on-year variation in capital stock, where poorly measured depreciations attenuate the
capital coefficient. In other words, rather than using the entire within-producer time-series
variation in the capital stock to identify the capital coefficient, we rather rely on measured

3

capital changes that line up with instances where producers invest.
Very few papers consider the role of measurement error in capital, or in inputs more generally. Van Biesebroeck (2007) evaluates the performance of various production function estimators, including the so-called control function approaches, in the presence of measurement error,
although not with a specific focus on measurement error in capital. He compares various methods in the presence of log additive mean-zero independent and standard normally distributed
errors to all inputs, measurement error in output and input prices. While his focus is on the
bias in the estimated coefficients, we provide an estimator that is robust to the presence of such
measurement error, in the context of endogenous input choices.
An often used alternative to production function estimation is the so-called factor-share
approach. In general, and in order to accommodate imperfect competitive output markets, the
output elasticities are directly computed in data through the ratio of an input’s expenditure
over total costs.4 The latter includes the payments to capital which rely not only on an estimate
of the user cost of capital, but also on a measure of the capital stock. Therefore, the factor-share
approach is subject to a potential measurement error problem as well.5

2

Measurement error in capital

In this section, we discuss the relevance of obtaining the correct parameter value of the capital
coefficient for any productivity analysis. We then discuss in greater detail what the potential
sources of measurement error in capital are, and how we incorporate measurement error into
the estimation of the production function. This discussion leads us to conclude that (lagged)
investment is a natural instrument for the recorded capital stock.

2.1

Relevance for productivity analysis

Dealing with measurement error in capital is critical to obtain reliable estimates of the capital
coefficient. We hereby revisit an older and important debate on the relative importance of
4

See Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008) and De Loecker, Eeckhout, and Unger (2020) for applications
of the approach.
5
Under constant returns to scale, no adjustment cost and perfect competitive output markets, revenue shares
(the ratio of an input’s expenditure in total revenue) can be used to estimate the production function (Asker,
Collard-Wexler, and De Loecker, 2014), while under imperfect competition, the user cost of capital — which is
rarely measured directly — needs to be observed.

4

capital accumulation and total factor productivity growth in explaining periods of high-growth
throughout the world, at various points in time. The essence of the debate can be traced back
to the measurement of the capital stock, and its growth, in the national accounts. If a country,
a region, or an individual producer for that matter, experience a growth in output, it can come
from factor accumulation or productivity growth. Economists care greatly as to which one it
is, for the plain and simple reason that one is free, and the other is not. Factor accumulation,
in the case of capital, requires investment, on top of offsetting depreciation, and it is privatelyheld, and purchased in the capital market at prevalent market prices; and thus imply a user
cost of capital. In contrast, if output rises due to productivity growth, say due to technological
progress, all factors become more productive.
This debate between productivity and factor accumulation was particular lively in the aftermath of the East Asian growth miracle. The industrial revolution in several East Asian
countries, during (roughly) 1960 and 1990, lead to periods of rapid growth; Taiwan, Singapore,
Hong Kong and Korea recorded average annual output-per-worker growth of 4.3, 4.2, 4.7 and
4.9 percent, respectively. The conflicting views on the source of his phenomenal output growth
are reflected in several prominent papers. Hsieh (2002) put forward evidence, using duality theory, that indeed the source behind the output growth was TFP, while Young (1995) concluded
that factor accumulation was the main driver behind this success.
Against this background, a separate literature developed taking the newly arrived microdatasets to estimate production functions. These data cover the very same variables, output
and input data, as in the analysis of Young (1995) and Hsieh (2002), but instead of aggregated
to the level of a country (by means of inspecting the national accounts), they are recorded at
the level of an individual producer. A major focus was on developing approaches that can deal
with the transmission bias, leading to otherwise biased factor shares of the various inputs. This
literature, starting with Olley and Pakes (1996), was also interested in productivity growth
episodes, and detecting the drivers behind it. One important take-away from this literature is
that the estimate of the factor share of capital is greatly affected by whether we recognize that
a producers’s input choices are systematically related to productivity, and that as industries
mature a non-random set of producers is forced to exit. In the case of US telecom equipment
producers, Olley and Pakes (1996) report a capital coefficient of 0.35, compared to the withinestimator (the benchmark at the time) of 0.06. While no attempts in this study, or in any of

5

the subsequent work, were made to connect this to aggregate implications, it is clear that any
conclusion, on what the drivers of output growth might be, will be highly sensitive to which
point estimate is used. In a similar type of analysis Collard-Wexler and De Loecker (2015)
demonstrate the importance of the point estimate on capital in detecting the productivity
effects from the introduction of a new technology, in their case the minimill in steel production.
While we broadly relate to the literature on the relative importance of productivity and
capital, as prominently featured in the literature mentioned above, we do not engage in a
revision of a particular debate, but our findings on the magnitude of the capital coefficient do
impact this discussion. Furthermore, we expect measurement error in capital to be problematic
for any analysis of micro-level correlations of productivity. If we systematically underestimate
the factor share of capital, we also underestimate its marginal product. This underestimate of
the role of capital will be loaded into the productivity residual. Thus, any firm characteristic
that is correlated with capital, such as firm size, export participation, research and development
or management, among others, will falsely appear to be associated with higher productivity.

2.2

Sources of Measurement Error in Capital

Capital stock is typically measured in one of two ways, using either book value, or the perpetual inventory method (PIM, hereafter). The book value of capital is measured using direct
information on the value of capital, as recorded in a firm’s balance sheet. The PIM adds up
depreciated past investments, and thus, requires data on investment, and recorded depreciations to construct capital stock. Of course, these approaches are related since the book value
of capital is frequently the outcome of firms themselves applying the PIM in their internal
accounting. PIM is the most common approach to construct capital stock series in census data,
while accounting-based filing typically supply the book value of tangible fixed assets (e.g. Orbis
and Computstat are two well-known examples); see Becker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, Klimek, and
Wilson (2006) for an excellent overview. PIM measures the capital stock of a particular asset
Ka using:
∞
X
Kat =
θajt Iat−j ,
(1)
j=0

where θajt is the weight at time t of asset a of vintage j and, thus, captures the depreciation
profile, and Iat−j is the real gross investment of vintage j. Literally applying equation (1) is
6

virtually impossible, even when we rely on the highest quality dataset, such as the U.S. Census
of Manufacturers. Instead, applied work typically relies on a more familiar law of motion for
capital:
e
Kite = (1 − δst )Kit−1
+ Iit−1 ,
(2)
where we now calculate current capital stock for a more aggregated asset e, such as equipment
and buildings, and rely on an industry-wide depreciation rate for assets δst , where s indicates
the industry, i indexes the producer, and t is year. Finally, real gross investment expenditure
is ideally corrected for sales and the retirement of capital assets.
This immediately raises a few measurement issues. First, this approach requires an initial
stock of capital, Ke0 , at the date on which production started. Second, investment price deflators are rarely available at the producer-level — these are typically computed at the industry
level. This is a problem, since asset mix can be differ considerably across producers within
the same industry. Third, depreciation rates are assumed to not vary across producers and
vintage of the capital stock, which again creates measurement error in capital. Aggregating
over heterogeneous assets with a common depreciation factors is, thus, expected to introduce
noise in the capital stock measure, as well. Moreover, depreciation does not simply follow a
fixed factor, and this all is further compounded by reported depreciation being governed by tax
treatment of depreciation rather than by economic depreciation.6
In contrast, investment is more precisely recorded through the purchases of various capital
goods and services in a given year. This is in stark contrast to capital stock, which is accumulated over time, and this further exacerbates the problem. While, to some extent, every input,
including labor and intermediate inputs, is subject to measurement error, capital is distinct in
this dimension.
The use of book value as recorded in a producer’s balance sheet is also subject to measurement error. In principle, one can rely on both measures — the book value and the constructed
capital stock using PIM — and see how they line up. In the U.S. Census data on manufacturing,
such as the Annual Survey of Manufacturing and the Census of Manufacturers, these perpetual inventory and direct assets measures differ by 15 to 20 percent (see Becker, Haltiwanger,
Jarmin, Klimek, and Wilson (2006)). This suggests a reasonable amount of measurement error
6

For example, when regulators set electricity rates (see, for instance, Progress Energy – Carolinas (2010)),
they often have hundreds of pages of asset-specific depreciations depending on the lifespan of a boiler, car, truck,
or building, and these depreciation rates typically have fairly intricate time series patterns.

7

in capital that is likely to be persistent over time. Given that we see measurement error even
in the highest-quality data sources such as the U.S. Census of Manufacturers, capital measurement error may be more prevalent for datasets covering developing countries. In the latter,
we are often precisely interested in identifying factors driving productivity growth, and the
(mis) allocation of resource; therefore, accurately measuring the marginal products, and capital
growth is of first-order importance. Finally, intangible capital is an increasing part of total
capital stock (see Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2009) and Haskel and Westlake (2017)). For all
the issues in measuring physical capital, such as buildings or machinery, measuring intangible
capital such as research and development or brand equity, is substantially harder.
In the next section, we introduce the identification and associated estimation strategy. In
Section 4, we turn to a series of Monte Carlo analysis, to demonstrate the performance of
our estimator. We illustrate our approach, in Section 5, by contrasting the estimated capital
coefficients using our procedure to traditional approaches. We do this for three distinct datasets
that have a long tradition in the productivity literature, including China’s NBES, the Indian
census of manufacturing (ASI) and a sample of Chilean manufacturing producers.

3

Identification and Estimation Strategy

We present the identification strategy to accommodate both unobserved productivity shocks
and measurement error in capital. This strategy suggests a straightforward estimation routine
that does not require additional data, and does not not add any complexity to the standard
estimation routines such as the class considered by ACF.

3.1

Identification under measurement error and productivity shocks

We consider a production function of the type:
qit = f (mit ) + βl lit + βk kit + ωit ,

(3)

where qit , lit , kit , mit and ωit denote (log) output, labor, capital, materials and productivity,
respectively. This captures the class of Hicks-neutral production functions including the gross
output and Leontief Cobb-Douglas specifications – i.e., f (mit ) = βm mit and f (mit ) = 0, re-

8

spectively.7 In levels these two production functions are given by
(
Mitβm Lβitl Kitβk Ωit
(Gross-Output),
Qit =
βl βk
min {βm Mit , Lit Kit Ωit } (Leontief).

(4)

In what follows we consider the standard DGP considered by ACF that allows to identify the
production function that is perfect competitive output markets and competitive input markets
with common factor prices. This allows us to focus on the role of measurement error in capital.
In subsection 3.22 we briefly discuss departures from this perfect competition framework.
The laws of motion. Capital and productivity follow the (standard) law of motions:
Kit = (1 − δ)Kit−1 + Iit−1

(5)

ωit =

(6)

ρωit−1 + ξit

This is a departure from the literature, which typically only assumes a first-order (exogenous)
Markov process, that allows for a non-linear process of the form ωit = g(ωit−1 ) + ξit . In practice,
typically an AR(1) process is used. Moreover, when the properties of new estimators, such as
ACF, are evaluated via Monte-Carlo experiment, these also assume an AR(1) process.8
Measurement error in capital When we turn to the actual solution and implementation
of our estimator, we rely on the commonly assumed errors-in-variable structure, where the
observed log of the capital stock (k) is the sum of the log true capital stock (k ∗ ) and the
measurement error (k ):
kit = kit∗ + kit ,
(7)
7

To avoid the unlikely case that the data on materials is generated by unexpected large swings in the price
of materials after labor and capital are installed, such that the Leontief FOC would fail to hold, we do not
consider the more general Leontief structure G(Mit ), but rather βm Mit .
8
While we consider an AR(1) process, the approach goes through for higher-order AR processes of the form
PP
p=1 ρp ωt−p . It thus remains an empirical matter how to evaluate the trade-off between allowing for nonlinearities and higher-order AR terms. Our approach does, however, accommodate endogenous processes of the
form ωit = ρ1 ωit−1 + ρ2 dit−1 , where dit is an action taken by the firm to impact future productivity, e.g. export
status or innovation. See De Loecker (2013) for a discussion, and Braguinsky, Ohyama, Okazaki, and Syverson
(2015) for a recent application.

9

where we use the ∗ notation to denote variables measured without error – the one that is typically
observed by the firm – and the unstarred notation to denote the observed value. This linear
form of measurement error allows us to use IV to rid the model of bias from error-in-variables.
We refer to this representation, loosely, as the reduced form for the various measurement
error sources we have described. We assume that kit is classical measurement error — i.e. it is
uncorrelated with true capital stock kit . We do, however, allow for kit to be serially correlated
over time (within a producer). Since capital is constructed using historical information on the
cost of assets, it is unlikely that there is no serial dependence in measurement error of the value
of assets.
We further assume that this measurement error is orthogonal to last period’s investment
choice:
E(iit−1 kit ) = 0.
(8)
Throughout we denote (log) investment as iit , and we observe investment without error. 9 Thus,
the main premise is that investment at time t − 1 is informative about the capital stock at time
t, conditional on lagged capital, but is not correlated with the measurement error in capital
kit . This makes lagged investment a valid instrument, as lagged investment is, by the presence
of the law of motion on capital, predictive of the current capital stock, and this assumption
guarantees that it is orthogonal to the measurement error. This condition holds by construction
if the measurement error is not serially correlated. However,we do allow for serially correlated
measurement error in capital as the likely source behind measurement error is due errors in
depreciation, which naturally give rise to dependency over time.
Of course, merely using lagged investment as an IV would not work: given that investment
choices depend on unobserved productivity, the exclusion restriction is violated. Our approach
is specifically designed to jointly treat the two sources of endogeneity: simultaneity and errors
in variables.
Simultaneity with Errors-in-Variables Let us consider the empirical counterpart of the
production function, where we follow the literature and include measurement error in output
9

We can allow for measurement error in investment, as long as this measurement error is not correlated with
the measurement error in capital kit , and if investment enters without error in the PIM calculation. This is
precisely what our Monte Carlo simulations accommodate.

10

(it )10
qit = βl lit + βk kit + ηit ,

(9)

where ηit is a composite error term composed of productivity, and measurement error in capital
and output:
(10)
ηit ≡ ωit − βk kit + it .
The search for an instrument (zit ) in this setting consists of satisfying both :
E(kit zit ) 6= 0 and E(ηit zit ) = 0.

(11)

This implies that not only that the instrument needs to be orthogonal to the capital and
output measurement error ( + k ), but also orthogonal to the productivity term ω — to avoid
the standard simultaneity bias. The literature has long recognized that the latter is difficult to
find, since candidates that are correlated with inputs are, more often than not, also correlated
with productivity, and therefore fail to satisfy the exclusion restriction. Input prices often fall
in this category, since they are expected to be correlated with the inputs, but at the same
likely correlated with productivity. Our setup adds a second source of endogeneity through the
presence of capital measurement error, and we now explain how our approach can deal with
both sources of endogeneity – i.e., E(kit ωit ) 6= 0; the simultaneity problem, and E(kit kit ) 6= 0;
the errors-in-variable problem.
It is instructive to consider how treating each source of endogeneity separately leads to a
biased estimate of the capital coefficient (and potentially also the labor coefficient – more on
this below). In fact deploying a pure IV approach using lagged investment would result in using
the moment condition E(ηit iit−1 ) = 0. The investment instrument is strong, as E(iit−1 kit ) > 0
due to the capital accumulation process. However, this IV approach would yield an upward bias
since η captures productivity (ω), and we expect investment to be increasing in productivity
E(iit−1 ωit ) > 0, through the persistent part of the productivity shock – i.e. the inequality
reduces to E(iit−1 ωit−1 ) > 0.11
∗
The error in output relates to true output as follows: qit = qit
+ it where q ∗ is true output and q denotes
measured output.
11
Indeed, in our monte-carlo experiements in section 4 the IV estimator is higher than the OLS estimator.
This pattern is mimicked by our applications, so we present this IV estimator, both to illustrate the bias it
causes, but also, to show what is being leveraged in the data to yield consistently higher capital coefficients.
10

11

Following the standard ACF approach would lead to a moment condition on the productivity
shock that still contains the measurement error in capital and would set the following moment
condition equal to zero to identify βk :
E(ξ˜it kit ) = 0,

(12)

where ξ˜it ≡ ξit − βk kit + ρβk kit−1 . The presence of measurement error, at both t and t − 1 makes
it impossible to identify the capital coefficient.
Our approach, however, relies on the following conditional orthogonality condition:
E(ηit iit−1 |ωit−1 ) = 0,

(13)

which with help from the assumed laws of motion (equations (5) and (6), respectively) leads to
the following moment condition that identifies the capital coefficient.
E(ξ˜it iit−1 ) = 0.

(14)

This expression highlights that we require (lagged) investment to be orthogonal to contemporaneous measurement error in capital (stated in equation (8)).12
The labor coefficient is identified using standard moment conditions (depending on what
one is willing to assuming about labor market frictions and adjustment costs). We do, however,
expect the labor coefficient to be biased in the presence of measurement error in capital, even
under the standard ACF approach, and this for the simple reason that labor and capital are
correlated. Under the Cobb-Douglas production technology, assumed throughout the literature
and in this paper, the two inputs are positively correlated and if there are no unobserved productivity shocks, one can show that this will lead to an upward bias of the labor coefficient.
The intuition behind this result is that labor will pick up the true capital variation through
the positive correlation of labor and (true) capital, and thus overestimate the impact of labor
on output variation.13 This has further implications for returns to scale. Correcting for the
presence of measurement error in capital leads to ambiguous returns to scale implications; depending both on the severity of the error in capital recording and the strength of the correlation
between labor and capital in the data.
12

Unlike the approach introduced by Olley and Pakes (1996) where only firms that invest can be used to estimate the production function, our approach has the potential to treat the zero investment firms as information
about the change in capital that is potentially contaminated with error.
13
See chapter 11 of Maddala and Lahiri (1992) and Pischke (2007) for a formal treatment of the signal-to-noise
bias in multivariate regression analysis.

12

3.2

Estimation

We present the main estimation algorithm that nests the standard approach in the literature,
but considers serially correlated measurement error in capital.
3.2.1

Benchmark

The estimation procedure consists of two steps, and follows the discussion in ACF closely.14
The main difference is that we exploit the (log) linear production structure in capital, labor
and productivity, which dictates a (log) linear control for productivity. The log linearity of the
production function guarantees that the control for productivity (through the cost minimizing
first-order condition used to control for unobserved productivity) will also be log-linear, and
allow to treat the error in capital measurement. Under our baseline specification of the Leontief
production function, the cost minimizing material choice gives a simple log-linear control for
productivity given by:
ωit = ln βm + mit − βl lit − βk kit (Leontief).

(15)

Note that this control is independent of the presence input price variation, and imperfect
competitive output or input markets. It merely states that the firm is optimally deploying the
mix of inputs given the technology. Alternatively, under the gross output production function
we follow ACF-LP and invert the material demand equation and (also) obtain a log linear
expression for productivity given by:
ωit = − ln βm + (1 − βm )mit + pm
t − pt − βl lit − βk kit (Gross-Output),

(16)

where all lower cases denotes logs, and pm and p are the material input and output price,
respectively.15 Note that in either the Leontief or Gross-Output, we obtain log-linear control
functions.16
14
The Not-for-Publication Appendix A provides precise details on these estimators, and our webpage has code
for these in STATA.
15
In this setting the input demand equation does depend on the specific features of output and input markets,
such as input price variation and imperfect competition.
16
If we replace the productivity shock in the production function with the control for productivity (regardless
of which production function we consider), we are left with a regression of output net of material variation on a
constant (and time dummies) and the measurement error in output: qit −mit = c+it . This is a standard finding

13

In both specifications, the first step consists of running a simple linear IV-regression where
capital is instrumented with lagged investment:
qit = θt + θl lit + θk k̂it + θm mit + ˜it

(17)

= φit + ˜it ,
where θt captures the constant term and the time-varying prices (under the gross output specification), ˜it = it − βk kit , and we use θh (h = {l, m, k}) to denote the reduced-form parameters,
on each input, capturing both the production function coefficients and the parameters governing the control for unobserved productivity, and k̂it denotes the predicted capital stock from
the first-stage IV.17
The moment conditions introduced in the previous section can now be formed by observing
that the joint productivity-measurement error of capital term (conditional on the parameter
vector β) is obtained using ωit (β) − βk kit = φit − βl lit − βk kit . Using the law of motion
on productivity the moment conditions can be constructed to estimate the labor and capital
coefficient, respectively:



lit−1
˜
= 0.
(18)
E ξit (β)
iit−1
In contrast with the standard approach (ACF) where E(ξ˜it kit ) = 0 is used to identify the
capital coefficient, we rely on lagged investment to be orthogonal to the productivity shock.
Our approach, however, preserves the flexibility of the ACF approach with respect to selecting
alternative DGP, and in the absence of measurement error both estimators (ACF and ours)
coincide.
The identification and estimation of the material coefficient, in case of the gross-output
specification follows immediately from the assumption of perfect competitive output markets.
in the literature, see for instance, footnote 17 on page 2444 of ACF. However, the norm is to run a regression
of output on labor, capital and materials. It is worth weighing the pros and cons. From a purely applied point
of view, it is very strong to suggest that the variation in materials in sufficient to capture output, and it seems
sensible to include labor, capital and estimate a coefficient on materials, all to eliminate the measurement error
in output. From a pure theoretically point of view, it is sufficient to run a regression of output net of materials
and recover the constant term. The advantage is that the measurement error in capital is not affecting the
estimate of predicted output (used subsequently to isolate the productivity shock). Running this regression
would then constitute the first stage for both technologies, and is robust to measurement error in capital. Note
that this result is a consequence of modeling the productivity shock as a log-additive shock to a Cobb-Douglas
input aggregator.
17
Measured capital is predicted using lagged investment, labor, materials and year dummies.

14

Taking the first-order condition of profits with respect to materials immediately generates
m
βm = PP QM , as an estimate. Due to the potential measurement error in output (), taking
the average of the material-revenue share would yield a biased estimate. Instead, we take the
median material revenue share across the sample to obtain a consistent estimate of βm . While
the coefficient on materials is often not of direct interest in the case of the Leontief production
function, it is given by the ratio of (physical) materials-to-output, M
, where again we consider
Q
the median across firms and time.18

4

Monte Carlo Analysis

We evaluate our estimator in a series of Monte Carlo analyses in which the main interest lies in
comparing the capital coefficient across methods as we increase the level of measurement error
in capital. We follow Ackerberg, Caves, and Frazer (2015) closely, starting with their datagenerating process, and add measurement error to capital. We depart from ACF by adding
time-varying investment costs in the investment policy function in order to generate additional
time-series variation in capital stock.
We refer the reader to Appendix B for the details of the underlying model of investment,
but the main features of our setup are as follows. We rely on a constant returns to scale
production function with a quadratic adjustment cost for investment. This model yields closedform solutions for both labor and capital, where labor is set using a static first-order condition
given firm-specific wages.19 Productivity and wages follow an AR(1) process, and we consider
a quadratic adjustment cost for investment: φit Iit2 , where φit — which should be considered as
the price of capital — itself follows a first-order Markov process. We solve the model in closed
form, extending the work in Syverson (2001) and discussed in Appendix B.2, and this generates
our perfectly measured Monte Carlo dataset on output, inputs, investment and productivity.
We then overlay measurement error on this dataset composed of AR(1) processes with
18

The presence of measurement error in output thus invalidates relying on average factor shares. See Appendix
A.1 for more details and also see Asker, Collard-Wexler, and De Loecker (2014) and De Loecker, Eeckhout, and
Unger (2020) for an application of this estimator.
19
ACF also deal with two other data-generating processes, other than the approach we described (called
DGP1 in their paper). In Appendix B.4, we also consider optimization error in labor (DGP2) and an interim
productivity shock between labor and materials as in ACF (DGP3), along with optimization error in labor. We
find similar results from any of the DGP’s considered by ACF.

15

normally distributed shocks:
it = ρq it−1 + uqit
kit = ρk kit−1 + ukit ,

(19)

where uq ∼ N (0, σq2 ), and uk ∼ N (0, σk2 ). In other words, we allow for serially correlated
measurement error in output and capital.
We analyze on the impact of increasing k , which is governed by the variance σk2 . We
distinguish between the role of measurement error within a given Monte Carlo, and the overall
distribution of estimated coefficients across 1,000 Monte Carlo runs.
Table B.1 in the Appendix shows the parameters used in our Monte Carlo. We pick the same
parameters for the size of the dataset, production function, and processes for productivity and
wages as in ACF. For the process for the price of capital, denoted φit , we pick parameters that
match the the cross-sectional dispersion of capital (std.[kit ] = 1.6) and the time-series variation
in capital (Corr.[kit − kit−1 ] = 0.93) in the Annual Survey of Industries in India (discussed in
Section 5), choosing an autocorrelation term for the process of φ of 0.9 and a shock variance of
0.3.20
Finally, we pick parameters for the measurement error in inputs and output. We choose a
measurement error for output with a standard deviation of 30 percent, and a low autocorrelation
of 0.2. For the error in capital (k ), we choose a serial correlation coefficient of 0.7, so a fairly
high persistence, and a standard deviation of 0.2. Note that this assumption on the time series
process for capital measurement error yields a difference between k and k ∗ , which has a standard
deviation of 30 percent.
Table 1 presents the estimated capital and labor coefficients from this Monte Carlo exercise,
with (true) parameters of the production: βk = 0.4 and βl = 0.6. We compare the performance
of estimators that use investment to instrument for mismeasured capital proposed in this paper,
that we call Control IV, and of those that do not, that we call Control estimator.
The Control IV estimator yields unbiased — i.e., the mean parameters are the same as the
true ones — and, precise estimates, with a standard deviation of 0.02. In contrast, the standard
Control function estimator yields downwardly biased estimates of the capital coefficient, with
20

Indeed, it is this last moment that the ACF Monte Carlo has difficulty replicating: it predicts a serial
correlation coefficient of capital of 0.997, which is much more than in any producer-level dataset we are aware
of.

16

Table 1: Monte-Carlo Results
(βk = 0.4, βl = 0.6)
Coefficient OLS
Capital
0.04
(s.e.)
(0.01)
Labor
0.95
(s.e.)
(0.01)

FE
0.03
(0.01)
0.90
(0.01)

IV
Control
0.07
0.32
(0.01) (0.03)
0.94
0.52
(0.01) (0.02)

Control IV
0.40
(0.02)
0.60
(0.02)

Notes: Mean and Standard deviation over 1,000 Monte-Carlo replications presented of DGP 1 in ACF with
capital measurement error. Control refers to the control function approach used in ACF, while control IV refers
to the control function that uses investment as an instrument. The estimates without control functions are
OLS, IV with capital instrument by investments, FE with firm fixed effects.

an average of 0.32 versus a true value of 0.4. As in ACF, the OLS estimator for capital is
downwardly biased because of the simultaneity problem, with βkOLS = 0.04. The IV estimator
is similarly biased, but shows a substantially larger capital coefficient than the OLS ones. Figure
1 plots the distribution of estimates of both the labor and capital coefficient showing that the
Control and Control IV estimates have similar variances, but there is very little overlap in the
distributions of the estimated coefficients.

4.1

The impact of measurement error

In Figure 2, we plot the average estimate of βk over 100 replications against the variance of
capital measurement error σk for both the Control IV and Control estimators. This Monte
Carlo simulation shows that standard estimator become progressively more biased away from
the true value of βk as the measurement error in capital increases. It is of course difficult to
guess the relevant range of this variance, but the main takeaway is that our IV-based estimator
is insulated from this problem. The simulations do suggest that standard methods deliver an
estimate of half the magnitude for a standard deviation in the capital measurement error σk of
about 0.2, which corresponds to a standard deviation between k and k ∗ of 0.28 in the stationary
distribution.
It is important to note that our estimator is robust to capital measurement error, while
still undoing the simultaneity bias that typically plagues the production function estimation.
17

Figure 1: The distribution of the estimated capital and labor coefficient in a Monte Carlo
(βk = 0.4, βl = 0.4)
(b) Labor

(a) Capital
20

25
20

15

15
10
10
5

5

0

0
.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

.6

.7

.3

.4

.5

Capital Coefficient

.6

.7

Labor Coefficient

IV Control
Control

IV Control
Control

DGP 1 capital error

DGP 1 capital error

Note: We plot the distribution of the estimated capital coefficient across 1000 Monte Carlo replications, with
βk = 0.4, and σk2 = 0.2.

Figure 2: Impact of measurement error on capital coefficient in a Monte Carlo (βk = 0.4):
.6
.58

Labor Coefficient

Capital Coefficient

.4

.3

.2

.1

.56
.54
.52

0

.5
0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

0

Variance of Capital Measurement Error

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

Variance of Capital Measurement Error

IV Control
Control

IV Control
Control

DGP 1 capital error

DGP 1 capital error

Note: We plot the estimated capital coefficient as a function of the variance in the capital measurement error
(σk2 ). Average of 100 Monte Carlo replications per value of σk .

Therefore, applying our estimator when the capital stock is accurately measured also provides
consistent estimates of the production function coefficients.

18

4.2

Alternative sources of measurement error

As discussed before, we have considered what we refer to as a reduced form for the measurement
error in capital. That is, we consider the standard representation of an errors-in-variable,
whereby the measurement error is (log) additive — here k + k . In Appendix C, we discuss an
alternative source of measurement error in capital, derived structurally from the measurement
error in depreciation rates: Kit = (1−δit )Kit−1 +Iit and δit = (δ +dit ); i.e., there is measurement
error in depreciation rates.
This form of measurement error does not map into a log-additive structure, and, we evaluate
our estimator in the presence of this alternative setup. The main takeaway from Appendix Figure C.1 is that our estimator outperforms the other approaches but, given the formal violation
of the moment conditions, leads to a small bias of the capital coefficient for large values of the
variance of the capital measurement error.
The evidence from the Monte Carlo unequivocally favors our estimator in the presence of
measurement error in capital and, moreover, suggests that the bias can be quite severe for
moderate measurement error in capital. To verify how large this problem is in real data, we
now apply our estimator, exactly as performed in our Monte Carlo analysis, to three different
datasets of manufacturing plants, in India, China and Chile.

5

Applications to plant-level data

We illustrate our approach by applying it to three plant-level datasets. The first dataset we use
is from the Annual Survey of Industries from India. This a plant-level survey for over 600,000
plants over a twenty-year period. Allcott, Collard-Wexler, and O’Connell (2016) have previously
used and described this dataset. The second dataset is the Chilean census, as used in Pavcnik
(2002) and Levinsohn and Petrin (2003), and covers plants in the Chilean manufacturing sector
for the period 1979-1986. Finally, we evaluate the impact of our correction to the Chinese
manufacturing database provided to us by Brandt, Van Biesebroeck, and Zhang (2012). All
variables are deflated using industry-specific price deflators and Appendix D describes each
dataset briefly, and presents basic summary statistics.
These three datasets have been used extensively to study productivity dynamics, but at the
same time have distinct features related to the measurement of capital. The data on Chinese
19

establishments report the book value of plants and investment, while the Indian and the Chilean
census data report both the book value and the (constructed) capital stock using the perpetual
inventory method. In addition, the economic environments are different in important ways.
There is substantial investment during the process of economic transition in China, while in
India and Chile the presence of small unproductive firms and persistent frictions paints a very
different productivity dynamic over time. We expect these differences to materialize in the
estimated coefficient, and in the role and importance of measurement error in the capital stock.
Throughout, we compare estimated production function coefficients (on labor and capital)
from our approach to those obtained by simple OLS, IV (without the simultaneity control) and
the control function approaches including the investment IV one presented in this paper. We
estimate a separate capital and labor coefficient for each industry in each country. We do this
for both the structural Leontief model (q = βl l + βk k) and for the more usual gross-output
production function (q = βl l + βm m + βk k) where we use a first-order condition to estimate the
material coefficient. We focus our discussion primarily on the gross-output specification, since
it uses a production function that is far more commonly studied in the empirical literature, but
the pattern of results is similar for the Leontief specification.
We start by reporting the median for the various estimators in Table 2, but also include
the 25th and 75th percentile across industries to give an idea of the range of estimates. We
confirm a well-known result in the literature that using fixed effects lowers the capital coefficient
substantially. In the case of the Gross-Output production function, the capital coefficient falls
from a median of 0.12 for OLS to 0.06 for firm FE in India, and from 0.24 to 0.12 for Chile, with
no difference for China. By itself, this does not conclusively show that there is measurement
error in capital. However, if capital is fixed over a long period of time, we cannot identify its
marginal product using the time series variation within producers. China is a clear case where
capital is changing at an unprecedented rate, quite atypical from the capital evolution of most
countries. Our next specification, IV (investment), considers a two-stage least squares regression
of output on capital and labor, where we instrument for capital with lagged investment. We
find substantially higher capital coefficients compared to OLS, of 0.06 versus 0.18 in China,
0.12 versus 0.17 in India, and 0.10 versus 0.22 in Chile, respectively. This reinforces our prior
that instrumenting for capital with lagged investment may lead to a higher capital coefficient.
However, investment and unobserved productivity are very likely to be positively correlated, so

20

Table 2: Production Function Coefficients
Gross Output with FOC Materials

OLS
FE
IV

Control
IV Control

China
Capital
Labor
0.06
0.12
[0.04 0.09] [0.09 0.17]
0.06
0.11
[0.03 0.09] [0.07 0.15]
0.18
0.03
[0.11 0.23] [0.00 0.06]

Capital
0.12
[0.09 0.15]
0.06
[0.04 0.09]
0.17
[0.14 0.25]

Labor
0.25
[0.18 0.32]
0.19
[0.14 0.24]
0.16
[0.12 0.21]

Capital
0.10
[0.04 0.06]
0.05
[0.08 0.13]
0.22
[0.19 0.37]

Labor
0.43
[0.33 0.51]
0.30
[0.22 0.38]
0.19
[0.03 0.40]

0.05
[0.02 0.10]
0.12
[0.08 0.17]

0.09
[0.07 0.11]
0.19
[0.12 0.20]

0.27
[0.23 0.341]
0.19
[0.17 0.30

0.09
[-0.01 0.12]
0.16
[0.13 0.35]

0.38
[0.33 0.57]
0.21
[0.03 0.59 ]

0.12
[0.07 0.21]
0.10
[0.04 0.19

India

Chile

Leontief

OLS
FE
IV

Control
IV Control

China
Capital
Labor
0.28
0.45
[0.22 0.33] [0.38 0.54]
0.26
0.40
[0.22 0.30] [0.36 0.45]
0.64
0.13
[0.54 0.74] [0.46 0.99]

India
Capital
Labor
0.38
0.70
[0.36 0.80] [0.64 0.80]
0.17
0.60
[0.16 0.30] [0.36 0.45]
0.60
0.40
[0.54 0.74] [0.46 0.99]

Chile
Capital
Labor
0.24
0.89
[0.19 0.31] [0.85 0.97]
0.12
0.71
[0.07 0.14] [0.66 0.81]
0.55
0.45
[0.45 0.74] [0.15 0.65]

0.25
[0.10 0.40]
0.31
[0.20 0.42]

0.33
[0.27 0.41]
0.44
[0.20 0.42]

0.22
[0.14 0.30]
0.29
[0.12 0.38]

0.60
[0.33 0.89]
0.73
[0.46 0.99]

0.76
[0.65 0.88]
0.68
[0.46 0.99]

1.01
[0.84 1.06]
0.97
[0.87 1.32 ]

Notes: We report the median coefficient across all industries for each dataset. In parenthesis we show the 25th
βk
and 75th percentile for each coefficient. Leontief specification is Qit = min {βm Mit , Lβitl Kit
Ωit }, and Gross
βm βl βk
Output with FOC Materials is given by Mit Lit Kit Ωit , where the material coefficient is computed using the
PMM
median of the material revenue share (βm = M edian[ Pt t Qitit ]).

21

the increase in the capital coefficient in the IV regression might also reflect the endogeneity of
investment.
Turning to the estimators that control for the simultaneity of inputs, and the impact of
measurement error in capital. We find the capital coefficient increases from a median of 0.05
for an ACF control function to 0.12 for our control IV approach for China. Likewise, the median
coefficient increases from 0.09 to 0.19 for India, and from 0.09 to 0.16 for Chile. The fact that
the capital coefficient roughly doubles is striking, but completely in line with the predictions
from our Monte-Carlo, say in figure 2, if the variance of the measurement error σk is around
0.2. In addition, the Leontief production function shows a similar pattern of increasing capital
coefficients when moving from the control to the control IV approach. The capital coefficient
increases from 0.25 to 0.31 for China, 0.33 to 0.44 for India, and 0.22 to 0.29 for Chile.
As for the labor coefficient, in general we find that the cases where the capital coefficient
increases, the labor coefficient offsets this decrease. For instance, for the gross-output production function, the control function labor coefficient decreases from 0.12 to 0.10 when we use our
IV approach in China, 0.27 to 0.19 for India, and 0.38 to 0.21 for Chile. Likewise, the labor
coefficient in the IV estimates are lower than the OLS ones, falling from 0.12 to 0.03 for China,
0.25 to 0.16 for India, and 0.43 to 0.19 for Chile respectively for the case of the gross-output
production function. Note as well that the Monte-Carlos were less dispositive as to the effect
of capital measurement error on the labor coefficient.
Finally, in Figure 3 we plot the industry-specific capital and labor coefficients by country,
with the top panel showing the gross-output production function, and the bottom panel showing
the Leontief. The vertical axis shows the capital coefficient from our IV estimator, while the
horizontal axis shows the capital coefficient that does not instrument with investment, and the
red solid line is the 45 degree line.
The bulk of the observations for the capital coefficient are above the 45-degree line (in
red), indicating that our IV estimates are higher than the non-IV estimates for capital. This
is particularly true for the Gross-Output production function. Note as well, that there is
nothing mechanical about our higher capital coefficients: there are several industries where we
find a lower capital coefficient using the IV control approach versus the control function. The
labor coefficients are also a bit lower, but this pattern is less striking. These differences are
also frequently statistically significant. We have computed the standard errors for the Control

22

Figure 3: Industry-specific Coefficients
(a) Gross-Output
Capital Coefficient
Chile

Labor Coefficient

China

India

Chile

.4

China

India

1.5

IV Control

IV Control

1
.2

0

.5

0
0

.2

.4

0

.2

.4

0

.2

.4

0

.5

1

0

Control

.5

1

0

.5

1

Control

FOC Materials

FOC Materials

(b) Leontief
Capital Coefficient
Chile

Labor Coefficient

China

India

Chile

China

India

2

1

IV Control

IV Control

1.5

.5

1

.5

0

0
0

.5

1

0

.5

1

0

.5

1

0

.5

Control

1

1.5

2

0

.5

1

1.5

2

0

.5

1

1.5

2

Control

Structural Leontief

Structural Leontief

Notes: Each observation is a two-digit industry (as classified by the respective national industry classification),
and we plot the capital coefficient obtained from our procedure (i.e., IV) against the alternative control function.
The red line is the 45-degree line.

and Control IV estimators using a bootstrap procedure, and report these in Table E in the
Appendix. We test for the capital coefficient being larger in the IV Control estimator than the
Control estimator at the 90 percent level, which happens in 15 percent of industries for the
Leontief production function, and in 17 percent of industries for the Gross-Output production
function. In contrast, the capital coefficient for the Control estimator is only larger than the
Control IV estimate at the 90 percent level for only 4 percent of industries for the Leontief
production function, and none of the industries for the Gross-Output.

23

Taking these results at face value suggests that measurement error in capital leads to obtaining capital coefficients that are significantly lower — i.e., half the magnitude. This has
important consequences for any subsequent productivity analysis.

6

Concluding remarks

This paper revisits the estimation of production functions in the presence of measurement error
in capital. Our starting point is that appropriately measuring capital is one of the most difficult
tasks that go into estimating a production function. There is, however, rather surprisingly little
work that deals directly with measurement error in capital, or any input for that matter.
Introducing an estimator that relies on a hybrid IV-control function approach, we build
on what have now become standard techniques to address the simultaneity bias, and add an
IV strategy to correct for the measurement error of capital. We propose a simple strategy
that relies on investment to inform us about the marginal product of capital; specifically,
we use lagged investment as an instrument for the capital stock while still controlling for
the standard simultaneity bias. The latter is crucial to capture the well-known endogeneity
concern that arises due the presence of unobserved productivity shocks. Our approach therefore
captures leading estimators in the literature that have come to be widely used throughout
various subfields of economics.
From an applied point, our estimator is easy to implement and adds no extra cost to the user,
and allows for a great deal of flexibility in incorporating recent advances in the estimation of
production function in the context of market imperfections, both in output and input markets,
or the presence of adjustment frictions for factors.
Monte Carlo simulations show that our estimator performs well, even in cases of rather large
measurement error. We also apply our estimator to Indian, Chilean and Chinese producer-level
data. We estimate capital coefficients that are double those obtained with standard techniques.
This indicates that correcting for measurement error in capital can be a first-order concern,
and it has immediate implications for the literature that studies productivity dynamics, firm
growth, investment, productivity dispersion, and the covariates of productivity growth. Indeed,
any analysis where the conclusions rest on estimates of the marginal product of capital, by itself,
or as an input into measurement of productivity, can be misleading in the presence of errors in
the recording and measurement of the capital stock.
24

References
Ackerberg, D., L. Benkard, S. Berry, and A. Pakes (2005): “Econometric Tools for
Analyzing Market Outcomes,” Handbook of Econometrics, 6.
Ackerberg, D. A., K. Caves, and G. Frazer (2015): “Identification properties of recent
production function estimators,” Econometrica, 83(6), 2411–2451.
Allcott, H., A. Collard-Wexler, and S. D. O’Connell (2016): “How Do Electricity
Shortages Affect Industry? Evidence from India,” American Economic Review, 106(3), 587–
624.
Asker, J., A. Collard-Wexler, and J. De Loecker (2014): “Dynamic inputs and
resource (mis) allocation,” Journal of Political Economy, 122(5), 1013–1063.
Bartelsman, E. J., and M. Doms (2000): “Understanding productivity: Lessons from
longitudinal microdata,” Journal of Economic literature, 38(3), 569–594.
Becker, R., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, S. D. Klimek, and D. Wilson (2006): “Micro
and macro data integration: The case of capital,” in A new architecture for the US national
accounts, pp. 541–610. University of Chicago Press.
Bond, S., and M. Söderbom (2005): “Adjustment costs and the identification of Cobb
Douglas production functions,” Discussion paper, IFS Working Papers, Institute for Fiscal
Studies (IFS).
Braguinsky, S., A. Ohyama, T. Okazaki, and C. Syverson (2015): “Acquisitions,
productivity, and profitability: evidence from the Japanese cotton spinning industry,” The
American Economic Review, 105(7).
Brandt, L., J. Van Biesebroeck, and Y. Zhang (2012): “Creative accounting or creative destruction? Firm-level productivity growth in Chinese manufacturing,” Journal of
development economics, 97(2), 339–351.
Collard-Wexler, A., and J. De Loecker (2015): “Reallocation and technology: Evidence from the US steel industry,” American Economic Review, 105(1), 131–71.
25

Corrado, C., C. Hulten, and D. Sichel (2009): “Intangible Capital and Economic
Growth,” Review of Income and Wealth.
De Loecker, J. (2013): “Detecting learning by exporting,” American Economic Journal:
Microeconomics, 5(3).
De Loecker, J., J. Eeckhout, and G. Unger (2020): “The rise of market power and the
macroeconomic implications,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135(2), 561–644.
De Loecker, J., and P. Goldberg (2014): “Firm Performance in a global market,” Annual
Review of Economics, 6, 201–227.
De Loecker, J., P. Goldberg, A. Khandelwal, and N. Pavcnik (2016): “Prices,
Markups and Trade Reform,” Econometrica, 84(2), 445–510.
De Loecker, J., and F. Warzynski (2012): “Markups and firm-level export status,” American Economic Review, 102(6), 2437–2471.
Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Syverson (2008): “Reallocation, firm turnover, and
efficiency: Selection on productivity or profitability?,” American Economic Review, 98(1),
394–425.
Griliches, Z., and J. Mairesse (1998): “Production Functions: The Search for Identification,” in Econometrics and Economic Theory in the Twentieth Century: The Ragnar Frisch
Centennial Symposium, ed. by S. Strom, pp. 169–203. Cambridge University Press.
Haskel, J., and S. Westlake (2017): Capitalism without Capital: the Rise of the Intangible
Economy. Princeton University Press.
Hsieh, C.-T. (2002): “What Explains the Industrial Revolution in East Asia? Evidence From
the Factor Markets,” American Economic Review, 92(3), 502–526.
Kim, K., A. Petrin, and S. Song (2016): “Estimating production functions with control
functions when capital is measured with error,” Journal of Econometrics, 190(2), 267–279.
Levinsohn, J., and A. Petrin (2003): “Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs to
Control for Unobservables,” Review of Economic Studies, 70(2), 317–341.
26

Maddala, G. S., and K. Lahiri (1992): Introduction to econometrics, vol. 2. Macmillan
New York.
Olley, G. S., and A. Pakes (1996): “The dynamics of productivity in the telecommunications equipment industry,” Econometrica, 64(6), 35.
Pavcnik, N. (2002): “Trade liberalization, exit, and productivity improvements: Evidence
from Chilean plants,” Review of Economic Studies, pp. 245–276.
Pischke, S. (2007): “Lecture notes on measurement error,” Working Paper London School of
Economics.
Progress Energy – Carolinas (2010): “Electricity Utility Plant Depreciation Rate Study,”
Docket E-2 Sub 1025.
Syverson, C. (2001): “Output Market Segmentation, Heterogeneity, and Productivity,”
Ph.D. thesis, University of Maryland.
(2011): “What determines productivity?,” Journal of Economic literature, 49(2),
326–65.
Van Biesebroeck, J. (2007): “Robustness of Productivity Estimates,” Journal of Industrial
Economics, 3(55), 529–539.
Young, A. (1995): “The tyranny of numbers: confronting the statistical realities of the East
Asian growth experience,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(3), 641–680.

27

A

Factor shares and Alternative Environments

We present a more detailed discussion on the use of the factor share approach to identify and estimate
the material coefficient in the baseline setup of our framework. Departures from perfect competitive
output and input markets are briefly discussed and we offer an illustration under a specific model
of product differentiation under common input prices, and highlight that the main features of our
approach are robust to considering such an environment.

A.1

Factor shares

Under the standard DGP op perfect competition it is well-known that the output elasticity of a variable
input in production can immediately be measured in the data using the revenue share of an input X:
βX =

(P X X)it
.
(Pt Q̃)it

(A.1)

where P X X is the expenditure on the input X, and P Q is observed revenue, including the measurement
error in output (Q̃t = Qit exp(it )). In the case of the Cobb-Douglas production function (either gross
output if we wish to measure the coefficient on materials, or Cobb-Douglas in labor and capital, if we
wish to measure the coefficient on labor), we have to confront the substantial dispersion in the revenue
share in (any) dataset. Under the assumed setup this dispersion can only come from measurement
error in output, and therefore we need to rely on an estimator that is robust to this.
The presence of measurement error in output then calls for a simple estimator:
 X

(P X)it
ˆ
βX = M edian
,
(A.2)
(P Q̃)it
where the median is used instead of the mean, due to the error in the denominator of this expression.
This estimator is a consistent estimator of βX if we assume that the output measurement error satisfies
M ed[it = 0]. This is obtained by letting the median operator go through the observed revenue share:
1
(P X X)it
,
Pt Qit exp(M edian[it ])

(A.3)

where we use the property of the exponential being a monotone function. Thus, our estimator proposed
in equation (A.2) is a consistent estimator of βX . Likewise, we can estimate the material coefficient βm
under the gross output production function, and under Leontief the estimator considers the median
it
).
of the output share ( M
Q̃it
Under the gross output specification, a special case presents itself whereby only the capital coefficient is required to be estimated using GMM. Using the estimates β̂l and β̂m , we can net out the
contribution of these inputs to output: yit = qit − βl lit − βm mit . We can then proceed with our estimation routine relying on yit as the measure of output (instead of qit in the first-stage). This discussion

28

outlines how control function methods can be combined with factor-share approaches in our method.
However, the factor share approaches crucially relies on the assumptions of flexible input choice and
competitive output markets.

A.2

Alternative environments

In most settings, we observe firms charging different prices for their output, and paying different prices
for inputs, which leads to an additional complication since researchers typically have access to only
(deflated) revenues and expenditures on inputs. We believe this to be a very important concern.
The starting point of our analysis, however, is to assume we have correctly converted the revenue
and expenditure data to the comparable units in a physical sense, and this is precisely the setup of
Ackerberg, Caves, and Frazer (2015).
A related but distinct concern is the presence of imperfect competitive output and input markets.
As discussed in the review article by De Loecker and Goldberg (2014), both observations lead to
two challenges: unobserved output and input price variation plagues identification, and second, the
control for unobserved productivity needs to be adjusted to accommodate the departures from perfect
competition and identical prices across firms. The approach suggested in this paper is thus valid under
commonly assumed models of imperfect competition, either when adopting the Leontief technology,
or in the case of the gross-output production function by extending the input demand equation as
in De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) and De Loecker, Goldberg, Khandelwal, and Pavcnik (2016).
We discuss briefly, and illustrate it with a few leading cases, how our approach can be adjusted to
incorporate departures from the standard setup in the main text of the paper.

Leontief As discussed in the main text, under the Leontief technology the presence of imperfect
competition does not affect the control. The reason is simple: regardless of input price differences,
or imperfect competition in the product market, as long as firms cost minimize and produce at the
optimal point where F (L, K)Ω = βM M , the control is valid.

Gross Output Under this technology, the control function approach is adopted and alternative
environments (such as input price differences and imperfective product and factor markets) require
additional terms to be included in the control to reflect the dependance of optimal input demand on
these output and input market conditions. In general, let the vector zit captures these factors, then
ωit = h(mit , kit , lit , zit ). A few leading cases that are of interest are: input price variation, demandside heterogeneity (e.g. export demand, product-level demand differences), quality differences. See
De Loecker and Goldberg (2014) and De Loecker, Goldberg, Khandelwal, and Pavcnik (2016) for a
detailed discussion.
The FOC approach to estimating the material coefficient is, however, no longer valid under imperfect competitive output markets, and therefore to estimate the material coefficient βm under the
gross output specification, we can no longer rely on the factor share.This is precisely the approach of
De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) to estimate markups: comparing the revenue share to the output

29

elasticity of a variable input generates a measure of the markup. We therefore introduce an additional
moment condition to identify the material coefficient – i.e., E(ξ˜it mit−1 ) = 0. This requires additional
structure to the problem by relying on observed, and serially correlated material prices, that are to
be included in the control for productivity. Under Leontief the material coefficient remains as before.
Finally, our approach, like ACF, can also handle different timing assumptions on the choice of
inputs. For instance, in the case in which labor faces adjustment costs, the labor input now constitutes
a state variable, and labor choices will not entirely react to productivity innovation shocks ξit . In the
case of one-period hiring, labor
t and labor at t − 1 are exogenous variables. The moments
h at time
i
˜
= 0 Thus, the source of identification for the labor coefficient
condition is then given by: E ξit lit
is then precisely that adjustment costs vary across firms, to the extent that these vary with the labor
stock (see Bond and Söderbom (2005) for a discussion).

30

B

Monte Carlo: details

In this section, we describe details of the Monte Carlo that we will use to evaluate the performance of
our estimator.

Table B.1: Monte Carlo Parameters
Data Size
Number of Firms
Time Periods

N = 1,000
T = 10

Production Function Parameters
Capital Coefficient
βk = 0.4
Labor Coefficient
βl = 0.6
Depreciation Rate
δ = 0.2
Productivity Process
ρω =0.7, σω = 0.3
Wage Process
ρw =0.3, σw = 0.1
Cost Capital φ

ρφ =0.9, σφ = 0.3
















Taken from ACF.















Dispersion of Log Capital of 1.6
Autocorrelation of Capital of 0.93

Measurement Error Parameters

Error in Capital ρk = 0.7, σk = 0.2
High Persistence, and 30 percent measurement
 error in stationary distribution
Error in Output ρy = 0.2, σy = 0.3
Low Persistence, and 30 percent measurement
error in stationary distribution

We specify laws of motion for each of the variables in the data-generating process.

B.1

Timing

First, we specify the timing assumptions in our model. Investment is chosen with one period time
to build. Materials are chosen statically — i.e., after the firm knows its productivity Ωit . Labor is
chosen statistically in for DGP 2 and DGP 3, and in an interim period for DGP 1 — i.e., part of the
productivity shock is revealed before the firm makes its labor choice.
Second, there are four exogenous state variables, productivity Ait , wages Wit , output prices Pit ,
and the price of capital φit , which all have log AR(1) processes. The only endogenous state variable

31

is capital.
Logged productivity A has a first-order Markov evolution:
ait = ρa ait−1 + uait ,

(B.1)

where ua ∼ N (0, σa2 ).
In addition, log wages have a first-order Markov process:
wit = ρw wit−1 + uw
it ,

(B.2)

and likewise for the logged price for output (P ):
pit = ρp pit−1 + upit ,

(B.3)

2 ) and up ∼ N (0, σ 2 ). For the purposes of the Monte Carlo, we will normalize
where uw ∼ N (0, σw
p
pit ≡ 1, the case of perfect competition.

B.2

Derivation of Investment Policy as in Syverson (2001)

In this section, we derive a closed form for the investment function in Syverson (2001), to show that
we can allow a time-varying cost of capital φit . This derivation is very close to Syverson (2001), so
our goal is merely to show that this model admits a time-varying cost of capital φit .
Firms have flow profits given by:
Πit = Pit Ait Lαit Kit1−α − Wit Lit −

φit 2
I ,
2 it

(B.4)

where P is the price of output, A is physical productivity, W refers to firm specific wages, and I is
investment.
The firm’s value function V is given by:
V (Pit , Ait , Kit , Wit , φit ) = max Pit Ait Lαit Kit1−α − Wit Lit
Lit ,Kit

+ βEit V (Pit+1 , Ait+1 , Kit+1 , Wit+1 , φit+1 )

(B.5)

such that Kit+1 = (1 − δ)Kit + Iit
where δ is the depreciation rate of capital.
Labor is chosen using the usual first-order condition

∂Πit
∂Lit

= 0:

1−α
Pit Ait αLα−1
= Wit
it Kit

 1
αPit Ait 1−α
→ Lit =
Kit
Wit

32

(B.6)

And, likewise, investment solves the Euler Equation,

∂V
∂I

= 0, giving,

φit Iit = βEit VK (Pit+1 , Ait+1 , Kit+1 , Wit+1 , φit+1 ).

(B.7)

The envelope condition yields:
VK (Pit , Ait , Kit , Wit , φit ) =(1 − α)Pit Ait Lαit Kit−α
+ (1 − δ)Eit VK (Pit+1 , Ait+1 , Kit+1 , Wit+1 , φit+1 ).
Substituting into the first-order conditions, the envelope condition becomes


α
1
1
α
− 1−α
1−α
1−α
1−α
Wit+1 Pit+1 Ait+1 + β(1 − δ)Eit φit+1 Iit+1 .
φit Iit =βEit (1 − α)α

(B.8)

(B.9)

And then iterating this equation forward — i.e., replacing Eit φit Iit with the right-hand side in
equation (B.9) — yields:


α
1
1
α
− 1−α
1−α
1−α
φit Iit =βEit (1 − α)α 1−α Wit+1
Pit+1
Ait+1


α
1
1
α
− 1−α
1−α
1−α
1−α
+ β(1 − δ)Eit β (1 − α)α
Wit+2 Pit+2 Ait+2
+ [β(1 − δ)]2 Et+1 φit+2 Iit+2


1
1
α
α
− 1−α
1−α
1−α
φit Iit =βEit (1 − α)α 1−α Wit+1 Pit+1 Ait+1


α
1
1
α
− 1−α
1−α
1−α
1−α
Wit+2 Pit+2 Ait+2
+ β(1 − δ)Eit β (1 − α)α


α
1
1
α
− 1−α
2
1−α
1−α
+ [β(1 − δ)] β (1 − α)α 1−α Wit+3 Pit+3 Ait+3

(B.10)

+ [β(1 − δ)]3 Et+2 φit+3 Iit+3 .
Writing in the form of geometric series

∞ 
α
1
1
X
α
− 1−α
β(1 − α) 1−α
1−α
1−α
j
Iit =
α
Eit
[β(1 − δ)] Wit+1+j Pit+1+j Ait+1+j
φit

(B.11)

j=0

Given that we assume that Pit , Ait and Wit follow the log-linear AR(1) process with normal error

33

terms, the investment function becomes:
i+1

j
∞
φp
αφi+1
Y
X
w
αφs
α
− 1−α
w
β(1 − α) 1−α
− 1−α
1−α
j
Iit =
α
(uw
)
Eit
{[β(1 − δ)] Wit
P
t+1+i−s
it
φit
s=0

j=0

·

j
Y
s=0

α
β(1 − α) 1−α
α
=
φit

j
Y

αφi+1
w
− 1−α

{[β(1 − δ)] Wit

·

φs
a

(uat+1+i−s ) 1−α }

s=0
j

s=0
j
Y

j
Y

φi+1
a

φs

p
(upt+1+i−s ) 1−α Ait1−α

j
Y

αφs

φi+1
p

w
− 1−α
Eit (uw
Pit1−α
t+1+i−s )

s=0

Eit [(upt+1+i−s )

φs
p
1−α

φi+1
a

]Ait1−α

s=0

j
Y

φs
a

Eit [(uat+1+i−s ) 1−α ]}

s=0

Since for  ∼ N (0, σ 2 ), we have E(u
further simplified as:

φs
1−α

2 2s

σ φ
) = exp( 2(1−α)
2 ); then, the investment function can be

 2 2 2s  φi+1
j
∞
αφi+1
p
X
Y
w
α
− 1−α
β(1 − α) 1−α
α σ w φw
1−α
j
Iit =
α
P
Eit
{[β(1 − δ)] Wit
exp
it
φit
2(1 − α)2
s=0
i=0
! i+1 j


j
φa
Y
Y
σp2 φ2s
σa2 φ2s
p
a
1−α
Ait
exp
}.
·
exp
2(1 − α)2
2(1 − α)2
s=0

s=0

B.3

(B.12)

Process for the Price of Capital

In the original Monte Carlo proposed by Ackerberg, Caves, and Frazer (2015), the authors extend the
model proposed by Syverson (2001) by allowing for the price of capital φ to differ between firms — i.e.,
to allow the price for capital to be a firm-specific φi . This is important, in the context of their Monte
Carlo, since it allows a higher cross-sectional dispersion of capital between firms than that generated
by reasonable processes of productivity, given the patterns in standard producer-level data.
In this paper, we also need capital to move around more than it does in Ackerberg, Caves, and
Frazer (2015), with a process that generates a serial correlation coefficient for capital of 0.99. Instead,
we have the following AR(1) process:
φit = ρφ φit−1 + σ φ uφit ,

(B.13)

where uφit ∼ N (0, 1).
Figure B.1 shows the relationship between the autocorrelation of the price of capital and estimates
of the capital coefficient using both the one and two-step estimators proposed in the paper. To make
these estimates more comparable, when we change ρφ , we adjust σ φ so that the stationary distribution

34

.25
.2
.15
.1
.05
0
.9

.92

.94

.96

.98

1

Autocorrelation of the Price of Capital
IV One-Step Control
One-Step Control

Notes: Autocorrelation of price of capital refers to the parameter ρφ , where the process for φ is φit = ρφ φit−1 +
uit . The variance term σk for measurement error is σk = 0. Average estimated coefficient over 100 Monte Carlo
replications.

Figure B.1: Persistence of the price of capital φ; i.e., ρφ , and estimate of the capital coefficient
of φ, given by the usual formula for an AR(1) process with normal errors √ σ

1−ρ2

, is unchanged. In

panel a, showing one-step estimators, for a wide range range of ρφ parameters below one, our estimator
performs very well. However, at very high levels of persistence of φ, our IV one-step estimate drops
to 0.2. In contrast, the estimates for panel b, showing two-step estimators, do not change much as we
vary the persistence of the price of capital φ.

B.4

Alternative Data-Generating Processes

We evaluate the performance of our estimator in two alternative data-generating processes (DGPs),
as considered in ACF in their Monte Carlos.
• DGP 1:
DGP 1 is the case considered in the main Monte Carlos in the paper. Note that labor is chosen
a half-period before materials are picked. More precisely, labor is chosen at time t − 0.5, and
materials are chosen at time t, where the productivity process is adjusted so that the stochastic
process for ωit−0.5 is given by:
ωit = ρ0.5 ωit−0.5 + ξitb ,
where ξitb is an appropriately adjusted normally distributed shock.
• DGP 2:

35

DGP2 refers to the case of optimization error in labor. The variance of the wage distribution is
∗ + l
shut down, σw = 0, but instead, firms face an optimization error in labor. Thus, lit = lit
it
l
where it ∼ N (0, 0.37).
• DGP 3:
∗ + l ,
DGP 3, has the same process as DGP 1, but adds in optimization error in labor,lit = lit
it
where lit ∼ N (0, 0.37), as in DGP 2.

Figure B.2, below replicates Figure 2 for DGP 1, 2 and 3, and shows the sensitivity of our IV
and non-IV two-step estimators to the measurement error in capital. Notice that the pattern that we
document in the Monte Carlos for DGP 1 in the main paper is the same as what we find for these
alternative DGPs: our estimator performs well with varying degrees of capital measurement error,
while the standard control function approaches are biased for reasonable amounts of measurement
error.

36

Capital Coefficient

.4

.3

.2

.1

0
0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

Variance of Capital Measurement Error
IV Control
Control
DGP 1 capital error

(a) Two-Step Control DGP 1

Capital Coefficient

.4

.3

.2

.1

0
0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

Variance of Capital Measurement Error
IV Control
Control
DGP 2 capital error

(b) Two-Step Control DGP 2

Capital Coefficient

.5
.4
.3
.2
.1
0
0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

Variance of Capital Measurement Error
IV Control
Control
DGP 3 capital error

(c) Two-Step Control DGP 3
Note: We plot the estimated capital coefficient as a function of the variance in the capital measurement error
(σk2 ). Average of 100 Monte Carlo replications per value of σk . The true value of βk = 0.4.

Figure B.2: Relationship between βk and Measurement error σk in Capital for different DGPs
37

C

Different Processes for Measurement Error in Capital

In our main specifications in this paper, we rely on the process for measurement error having the form:
∗
kit = kit
+ kit ,

(C.1)

where kit is a mean zero measurement error, which may be serially correlated. While this is the
standard formulation for an errors-in-variables structure, we contrast this approach to, what we refer
to as, a structural derived measurement error for capital. After we introduce this setup, we perform
an analogous Monte Carlo analysis to evaluate our estimator, and we make sure that both approaches
are directly comparable through their implied variance in the measurement error of capital.
As discussed in Section 2, we consider the main source of the capital measurement error to stem
∗ K∗
from errors in depreciation Dit = δit Ki−1t , where the correct measure is given by dit = δit
it−1 .
Applying the same law of motion for capital as before, it is easy to show that the measured capital
stock under the error in depreciation rates is given by:
Kit =

t
X

∗
Iiτ

−

τ =0

t
X

Diτ −1 ,

(C.2)

τ =0

where we keep the assumption that we observe investment without error and, for simplicity, also the
initial capital stock.21 The source of measurement error is, thus, from the cumulative depreciation
errors, and we capture as follows: δit = δ ∗ + dit . Both the reduced-form and the structural approach
generate a wedge between the measured and true capital stock, in levels K and K ∗ , respectively.
After some algebra, we have a direct mapping between the structural measurement error, dit , and the
reduced form measurement kit :
K∗
dit = it∗ exp (kit ).
(C.3)
K0
This relationship is important when comparing the performance of our estimator across both Monte
Carlos: a much smaller variance in the depreciation error, dit , is needed to generate a certain variance
of the classical measurement error, kit .22

C.1

Monte Carlo Analysis

All parameters of the Monte Carlo are the same as before, except that we parameterize dit ∼ N (0, σd ).
∗ = δK ∗
True depreciation is given by Dit
i−1t . However, measured depreciation is given by Dit =
d
(δ + it )Kit .
21

This is without loss of generality for the purpose of this Appendix.
We have traced this out in our Monte Carlo analysis, and we obtain about a 20-1 ratio — i.e., we obtain
similar implied variances for the measurement error using either σ k = 0.2 or σ d = 0.01.
22

38

Figure C.1 presents the results of this Monte Carlo for both the IV Control method we propose
and the Control method that does not use investment as an instrument. Plot the relationship between
the mean estimate of βk over 1,000 replications, as we vary method and a two-step , across the three
data-generating process considered by ACF.
Figure C.1 shows that under a small amount of measurement error in depreciation — say, on the
order of a 0.01 variance shock to a depreciation rate of 0.1 — the IV control function method we have
proposed does fairly well, with mean estimates around the true value of 0.4. In contrast, the mean
estimates that do not instrument with investment, show a drop of βk to 0.3, with a 0.01 variance shock
to the depreciation rate, in line with the previous results that we showed illustrating that measurement
error in capital stock leads to downward bias on the capital coefficient.
Notice that Figure C.1 does not show that our IV Control function estimator is consistent for any
value of measurement error in depreciation. Indeed, the process for measurement error in depreciation
does not lead to the log additive error structure on capital that we need for estimation. Instead, our
goal is merely to point out that our estimator might perform well for alternative measurement error
structures, at least for some small deviations from our structure.
.5

.4

.3

.2

.1
0

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

Variance of Depreciation Measurement Error
IV Control
Control
DGP 1 depreciation error

Note: We plot the estimated capital coefficient as a function of the variance in the capital measurement error
(σk2 ). Average of 100 Monte Carlo replications per value of σd . The true value of βk = 0.4.

Figure C.1: Relationship between βk and Measurement error σd in Depreciation

39

D

Data Appendix

We apply our estimator to three datasets, covering manufacturing plants in China, India and Chile.
There have been numerous productivity studies using these data, and, therefore, are completely standard in which variables are reported, and how they are constructed.

D.1

Chilean manufacturing

Annual plant-level data on all manufacturing plants with at least ten workers were provided by Chile?s
Instituto Nacional de Estadistica (INE). These data, which cover the period 1979-1986, include production, employment, investment, intermediate input, and balance-sheet variables. Industries are
classified according to the four digit ISIC industry code. Output and input price indices are constructed at the three digit industry and obtained directly from average price indices produced by the
Central Bank of Chile. We directly observe total number of employees, total real value of production, total real intermediate input, total real book-value of fixed assets, gross additions to capital
(i.e. investment). In total there are 37,600 plant-year observations reporting employment, with a
minimum of 4,205 plants in 1983 and 5,814 plants in 1979. Following Levinsohn and Petrin (2003)
we rely on the law of motion for capital where investment is productive within the year, reflecting
the accounting standards of reported additions to capital stock (i.e. Kt = (1 − δ)Kt−1 + It ). See
Pavcnik (2002), Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) and Asker, Collard-Wexler, and De Loecker (2014) for
productivity studies using these data.

D.2

Chinese manufacturing

We Chinese manufacturing is described in detail in Brandt, Van Biesebroeck, and Zhang (2012).
This is firm-level data for the period 1998–2007 that are the product of annual surveys conducted
by the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS). The survey includes all industrial firms that are either
state-owned, or are non-state firms with sales above 5 million RMB. There are plant-level identifiers
that
There are 1,557,915 plant-by-year observations at 346,434 unique plants. For plants observed
multiple times, only about 1 percent have gaps between yearly observations.

D.3

Indian manufacturing

We use India’s Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) for establishment-level microdata; this dataset
is described in more detail in Allcott, Collard-Wexler, and O’Connell (2016). Registered factories
with over 100 workers (the “census scheme”) are surveyed every year, while smaller establishments
(the “sample scheme”) are typically surveyed every three to five years. The publicly available ASI
includes establishment identifiers that are consistent across years beginning in 1998, but we have plant
identifiers going back to 1992. We have a plant-level panel for the entire 1992-2010 sample.

40

The ASI is comparable to manufacturing surveys in the United States and other countries. Variables include revenues, value of fixed capital stock, total workers employed, total costs of labor, and
materials. Industries are grouped using India’s NIC (National Industrial Classification) codes, which
are closely related to SIC (Standard Industrial Classification) codes.
There are 615,721 plant-by-year observations at 224,684 unique plants. 107,032 plants will be
immediately dropped from our estimators because they are observed only once. For plants observed
multiple times, 60 percent of intervals between observations are one year, while 91 percent are five
years or less.
The mean (median) plant employs 79 (34) people and has gross revenues of 139 million (20 million)
Rupees, or in U.S. dollars approximately $3 million ($400,000).

41

E

Standard Errors Across Estimators
Table E.1: Standard errors
Leontief

OLS
FE
IV
Control
IV Control

China
Capital Labor
0.02
0.03
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.13
0.23
0.12
0.24

India
Capital Labor
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.03
0.05
0.11
0.09
0.19

Chile
Capital Labor
0.03
0.05
0.04
0.06
0.09
0.13
0.05
0.13
0.20
0.45

Gross Output with FOC Materials

OLS
FE
IV
Control
IV Control

China
Capital Labor
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.13
0.23
0.12
0.24

India
Capital Labor
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.05
0.11
0.09
0.19

Chile
Capital Labor
0.01
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.05
0.07
0.05
0.13
0.20
0.45

Notes: We report the median standard error across all industries for each dataset. Leontief specification is
βk
βk
Qit = min {βm Mit , Lβitl Kit
Ωit }, and Gross Output with FOC Materials is given by Mitβm Lβitl Kit
Ωit , where the
PtM Mit
material coefficient is computed using the median of the material revenue share (βm = M edian[ Pt Qit ]).

42

Appendix For Online Publication

A

Estimators: code and implementation

In this section we describe the estimators proposed in this paper in great detail, enough so that they
can easily be coded up by other researchers, and code for these estimators is also available in STATA.

A.1

Leontief

1. Estimate φ function.
qit = θl lit + θk kit + θm mit + it
by 2SLS using exogenous regressors W = [lit , iit−1 , mit ], and obtain φ̂it = θl lit + θk kit + θm mit .
Note that the control function (not IV) has Wit = [lit , kit , mit ] instead — the OLS estimator.
2. For a parameter β, minimize the criterion Q(β) using:
(a) Compute ωit = φ̂it − βk kit − βl lit
(b) Estimate the AR(1) process for productivity, ωit = ρωit−1 , by OLS, obtain ρ̂. Recover
productivity shock ξ˜it = ωit − ρ̂ωit−1 – where tilde refers to the presence of the measurement
error in capital.
 

lit−1
˜
(c) Compute Q(β) as the empirical analogue of the moment condition E ξit
= 0.
iit−1
Q(β) = (ξz)0 (z 0 z)−1 (ξz),
where ξ denotes the stacked vector of ξ˜it , and z denotes the stacked vector of [iit−1 , lit−1 ].
Note that the control function (not IV) has Zit = [kit , lit−1 ] instead.
(d) Find β̂ as the minimizer of Q(β).

A.2

Gross Output (FOC Materials)

1. Estimate βm

β̂m = M edian

P M Mit
P Qit



2. Produce output yit netted out from material contribution.
yit = qit − β̂m mit

43

.

3. Estimate φ function.
yit = θl lit + θk kit + θm mit + it
by 2SLS using exogenous regressors W = [lit , iit−1 , mit ], and obtain φ̂it = θl lit + θk kit + θm mit .
4. For a parameter β, minimize the criterion Q(β) using:
(a) Compute ωit = φ̂it − βk kit − βl lit
(b) Estimate the AR(1) process for productivity, ωit = ρωit−1 , by OLS, obtain ρ̂. Recover
productivity shock ξit = ωit − ρ̂ωit−1 .
 

l
it−1
(c) Compute Q(β) as the empirical analogue of the moment condition E ξ˜it
= 0.
iit−1
Q(β) = (ξz)0 (z 0 z)−1 (ξz),
where ξ denotes the stacked vector of ξ˜it , and z denotes the stacked vector of [iit−1 , lit−1 ].
(d) Find β̂ as the minimizer of Q(β).

44

