NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ESTIMATION OF A ROY/SEARCH/COMPENSATING DIFFERENTIAL MODEL
OF THE LABOR MARKET
Christopher Taber
Rune Vejlin
Working Paper 22439
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22439

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2016

We would like to thank seminar participants at a number of places for helpful comments and
suggestions. We especially thank Joe Altonji, Jesper Bagger, Jim Heckman, John Kennan,
Rasmus Lentz, and Greg Veramendi for comments and Carl Sanders for comments and research
assistance. Taber thanks the NSF for support. Vejlin acknowledges financial support from the
Danish Social Sciences Research Council (grant no. 09 - 066745). All remaining errors are our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Christopher Taber and Rune Vejlin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Estimation of a Roy/Search/Compensating Differential Model of the Labor Market
Christopher Taber and Rune Vejlin
NBER Working Paper No. 22439
July 2016
JEL No. J3
ABSTRACT
In this paper we develop a model capturing key features of the Roy model, a search model,
compensating differentials, and human capital accumulation on-the-job. We establish which
features of the model can be non-parametrically identified and which can not. We estimate the
model and use it to asses the relative contribution of the different factors for overall wage
inequality. We find that Roy model inequality is the most important component accounting for
the majority of wage variation. We also demonstrate that there is substantial interaction between
the other features - most notably the importance of the job match obtained by search frictions
varies from around 9% to around 29% depending on how we account for other features.
Compensating differentials and search are both very important for explaining other features of the
data such as the variation in utility. Search is important for turnover, but so is compensating
differentials: 1/3 of all choices between two jobs would have resulted in a different outcome if the
worker only cared about wages.

Christopher Taber
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin -Madison
1180 Observatory Dr
Social Sciences Building #6448
Madison, WI 53706-1320
and NBER
ctaber@ssc.wisc.edu
Rune Vejlivn
Aarhus University
and IZA
rvejlin@econ.au.dk

1

Introduction

It is well-known that variation in wages across observably similar workers is high. There are
several competing theories as to why this is the case. Four of the most important models of postschooling wage determination are human capital, the Roy model, the compensating differentials
model, and the search model. All four lead to wage heterogeneity. While separating human capital accumulation from the others is quite common, we know remarkably little about the relative
importance and interactions of the other three sources of inequality. The goal of this paper is to
quantify the effect of each of these explanations on overall wage inequality and to investigate how
they interact.
In a human capital model, workers who have accumulated more human capital while working
earn more money than less experienced workers. The key feature of the Roy model is comparative
advantage in which some workers earn more than others as a result of different skill levels at
labor market entry. In the canonical Roy model, workers choose the job for which they achieve
the highest level of wages. By contrast, in a compensating wage differentials model, a worker is
willing to be paid less in order to work on a job that they enjoy more. Thus, workers with identical
skills and job opportunities can earn different wages. Finally, workers may just have had poor luck
in finding their preferred job. Labor market frictions can lead to heterogeneity in wages for two
different reasons. First, some workers may work for firms for which they are a better match and
earn more money. The second is monopsony. In the framework we use, the bargaining power of
the worker depends on their outside option so two equally skilled workers at the same firm may
earn different wages. In short, one worker may have higher wages than another because a) he has
accumulated more human capital while working (human capital), b) he has more talent at labor
market entry (Roy model), c) he has chosen more an unpleasant job (compensating differentials),
or d) he has had better luck in finding a good job and receiving outside offers (search frictions).
The goal of this work is to uncover the contribution of these different components and how they
interact to produce overall wage inequality.
Combining these four prominent theories into one coherent framework and investigating the
relative importance in various dimensions is important not only from a theoretical point of view
but also from a practical standpoint. An understanding of the underlying causes of inequality is
essential for policymakers who wish to decrease wage inequality. Perhaps it is even important
for deciding whether or not decreasing wage inequality is a major concern. If the primary driver
behind wage inequality is compensating differentials inequality might be less problematic since
it simply reflects different preferences for jobs. If the primary driver is Roy model heterogene1

ity (productivity differences), search frictions, or human capital then decreasing wage inequality
might seem like a more appropriate action. However, the best way to do it depends on the relative
importance of the different channels - if the primary source is Roy model inequality that would
suggest focusing on pre-market factors (like education), but for the other two post labor market
policies would be more effective.
In this paper we develop a structural model of wage determination that contains elements of all
four models. The model is estimated on Danish matched employer-employee data from 1985-2003.
We use the estimated parameters to decompose overall wage inequality into the four components
in various ways. We find that while all four models are contributors to overall wage inequality,
the Roy model inequality is the most important accounting for between 64% and 83% of wage
inequality. The magnitude of the effects depend on the way we implement the decomposition as
there are important interactions between the different components of the model. Most striking
is search. The monopsony component of search frictions explains roughly 8% of wage variation.
The importance of the direct source of search frictions (workers work at different firms due to
frictions) varies from around 1% to around 21%.
While search and compensating differentials are less important for wage inequality than the
Roy model, we show that they are both essential for explaining other features of the data. For
example, they strongly impact the level of wages as we show that without them workers would
get 0.20 and 0.17 log points higher wages, respectively. As another example, rather than looking in
variation in wages we look at variation in utility. Together, compensating differentials and search
frictions explain the bulk of of the variation in utility.
Also, compensating differentials are important in determining job choices. Roughly 1/3 of all
choices would be different if workers only cared about wages and not the non-pecuniary aspect
of a job. We conclude that all four of these features are important aspects of the labor market in
Denmark and should be included for a full understanding of wage inequality and job turnover.
The paper proceeds as follows. We briefly discuss the relationship between this work and the
previous literature in Section 2. We then describe the model and the decomposition in Section 3.
Identification is discussed in 4 and the specific econometric specification is presented in Section 5.
Obtaining the right data is crucial to this exercise. Ideally one needs matched employer-employee
data as well as a long panel on workers and detailed information on job-to-job transitions. We
describe the data and institutional features of the Danish labor market in section 6. Section 7
presents the auxiliary model that we use. Section 8 presents the results and section 9 concludes.

2

2

Relation to Other Work

There is a huge amount of work on search models, on the Roy model, on human capital acquired
on-the-job and on compensating differentials. A full review of all of these literatures is beyond the
scope of this paper. See Roy (1951), Heckman and Sedlacek (1985), Heckman and Honoré (1990),
or Heckman and Taber (2008) for a discussion about the Roy model. Rosen (1987) provides an
excellent discussion of compensating differentials models and Eckstein and Van den Berg (2007),
Rogerson, Shimer, and Wright (2005), and Roberson and Shimer (2011) provide a nice discussion
of empirical search models. For human capital models see Weiss (1986) or Heckman, Lochner, and
Todd (2006).
Rather than a broad discussion, we focus on the relationship between our work and a few
other important key papers from the different literatures.
Two of the most important related literatures were started by Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis
(1999) and Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002). Both of these papers use panel data on both firms
and workers from France. Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (1999) use a fixed effect approach to
estimate firm effects and worker effects while Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002) estimate a structural
equilibrium search model.
Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (1999) estimate a model analogous to
log(Wit ) = Xit0 β + θi + µ j(i,t) + ζ it

(1)

where i indexes an individual, j(i, t) indexes a firm, and t indexes time. θi is an individual fixed
effect, µ j is a firm fixed effect, and ζ ijt is independent and identically distributed. We use this as a
motivation for our auxiliary model.
Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (1999) and the literature that has arisen around this methodology all find that variance in firm effects play an important role for wages. Important examples
are Sørensen and Vejlin (2013), Andrews, Gill, Schank, and Upward (2008), Gruetter and Lalive
(2004), Card, Heining, and Kline (2013), and Card, Cardoso, and Kline (2014).
The fact that some firms are able to survive while paying lower wages is often attributed to
search frictions. However, in our model both search frictions and compensating differentials could
result in differences in average wages across firms. Since we do not model the job formation
process from the firm’s point of view, we can not answer this question explicitly, but we can shed
light on the nature of firm wage components from the perspective of the workers.
Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002) decompose wage inequality into a search component, a firm
productivity component, and an ability related component. As such their research question is very
3

much related to ours. They find that for skilled workers, the individual component is moderately
important (explains up to 40% of wage inequality), but that for low skill workers virtually all of
the inequality can be assigned to search frictions and differences in firm productivity. The main
components that are in our model but not in theirs are human capital, compensating differentials
and comparative advantage in jobs. Postel-Vinay and Robin allow for absolute advantage only in
the sense that ability is one dimension and the relative productivity of two workers does not vary
across firms. By contrast, we allow for a match specific productivity meaning that some workers
match better with some firms (the Roy component of our model). Furthermore, our estimation
and identification strategy are very different. They estimate assuming that the model is in steady
state, so the information we get from looking at the rate at which people switch jobs and from the
revealed preference argument is not a source of identification their model.
Several papers build on the framework developed by Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002). Cahuc,
Postel-Vinay, and Robin (2006) extend it to account for a more general bargaining framework and
Bagger, Fontaine, Postel-Vinay, and Robin (2014) allows for the accumulation of general human
capital while working, see also Lentz (2010), Lise, Meghir, and Robin (2013), Robin (2011) for
other applications. Our paper can most cleanly be seen as building on this literature by adding
non-pecuniary aspects of jobs and much more heterogeneity in skills.
The idea about compensating differentials date all the way back to Smith (1776). More recently,
another important related literature was started by Keane and Wolpin (1997). They estimate a
model where they introduce compensating differentials into a model of human capital, and Roy
model inequality. Similar to us, they find that initial conditions on labor market entry are the
main drivers of earnings inequality. However, their model is very different in that they do not
explicitly incorporate search frictions and do not make use of matched employer-employee data
as their focus is on occupations rather than firms. Becker (2009) uses a framework similar to ours
in that it incorporates compensating differentials into a search models. We build on this work by
incorporating more Roy flexibility and by using matched employer-employee data, which allows
us to perform the decompositions which are the focus of our paper. Becker (2009) focuses more on
unemployment insurance than wage inequality. Dey and Flinn (2005) and Dey and Flinn (2008)
estimate search models with a particular type of non-wage characteristics: health insurance.
There is a vast literature on human capital models. Most related to our work is that by Huggett,
Ventura, and Yaron (2011). They estimate a life-cycle model with idiosyncratic shocks to human
capital, heterogeneity in ability to learn, initial human capital, and initial wealth. Their focus is
quiet different from our in that they are interested in what the driver is behind differences in life-

4

time earnings, utility, and wealth. They find that most of the variation is due to differences in
initial conditions. This is in accordance with our finding that most of the differences in instantaneous wage variation is due to differences in worker ability.
Closer to our setup is Sullivan (2010). This paper includes elements of all four components
of our model above, though this is not the main focus. We build on this work by including a
more complete search model with endogenous wage formation and by estimating it on matched
employer-employee data (which, as said above, is essential to identify our counterfactuals). Other
than that, our models are quite different. Sullivan and To (2014) is more similar in that they estimate a job search model with a general form of non-wage job characteristics. Thus, the model
include search and compensating differentials. However, many differences exist between their
paper and ours. First, they specify output as being only match specific, while we allow workers
and firms to have constant ability and productivity across matches as well as match specific. The
reason for this choice by Sullivan and To (2014) is likely motivated by the use of NLSY data in the
estimation. The NLSY follows only workers, so it is not suited for dealing with firms. Secondly,
their model is only a partial equilibrium model in the sense that workers draw a wage and a nonwage component, but there is no negotiation between firms and workers. E.g. a firm does not
try to negotiate the wage down in a match where the worker have a high value of the non-wage
component. Also their model does not include human capital. Finally, Sorkin (2015) distinguishes
between search and compensating differentials using a similar type of revealed preference argument as we do. Other than that, our models are very different as he specifies the wage function
in a more reduced form manner and focuses on the distinction between search frictions and compensating differentials on understanding the firm fixed effect in a wage regression and mostly
abstracts from comparative advantage and human capital.1 By contrast we use a firm random
effect approach and focus on wage inequality.

3

The Model and Decomposition

The model is in continuous time and wages are determined similarly to Cahuc, Postel-Vinay, and
Robin (2006), Dey and Flinn (2005), and Bagger, Fontaine, Postel-Vinay, and Robin (2014).2 We
formally treat agents in our model as infinitely lived though in practice we think of it as a life-cycle
1 He

also uses LEHD data which is quarterly data. While his paper studies a larger country, this data makes distinguishing job-to-job transitions from job-to non-employment to-job transitions much more difficult than in our data.
2 Note, that we assume bargaining over wages as opposed to wage posting. Hall and Krueger (2012) show that there
is mixed evidence regarding the wage determination process. In their survey around one third of all workers report
having bargained over their wage. Another third reports that they had precise information about the wage before
meeting the employer, which is a sign of wage posting.

5

model where the date of retirement is sufficiently far away that it can be ignored. A substantive
difference between our paper and most of the search literature is that we assume that there are
finite number of job types indexed j = 1, ..., J with j = 0 denoting non-employment. In the data,
job types correspond to establishments. We assume the economy consists of a very large number
of potential employers of each type. In estimation this is similar to the finite number of types
of individuals as is common in much of the structural labor literature, (see e.g. Heckman and
Singer, 1984, or Keane and Wolpin, 1997). Job offers from each type of job arrive at rate λnj for
non-employed workers and λej for employed workers. We allow for worker heterogeneity in the
job destruction rate, δi .3
We do not allow for borrowing or lending. Worker i’s flow utility from working at job j with
wage W is uij (W ). The fact that this depends on j is an important aspect of our model that accommodates compensating differentials: workers care about jobs above and beyond the wage that
they earn or expectations about future wages.
Human capital is completely general and takes on a discrete set of values ψ0 , ..., ψH . When
individuals are employed, human capital appreciates randomly to the next level (ψh to ψh+1 ) at
rate λh and does not accumulate when people are not working.4 We let πij ψh be the productivity
of worker i at job type j when the worker has human capital ψh . Notice, that unlike many models
which assume either additive or multiplicative production functions we allowπij to be completely
general. In the bargaining protocol presented later, the object of negotiation is the human capital
rental rate. That is, the employer and worker agree on a rental rate R that is fixed until the next
negotiation which only takes place by mutual consent. This means that when human capital
is augmented the wage is not renegotiated but automatically rises from Rψh to Rψh+1 .5 We treat
production on the job as if it is linear, so hiring worker i does not crowd out hiring of other workers
(or affect the productivity of current workers), so the value of a vacancy is zero and the value of
the match is πij ψh .
After a job is destroyed some individuals immediately receive an offer. Specifically, with probability P∗ the worker immediately receives a job offer which is drawn from the same distribution
of jobs as for non-employed workers. The worker can either accept it or reject it and enter nonemployment. Including this into the model reconciles involuntary job-to-job transitions which are
3 We

discuss below why we allow arrival rates to depend only on j and destruction rates to depend only on i.
human capital to depreciate when out of the labor force could easily be imbedded into this framework
though we think it would change our counterfactuals very little.
5 Another natural way to do this would be to assume that the absolute wage is agreed upon and that the return to
human capital only accrues when workers receive outside offers. This would be similar in nature as Postel-Vinay and
Turon (2010). Human capital does not play a major role in this analysis and we expect the alternative contracting to
give very similar results though be somewhat messier to implement.
4 Allowing

6

seen in the data.
Following Bagger, Fontaine, Postel-Vinay, and Robin (2014), a key aspect of this model is that
when a worker receives an outside offer then the human capital rental rate is determined by a form
of generalized Nash Bargaining between the two firms. This form of wage setting leads to efficient turnover. Renegotiation requires mutual consent, so as long as the employment relationship
continues, the rental rate is kept fixed until both parties agree to renegotiate it.6
Define Vijh ( R) to be the value function for worker i with the rental rate R working in job j and
having human capital level h. Workers who are non-employed have flow utility Ui0h and value
∗ denote the value function immediately after a match is destroyed. The
function Vi0h . We let Vi0h
∗ and V is that the former incorporates the possibility of receiving an offer
difference between Vi0h
i0h

immediately.
If a non-employed worker i with human capital ψh receives an offer from job type j a match
is formed if Vijh (πij ) > Vi0h . Note, that this is efficient in the sense that joint surplus between
workers and firms are maximized. A major issue is the determination of the wage in the match.
Both the worker and the firm would prefer the potential rental rate R to not forming the match as
long asVi0h ≤ Vijh ( R) ≤ Vijh (πij ). The issue is that there are many such values of R. We denote
the equilibrium rental rate as Rij`h0 where it depends on worker i, the current establishment j, the
best outside option `, and units of human capital, h0 , at the negotiation time. We assume that it is is
defined by the solution to
Vijh0 ( Rij0h0 ) = βVijh0 (πij ) + (1 − β)Vi0h0

(2)

where β is the worker’s bargaining power.7 Since the bargaining position for a worker who has
just been laid off is non-employment, this will also be the wage for workers who experience a
match destruction, but are then immediately hired by a new firm. Note that when β = 1 the
worker has all of the bargaining power and extracts full rent Rij0h0 = πij . When β = 0 the firm has
all of the bargaining power and pays the value of Rij0h0 that makes the worker indifferent between
accepting the offer or staying non-employed.
Now suppose that worker i is working in job type j and receives an outside offer from job type

`. As in Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002), one of three things can happen. First, the new job offer
6 In the presentation of this model we assume that workers would never want to renegotiate when their human
capital augments. This does not have to be true as a worker may prefer non-employment to the current job under some
circumstances. However, this will not happen in our empirical specification so we abstract from it here.
7 We do not explicitly derive this from a bargaining game as do Cahuc, Postel-Vinay, and Robin (2006), but treat it as
a functional form assumption: wages are indeterminate and this will give a wage that both parties will agree to. It has
the nice property that if there is surplus in the match, when β = 1 the worker get all of the surplus, when β = 0 the
firm gets all of the surplus, and when 0 < β < 1 the surplus between them is split.

7

could dominate the old one, Vi`h (πi` ) > Vijh (πij ). In this case the worker will switch to the new
job and the new rental rate Rij`h0 will be determined by
Vi`h0 ( Rij`h0 ) = βVi`h0 (πi` ) + (1 − β)Vijh0 (πij ).

(3)

If Vi`h (πi` ) < Vijh (πij ) then the worker has the option to renegotiate their wage. If they choose to
renegotiate, their new rental rate will be determined by
Vijh ( Rij`h0 ) = βVijh0 (πij ) + (1 − β)Vi`h0 (πi` ).

(4)

Since renegotiation only happens when both parties agree, the wage is renegotiated when Rij`h0
is higher than the workers current rental rate. If it is lower the worker will ignore the offer.
This condition is relatively straight forward to check. Let Rij`h0 be the current rental rate. If
Vijh ( Rij`h0 ) < Vi`h (πi` ) the worker will want to renegotiate. Note that we have been a bit sloppy
with notation as we use the notation Rij`h0 to denote the rental rate that worker i with human capital ψh0 at the time of negotiation would receive from job type j when their outside option was job
type `. As one can see from equations (3) and (4), it will be the same regardless of whether they
started at job type ` and moved to j or if they started at j and then used an outside offer from job
type ` to renegotiate their wage.
To solve the model we need to calculate the value functions Vijh ( R) and Vi0t as there are no
easy closed form solutions for the wage as in Cahuc, Postel-Vinay, and Robin (2006) or Bagger,
Fontaine, Postel-Vinay, and Robin (2014).
It is convenient to define

∑

e
Λijh
( R) ≡

λe`

{`:Vijh ( R)<Vi`h (πi` )}
n
Λi0h

∑

≡

λn`

{`:Vi`h (πi` )>Vi0h }

these are the sums of arrival rates that will lead to some reaction, either renegotiation or switching
job, for employed workers and non-employed workers, respectively. Thus, for worker i with
human capital h who is currently employed at job type j with rental rate R this is the arrival rate
of some outside offer that will change behavior.
We can write the value function for worker i with human capital h who is currently employed
at job j with rental rate R as

8




e
ρ + δi + λh + Λijh
( R) Vijh ( R)




∑

= uij ( Rψh ) + 


e



λ` βVijh (πij ) + (1 − β)Vi`h (πi` ) 

{`:Vijh ( R)<Vi`h (πi` )≤Vijh (πij )}





∑

+

∗
λ` βVi`h (πi` ) + (1 − β)Vijh (πij )  + δi Vi0h
+ λh Vijh+1 ( R).


e



{`:Vi`h (πi` )<Vijh (πij ))}

Consider the different components on the right hand side of this equation. The first, uij ( Rψh ), is
the flow utility that the worker receives until something happens. The second component denotes
outside offers that will lead the worker to renegotiate their wage but ultimately stay at the current
job. If Vi`h (πi` ) ≤ Vijh ( R) the outside offer will not be useful for renegotiating and if Vijh (πij ) <
Vi`h (πi` ) then the worker will leave to the next job. The component in brackets represents the value
function of the renegotiated wage as described in equation (4). The next term denotes outside
offers that lead the worker to leave the current job. Again, the term in brackets denotes the value
∗ and
function under the negotiated wage as described in equation (3). The next two terms δi Vi0h

λh Vijh+1 ( R) represent respectively the events in which the worker is laid off and in which human
capital augments.
When h = H we get an expression that is identical except that it no longer contains the possibility of human capital augmenting




e
ρ + δi + Λijh
( R) VijH ( R)




∑

= uij ( RψH ) + 


e



λ` βVijH (πij ) + (1 − β)Vi` H (πi` ) 

{`:VijH ( R)<Vi` H (πi` )≤VijH (πij )}





∑

+

∗
λ` βVi` H (πi` ) + (1 − β)VijH (πij )  + δi Vi0H
.


e



{`:Vi` H (πi` )<VijH (πij ))}

There is only one way for the status to change following a non-employment spell - the worker
can take a job. This leads to the simpler formulation
n
(ρ + Λi0h
) Vi0h = ui0h +

∑

λnj [ βVi`h (πi` ) + (1 − β) Vi0h ] .

{`:Vi`h (πi` )>Vi0h }

The first term is the flow utility and the second denotes the outcome in which an offer is received
that dominates non-employment. The term in brackets represents the value function under the
renegotiated rate.
9

Finally, the value function for workers immediately after their match is destroyed is

Vi0∗ (h)

=P

∗ ∑{`:Vilh (πi` )>Vi0h }

λn` Vi`h ( Ri`0h )

∑` λn`

n
Λi0t
+ 1−P
∑` λn`



∗


Vi0h

The first term is result of an acceptable offer while the second is the result from either no offer
or an unacceptable offer.
This is the full model. Notice, that unlike many other search models, job ladders in this model
are individual specific. This is both due to comparative advantages and tastes for non-pecuniary
aspects of the job. This makes the model computationally harder to solve than e.g. Bagger,
Fontaine, Postel-Vinay, and Robin (2014). Obviously, there are many other features in the labor
market that we have abstracted from. This is intentional. Our goal here is not to write down the
most complicated model that is computationally feasible, but rather to write down the simplest
model that captures the essence of our four models and allows us to distinguish between them.
Next consider a decomposition that allows us to understand the various components. We can
choose any measure of wage inequality (we later use the variance of log wages). In the context of
the model we have written down, one can see the different sources of wage inequality:
• Worker variation in potential rental rates πi1 , ..., πiJ leads to “Roy model” inequality.
• Variation in the function uij (·) across workers accommodate “compensating differentials”
inequality. The mean of uij (·) will vary across jobs, so some jobs on average offer a higher
utility level.
• λej and λnj incorporate search frictions - note that these affect wage inequality in two different
ways: directly through the job at which one takes, and indirectly through the bargaining
process.
• Variation in ψh incorporates human capital.
After estimating the parameters of the model, we use it to decompose overall post-schooling wage
inequality into the different components. An orthogonal decomposition does not exist, so the
order in which we perform the decomposition matters. This is not surprising because the different
sources interact.
Thus, many possible ways to decompose wages exist and we use different ones to highlight
different features of the model. The following simulations represent one example of a decomposition. We sequentially take the following steps.

10

a) First simulate the cross section variance of wages using all parameters (which should be approximately the same as overall wage inequality in the data).
b) Eliminate variation from human capital. We can do this by setting λh = ∞ so that workers
obtain their maximum human capital immediately.
c) Eliminate variation coming from heterogeneity in monopsony power through renegotiated
wages. We can do this by setting β = 1 so that workers get paid their productivity immediately.
d) Eliminate heterogeneity coming from worker luck in the job offers they have received. We do
this by setting λej and λnj arbitrarily high so that workers move to the preferred job immediately.
e) To eliminate Roy model inequality we set rental rates to be Rij = E( Rij | j) for all j eliminating
variation due to skill differences so that job types pay constant wages (but holding workers
ordering of jobs constant).
f) Eliminate inequality based on compensating differentials. We do this by assuming individuals
choose jobs to maximize wages only.
The difference between a and b is due to human capital, the difference between b and d is due
to search frictions (with b-c the monopsony part and c-d the match part), the difference between
d and e is due to Roy model inequality, and the remaining fraction in e is due to compensating
differentials. After implementing step f, all workers earn identical wages.
Notice, that we have estimated a model that tends to overstate the importance of search frictions when we take it to the data. First, preferences are stable. This means that job-to-job transitions only result from search frictions. Secondly, human capital is completely general. Specific
human capital will play a very similar role as bargaining in our model in terms of increasing wages
and in fact we use features of the returns to tenure in order to identify it.
One can also see the importance of matched employer-employee data. When we eliminate
Roy model inequality we eliminate the match specific component of wages but allow for a job
type level component.
Notice, that even though we have endogenous wage determination, the model does not endogenize job offer arrival rates nor the distribution of job types. This is important to keep in mind
later when we do the decompositions - they are essentially partial equilibrium simulations. Allowing for these equilibrium effects would be an interesting and important extension of our work.
11

4

Identification

In this section we discuss non-parametric identification of our model. The details are given in
Appendix A. We show which aspects of the model can and cannot be identified. Both parts are
important. This is relevant in that we can not credibly simulate counterfactuals that are not identified from the data. We respect this in our main counterfactual exercises below by simulating
counterfactuals that we have shown are identified (except in a couple of cases where we note it
explicitly).
Proving general non-parametric identification of the model when the number of job types J is
very large seems overly tedious, so instead we focus on a simpler case to illustrate how our model
can be identified. There are two different types of jobs workers can get: A and B. We fully expect
our result to generalize to larger (but finite) J.8 One caveat to this argument is that the fact that
we know there are only two job types and can observe the type proves useful for identification of
some terms. Clearly, we can not literally operationalize this when we go to the data but rather take
the finite job types as an approximation. In the empirical specification below we will recognize
this issue and normalize the model appropriately. For example, with two job types we can identify
λnA , but we know from Flinn and Heckman (1982) that it is not non-parametrically identified from
the reservation utility with a continuum of job types so we normalize the reservation utility.9 We
also simplify to the case in which human capital only takes on two values, h = {0, 1}.
We first consider what can be identified without data on wages. Throughout this section we
assume that we observe workers from the beginning of their working career in which they start
non-employed.10 In this setting we can partition people into types depending on their preferences
for jobs and non-employment. In a more general model the preference order would change with
human capital accumulation, but we assume it does not to simplify the already complicated specification.11 For example, one type prefers A to B and B to non-employment. This yields a total of 5
types: A  B  0, B  A  0, A  0  B, B  0  A, and non-workers: 0  max( A, B), where,
for example, A  B  0 denotes A preferred to B, B preferred to non-employment.
In Appendix A we show that from the observed job choices and the timing of transitions we
can identify the transition parameters,
λnA , λnB , λeA , λeB , P∗
8 Though

of course the length of the panel we would need for identification would also increase.
(2008) provides a nice example of how to identify this type of model in the more complicated setting.
10 In the data this is not true for all workers. However this is not relevant for identification in that we can focus only
on those workers who we observe at the beginning of their careers.
11 This will also be imposed in our empirical specification.
9 Barlevy

12

the distribution of δi , and the population proportions of each of the five different types.
Identification crucially depends on two types of arguments and also depends on some special
aspects of our data. The first is that we follow Villanueva (2007) and others by using a revealed
preference argument that a worker has shown a preference for one job over another if they voluntarily leave the first job to start the second.12 As a result it will be very important for us to distinguish job-to-job transitions (in which we can sometimes use our revealed preference argument)
from job-to non-employment to-job transitions where we can not use this argument. Intuitively, if
we consistently observed that workers were willing to take wage cuts to go to a certain establishment, this would indicate that this establishment had high non-pecuniary benefits. A limitation of
this approach is that we do not observe whether a job-to-job transition is voluntary. In the model
we allow for some job-to-job transitions to be involuntary through P∗ . We show that P∗ can actually be identified directly from standard data by the rates at which people experience job-to-job
transitions. However in the estimation we will augment our standard data with additional data
in which we directly observe the fraction of job-to-job transitions that are voluntary. We prefer to
use the direct evidence over the more model specific identification shown in the appendix.
A second key aspect of the model is that we show that the arrival rates for employed (λej ) can
be identified by the rate at which workers switch jobs. If the reason that all workers do not work
for the highest paying job is because of search frictions, then eventually they should match with
the highest paying job. Thus, if search frictions are a very important component of inequality, the
rate of job switching should be fairly slow. However, if search frictions are relatively unimportant
(arrival rates are high) workers will quickly receive an offer from their preferred job.13 Thus, it is
important to have high quality panel data on job switching and also matched employer-employee
data.
We next incorporate information from wages. Let wit denote the log of the wage measured at
time t if the worker is working. To incorporate the main features of the Danish data, we assume
that we only observe wages a finite number of times. For simplicity assume it is at the integers

(t = 1.0, 2.0, ...). Without loss of generality we can normalize the initial level of human capital
ψ0 = 1. In the appendix we show that we can identify the wage distribution for each type in each
state of the world in which we might observe that type.
As an example focus on those individuals who prefer job A to job B and job B to non-employment
12 Other

recent papers using job-to-job transitions as a revealed preference are Sorkin (2015) and Bagger and Lentz
(2015).
13 It is important to point out that this does not necessarily incorporate all forms of search frictions. If the worker’s
first job restricts all jobs they can subsequently obtain, this will look identical to what we call Roy model heterogeneity.
However, the type of search friction we have modeled in this paper is the most common type in equilibrium search
models such as Burdett and Mortensen (1998) or Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002).

13

(A  B  0). For each level of human capital there are seventeen possible labor market statuses
depending upon current employment, current human capital, the workers best outside offer, and
the level of human capital when the wage was negotiated. The wages for these workers depend
on the human capital arrival rate, λh , and ψ1 , the distribution of measurement error, and the eight
dimensional set of wages

( RiA00 , RiAB0 , πiA , RiB00 , πiB , RiA01 , RiAB1 , RiB01 ).
where Rij`h0 is the rental rate for worker i in the current job j with the best outside option ` who
had h0 units of human capital at the negotiation time. We show that we can identify the joint
distribution of the wages for this type of worker. This requires panel data on wages for which we
can observe the same worker with different employers. The employment status is not known with
certainty but we can still identify this distribution by varying the timing of transitions. We show
that similar types of expressions can be identified for the other types of workers. This is much
simpler for workers that only work at one type of firm.
There are three important parts of our model that are not identified. We can not hope to identify the wage a worker would receive on a job they would never take. For example, consider the
workers who prefer A to non-employment to B. They would never take a B type job so we can not
identify the wage they would have earned in such a job. For these workers we can only identify
the joint distribution of

( RiA00 , πiA , RiA01 ).
While obvious at some level, it is important to keep in mind that this limits the type of counterfactuals which can be simulated. We view this not as a limit of our model or particular data, but
rather as a fundamental identification problem that will be an issue for non-parametric identification with any model and data set. It is essentially the identification at infinite problem discussed
in Heckman (1990) and Heckman and Honoré (1990). Without an exclusion restriction moving
the conditional probability of doing each job to one, we can not identify the full unconditional
distribution of wages in that job.
Second, we explicitly show in the appendix that we can not non-parametrically identify the
bargaining parameter β. The basic intuition is that we use a revealed preference argument to identify the preference workers have across jobs (i.e. the population distribution of the preference
types) which identifies ordinal utility but not cardinal utility. We can not distinguish the magnitude of β from the magnitude of the strengths of preferences for jobs. As an example, consider the
case above for workers that would only take job A and assume no human capital. There are only
14

two relevant labor market statuses for this group: a) they have received one offer from a type A job
and b) they have received 2 or more offers from type A jobs within the employment spell. In the
second state of the world, since two A firms have bid for them, they will receive a wage equal to
their productivity at job A which is πiA . In the other state of the world we can identify their wage
and and the difference between it and their productivity (πiA ). As long as they are different we
know that β < 1. However, that wage depends on two different things; the bargaining parameter,
β, and the difference in utility between not working and working at firm A. For any β, we can find
some set of preferences that can reconcile the wage. We show in the appendix that this identification problem extends to more complicated cases so that β is not identified. In the empirical model,
we fix this issue not by setting β ex-ante but by setting the intensity of preferences by assuming
that the variance of the preference error terms is unity. A different value would yield a different β.
Third, we can identify the wages individuals would earn at each job and their preference ordering across jobs. However, we cannot identify how the preference ordering would change if
productivity changed. This is closely related to the non-identification result for β. Since revealed
preferences can not identify the relative importance of wages versus non-pecuniary aspects of jobs,
we cannot identify how job orderings would change if we change productivity and/or wages. Presumably one could identify this by using wage changes at different establishments as an exclusion
restriction, but this information is not needed for the counterfactuals we estimate.
It is important to point out that even though we can not identify β non-parametrically, we can
perform two interesting counterfactuals. Completely eliminating search friction will lead people
to be paid their productivity at their preferred job - this is non-parametrically identified. We will
also simulate a counterfactual where, we get rid of inequality arising from the bargaining process
(the difference between the wage in status a and status b above). We implement this by setting
β = 1 and this counterfactual is identified because the worker will be paid πij in that case.

5

Econometric Specification/Parameterization

Even though the model is mostly non-parametrically identified, estimating it non-parametrically
is not an option. In this section we present our empirical specification, where we try to be flexible.
We assume that log productivity of individual i at job type j is specified as
p

p

log(πij ) = θi + µ j + vij
p

p

where θi is the same for individuals at all jobs, µ j is the same for all individuals at job j and vij is
the match specific component. Thus, we allow for worker and firm heterogeneity in productivity
as well as match (worker-firm) specific productivity.
15

The flow utility for individual i at job type j with human capital rental rate R is

uij ( Rψh ) = α log( Rψh ) + µuj + viju .
where α is the weight workers put on log consumption compared to the non-pecuniary aspects of
a job. What matters for occupational choice will be the utility evaluated at πij ψh . We can rewrite
this flow utility as the sum of three terms



p
p
uij (πij ψh ) =α θi + µ j + vij + α log(ψh ) + µuj + viju

 

p
p
= α(θi + log(ψh )) + αµ j + µuj + αvij + viju .
The first term is common across jobs so all that matters for job-to-job turnover are the latter two
terms. The second term pertains to firm specific factors and the last term pertains to match specific factors. Log utility has a special feature that when human capital increases the income and
substitution effects balance so that the taste across jobs does not change. This greatly simplifies
the computation and given that human capital takes a relatively minor role, likely makes little
difference to the ultimate results.14
We assume that θi is normally distributed with mean Eθ and variance σθ2 and that we observe
log wages with classical i.i.d. normally distributed measurement error ξ it with mean zero and
variance σξ2 .
p

p

The joint distributions (µ j , µuj ) and (vij , viju ) are ex-ante independent of each other.15 We set


p
var (viju ) = 1.16 Moreover, we assume that viju , vij are jointly normal distributed which gives us


 
p
p
two parameters, cov viju , vij and var vij . However, note from the equation above that the part


p
of the idiosyncratic error term that is relevant for decisions is αvij + viju . Thus all that matters


p
p
for the model in determining wages is the joint distribution of vij and αvij + viju . As a result, we




p
p
can not separately identify cov viju , vij from α, so we normalize cov viju , vij = 0 and estimate α
p

along with σv p , the standard deviation of vij .17
14 We

are able to solve the model without the assumption of log utility, but it complicates the numerical problem.
Also the income effect associated with human capital would be quite different if we allowed workers to borrow against
future human capital growth. It also might be quite different if human capital was not perfectly general. For the
question at hand this does not seem particularly important so we keep it simple, but allowing for a richer model of
human capital is an important avenue for future research.
15 As a result of selection they will be correlated conditional on the jobs actually chosen.
16 Normally, we would think of this as a normalization, but with its interaction with β and the other functional forms
it is not technically a normalization.


p

p

see this notice that even after a scale normalization, what we can hope to identify is cov αvij + viju , vij =

p
p
p
αvar vij + cov(viju , vij ). We can not separate the first component from the second. Thus, setting cov(viju , vij ) = 0 is an
innocuous normalization for us, though there are some counterfactuals for which it would not be innocuous.
17 To



16

The same is true for the joint distribution of µuj and




p
αµ j + µuj . We can not separate α

p

from the joint distribution of µuj and µ j . However, we only get one normalization. Normaliz



p
p
ing cov viju , vij = 0 delivers identification of α from the joint distribution of cov viju , vij and
 
p
var vij . Knowledge of this α takes the place of the normalization for the joint distribution of


p
p
µuj and αµ j + µuj . Thus covariance of (µ j , µuj ) is left unrestricted but its estimated value funda

p
mentally depends on the cov viju , vij = 0 normalization.
Human capital evolves as
log(ψh ) = b1 h + b2 h2 + b3 h3
In most specifications18 we use a cubic spline so there are two free parameters and we choose the
third to impose that
∂ log(ψH )
= 0.
∂h
The time period is assumed to be one year, so we fix λh = 1. In Bagger, Fontaine, PostelVinay, and Robin (2014) human capital evolves deterministic. We do not view this difference
as important, but if anything our specification tends to make human capital more important in
explaining wage variation.
As mentioned above we allow the job destruction rate to vary across individuals but not across
jobs. We specify it as

log (δi ) ∼ N µδ , σδ2 .
Allowing δi to vary across establishments in a way that is correlated with job types is feasible, but
our goal is to keep the model simple and allowing the job destruction rate to vary across jobs does
not add much to the model.
In terms of identification of the arrival rates of jobs λe and λn , there are two important considerations. The first is the identification issue noticed by Flinn and Heckman (1982). With a
continuous number of jobs, we can not separately identify the arrival rate of jobs from the reservation utility. We address this issue by estimating the λ’s but restricting the location of the utility
of non-employment. We take a simple specification for the value of non-employment by assuming
ui0t = α [ E(θi ) + γθ (θi − E(θi )) + νion ]
n ∼ N (0, σ2 ). When θ = E θ and νn = 0 then u
with νi0
( i)
i
i0t = αE ( θi ) . This means that when they
ν
i0

have no human capital, average workers acceptance rate of jobs from non-employment would
18 We use this specification for the base model and for low education men and women.

This led to a strange shape for
highly educated men and women so in that case we set b3 = 0 and just estimated an unrestricted quadratic.

17

be roughly 50%. We think of this as a normalization; choosing a different value would lead to
different estimates of λ.
For exactly the same reason as we can not separately identify the level of λe and λn from the
level of ui0t , we can not separate individual heterogeneity in λe and λn from heterogeneity in ui0t .
As can be seen we incorporate this as heterogeneity in ui0t and do not allow for individual specific
heterogeneity in the λ’s which again we think of as a normalization.
The second issue is allowing for job specific arrival rates, i.e. j subscripts on λej and λnj . We
parameterize the model somewhat differently. We estimate λe and λn which are the arrival rate of
any job. We then estimate the distribution from which those jobs are drawn (and assume this is
the same regardless of whether it comes from employment or non-employment). Thus, instead of
allowing for differences in arrival rates across job types (and assume one of each type) we allow
the mass of job types to differ. We tried to choose a relatively parsimonious functional form for the


p
distribution of µ j , µuj which is a discrete distribution. With no obvious parametric alternative
we use the following one:
µuj = f 1 [U1 ( j) + f 3 U2 ( j)]
p

µ j = f 2 [ f 3 U1 ( j) + U2 ( j)]
where U1 ( j) and U2 ( j) are distributed as discrete uniform across [-1,1]. In our specification we
allow each of U1 and U2 to take ten different values and assume these are unrelated to each-other
giving us one hundred different firm types. Essentially f 1 governs the variance of µuj , f 2 governs
p

the variance of µ j , and f 3 governs their correlation.
We fix the discount rate at ρ = 0.05. This leaves a total of 18 parameters to be estimated:



µδ , λn , λe , Eθ , σθ , σξ , σv p , α, f 1 , f 2 , f 3 , b1 , b2 , β, P∗ , σδ2 , σν2 , γθ



Recall that even though we showed that β is not identified in the non-parametric model, we estimate it here. We fixed this problem by setting var (viju ) = 1. This defines the scale of utility in
which case β can be identified relative to this scale. The issue is that it is impossible to distinguish
bargaining power from the intensity of preferences because all we could identify was ordinal utility not cardinal utility. Once we have normalized var (viju ) = 1, we no longer have this problem
and β is identified essentially from the importance of the bargaining process. The larger is β the
smaller will be the importance of this process. Note as well that since β is identified from this
normalization it can not be interpreted literally and can not be compared across different samples
or the bargaining power estimated in related models.
18

6

Data and Danish Institutional Features

We use Danish matched employer-employee data. The data consists of two types. The first is
weekly spell data that covers all individuals aged 15-74 in Denmark from 1985 to 2003. The data
period stops in 2003 because this is as far as the spell data has been constructed.19 The version of
the spell data used in this paper is generated from various raw registers maintained by Statistics
Denmark. It consists of a worker identifier, firm and establishment identifiers, start and end date
of the spell, and a state variable. The states are employed, unemployed, self-employed, retired,
and non-participation. Unemployment is defined by receiving either unemployment insurance
benefits or social assistance. Non-participation is a residual state in the sense that it means that
we do not observe the worker in any of the available registers. The second type of data is annual
cross-section data from the Danish register-based matched employer-employee data set IDA and
other annual data sets.20 IDA contains socioeconomic information on workers and background
information on employers, and covers the entire Danish population age 15 to 74.21 Thus, the unit
of observation in our data set is a worker-week-labor market state-establishment (if employed).
We choose to have our empirical analogue of a job type be at the establishment level and not
the firm level. We differ on this point from most of the empirical search literature which uses firms
as the employer unit. Using establishments have at least three advantages in the current setting.
The firm identifier in the Danish data is not well defined over time, since it is based on a mixture of
tax reporting numbers and legal units. Firms might change both the tax reporting number and the
legal unit (and hence firm identifier) without changing anything else. The establishment identifier
is consistent over time.22 Secondly, when thinking about compensating differentials, which is an
integral part of the model, the most appropriate unit seems to be the establishment and not the
legal firm. Third, it provides a more convenient way to think about government jobs. Treating
the government is one firm is problematic. Since different government establishments often have
very different responsibilities and do not coordinate with each other, thinking about them as if
19 See

Bunzel (2010) and Bobbio (2010) for a longer description. The research group at Aarhus University responsible
for creating the spell data have made several attempts at extending the period that it covers. This has proven a great
difficulty due to several data breaks in the raw registers in the mid-2000’s. At the current moment there is an effort
being made trying to update the spell data, but the data is not in a state such that it can be used for research as it is still
being debugged.
20 Both IDA (Integreret Database for Arbejdsmarkedsforskning/Integrated Database for Labor Market Research) and
the other annual data sets are constructed and maintained by Statistics Denmark.
21 IDA contains the annual average hourly wage for the job occupied in the last week of November. However, as
shown in Lund and Vejlin (2015) the hourly wage measure developed by Statistics Denmark have several drawbacks.
Instead we use the hourly wage measure suggested by Lund and Vejlin (2015), which improves the original measure in
multiple dimensions.
22 The establishment is constructed by Statistics Denmark and is the same across years if one of three criteria is met:
same owner and industry; same owner and workforce; same workforce and either same address or same industry.

19

they are separate seems like the best approximation.
We aggregate unemployment and non-participation into non-employment. It is an open question how to think about non-participation. Looking at the data, it is clear that non-participation
in the data is not an absorbing state in the sense that the hazard rate into employment from nonparticipation is around half of the hazard from unemployment. Our model allows for workers
who do not take any job, so including workers who are not active in the labor market is not a big
issue, since it will be captured by a high flow utility from non-employment.
We categorize a job-to-job transition as a transition between two establishments with a very
short intermediate non-employment spell (details below). From the identification strategy it is
clear that we need to distinguish between voluntary job-to-job transitions and involuntary job-tojob transitions in order to interpret them as a revealed preference. It is obvious that not all jobto-job transitions in the data are indeed voluntary. In Denmark, an average notice period is 2-3
months.23 This means that on average a fired worker has around 2-3 months in order to find a new
job before the old job stops. If the worker finds a job in this period and start before the old one stops
it will look like a job-to-job transition in the data. Using only population-wide register data we are
not able to credibly distinguish such a case from a true voluntary job-to-job transition. As shown
above we can identify P∗ (immediate offer after job destruction) without direct information on the
status of the job-to-job transition. However, we chose to augment the standard data from Statistics
Denmark with survey data from two representative samples of workers in 1995 and 2000.24 Both
surveys contain questions on whether the job spell in November 5 years ago terminated due to
the employer or the employee. This is matched with the register data and used later to form a
moment that identifies the parameter, P∗ .

6.1

Sample Selection Criteria

In order to select an appropriate estimation sample, we use the following sample selection criteria.25 First, we censor workers after age 55 in order to avoid retirement related issues. We also
disregard spells before labor market entry (or age 19) defined as the time of highest completed education (and not observed in education later). This is done in order not to draw inference from jobs
that are not a part of the worker’s primary job market. We then proceed by disregarding workers with errors in educational information. Temporary non-employment spells with 12 weeks or
less in between jobs at the same establishment are overwritten by the employment spell. Non23 The

notice period typically depends positively on tenure and also varies across sectors.
survey is the “The Danish Work Environment Cohort Study.”
25 See Appendix B for a more thorough description.
24 The

20

employment spells that are 2 weeks or shorter are allocated to the first of the two employment
spells. In the first case this is done because we believe that recalls are substantially different from
being laid off permanently. In the second case we believe that for non-employment spells shorter
than two weeks it is most likely the case that the job was obtained before starting non-employment
and the two weeks are basically caused by a timing issue or short vacation in between jobs.26 Since
the model does not contain retirement or self-employment, we censor workers when they enter
those two states. Finally, we also disregard workers who have gaps in their spell histories. This
could arise if the worker for some reason have missing IDA data in a given year due to e.g. temporary emigration. This gives us our estimation sample.27
Since the model is cast in steady state and cross-sectional wages therefore have no trend we
detrend wages in logs by gender-educational groups conditional on experience. We condition
on experience since the composition of workers change over the sample period due to an aging
workforce.
Since job-to-job transitions play a vital role for the identification of our model, we ignore transitions from two types of establishments. The first are transitions for workers to or from establishments with missing ID (0.5 percent, cf. Table 2). We also ignore job-to-job transitions from closing
establishments or establishments with mass layoffs.28

6.2

Descriptive Statistics

In this section we present different descriptive statistics for the estimation sample. The number
of years in sample and the number of establishments for each worker are important for the identification of the model. Table 2 show statistics for these measures together with other descriptive
statistics. The worker is on average in the sample for 11 years and is employed in 2.7 different establishments. There are almost as many women as men in the sample. This is because we are not
censoring or deleting public employees of which many are women. The workers have on average
twelve years of education. However, this moderately changes over the sample period, since entering workers are better educated that those leaving the sample. The average cross-section age is 38.
A total of 83 percent are employed in general, while 32 percent are employed in the public sector.
The fact that only 83 percent are employed is intentional and is a result of the mild sample selection
26 The

Danish labor market institutions give rise to the possibility of laying of workers temporary, so they actively
support the possibility of recalls. Regarding the second case, it seems unlikely that a job should start just 1-2 weeks
after entering non-employment. Usually, jobs are advertised at least 1-2 months before the starting date.
27 One worry about imposing strict sample selection criteria is that the sample will be unbalanced over the sample
period. However, the sample selection results in an almost balanced sample in the sense that the sample consists of
around 1.8 mill. workers in 1985 and 1.65 mill. in 2003.
28 A mass layoff is defined as the establishment having more than 15 workers in year t and less than 30 percent left in
year t + 1. We define an establishment to be closing if we do not observe it in the data any longer.

21

that we impose. The average labor market experience is 13 years. Finally, in a given cross-section
the establishment identifier is missing for 0.5 percent of all employment observations.
Figure 9 shows the estimates from a Kaplan-Meier estimator of the survival probability for employment spells (time between non-employment spells), job spells (a job is defined as an employment spell within an establishment), and non-employment spells. Notice, we only use non-left
censored spells, so shorter spells are overrepresented compared to the moments presented later.
The survival rate for non-employment is higher than what is normally observed as a consequence
of the mild sample selection. The job survival rate is lower than the employment survival rate
indicating significant job-to-job turnover between establishments. This is important for identification of job ladders.
The dips in both the survival rates for jobs and non-employment come from a “New Year”
effect. In the reported data there is an over-representation of state changes at January 1st each
year. Most of the state changes are coming from transitions the past year that have not been
reported correctly.

6.3

Institutional Setting

The Danish labor market is characterized by having a so-called flexicurity system. The three main
pillars in the flexicurity system are a generous social security system, flexible hiring and firing
rules, and an active labor market policy with a focus on job search and re-employment possibilities, see Andersen and Svarer (2007) for a more thorough review. The generous social security
system is a variant of the Ghent-model and consists of two main parts; unemployment insurance
benefits and social assistance which is means-tested. The first is heavily subsidized by the government with members of unemployment insurance funds paying around one third of the total cost.
If an individual is not eligible for unemployment insurance he or she can apply for social assistance. This is means-tested and eligibility requires among other things that the worker does not
own much of value and is available for the labor market. The flexible hiring and firing rules and
the low degree of employment protection results in a highly fluent labor market, see e.g. Bertheau,
Bunzel, Hejlesen, and Vejlin (2016). These first two pillars were already in place in the 70’s. However, in the 70’s and 80’s Denmark did not do very well in international comparisons. A series of
reforms in the early 90’s shifted focus from passive to active labor market policies, shortened the
maximum unemployment duration, and increased the eligibility criteria. It is this combination
that has been become known as the flexicurity model.
A full-time job in Denmark is around 1700 hours per year, which is lower than in the US. While
hours are low the participation rate is rather high around 75-80 percent. Furthermore, as indicated
22

by the sample above the public sector is rather large, which is typical for a Scandinavian welfare
state.
Clearly, the model presented makes some strong assumptions. Most notably regarding the
wage setting mechanism. The fact that wages can and will be renegotiated when credible outside
offers presents themselves is not something that necessarily happens in a labor market that is as
highly unionized as the Danish. Even though unionization has been persistently high (around
70-80 % of workers are unionized) during the estimation period, Denmark underwent a transformation in the 80’s and early 90’s from having a centralized wage bargaining system to having a
more and more decentralized wage setting system (see e.g. Fontaine and Vejlin, 2016 and Dahl,
le Maire, and Munch, 2013). According to Boeri and Calmfors (2001) the centralization index of
the Danish bargaining system has dropped from 0.64 for 1973–77 to 0.47 for 1983–87 and 0.34 for
1993–97.29 This is also pointed out by Dahl, le Maire, and Munch (2013) who use the decentralization process to investigate how different wage bargaining systems affect wage dispersion. With
this change in mind, centralized bargaining is still an important part of the Danish labor market
especially for the public sector. It is clear that for most public sector jobs wage renegotiations does
not take place when an outside offer appears. However, there are a wide use of tenure contracts
in both the public and private sector in the sense that wages go up with tenure at a specific pace.
This is especially true for contracts negotiated in the more centralized system. There are several
papers starting with Burdett and Coles (2003) that study wage-tenure contracts theoretically. In
these models tenure effects arise as a result of firms trying to reduce their quit rate by back-loading
wages. This is essentially the same underlying mechanism as in our framework, where tenure effects also arise as a result of firms trying to retain workers. With obvious caveats tenure contracts
could be interpreted as firms realizing that workers over time accumulate outside offers, but without being able or willing to renegotiate wages as they do. Thus, the same underlying economic
mechanism is at play.

7

Auxiliary Model

We estimate our model using indirect inference following Gourieroux, Monfort, and Renault
(1993). Our approach is to use the formal non-parametric identification results as a guide to which
aspects of the data identify the different parameters. To keep the relationship between the parameters and the data as transparent as possible, we focus on the exactly identified case. In particular,
29 The

index takes values from 0 to 1.

23

for each parameter we choose one auxiliary parameter that we think is useful for identifying it.30
We find this approach to be highly beneficial for us in understanding the mapping between the
parameters and the data. This is also relevant because identification of some of our parameters is
more subtle than others. The most important example is β versus, for example, Eθ . We see that β
is primarily identified by the tenure squared term in a fixed effect regression. This is a relatively
imprecisely estimated parameter as opposed to mean wages which is very precisely measured. If
we included a lot more moments in the data this feature would get very little weight and identification of β would come more from higher order moments of the wage distribution rather than the
patterns of wage growth within a job which is why it is important.31

7.1

Notation

Let us define the variables used from the data
• i = 1, ..., N index individuals
• ` = 1, ..., Li index employment spells-a spell of consistent employment with no non-employment
in between
• j = 1, ..., Ji` index a job spell that occurs within employment spell ` for individual i
• t = 1, ..., Ti` j index the set of wage observations on job spell i ` j.
• f i` j the establishment associated with this job spell
• Di` j the duration of time that the worker worked on job spell i ` j
• wi` jt the tth wage observation at job i ` j
• Ei` jt the tth experience observation at job i ` j
• TEi` jt the tth tenure observation at job i ` j. It is set to 0 at the first November cross-section in
job i ` j and from that it increases with Ei` jt .
• k = 1, ...Ki the number of non-employment spells for individual i
n the duration of non-employment spell ik
• Dik
30 While we use this language, it is not precisely how the estimation works. In practice, all the auxiliary parameters
are useful for identifying all of the structural parameters.
31 It is also not obvious which other features of the data we would use. Our main job is to decompose the variance
of log wages and we target and fit the variance of log wages. We could look at higher order moments of the data and
fit them - presumably if one really wanted to do that they would want to go beyond Gaussian assumptions about the
error term. While adding this data and new parameters is feasible, we do not think it would add much to the current
paper and it certainly would make the mapping between parameters and data much more opaque.

24

We assume that there are a large number of people in the economy, but a finite number of J job
types. Our econometric specification differs from the identification section above in that we do not
observe precisely which type an establishment is. Instead we infer the types of the establishments
by using data from co-workers.32
Given these variables from the data, we now define intermediate variables which we will use
in the actual moments. First, we define intermediate variables related to transitions. As argued
previously we use the revealed preference of a job-to-job transition to indicate preference for a job.
With this in mind we define

Si ` j



1
≡ −1


0

if spell i ` j starts with a job-to-job transition and does not end with one
if spell i ` j ends with a job-to-job transition and does not start with one
otherwise.

Thus, Si` j =1 indicates that the worker has shown a preference for the job in the sense that he/she
likely voluntarily chose it over another initially, but did not voluntarily choose another job when
the employment relationship ended. Similarly Si` j = −1 indicates that the worker did not particularly like the job the sense that they only entered when they had no other job offers and then left
for another job. Since it is part of an auxiliary model it does not need to be a perfect measure of
preference, just correlated with preference.
Notice, that if the spell is left censored we assume that it starts from non-employment. Likewise, if the job is right censored we assume that it ends in a job destruction. Si` j should sum to
zero for each individual when summing over jobs, but not when summing over establishments.
Si` j thus measures whether the worker has revealed a preference for working in establishment
f i` j . There could potentially be many different ways to construct a function related to revealed
preferences. The above function only puts weight on the least preferred job (the first job in an
employment spell) and the most preferred job (the last job in an employment spell) and assigns
equal weight to the jobs in between. We prefer this functional form due to its simplicity.
As mentioned above, the other complicated aspect of identification is that we use co-workers
as a proxy for job types. In particular, we use co-workers to estimate the covariance of workers
q

preferences over jobs. For this we define the number of job-to-job separations, s−i , and the numq

ber of job-to-job hires, h−i , for each establishment q. Since we want to use this to estimate the
correlation between person i’s preferences and their co-workers, we exclude individual i from this
calculation.
32 We could use co-workers to estimate the posterior type probabilities for each establishment, but this is not central
to anything we do.

25

q
s −i

L Ji` j −1

N

=

q
h −i

∑∑ ∑

i ∗ =1

`=1 j=1

N

=

1[ q = f i ∗ ` j , i 6 = i ∗ ]

Ji` j

L

∑ ∑ ∑ 1[ q =

i ∗ =1

f i∗ ` j , i 6= i ∗ ]

`=1 j=2

From this define
f

h −i ` j ≡

h−i`ij
f

f

h−i`ij + s−i`ij

Thus, h−i` j is a measure of the degree to which individual i’s co-workers at establishment
f i` j like working there expressed by looking at job-to-job transition patterns. Since our goal is to
construct a covariance we construct a residualized version of h−i` j by subtracting the mean value
of h−i` j across jobs for individual i
f

e
h −i ` j ≡

h−i`ij
f

f

h−i`ij + s−i`ij

−

∑ ∑

f

Ji`∗

∗

h−i`i k

f i `∗ k
` ∗ =1 k =1 h − i

Li

∑

Ji`

Li

1

f

∗

+ s−i`i k

1( N ( f i` j ) > 50)

` ∗ =1
f

where N ( f i` j ) is the number of individuals that contribute to h−i`ij .33 Notice, that this does not
include employment spells where the employee is employed by firm f i` j in the first job spell.
We also need some analogous intermediate variables regarding wages. First define wi as the
mean worker wage over his working life
Li

Ji` Ti` j

∑ ∑ ∑ wi` jt

wi =

`=1 j=1 t=1
Li

Ji`

∑ ∑ Ti` j

`=1 j=1

For the jobs where we observe a wage we also define the average job wage
wi ` j =

1
Ti` j

Ti` j

∑ wi` jt ,

t =1

If we do not observe any wages in the job we set wi` j to zero.
33 We

condition on the establishment having more than 50 observations, N ( f i` j ) > 50, in order to be able to calculate
the covariance matrix of the moments by bootstrap. The issue is that within a bootstrap repetition we might draw
the same individual multiple times. This will generate an upward bias in the estimate of e.g. e
h−i` j as copies of the
individual will have the same preference. However, this is only a problem for smaller establishments as the bias goes
away when the establishment size increase. We will use this condition for moments involving co-workers.

26

For the jobs where we observe at least one wage define
L

ei` j
w

J

∗

∑`∗i =1 ∑ j∗i`=1 wi∗ `∗ j∗
≡ wi ` j − L


J ∗
∑`∗i =1 ∑ j∗i`=1 1 Ti`∗ j∗ > 0

ei` j has the nice feature that it will sum to zero across jobs for each individual.
w
When we look at co-workers, for the same reason as for hi` j sometimes need to take the individual out of the calculation, so define

e −i ` j
w



Ji∗ `∗ j∗
L∗
ei∗ `∗ j∗ 1 i∗ 6= i, f i∗ `∗ j∗ = f i` j
∑iN∗ =1 ∑`∗ι =1 ∑ j∗ =1 w
≡

Ji∗ `∗ j∗ 
L∗
∑iN∗ =1 ∑`∗ι =1 ∑ j∗ =1 1 i∗ 6= i, f i∗ `∗ j∗ = f i` j

e−i` j is measuring the average value of w
ei∗ `∗ j∗ over jobs at establishment f i∗ `∗ j∗ taking out the
w
contribution from individual i.

7.2

Auxiliary Model

Using the definitions of the intermediate variables, we now define the moments used in the estimation. In general notice that many of the moments are calculated over different samples, since
not all variables are defined for each job spell.
For expositional reasons we divide the parameters into two groups: those that are primarily
important for turnover and those that are primarily important wages. There are 8 parameters that
are important for turnover: σζ2 , d0 , λe , λn , σν , f 1 , P∗ , γθ .
We first discuss which moments we chose to identify these variables.
• Level and variance of job destruction rate, µδ , σδ2 : This is the rate at which people enter
non-employment. We identify the mean and variance by using the duration of employment
spells
L=


 J
Li
i` D
∑
∑
i
`
j
j
=
1
`=
1
∑iN=1
Li
N
1
[
L
∑ i =1
i > 0]

and the variance
∑iN=1

 J

L
i` D
∑`=i 1 ∑ j=
1 i` j
Li

!2

−L

∑iN=1 1[ Li > 0]
• Arrival rate of outside offers from employment, λe : This will be important for determining
how long someone stays on a job before moving to the next job. We use the average length

27

of time on a job.34
J=

 J −1

Li
i`
Di ` j
N ∑`=1 ∑ j=1
∑ i =1
L
∑`=i 1 Ji` −1
L
∑iN=1 1[∑`=i 1 Ji` − 1 >

0]

• Arrival rate of jobs from non-employment, λn : Similar to the previous one this will be
important for the rate at which people enter employment from non-employment and we
use the average length of non-employment spells

K=

∑iN=1

K

n
∑k=i 1 Dik
Ki

∑iN=1 1[Ki > 0]

• Variance in tastes for non-work, σν2 : The way we have parameterized this, it will be related
to the variance in non-employment spells
∑iN=1



2

K

n
∑k=i 1 Dik
Ki

−K

∑iN=1 1[Ki > 0]
• Variation in non-pecuniary benefits at the establishment level, f 1 : This parameter picks up
whether there is a lot of commonality across workers in the tastes for particular establishments. We use the covariance between co-workers in the preference for the job as measured
through job-to-job transitions. Again, we condition on the size of the establishment, since
this moment involves co-workers of individual i.
cov(e
h − i ` j , Si ` j | N ( f i ` j , e
h−i` j , Si` j ) > 50)
• Probability of immediate offer after job destruction, P∗ : This will be important because it
depends on what fraction of job-to-job transitions are voluntary. We have direct evidence
on this from the survey data. We select those from the survey that are in our data and who
made a job-to-job transition between the job asked about in the interview and the time of the
interview. We then calculate the fraction that report that employment terminated on their
employer’s initiative. Formally, we match on

∑iN=1

1[Survey1995,i = 1 ∧ J1990,i = 1 ∧ S1995,1990,i = 1 ∧ R1995,i = 1]
+ 1[Survey2000,i = 1 ∧ J1995,i = 1 ∧ S2000,1995,i = 1 ∧ R2000,i = 1]
1[Survey1995,i = 1 ∧ J1990,i = 1 ∧ S1995,1990,i = 1]
∑iN=1
+ 1[Survey2000,i = 1 ∧ J1995,i = 1 ∧ S2000,1995,i = 1]

34 The distinction between this one and the first is that this one is the length of time working for a particular employer
while the first is the length of time between non-employment spells. Thus, the first one includes more than one job if
the movement was through a job-to-job transition.

28

where Survey x,i is an indicator variable for being in the survey in year x, Jy,i is an indicator
variable for being in a job in November year x, Sx,y,i is an indicator for having a November cross-section job in year y ending in a job-to-job transition before year x, and Ry,i is an
indicator for having reported in year x that the employment terminated on the employers
initiative.
• Importance of ability in tastes for non-employment, γθ : It is important for how the duration
varies with general ability θ. We use the covariance between the length of a non-employment
spell and average wages over the data (for people that ever work)
!
!
K
Ki
Ki
N
N
nw
n
D
w
∑iN=1 ∑k=i 1 Dik
∑
∑
∑
∑
i
i =1 k =1 ik
i =1 k =1 i
−
N
N
K
K
∑ i =1 i
∑ i =1 i
∑iN=1 Ki
For wages we have 10 parameters: Eθ , σθ , σξ , σv2p , f 3 , f 2 , α, β, b1 , b2
We use the following moments.
• Mean level of general ability, Eθ : Since all other variables are mean zero, this will be important for getting the overall wage in the economy, so we use the average wage across all time
periods.
N

Li

Ji` Ti` j

∑ ∑ ∑ ∑ wi` jt

w≡

i =1 `=1 j=1 t=1
N

Li

Ji`

∑ ∑ ∑ Ti` j

i =1 `=1 j=1

• The variance of general ability, the variance of measurement error, and the variance of the
comparative advantage piece: σθ2 , σξ2 , σv2p : Since these parameters will be important for variance at different levels we decompose the overall variance into three components: within job
spell, between job spell/within worker, between worker. We think that σξ will be important
for the first, σv p will be important for the second, and σθ will be important for the third
N

Li

Ji` Ti` j

∑∑∑

i =1 `=1 j=1 t=1
N

N

Li

∑∑

Ji`

Li

Ji` Ti` j

∑∑∑∑

∑ (wit − w)2
=

wi` jt − wi` j

2

i =1 `=1 j=1 t=1
N

Li

Ji`

∑ ∑ ∑ Ti` j

∑ Ti` j

i =1 `=1 j=1

i =1 `=1 j=1

∑iN=1

+

L
∑`=i 1
N

Ji` Ti` j

∑

∑ ( w v − w i )2

j =1 t =1
Li

Ji`

∑ ∑ ∑ Ti` j

i =1 `=1 j=1

29

∑iN=1

+

L
∑`=i 1
N

Ji` Ti` j

∑ ∑ ( w i − w )2

j =1 t =1
Li

Ji`

∑ ∑ ∑ Ti` j

i =1 `=1 j=1

• Importance of establishment for productivity, f 3 : Here we use the covariance of co-workers
wages relative to the wages these workers have received at other firms. Again, we condition
on the size of the establishment, since this moment involves co-workers of individual i.

ei` j , w
e −i ` j | N ( f i ` j , w
ei` j , w
e−i` j ) > 50)
cov(w
• Correlation between establishment productivity and establishment non-pecuniary aspects,
f 2 : Here we use the covariance between workers wages at the firm and tastes for the firm.
Again, we condition on the size of the establishment, since this moment involves co-workers
of individual i.

ei` j | N ( f i` j , e
ei` j ) > 50)
cov(e
h −i ` j , w
h −i ` j , w
• Importance of wages as a component of utility, α : To identify this we use the fraction of
wage losses that occur at job-to-job transitions.
N

Li

Ji`

∑ ∑ ∑ 1 [ w i ` j < w i ` j −1 ]

Pr (wi` j+1 < wi` j ) =

i =1 `=1 j=2
N

Li

.

∑ ∑ ( Ji` − 1)

i =1 `=1

The idea behind this is that the more important wages are as a determinant of job preference
the less often we will see wage losses at job-to-job transitions.
• Bargaining parameter and human capital production parameters, β, b1 , b2 : Estimation of
these parameters is quite subtle and distinguishing between them is difficult. Choosing
which moments to use was not straight forward and we explored many options ultimately
deciding the following approach was intuitively better and more robust than the alternatives. In our model, β essentially picks up the importance of the bargaining process as a
determinant of wages (smaller values of β imply that it is more common). Thus, β can be
identified by measuring the importance of tenure. We estimate the following regression using those observations with no left censored tenure (meaning job spells where we do not
observe the beginning of the spell)

wi` jt = β i` j + β 1 Ei` jt + β 2 Ei2` jt + β 3 TEi2` jt + ei` jt
where β i` j is a job spell fixed effect. We match on the estimates of β 1 , β 2 , and β 3 . Note
that since β i` j is a job spell fixed effect, as pointed out by Altonji and Shakotko (1987) and
30

Topel (1991) and others, experience and tenure are perfectly correlated within a spell. As
a result we can not identify the coefficient on tenure directly. Instead use the coefficient
on tenure square to pick up the importance of bargaining. Intuitively, this works because
the rate at which people switch jobs is identified from other moments so for any level of
bargaining power we know the rate at which that bargaining power should decline. The
squared term should pick up both the magnitude of the tenure effect and the rate at which
it stops increasing, and since other components of the model pick up the rate the magnitude
of this parameter should identify the magnitude of the bargaining effect.

8

Results

We estimate the model using indirect inference with the auxiliary model described above. Our
objective function is the sum of the squared deviation between the simulated model and the data
weighted by the inverse of the absolute value of the estimated parameters.35 The covariance matrix of the data moments have been calculated by bootstrapping the sample 200 times.36 We estimate first using the full sample and then by dividing into four different demographic groups on
the basis of gender and education.

8.1

Fit and Estimates

The results for the full sample are presented in Tables 3 and 4. Table 3 shows the auxiliary parameters from the sample and model. One can see that the fit is excellent. This is perhaps not surprising
because we have as many free parameters as we do auxiliary parameters to match. However, the
model is non-linear, so there is no guarantee of a match.37 The structural parameters of the model
are presented in Table 4. We do not view these estimates as interesting in their own right as they
can only be interpreted in the context of the other parameters. We judge them in the context of
their contribution to the counterfactuals.
One thing to note is our estimate of λe relative to λn as we find a much higher value of the
former than the latter. This is largely due to the fact that we are looking at non-employment rather
35 We do this instead of the most common approach which is to normalize weight by the inverse of the standard errors

(which is related to the efficient weighting matrix). Our goal is to match all the moments, but the standard errors are
very different for the different auxiliary parameters and often very small. We worry that the standard approach might
put essentially no weight on some auxiliary parameters. Given the fit of the model, the weighting matrix should not
matter very much.
36 More specifically, in each bootstrap repetition we draw N (recall that N is the sample size) individuals with replacement from the data and recalculate the moments on the bootstrap sample. After having done 200 repetitions we
calculate the covariance matrix of the estimated moments.
37 It is also possible that there are multiple solutions of the model that all fit the data. While one can never guarantee
a global optima, we have found no evidence of this.

31

than unemployment. We see in the raw data that non-employment spells tend to be similar in
length to job spells, but switching jobs from employment should happen at a lower rate since
workers with jobs are presumably much pickier. Whether this is due to heterogeneity in arrival
rates or reservation values is hard to identify and we have made a certain normalization through
heterogeneity in reservation utility rather than heterogeneity in arrival rates. The primary goal
of this project is to explain wages rather than employment, so we do not view this issue as first
order for this paper but worth exploring for other papers that are more concerned with explaining
unemployment.
We also make some remarks about the raw data. We have talked about the importance of the
coefficient on tenure squared in identifying β. One can see in the raw data that this coefficient
is much larger in absolute value than the coefficient on experience squared. This results in the
bargaining process being quite important for earnings inequality. Secondly, note that wage drops
at job-to-job transitions are not at all uncommon, roughly 40%. Some of this will be explained
by the fact that many of these transitions, 20%, are involuntarily. The rest will be explained by
compensating differentials and the fact that workers will take a hit to wages in the short run for
more wage growth in the long run.

8.2

Decomposition of Wage Variation

We focus on the decomposition of total log wage variance which is presented in Table 5. We sequentially eliminate the different sources of wage inequality and document their effect on inequality. Prior to the decomposition in the table, we eliminate measurement error. The total variance of
log wages in the model and in the raw data is 0.124, but it falls to 0.106 without the measurement
error.
We begin with the variance of 0.106 and try to determine which factors contribute to it. Recall
that given the issues with the non-employment, eliminating compensating differentials makes
less sense than the others. We simulate four different sequences of decompositions (A-D) in Table
5. It is important for the interpretation to understand that we eliminate things sequentially. For
example in column (A) the first row presents results in which we eliminate human capital. The
second row presents results where we eliminate human capital and monopsony. In the third we
eliminate human capital, monopsony, and Roy model inequality, etc.
In all columns, our first two steps are the same. We eliminate human capital first by setting
it to the maximum level, ψH . We do this since it is well known to have little explanatory power
(i.e. the R2 in a Mincer model does not change much when experience and experience squared
are dropped), so we view this as well known and less interesting for the purpose of explaining
32

variation in wages. In addition, given the structure of the model, human capital largely operates
exogenously and separately from other aspects of the model, so it does not interact as much. We
show that the small explanatory power is true here as well as human capital explains about 5% of
wage variation.
The second step is to eliminate the variation in monopsony powers that firms have over workers reflected in the bargaining process by setting β = 1. We set β = 1 prior to the other counterfactuals for the reasons discussed above; the level of β is is set by normalizations on other parameters
(mostly the scale of preferences), so it does not make sense to hold it fixed while changing the other
parameters. Setting β = 1 eliminates the variation in the model that comes from negotiation by
giving all of the bargaining power to the worker. This lowers the variance of wages by about another 8%. The fundamental source in the model that leads to this heterogeneity is search frictions,
i.e., in a perfectly competitive environment firms would have no monopsony power. Thus in an
accounting sense, this 8% should be attributed to search frictions.
We next eliminate the remaining part of search frictions, compensating differentials, and Roy
model inequality. As discussed above, the selection problem makes eliminating compensating
differentials is the most tenuous of these. Thus, the most reliable simulations are (A) and (B) in
which we eliminate the other two first. More specifically we do the following
• We eliminate search frictions by allowing workers to find the most preferred job immediately
(i.e. λe , λn → ∞)
• We eliminate Roy inequality by eliminating variation in wages within job type, but we hold
the preference ordering across jobs exactly the same, but set σθ = σv p = 0 in the wage setting. We hold the preference ordering for jobs constant since we cannot non-parametrically
identify how these would change when we change productivity as discussed in section 4
on identification. Note, that for this counterfactual one can see the necessity of matched
p

employer-employee data. We still allow for µ j , the variation across job types that is common to all workers.
• We eliminate compensating differentials by assuming workers choose among acceptable jobs
only by comparing wages (i.e. viju = µuj = 0). However, for the reasons discussed above we
condition on acceptable jobs by which we mean any job the worker would accept from nonemployment in the real world. That is, any job rejected from non-employment in the full
model would always be rejected in this counterfactual.
The first thing to note from Table 5 is that in all four simulations Roy model inequality is the
33

most important accounting for the vast majority of the variation in every decomposition. Nonparametrically we can not separately identify how much of this comes from the common comp

ponent, θi , versus the match component, vij as this separability is a functional form restriction to
make estimation feasible. Given the parametric form we find that roughly 60% of the Roy component comes from the common component.
The relative importance of search frictions and compensating differentials varies considerably
across the four simulations so this is clearly not an orthogonal decomposition. We do not view this
feature as a weakness of our decomposition but rather as a way of demonstrating how the aspects
of the model interacts. Most interesting is search frictions. Recall that the monopsony aspect
explains 8% of the variation in every case and that monopsony power arise in the this model
because of search frictions. The remaining amount varies considerably across the specifications.
It is about 1% in (A), 3% in (B), 21% in (C) and 2% in (D). What leads to these large differences
in the importance of frictions? The order of the decomposition fundamentally alters the aspects
of jobs that workers are searching for. In the base case, which corresponds to (B), workers are
 
p
searching for good matches in four different dimensions - firm specific productivity µ j , firm
 
 
p
specific non-pecuniary aspects µuj , match (individual×firm type) productivity vij , and match
 
(individual×firm type) utility viju . When workers are searching for all four of these aspects this
leads to 3% variation in wages (0.093-0.090 in column (B)). In experiment (A) we first eliminate
Roy inequality. This means that we have eliminated the individual×firm type productivity match
 
p
vij , which is a very important source of wage inequality. In this case workers are searching
for a good match in terms of the non-pecuniary aspects (both match specific and firm specific)
and firm productivity only. Perhaps not surprising these aspects are not particularly important
for wage inequality and search only explains 1% of the inequality. In (C) we do the opposite, we
first get rid of compensating differentials which means we are getting rid of both the firm specific
and individual×firm specific non-pecuniary characteristics (µuj and viju ). In this case workers are
searching only for pecuniary aspects of the job and search frictions turn out to be very important.
They explain 21% of the variation (29% total if one includes the monopsony part). In (D) we
eliminate both the search for non-pecuniary aspects and the individual×firm type productivity
match, so that all is being searched for is the firm type productivity. This explains 2% of the
variation.

8.3

Decomposition of Utility Variation

Table 5 quantifies the amount of variation in log wages. However, workers care about more than
just wages. Another way of quantifying inequality is to look at variation in utility rather than just
34

wages which we do in Table 5. We should emphasize that unlike the main decomposition of Table
5, this one is not non-parametrically identified because we can only non-parametrically identify
ordinal utility not cardinal utility. Thus, it should be viewed with some caution. For example,
while we could get some bounds on utility (measured in units of foregone wages) by observing
the wage cuts one could take, but the results would be sensitive to tail behavior at the most favored
job which can not be bounded non-parametrically. Despite the limitations, the results show how
potentially important the other two channels might be. For comparison we only use employed
workers and we normalize utility to log wage equivalent units. That is, recall that flow utility is
defined as
Uij (Wψh ) = αlog(Wψh ) + µnj + vijn .
To put utility in the same units as log wages we can rescale simply by re-normalizing by dividing
by α
e ij (Wψh ) ≡ log(Wψh ) +
U

µnj + vijn
α

!
.

The results of this decomposition are presented in Table 6 and they are very different. This can
be seen purely from looking at the variance in the first row - variance in tastes for non-pecuniary
aspects contributes more to the variance than does variance in wages. First of all, from the overall
variance one can see that the variance in wages accounts for only about 1/3 of the variation in
utility. Unlike the wage variance, where the Roy model explained most of the variation, most
of the variation in utility is explained by the interaction between compensating differentials and
search. In this case it does not matter all that much how we do it, but getting rid of either search
or compensating differentials eliminates most of the variation in flow utility.

8.4

Life-Time Profiles

So far we have investigated how the different components matter for cross-sectional variation in
wages and utility. Here we turn our attention to how they affect average wage and utility over
the life-cycle.38 Figure 9 shows average wages for different combinations of counterfactuals. In
the base model all four components of wage variation are present. The wage profile is increasing and concave, which we would also expect given our moments. The first step is to eliminate
human capital by setting it to the maximum level. One can see that not surprisingly a large part
38 Once

again, there is a large literature looking at this and a full literature review is beyond the scope of this paper.
Weiss (1986) and Sanders and Taber (2012) provide nice surveys. Recent examples include Bagger, Fontaine, PostelVinay, and Robin (2014), Sanders (2014),Lu (2016), and Han (2016).

35

the increase in average wages over the life-cycle is due to increases in human capital. This is in
accordance with the results from Bagger, Fontaine, Postel-Vinay, and Robin (2014). The next step
is to eliminate monopsony power by setting β = 1, so workers get their full productivity. This
eliminates any effect of outside wage offers. We can see that this is more important than general
human capital and also relatively more important early in workers carriers. However, it is also interesting that it still has a large effect on the level of wages after 20 years, which basically tells use
take as evidence that it takes a long time for the worker to move to his/her preferred firm match
and to then generate outside offers for rent extraction. Next, we delete search frictions by letting
employed workers move to their preferred job immediately. We can see that this increase wages
and essentially makes the profile flat.39 Finally, we delete Roy model heterogeneity. This decrease
average wages by about 0.2 log points. This is due to the considerable variance in selection on
match productivity which no longer exists.
Figure 9 shows average utility with the same decomposition as the one above for wages. Eliminating human capital and monopsony power has about the same effect as before. Contrary to
before, eliminating search increase utility by much more than search and monopsony power combined. This is a result of workers moving to their preferred job, which does not only have higher
wages on average, but also have a higher non-pecuniary return. It is clear from this that search
frictions and compensating differentials are not only important for explaining the variation in
utility, but also for explaining the level. Eliminating Roy model heterogeneity has the exact same
effect as on wages.

8.5

Other Aspects of the labor market

The fact that search frictions and compensating differentials are not that important for wage inequality does not mean that they are not important for the labor market more generally. We quantify their importance in a few other ways. Compensating differentials are important for turnover.
In roughly 1/3 of the competing offers we see in the simulation of our full model, the workers
would have made a different choice if they only cared about wages. The consequences are large
as workers earn about 0.20 log points lower wage as a result of these choices. In our model search
frictions are obviously important in explaining turnover as there would be no turnover without
them. To quantify, wages would be about 0.17 higher in the absence of search frictions. Of these
0.17, roughly 0.07 is due to the negotiation and 0.10 is due to the actual job match.
39 The

reason it is not completely flat is because all workers start as non-employed. High ability individuals have
lower flow utility from unemployment, so they are willing to take more jobs out of non-employment and since they are
high ability individuals they have high wages, so the profile is slightly decreasing.

36

8.6

Sub-groups

As mentioned previously, we also estimate the model for different subgroups. In particular, we
divide individuals by gender and whether or not they have more education than high school. In
Tables 7 and 8 we present the results for the different demographic groups in terms of moment
fit and parameter estimates. First, as is clear from Table 7 the fit is very good for each of the
four groups. For the most part the parameters are quite similar across the different groups and
the differences make sense. However, there are two notable differences about college men as
compared to the other groups: they have a substantially higher value of α and a substantially
lower value of β. This will lead to differences in the simulations between college men and the
other groups that we discuss below.
Table 9 presents the decomposition results for all four groups. To fit the information in a single
table, rather than present the results in four different types of decompositions as in Table 5, we
present the results of the different counterfactuals that can be used to produce those results. That
is while the decompositions in Table 5 are sequential, the counterfactuals presented in Table 9 are
more complicated. The first two rows are analogous to Table 5. The remaining rows continue
to assume no human capital and no monopsony, but otherwise are not sequential. The main
result holds for all four groups. Roy model inequality is clearly the most important factor for all
four demographic groups. Furthermore, the basic results above regarding the interaction between
search and the other components are generally true as well.
Despite the similarities, there are quite a few factors that are different across the different
groups. As suggested by the parameter estimates above college men differ from the other groups
in three important ways. First, the level of inequality is very different: the variance is more than
twice as large for college men as it is for high school women. Second, compensating differentials
are less important for college men than for the other groups. Third, the importance of monopsony
is also quite different: it is a very important factor for college men explaining almost 30% of the
variation while it only explains 12% for high school women. As discussed above this comes directly from the fact that the coefficient on tenure squared is much larger for this group which leads
to a smaller value of β. With the exception of college men, the largest drops for search occur when
we drop compensating differentials first. Second, the bargaining process is much more important
for college men than it is for the other groups.
These two results can be anticipated from the difference in parameter estimates. The α dictates
p

the importance of wages relative to the idiosyncratic taste since the variance of νij is normalized
to one. The higher value suggests that college men place a relatively higher value on pecuniary

37

aspects of the job than non-pecuniary aspects. The lower value of β suggests that these men have
lower bargaining power leading to a greater role for monopsony. While a smaller bargaining
parameter for college men seems surprising on its face, it makes more sense from a broader perspective. First, one should keep in mind that it is only identified given the normalization on the
p

variance of νij so we can not literally compare it across groups. It could just be picking up the fact
p

that the true variance of νij is lower for this group of people. However, as we see in the simulations
it does lead to a larger importance of bargaining. As a practical matter, this occurs because the coefficient on tenure squared is considerably larger for college men than the other groups as can be
seen in Table 7. The implication is that the bargaining process is more important for this group
than the others. Intuitively this makes sense to us. While it is not incorporated in our model, one
could interpret β as picking up the relative importance of jobs that post wages versus those that
bargain with employers. That is, if a firm commits to wage posting our model will interpret that
as the worker having all the bargaining power, since there will be no return to tenure. One can
see that the order of the magnitude of β perfectly corresponds with the order of the coefficient on
tenure squared, so one can see what factor in the data are driving these results. Intuitively, it seems
plausible to us that college educated men is the group that will encounter wage posting offer the
least. There exists a small literature on the choice of wage posting versus sequential auction from
the firms point of view.Postel-Vinay and Robin (2004) propose a random search model with onthe-job search. Workers can choose search intensity thereby potentially generating a moral hazard
problem in the sequential auction setting. Firms can commit to either matching (sequential auction) or not matching (wage posting) outside offers. In this environment high productive firms
chose to match, while low productive firms chose to post wages.40 If there is positive assortative
matching as suggested by Bagger and Lentz (2015) and Lise, Meghir, and Robin (2016) then college men would be more likely to be employed in a high productive firm which chooses to match
outside offers. Distinguishing a model with both wage posting and bargaining from one with
bargaining but allowing for a flexible β seems extremely difficult and as a practical manner we are
not sure how to distinguish them. We leave this as an open research question for future work.
The relative importance of search frictions depends quite a bit on the experiment we do. For
example, if we eliminate compensating differentials first, then the impact of getting rid of search
frictions next leads to a large decline for all groups except college educated men, but if we just
eliminate search friction the largest decline happens for college educated men.
40 Doniger

(2015) use a similar setup but in a more general framework.

38

9

Conclusions

The goal of this paper is to estimate the primary drivers behind wage variation. For this purpose
we have developed and estimated a general labor market model. The model includes features
from the Roy model (productivity differences across workers), search frictions, general human
capital acquired on the job, and compensating differentials. The model includes endogenous wage
determination.
We add to the literature by investigating non-parametric identification of the model given revealed preferences from job-to-job transitions and wages. We show that almost all aspects of the
model are identified. Two important exceptions are bargaining power and wages in jobs that
workers would never take. The later is expected, while the former was unanticipated by us, but
comes from the fact that revealed preferences can identify the preference order, but not the differences in utility.
We estimate the model on Danish matched employer-employee data using indirect inference.
The model fit is very good. Using the estimated model we show that Roy model heterogeneity
is the most important driver behind wage variation explaining between 64% to 83% of the total.
Search friction, human capital, and compensating differentials matter to a lesser extent. These
factors also interact in important ways.
Simulations show that compensating differentials and search friction are both important for
other aspects of the data. One third of all encounters between two firms and a worker would have
changed transition path if workers only cared about wages and not the non-pecuniary aspect
of a job. Worker would on average earn 0.20 log point high wages if they did not care about
non-pecuniary aspects of the job but only about wages and 0.17 log points higher if there were
no search frictions. We show that variance in utility is primary driven by search frictions and
compensating differentials and not Roy model heterogeneity. These conclusions in general hold
across education-gender subgroups.
We should also emphasize that we have intentionally kept the model very simple. Computation of this model is quite fast so adding other features into this framework is straight forward
computationally (although likely difficult to identify). Two that come to mind are job specific
human capital and non-pecuniary costs of switching jobs. We conclude that future research that
wants to understand wage determination and labor market transitions should worry about all
four features.

39

References
Abowd, J. M., F. Kramarz, and D. N. Margolis (1999). High Wage Workers and High Wage
Firms. Econometrica 67(2), 251–333.
Altonji, J. G. and R. A. Shakotko (1987, July). Do wages rise with job seniority? Review of Economic Studies 54(3), 437–59.
Andersen, T. and M. Svarer (2007). Flexicurity - Labour Market Performance in Denmark. CESifo Working Paper Series 2108, CESifo Group Munich.
Andrews, M. J., L. Gill, T. Schank, and R. Upward (2008). High wage workers and low wage
firms: negative assortative matching or limited mobility bias? Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society A(2008) 171(Part 3), 673–697.
Bagger, J., F. Fontaine, F. Postel-Vinay, and J.-M. Robin (2014). Tenure, experience, human capital, and wages: A tractable equilibrium search model of wage dynamics.
Bagger, J. and R. Lentz (2015). An equilibrium model of wage dispersion and sorting. Working
Paper.
Barlevy, G. (2008, January). Identification of search models using record statistics. Review of
Economic Studies 75(1).
Becker, D. (2009). Non-wage job characteristics and the case of the missing margin. Federal
Trade Commision.
Bertheau, A., H. Bunzel, M. Hejlesen, and R. Vejlin (2016). Labor market transitions over the
business cycle. Unpublished Working Paper, Department of Economics, Aarhus University.
Bobbio, E. (2010). The Danish Matched Employer-Employee Data. Unpublished Manuscript.
Boeri, Tito, A. B. and L. Calmfors (2001). The role of unions in the twenty-first century. Oxford
University Press.
Bunzel, H. (2010). The LMDG Data Sets. Unpublished Manuscript.
Burdett, K. and M. Coles (2003). Equilibrium wage-tenure contracts. Econometrica 71(5), 1377–
1404.
Burdett, K. and D. T. Mortensen (1998). Wage differentials, employer size, and unemployment.
International Economic Review 39(2), 257–273.
Cahuc, C., F. Postel-Vinay, and J.-M. Robin (2006, March). Wage bargaining with on-the-job
search: Theory and evidence. Econometrica 74(2), 323–364.
40

Card, D., A. Cardoso, and P. Kline (2014). Bargaining, sorting, and the gender wage gap: Quantifying the impact of firms on the relative pay of women.
Card, D., J. Heining, and P. Kline (2013). Workplace heterogeneity and the rise of west german
wage inequality. Quartely Journal of Economics 128(3), 967–1015.
Dahl, C. M., D. le Maire, and J. R. Munch (2013). Wage dispersion and decentralization of wage
bargaining. Journal of Labor Economics 31(3), 501–533.
Dey, M. S. and C. J. Flinn (2005, 03). An equilibrium model of health insurance provision and
wage determination. Econometrica 73(2), 571–627.
Dey, M. S. and C. J. Flinn (2008, January). Household search and health insurance coverage.
Doniger, C. L. (2015, August). Wage dispersion with heterogeneous wage contracts. Finance
and economics discussion series 2015-023. washington: Board of governors of the federal
reserve system.
Eckstein, Z. and G. Van den Berg (2007). Empirical labor search. Journal of Econometrics 136(2),
531–564.
Flinn, C. and J. Heckman (1982). New methods for analyzing structural models of labor force
dynamics. Journal of Econometrics 18, 115–168.
Fontaine, F. and R. Vejlin (2016). Who benefits from the unemployment insurance?
French, E. and C. Taber (2011). Identification of models of the labor market. In D. C. O. Ashenfelter (Ed.), The Handbook of Labor Economics Volume 4A.
Gourieroux, C., A. Monfort, and E. Renault (1993, December). Indirect inference. Journal of Applied Econometrics 8, S85–S118.
Gruetter, M. and R. Lalive (2004). The importance of firms in wage determination. IEW - Working Papers 207, Institute for Empirical Research in Economics - IEW.
Hall, R. E. and A. B. Krueger (2012, September). Evidence on the incidence of wage posting,
wage bargaining, and on-the-job search. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4(4), 56–
67.
Han, J. (2016, April). Multidimensional learning and earnings dynamics.
Heckman, J. (1990). Varieties of selection bias. American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 80.
Heckman, J. and B. Honore (1989). The identifiability of the competing risks mode.
Biometrika 76, 325–330.
41

Heckman, J. and G. Sedlacek (1985). Heterogeneity, aggregation, and market wage functions:
An empirical model of self-selection in the labor market. Journal of Political Economy 93(6),
1077–1125.
Heckman, J. and B. Singer (1984). A method for minimizing the impact of distributional assumptions in econometric models for duration data. Econometrica 52, 271–320.
Heckman, J. J. and B. E. Honoré (1990). The empirical content of the roy model. Econometrica 58(5), 1121–1149.
Heckman, J. J., L. J. Lochner, and P. E. Todd (2006). Earnings Functions, Rates of Return and Treatment Effects: The Mincer Equation and Beyond, Volume 1, Chapter 7, pp. 307–458. Amsterdam:
North Holland.
Heckman, J. J. and C. R. Taber (2008). Chapter Roy model. Palgrave Macmillan.
Huggett, M., G. Ventura, and A. Yaron (2011). Sources of lifetime inequality. American Economic
Review 101(7), 2923–54.
Keane, M. P. and K. I. Wolpin (1997). The career decisions of young men. The Journal of Political
Economy 105(3), 473–522.
Kotlarski, I. (1967). On characterizing the gamma and the normal distributions. Pacific Journal of
Mathematics 20(1), 69–76.
Lentz, R. (2010). Sorting by search intensity. Journal of Economic Theory 145(4), 1436 – 1452. Search
Theory and Applications.
Lise, J., C. Meghir, and J.-M. Robin (2013, January). Mismatch, sorting and wage dynamics.
Working Paper 18719, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Lise, J., C. Meghir, and J.-M. Robin (2016). Matching, sorting and wages. Review of Economic
Dynamics 19, 63 – 87. Special Issue in Honor of Dale Mortensen.
Lu, C. (2016, January). Wages, career progress, and multidimensional skills: What do recessions
tell us?
Lund, C. and R. Vejlin (2015). Documenting and improving the hourly wage measure in the
danish ida database.
Postel-Vinay, F. and J.-M. Robin (2002, November). Equilibrium Wage Dispersion with Worker
and Employer Heterogeneity. Econometrica 70(6), 2295–2350.
Postel-Vinay, F. and J.-M. Robin (2004). To match or not to match?: Optimal wage policy with
endogenous worker search intensity. Review of Economic Dynamics 7(2), 297 – 330.
42

Postel-Vinay, F. and H. Turon (2010). On-the-job search, productivity shocks, and the individual
earnings process*. International Economic Review 51(3), 599–629.
Roberson, R. and R. Shimer (2011). Search in macroeconomic models of the labor market. In
D. C. O. Ashenfelter (Ed.), The Handbook of Labor Economics Volume 4A.
Robin, J.-M. (2011). On the dynamics of unemployment and wage distributions. Econometrica 79(5), 1327–1355.
Rogerson, R., R. Shimer, and R. Wright (2005). Search-theoretic models of the labor market: A
survey. Journal of Economic Literature XLIII, 959–988.
Rosen, S. (1987). Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 1, Chapter 12, The Theory of Equalizing
Differences„ pp. 641–692.
Roy, A. D. (1951). Some thoughts on the distribution of earnings. Oxford Economic Papers 3(2),
135–146.
Sanders, C. (2014, August). Skill accumulation, skill uncertainty, and occupational choice.
Sanders, C. and C. Taber (2012). Life-cycle wage growth and heterogeneous human capital.
Annual Review of Economics 4.
Smith, A. (1776). An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of the Nations. W. Strahan and
T. Cadell.
Sørensen, T. and R. Vejlin (2013). The importance of worker, firm and match effects in the formation of wages. Empirical Economics 45(1), 435–464.
Sorkin, I. (2015, October). Ranking firms using revealed preference.
Sullivan, P. (2010). A dynamic analysis of educational attainment, occupational choices, and job
search. International Economic Review 51(1), 289–317.
Sullivan, P. and T. To (2014). Search and nonwage job characteristics.
Topel, R. (1991). Specific capital, mobility, and wages: wages rise with job seniority. The Journal
of Political Economy 99(1), 145–176.
Villanueva, E. (2007). Estimating compensating wage differentials using voluntary job changes:
Evidence from germany. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 60(4), 544–561.
Weiss, Y. (1986). The determination of lifecycle earnings: A survey. In O. Ashenfelter and
D. Card (Eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 1, pp. 603–640. Amsterdam: NorthHolland.

43

Appendix A: Identification
This section is composed of three different parts. We first consider what can be identified without
information on wages. We then show what can be additionally identified with wage information.
Finally, we show that the bargaining parameter, β, is not identified.

Identification of parameters determining turnover (without using wages)
As mentioned in the text, we assume that workers begin their working life non-employed and
that we observe all data on workers from time 0 to T. To identifying the full distribution of δi nonparametrically we need to observe completed spells so we assume that we can let T go to some
arbitrarily large number. Since we allow for the possibility of large T anyway, we use it for some
other arguments. We expect (but have not showed explicitly) that if we eliminated or restricted
heterogeneity in δi we could place an upper bound on the length of the panel needed. We observe
labor force status during a worker’s entire life - that is whether the worker is working and if so,
the and establishment for which they work. We assume that we only observe wages at a finite
number of times. For simplicity assume it is at the integers (t = 1.0, 2.0, ...). Both the assumption
on continuous observable labor market status and on wages being only observable at integers
match the Danish data, where we have labor market status at a weekly basis and where wages
are only observed for the job in the last week of November. Let wit denote the log of the wage
measured at time t for individual i working at time t. Human capital takes on only two values 0
and 1.
As mentioned in the text, we can classify workers into different “types” by their preferences
over jobs. For example one type is:

ViA0 (πiA ) < Vi00 < ViB0 (πiB ),Vi01 < ViA1 (πiA ) < ViB1 (πiB ).
We can define all of these different combinations of types. However, to keep this already complicated section tractable we will assume that there are only 5 different types by not allowing workers
to change their ordering after human capital accumulates. We see no reason why this would be an
issue, but focus on this case for simplicity. It will be true for our empirical specification. The five
types are:

44

Type
0
B0
A0
BA
AB

ViAh (πiA ) < Vi0h , ViBh (πiB ) < Vi0h
ViAh (πiA ) < Vi0h < ViBh (πiB )
ViBh (πiB ) < Vi0h < ViAh (πiA )
Vi0h < ViAh (πiA ) < ViBh (πiB )
Vi0h < ViBh (πiB ) < ViAh (πiA )

for h = {0, 1}.
We start by showing that we can identify λnA , λnB , λeA , λeB , P∗ , the sample probabilities of the five
types above, and the distribution of δi (denote it Fδ ) without using data on wages. The biggest
complication is the addition of P∗ because when we observe a job-to job-transition we do not
know whether it was voluntary or involuntary.
Identification of λnA and λnB
Condition on workers who are initially non-employed, start at an A type firm, become nonemployed, start at a B type firm, become non-employed, and then start at another firm. We know
these are either AB types or BA types. The probability that the third firm is a B type firm is
PB ≡

λnB
.
λnA + λnB

We define PA in an analogous manner. Let T1 be the duration of the first non-employment spell,
T2 be the duration of the first employment spell, T3 the duration of the second non-employment
spell, T4 the duration of the second employment spell, and T5 the duration of the third non
employment spell. For any value t1a , t1b , t2 , t3 , t4 , t5 we can identify
n
n a
Pr ( T1 > t1a , T2 ≤ t2, T3 ≤ t3 , T4 ≤ t4 , T5 ≤ t5 ) e−(λ A +λB )t1
 =
.
n
n b
Pr T1 > t1b , T2 ≤ t2, T3 ≤ t3 , T4 ≤ t4 , T5 ≤ t5
e − ( λ A + λ B ) t1

Clearly, λnA + λnB is identified as long as we pick values such that t1a 6= t1b . From this sum and PB
we can identify λnA and λnB .
We should point out that the fact that we observe the identity of the firm facilitates identification. As mentioned in the text, in general we know from Flinn and Heckman (1982) that separating
arrival rates from reservation wages can not be done non-parametrically. In the actual empirical
application we do not use the identity of the firms, so we identify this only after normalizing the
location of the taste for non-employment.
Identification of P∗
Next, we establish identification of P∗ . This is the probability of getting an offer from a firm
immediately after a spell is terminated conditional on being terminated. As a practical manner in
45

the estimation we use additional information as we observe the fraction of job-to-job transitions
that are voluntary directly from survey data. Here we show that we can identify P∗ without that
knowledge.41
This is simplified by conditioning on people who we know are either AB types or BA types.
We do this by conditioning on individuals who start at a type B job, leave to non-employment and
then start a type A job at t1 . We will derive the hazards of those moving from A to B and from A
to non-employment at time t1 + τ. Since they have accepted offers from both jobs we know that
they are either members of the AB group and the BA group. The events that put one into this
conditioning set are independent of type, so the relative proportion of AB types to BA types will
be the same as it is in the population. We have assumed that the distribution of δi is independent
of types, so it is the same for both the AB types and the BA types. Since we have conditioned on
being at a B job beforehand and then leaving to non-employment, we have a selected sample of
the distribution of δi which we define to be Fc .
Note that AB types (preferring A to B and B to non-employment) could move directly from
A to B only if their job was destroyed and they immediately got an offer from a B type firm.
However, for the BA types there are two ways that this transition could happen, either they are
laid off and rehired or they receive an offer directly. The other key difference is that the only way
that the BA types would still be working at the original type A firm at time t1 + τ is if they had
not received an outside offer from a type B firm. Putting these together the hazard rate out of job
A and into job B is
P ( AB)

´

e ´
e−δi τ δi P∗ PB dFc (δi ) + P ( BA) e−λB τ e−δi τ [δi P∗ PB + λeB ] dFc (δi )
´
´
P ( AB) e−δi τ dFc (δi ) + P ( BA) e−λB τ e−δi τ dFc (δi )

We can also identify the conditional hazard of movements to non-employment at time t1 + τ.
This is
P ( AB)

´

e ´
e−δi τ δi [1 − P∗ ] dFc (δi ) + P ( BA) e−λB τ e−δi τ δi [1 − P∗ ] dFc (δi )
´
e ´
P ( AB) e−δi τ dFc (δi ) + P ( BA) e−λB τ e−δi τ dFc (δi )

where P ( AB) and P ( BA) are the probabilities of being an AB or BA type worker, respectively. Intuitively, the model is identified from these equations because our only parameters are essentially
P∗ , λ B , P ( AB) and P ( BA) (because Fc is identified if P∗ is known), but we can move τ continuously. To show this formally we assume that δi is bounded from below by δ` to avoid strange
behavior of Fδ near δi = 0.
To see how to identify P∗ we take the ratio of these two hazards and take the limit at τ → ∞
41 Doing

it this way is easier than using the other information as the expression is very complicated.

46

´
e ´
P ( AB) e−δi τ δi P∗ PB dFc (δi ) + P ( BA) e−λB τ e−δi τ [δi P∗ PB + λeB ] dFc (δi )
´
lim
e ´
τ →∞ P ( AB ) e−δi τ δi [1 − P∗ ] dFc ( δi ) + P ( BA ) e−λ B τ e−δi τ δi [1 − P∗ ] dFc ( δi )
e

= lim

τ →∞

=

e ´
e−λ B τ e−δi τ dFc (δi )
´ −δ τ
e i δi dFc (δi )
eτ
−
λ
∗
P ]e B

P ( AB) P∗ PB + P ( BA) P∗ PB e−λb τ + P ( BA) λeB
P ( AB) [1 − P∗ ] + P ( BA) [1 −

P∗ PB
[1 − P ∗ ]

Since PB is identified, P∗ is identified.42
The intuition for this result is that as τ gets large all of the BA types should have gotten a B
offer by then so that all that is left is AB types and the only way that they make a transition to
a B firm is through a displacement. Comparing that to their exit rate to non-employment gives
P∗ . As mentioned above, since we need to assume that we do not have right truncated spells for
identification of δi we use it here for convenience, but the intuition of the argument is that as τ
gets larger the proportion of AB in the sample shrinks making involuntary switches relatively
more important which identifies P∗ . It does not need to shrink all the way to zero - it just makes
the expression simpler if it does.
Identification of P ( AB) /P( BA), λeA , and λeB
Using the same conditioning as above, once P∗ has been identified it is trivial to identify Fc because
the hazard rate to non-employment for this group is δi [1 − P∗ ]. Here it is important that we have
no right truncated spells in which case we can identify the distribution of the log of length of the
employment spell. This distribution is the convolution of the distribution of δi [1 − P∗ ] and an
extreme value distribution (see e.g. Heckman and Honore, 1989, or French and Taber, 2011), so
the distribution of δi [1 − P∗ ] and thus Fc is identified.
To identify λeB and P( AB)/P( BA) note that we can identify the probability that someone is still
employed at the type A firm at time t1 + τ (all conditional on having worked at a B firm). This is
´
e ´
P ( AB) e−δi τ dFc (δi ) + P ( BA) e−λB τ e−δi τ dFc (δi )
.
P ( AB) + P ( BA)
Since Fc is identified,
e

P ( AB) + P ( BA) e−λB τ
P ( AB) + P ( BA)
is as well.
42 We

used the fact that δi is bounded from below for 0 < limτ →∞

47

e ´
e−λ B τ e−δi τ dFc (δi )
´ −δ τ
e i δi dFc (δi )

< limτ →∞

e ´
e−λ B τ e−δi τ dFc (δi )
´
`
δ e−δi τ dFc (δi )

= 0.

Evaluate this letting τ go to ∞ and P ( AB) / ( P ( AB) + P ( BA)) is identified and thus so is
P ( BA) / ( P ( AB) + P ( BA)). Given this λeB is identified at any other value of τ.
We can identify λeA by using an analogous argument.
Identification of P(0), P( A0), and P( B0)
Note that P (0) is identified directly from the data as those that never work.
To identify the P ( A0) group we use the same argument we used for identification of P∗ except
that we no longer condition on having a B spell prior to the A spell. We condition on all individuals
who’s first spell is a type A spell which starts at t1 and condition on how it ends. Now three types
can experience the A spell.
The hazard rate of moving to B at time t1 + τ conditional on starting at an A type firm and
remaining at that firm is43
´
e ´
P ( AB) PA e−δi τ δi P∗ PB dF (δi ) + P( BA) PA e−λB τ e−δi τ [δi P∗ PB + λeB ] dF (δi )
´
´
.
e ´
P ( AB) PA e−δi τ dF (δi ) + P( BA) PA e−λB τ e−δi τ dFc (δi ) + P ( A0) e−δi τ dFc (δi )
We can also identify the conditional hazard of movements to non-employment at time t1 + τ.
This is


´
´
e 
P ( AB) + P( BA)e−λb τ PA e−δi τ δi [1 − P∗ ] dF (δi ) + P ( A0) e−δi τ δi [1 − P∗ PA ] dF (δi )

´
´
e 
P ( AB) + P( BA)e−λB τ PA e−δi τ dFc (δi ) + P ( A0) e−δi τ dFc (δi )

As above we take the ratio between these and send τ → ∞
´
e ´
P ( AB) PA e−δi τ δi P∗ PB dF (δi ) + P( BA) PA e−λB τ e−δi τ [δi P∗ PB + λeB ] dF (δi )
´
´
lim 
e 
τ →∞ P ( AB ) + P ( BA ) e−λ B τ PA e−δi τ δi [1 − P∗ ] dF ( δi ) + P ( A0) e−δi τ δi [1 − P∗ PA ] dF ( δi )
e

e−λ B τ

e

´

e−δi τ λe dF (δ )

P ( AB) PA P∗ PB + P( BA) PA e−λB τ + P( BA) PA ´ e−δi τ δ dFB(δ ) i
i
i
= lim 
e 
τ →∞ P ( AB ) + P ( BA ) e−λ B τ PA [1 − P∗ ] e−λb τ + P ( A0) [1 − P∗ PA ]
P ( AB) PA P∗ PB
=
P ( AB) PA [1 − P∗ ] + P ( A0) [1 − P∗ PA ]
We have shown that everything in this expression apart from P( A0)/P ( AB) is identified, thus
P( A0)/P ( AB) is identified.
An analogous argument gives P( B0)/P ( AB) . Knowledge of P (0) ,P( AB)/P( BA), P( A0)/P ( AB),
and P( B0)/P ( AB)is sufficient to identify all of the pieces.
43 Note that we have used the fact that the probability of being an AB type conditional on an original A spell is
P ( AB) PA / ( P ( AB) PA + P( BA) PA + P( A0)) with similar expressions for the conditional probability of being a BA
type. The denominator in this expression cancels.

48

Identification of distribution of unconditional distribution of δi
Continue to condition on individuals whose first spell is A. We showed how to identify Fc above,
but we need to show identification of the unconditional distribution of δi using a similar argument.
We can identify the distribution of the hazard rates to non-employment and thus the distribution
of the logs of the hazard rates to non-employment.44 Thus, we can identify the distribution of
P ( A0)
[log(δi ) + log (1 − P∗ PA )]
P ( A0) + PA ( P ( AB) + P ( BA))
PA ( P ( AB) + P ( BA))
+
[log(δi ) + log (1 − P∗ )]
P ( A0) + PA ( P ( AB) + P ( BA))
Since everything except δi in this expression is identified, we can identify the distribution of δi .
So far we have used only information about turnover and no information about wages. We
have shown that with this information we are able to identify transition rates and type probabilities.

Identification of Wage Components
We now incorporate information from wages. As a reminder of the notation, for any worker
who is currently working, there are four different states which are relevant for their wages: their
current employer, their current human capital, the outside option when their current wage was
negotiated, and the level of human capital when the current wage was negotiated. We denote
these as functions of the individual and time as j(i, t), h(i, t), `(i, t)and h0 (i, t), respectively. We

will also use the notation rij`h = log Rij`h ψh . Then for each integer t at which time the agent is
working, we observe
wit ≡rij(i,t)`(i,t)h0 (i,t) + log

ψh(i,t)
ψh0 (i,t)

!

+ ξ it

where ξ it is i.i.d. measurement error. One can see here the distinction between h(i, t) and h0 (i, t).
Identification of Distribution of Measurement Error (ξ it )
First, we identify the distribution of measurement error and then the arrival rate of human capital,
λh . We condition on a group who
• Are non-employed until time 1 − d1
• Start working in job A at time 1 − d1 and leaves to non-employment at 1 + d2
44 Note

that in this case we are using the distribution of the employment spell only, not the job spell. It is only the
hazard rate to non-employment.

49

• Are non-employed until time 2 − d3 when they start again at a type A firm and they stay
through period 2
We assume that the d j ’s are sufficiently small, so spells do not overlap. From this we can identify
the joint distribution of

(wi1 , wi2 )
conditional on the events above for alternative values of d1 , d2 , and d3 .
Taking limits of the above object as d1 ↓ 0, d2 ↓ 0, and d3 ↓ 0, we can identify the conditional
distribution of

(riA00 + ξ i1 , riA00 + ξ i2 )
for our conditioning group. Without the measurement error, both of these wages will correspond
to riA00 because the workers have not had enough time to accumulate human capital or get an
outside offer. Notice, that since ψ0 = 1 then RiA00 = WiA00 , i.e. the rental rate is equal to the wage
paid. Using Kotlarski’s lemma (Kotlarski 1967) we can identify the the marginal distributions
of both the measurement error and riA00 . We need to additionally assume that the characteristic
function of the measurement error, φξ (s), does not vanish.
Identification of λh
Next, we show how to identify λh . To economize on notation we will use E (· | d) to denote the
expectation conditional on the events described above at values of d = (d1 , d2 , d3 ) . We use the
same conditioning group as in the Measurement Error section and continue to send d1 ↓ 0 and
d3 ↓ 0, but allow d2 to vary. We can identify
h


i
E (eıswi2 | d)
lim
= lim e−λh d2 E (eısriA00 | d) + 1 − e−λh d2 E (eısriA01 | d) .
φξ (s)
d1 ,d3 ↓0
d1 ,d3 ↓0
By varying d2 we can identify λh .45 Intuitively, varying d2 varies the time that the worker has to
get a human capital shock.
45 To

see how, take the ratio of the derivatives of this function in terms of d2 at two different values of d2 and it will
be a known function of λh . First note that the derivative with respect to δ2 is
h
i
lim −λh e−λh d2 E (eısriA00 | d) + λh e−λh d2 E (eısriA01 | d) =λh e−λh d2 [ E (eısriA00 | A) − E (eısriA01 | A)]
d1 ,d3 ↓0

=λh e−λh d2 [ E (eısriA00 | A) − E (eısriA01 | A)]
where the notation E(· | A) means the expected value conditional on taking an A job first. Now take the ratio of this at
two different values of d2 say d2a and d2b then
a

∆(d2a , d2b ) ≡

λh e−λh d2 [ E (eısriA00 | A) − E (eısriA01 | A)]
b

λh e−λh d2 [ E (eısriA00 | A) − E (eısriA01 | A)]
b
a
= e λ h ( d2 − d2 ) .

50

Identification of ψ1 and the Distribution of Wages for the AB types
We now consider identification of ψ1 and demonstrate identification of the full wage distribution
for the AB type. Identification of the ladder is complicated, so we will do this stepwise by showing
identification of expanding subsets of the full distribution.
For the AB types these are the seventeen different labor market statuses possible
Table AA1
Labor Market Statuses for AB workers
j(i, t) h(i, t) `(i, t) h0 (i, t)
Wage
A
0
0
0
RiA00
A
0
B
0
RiAB0
A
0
A
0
πiA
A
1
0
0
RiA00 ψ1
A
1
B
0
RiAB0 ψ1
A
1
A
0
πiA ψ1
A
1
0
1
RiA01 ψ1
A
1
B
1
RiAB1 ψ1
A
1
A
1
πiA ψ1
B
0
0
0
RiB00
B
0
B
0
πiB
B
1
0
0
RiB00 ψ1
B
1
B
0
πiB ψ1
B
1
0
1
RiB01 ψ1
B
1
B
1
πiB ψ1
0
0
NA
NA
NA
0
1
NA
NA
NA
From the table one can see that for an AB worker wages depend on the joint distribution of
eight objects (in addition to ψ1 )

( RiA00 , RiAB0 , πiA , RiB00 , πiB , RiA01 , RiAB1 , RiB01 )
While there are multiple ways to show identification, we focus on a particular set of transitions.
We assume that workers start their labor market career in non-employed and receive their first job
at 1 − d1 . The following table shows the transition path.
∆(d2a , d2b ) is directly identified from the data and
λh =



log ∆(d2a , d2b )
d2b − d2a

51

.

Transition
Start at A
Move to non-employment
Start at B
Move to non-employment
Start at B
Move to A
Move to non-employment
Start at A
Move to non-employment
Start at B
Move to non-employment
Start at B
Move to A
Move to B

Time
1 − d1
1 + d2
2 − d3
2 + d4
3 − d5 − d6
3 − d6
3 + d7
4 − d8
4 + d9
6 − d10
6 + d11
8 − d12 − d13
8 − d13
8 + d14

with d j ≥ 0 for j = 1, ..., 14. We also assume that the d j ’s are sufficiently small such that the above
spells do not overlap. The goal here will be to look at the joint distribution of wages conditional
on the d j ’s. Analogous to above, we use the notation E [· | d] to mean the conditional expectation
conditioning on events occurring at times denoted by d1 − d14 .
In going forward we condition on functions of wages from the first eight periods f (wi1 , ..., wi8 ).
For any function f (wi1 , ..., wi8 ) notice that
E ( f (wi1 , ..., wi8 ) | d) = P [ AB | d] E [ f (wi1 , ..., wi8 ) | d, AB]

+ P [ BA | d] E [ f (wi1 , ..., wi8 ) | d, BA] .
The last value d14 will play a crucial roll in distinguishing between these expressions. As it is not
realized until after period 8 it does not affect either E [ f (wi1 , ..., wi8 ) | d, AB] or E [ f (wi1 , ..., wi8 ) | d, BA] .
However, it does influence P [ AB | d] because a BA can move from A to B directly either because
they got an outside offer from a B firm or because the they were laid off and got an immediate offer. For an AB type it can only be due to the latter event. It is straight forward to show
that P [ AB | d] is a known increasing function of d14. 46 Notice then for any distribution of wages,
f (·), and any values of d1 , ..., d13 , by moving d14 we can separately identify E [ f (wi1 , ..., wi8 ) | d, AB]
from E [ f (wi1 , ..., wi8 ) | d, BA]. We refrain from making this argument repeatedly but just condition
on types implicitly assuming that E [ f (wi1 , ..., wi8 ) | d, AB] is identified. In what follows we will
46 It

is



2
e
P ( AB) E e−(λ A +δi )(d5 +d12 )−δi (d13 +d14 ) δi P∗ PA + λeA δi P∗ PB


P [ AB | d] =
.

2
e
P ( AB) E e−(λ A +δi )(d5 +d12 )−δi (d13 +d14 ) δi P∗ PA + λeA δi P∗ PB



e
+ P( BA) E e−δi (d5 +d12 )−(λB +δi )(d13 +d14 ) [δi P∗ PA ]2 δi P∗ PB + λeB

52

start with a subset of the full joint distribution, ( RiA00 , RiAB0 , πiA , RiB00 , πiB , RiA01 , RiAB1 , RiB01 ),
and show identification. We will then increase the subset until we reach the full joint distribution.
Identification of joint distribution of ( RiA00 , RiB00 , RiAB0 ) for the AB types
We start by sending d1 ...d13 ↓ 0 and look at the joint distribution of (wi1 , wi2 , wi3 ) . A complication is that in period 3, individuals who moved directly from B to A could have either have gotten
an outside offer from an A firm or been laid off and found a new job immediate. The probability
that it is a voluntary transition (the former case) is defined to be ρ3 (d) which is a complicated
expression involving transition parameters which we have shown are identified. Since ρ3 (d) is a
known expression of parameters we have shown it is identified.
Then for any values of s1 − s3 we can identify
E exp [i (s1 wi1 + s2 wi2 + s3 wi3 ) | d, AB]
φξ (s1 ) φξ (s2 ) φξ (s3 )
d1 ...,d13 ↓0


lim ρ3 (d) E exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riB00 + s3 riAB0 | AB)]
=
d1 ...,d13 ↓0


+
lim (1 − ρ3 (d)) E exp [i ((s1 + s3 ) riA00 + s2 riB00 | AB)] .
lim

d1 ...,d13 ↓0

We will use the same basic argument for identification of the model throughout this section.
We will be explicit about it here, but not as explicit in what follows (which will involve many more
terms).
1. limd1 ...,d13 ↓0 ρ3 (d) is identified as it is a known function of parameters that we have shown
are identified.
2. By setting s3 = 0 we can identifyE exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riB00 | AB)] from the expression above.
3. Once this is identified, E exp [i ((s1 + s3 ) riA00 + s2 riB00 | AB)] is identified as we vary s3 .
4. Everything in the expression above is identified except E exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riB00 + s3 riAB0 | AB)]
so we can solve for this expression as well.
5. E exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riB00 + s3 riAB0 | AB)] is the characteristic function of (riA00 , riB00 , riAB0 ),
so if this is identified, the joint distribution of (riA00 , riB00 , riAB0 ) is identified.
Identification of ( RiA00 , RiB00 , RiAB0 , R A01 , RiB01 , RiAB1 ) for the AB types
Now we extend the argument to include the joint distribution of

( RiA00 , RiB00 , RiAB0 , R A01 , RiB01 , RiAB1 )
53

for the AB types by adding periods 4, 6, and 8. The key here is that we will now vary d7 which
will allow the possibility that human capital evolves between time 3 and 3 + d7 . We keep d7 < 1.
Note that there are now 8 possible events that can occur in the data; (human capital evolves or
does not evolve between period 3 and 3 + d7 )× (the job-to-job transition to job A at time 3 is
voluntary/involuntary) ×(the job-to-job transition to job A at time 8 is voluntary/involuntary).
Let ρ3 (d) and ρ8 (d) be the conditional probability that the job-to-job transitions are voluntary
at time 3 and 8, respectively. These are identified as is their limit. To simplify the following
expression define
ρ3`1 ≡
ρ8`1 =

lim

ρ3 ( d )

lim

ρ8 ( d )

d1 ...,d6 ,d8 ,...,d13 ↓0
d1 ...,d6 ,d8 ,...,d13 ↓0

and note that these values are identified. For any value of s1 − s6 we can identify
E exp [i (s1 wi1 + s2 wi2 + s3 wi3 + s4 wi4 + s5 wi6 + s6 wi8 ) | d, AB]
lim
φξ (s1 ) φξ (s2 ) φξ (s3 ) φξ (s4 ) φξ (s5 ) φξ (s6 )
d1 ...,d6 ,d8 ,...,d13 ↓0
h
i
=e−λh d7 ρ3`1 ρ8`1 E exp [i ((s1 + s4 ) riA00 + (s2 + s5 ) riB00 + (s3 + s6 ) riAB0 ) | AB]
h 
i
+ e−λh d7 ρ3`1 1 − ρ8`1 E exp [i ((s1 + s4 + s6 ) riA00 + (s2 + s5 ) riB00 + s3 riAB0 ) | AB]
h
 i
+ e−λh d7 1 − ρ3`1 ρ8`1 E exp [i ((s1 + s3 + s4 ) riA00 + (s2 + s5 ) riB00 + s6 riAB0 ) | AB]
h

i
+ e−λh d7 1 − ρ3`1 1 − ρ8`1 E exp [i ((s1 + s3 + s4 + s6 ) riA00 + (s2 + s5 ) riB00 ) | AB]

h
i
+ 1 − e−λh d7 ρ3`1 ρ8`1 exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riB00 + s3 riAB0 + s4 riA01 + s5 riB01 + s6 riAB1 ) | AB]

h 
i
+ 1 − e−λh d7 ρ3`1 1 − ρ8`1 E exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riB00 + s3 riAB0 + (s4 + s6 ) riA01 + s5 riB01 ) | AB]

 h
 i
+ 1 − e − λ h d7
1 − ρ3`1 ρ8`1 E exp [i ((s1 + s3 ) riA00 + s2 riB00 + s4 riA01 + s5 riB01 + s6 riAB1 ) | AB]

 h

i
+ 1 − e − λ h d7
1 − ρ3`1
1 − ρ8`1 E exp [i ((s1 + s3 ) riA00 + s2 riB00 + (s4 + s6 ) riA01 + s5 riB01 ) | AB]
We showed above that the first four expressions are identified. Thus we have four new expressions
to identify

( a) E exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riB00 + s3 riAB0 + s4 riA01 + s5 riB01 + s6 riAB1 ) | AB]
(b) E exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riB00 + s3 riAB0 + (s4 + s6 ) riA01 + s5 riB01 ) | AB]
(c) E exp [i ((s1 + s3 ) riA00 + s2 riB00 + s4 riA01 + s5 riB01 + s6 riAB1 ) | AB]
(d) E exp [i ((s1 + s3 ) riA00 + s2 riB00 + (s4 + s6 ) riA01 + s5 riB01 ) | AB]
We use the same approach as above. If we evaluate at s3 = s6 = 0 these expressions are the
same and thus E [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riB00 + s4 riA01 + s5 riB01 | AB)] is identified. This identifies (d) for
any values of s1 − s6 .
54

Again using the same type of argument, given (d), keeping s3 = 0 but varying the other values
of s j identifies (c) and setting s6 = 0 but varying the others gives (b). Then everything in the large
equation above is identified other than ( a), so it is identified by varying all values of s j .
Identification of ψ1
Next, we consider identification of ψ1 which we can do from E [log (Wi7 ) | d, AB] alone. In
order to do this we condition on 1 < d11 < 2 so that we observe wi7 and we will vary d2 but
send the rest of the d j ↓ 0 (except d14 as usual). For this case there are three possibilities: human
capital has not evolved before period 7, human capital evolves between time 1 and time 1 + d2 ,
and human capital evolves between periods 6 and 7.
E [log (wi7 ) | d, AB] =




e
e
e−λh [1+d2 ] e−λB E [riB00 | AB] + 1 − e−λB E [log (πiB ) | AB]





e
e
+ 1 − e−λh d2 e−λB E [riB01 | AB] + 1 − e−λB ( E [log (πiB ) | AB] + log (ψ1 ))





e
e
+ e−λh d2 − e−λh [1+d2 ] e−λB E [riB00 | AB] + 1 − e−λB E [log (πiB ) | AB] + log (ψ1 ) + E (ξ i7 )


e
e
=e−λh d2 e−λB E [riB00 | AB] + 1 − e−λh d2 e−λB E [riB01 | AB] + E (ξ i7 )


h

 
i
e
+ 1 − e−λ A E [log (πiB ) | AB] + 1 − e−λh d2 1 − e−λB + e−λh d2 − e−λh [1+d2 ] log (ψ1 )
lim

d1 ,d3 ,...,d13 ↓0

Everything is known in this expression except E [log (πiB ) | AB] and log (ψ1 ) , so by varying d2
they can be separately identified.
Identification of ( RiA00 , RiAB0 , RiB00 , RiA01 , RiAB1 , RiB01 , πiA , πiB ) conditional on AB
Now we assume that 1 < d11 < 2 and 1 < d9 < 2 such that we observe wages at time 5
and 7. Using the same argument as above by varying d7 , we can identify the expected value of
f (wi1 , ..., wi8 ) conditional on human capital arriving between time 3 and 3 + d7 (write this conditioning as Hi4 = 1). To simplify the notation we define
viA ≡ log(πiA )
viB ≡ log(πiB ).
We will set the rest of the d j ’s close to zero (other than d7 , d11 , d9 , and d14 ). Since we condition
on human capital arriving between period 3 and 3 + d7 , we know that the wage in the first period
will be approximately RiA00 , the second period RiB00 , the fourth RiA01 ,and the sixth RiB01 . As before
for the third and the eighth period the wage can take two values depending on whether the jobto-job transition was voluntary or not (RiA00 or RiAB0 in 3 and RiA01 or RiAB1 in 8). For period 5 the
55

wage can take 3 values depending on outside offers either RiA01 if no outside offers, RiAB1 if an
offer from a B type only, or πiA if an offer from an A type. Similarly in period 7 the wage can take
2 values depending on whether there was no outside offer (RiB01 ) or an outside offer from a B firm
(πiB ).47 This gives a total of 2 × 3 × 2 × 2 = 24 different possibilities.
Analogous to above we define
ρ3`2 ≡
ρ8`2 ≡

lim

ρ3 ( d )

lim

ρ8 ( d )

d1 ,...,d6 ,d8 ,d10 ,d12 ,d13 ↓0
d1 ,...,d6 ,d8 ,d10 ,d12 ,d13 ↓0

Putting this together can identify the complicated expression with the relevant 24 terms.

47 Since

we are considering AB types they could not have gotten an offer from an A firm or they would have left

56

57

E exp [i (s1 wi1 + s2 wi2 + s3 wi3 + s4 wi4 + s5 wi5 + s6 wi6 + s7 wi7 + s8 wi8 ) | d, AB, Hi4 = 1]
φξ (s1 ) φξ (s2 ) φξ (s3 ) φξ (s4 ) φξ (s5 ) φξ (s6 ) φξ (s7 ) φξ (s8 )
d1 ,...,d6 ,d8 ,d10 ,d12 ,d13 ↓0
h
i
e
e
e
= e−(λ A +λB ) e−λB ρ3`2 ρ8`2 E exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riB00 + s3 riAB0 + (s4 + s5 ) riA01 + (s6 + s7 ) riB01 + s8 riAB1 ) | AB]
i

h
e
e
e
+ e−(λ A +λB ) 1 − e−λB ρ3`2 ρ8`2 E exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riB00 + s3 riAB0 + (s4 + s5 ) riA01 + s6 riB01 + s7 viB + s8 riAB1 ) | AB]
i


h
e
e
+ 1 − e−λ A e−λB ρ3`2 ρ8`2 E exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riB00 + s3 riAB0 + s4 riA01 + s5 viA + (s6 + s7 ) riB01 + s8 riAB1 ) | AB]
i


h
e
e
+ 1 − e−λ A 1 − e−λB ρ3`2 ρ8`2 E exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riB00 + s3 riAB0 + s4 riA01 + s5 viA + s6 riB01 + s7 viB + s8 riAB1 ) | AB]
i


h
e
e
e
+ e−λ A 1 − e−λB e−λB ρ3`2 ρ8`2 E exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riB00 + s3 riAB0 + s4 riA01 + (s6 + s7 ) riB01 + (s5 + s8 ) riAB1 ) | AB]
i


h
e
e
e
+ e−λ A 1 − e−λB 1 − e−λB ρ3`2 ρ8`2 E exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riB00 + s3 riAB0 + s4 riA01 + s6 riB01 + s7 viB + (s5 + s8 ) riAB1 ) | AB]
i
h 
e
e
e
+ e−(λ A +λB ) e−λB ρ3`2 1 − ρ8`2 E exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riB00 + s3 riAB0 + (s4 + s5 + s8 ) riA01 + (s6 + s7 ) riB01 ) | AB]
i

h 
e
e
e
+ e−(λ A +λB ) 1 − e−λB ρ3`2 1 − ρ8`2 E exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riB00 + s3 riAB0 + (s4 + s5 + s8 ) riA01 + s7 viB + s6 riB01 ) | AB]
i


h 
e
e
+ 1 − e−λ A e−λB ρ3`2 1 − ρ8`2 E exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riB00 + s3 riAB0 + (s4 + s8 ) riA01 + s5 viA + (s6 + s7 ) riB01 ) | AB]
i


h 
e
e
+ 1 − e−λ A 1 − e−λB ρ3`2 1 − ρ8`2 E exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riB00 + s3 riAB0 + (s4 + s8 ) riA01 + s5 viA + s6 riB01 + s7 viB ) | AB]
i


h 
e
e
e
+ e−λ A 1 − e−λB e−λB ρ3`2 1 − ρ8`2 E exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riB00 + s3 riAB0 + (s4 + s8 ) riA01 + s5 riAB1 + (s6 + s7 ) riB01 ) | AB]


h 
i
e
e
e
+ e−λ A 1 − e−λB 1 − e−λB ρ3`2 1 − ρ8`2 E exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riB00 + s3 riAB0 + (s4 + s8 ) riA01 + s5 riAB1 + s6 riB01 + s7 viB ) | AB]
h
 i
e
e
e
+ e−(λ A +λB ) e−λB 1 − ρ3`2 ρ8`2 E exp [i ((s1 + s3 ) riA00 + s2 riB00 + (s4 + s5 ) riA01 + (s6 + s7 ) riB01 + s8 riAB1 ) | AB]

 h
 i
e
e
e
+ e−(λ A +λB ) 1 − e−λB
1 − ρ3`2 ρ8`2 E exp [i ((s1 + s3 ) riA00 + s2 riB00 + (s4 + s5 ) riA01 + s6 riB01 + s7 viB + s8 riAB1 ) | AB]


h
 i
e
e
+ 1 − e−λ A e−λB 1 − ρ3`2 ρ8`2 E exp [i ((s1 + s3 ) riA00 + s2 riB00 + s4 riA01 + s5 viA + (s6 + s7 ) riB01 + s8 riAB1 ) | AB]


 h
 i
e
e
+ 1 − e−λ A 1 − e−λ B
1 − ρ3`2 ρ8`2 E exp [i ((s1 + s3 ) riA00 + s2 riB00 + s4 riA01 + s5 viA + s6 riB01 + s7 viB + s8 riAB1 ) | AB]

lim

58



h
 i
e
e
e
+ e−λ A 1 − e−λB e−λB 1 − ρ3`2 ρ8`2 E exp [i ((s1 + s3 ) riA00 + s2 riB00 + s4 riA01 + (s5 + s8 ) riAB1 + (s6 + s7 ) riB01 ) | AB]


 h
 i
e
e
e
+ e−λ A 1 − e−λ B 1 − e−λ B
1 − ρ3`2 ρ8`2 E exp [i ((s1 + s3 ) riA00 + s2 riB00 + s4 riA01 + (s5 + s8 ) riAB1 + s6 riB01 + s7 viB ) | AB]


h

i
e
e
+ 1 − e−λ A e−λB 1 − ρ3`2 1 − ρ8`2 E exp [i ((s1 + s3 ) riA00 + s2 riB00 + (s4 + s5 + s8 ) riA01 + (s6 + s7 ) riB01 ) | AB]





+ 1 − e−λB e−(λ A +λB ) 1 − ρ3`2 1 − ρ8`2 E exp [i ((s1 + s3 ) riA00 + s2 riB00 + (s4 + s5 + s8 ) riA01 + s6 riB01 + s7 viB ) | AB]
i


 h
1 − ρ8`2 E exp [i ((s1 + s3 ) riA00 + s2 riB00 + (s4 + s8 ) riA01 + s5 viA + (s6 + s7 ) riB01 ) | AB]
+ e−λ B 1 − e−λ A
1 − ρ3`2
i


 h

e
e
1 − ρ8`2 E exp [i ((s1 + s3 ) riA00 + s2 riB00 + (s4 + s8 ) riA01 + s5 viA + s6 riB01 + s7 viB ) | AB]
1 − ρ3`2
+ 1 − e−λ A 1 − e−λ B
i



h
e
e
e
+ e−λ A 1 − e−λB e−λB 1 − ρ3`2 1 − ρ8`2 E exp [i ((s1 + s3 ) riA00 + s2 riB00 + (s4 + s8 ) riA01 + s5 riAB1 + (s6 + s7 ) riB01 ) | AB]
i



 h
e
e
e
1 − ρ8`2 E exp [i ((s1 + s3 ) riA00 + s2 riB00 + (s4 + s8 ) riA01 + s5 riAB1 + s6 riB01 + s7 viB ) | AB]
+ e−λ A 1 − e−λ B 1 − e−λ B
1 − ρ3`2

We now have sixteen new terms that have not been previously identified.

( a) E exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riB00 + s3 riAB0 + (s4 + s5 ) riA01 + s6 riB01 + s7 viB + s8 riAB1 ) | AB]
(b) E exp [i (s1 RiA00 + s2 riB00 + s3 riAB0 + s4 riA01 + s5 viA + (s6 + s7 ) riB01 + s8 riAB1 ) | AB]
(c) E exp [i (s1 RiA00 + s2 riB00 + s3 riAB0 + s4 riA01 + s5 viA + s6 riB01 + s7 viB + s8 riAB1 ) | AB]
(d) E exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riB00 + s3 riAB0 + s4 riA01 + s6 riB01 + s7 viB + (s5 + s8 ) riAB1 ) | AB]
(e) E exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riB00 + s3 riAB0 + (s4 + s5 + s8 ) riA01 + s7 viB + s6 riB01 ) | AB]
( f ) E exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riB00 + s3 riAB0 + (s4 + s8 ) riA01 + s5 viA + (s6 + s7 ) riB01 ) | AB]
( g) E exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riB00 + s3 riAB0 + (s4 + s8 ) riA01 + s5 viA + s6 riB01 + s7 viB ) | AB]
(h) E exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riB00 + s3 riAB0 + (s4 + s8 ) riA01 + s5 riAB1 + s6 riB01 + s7 viB ) | AB]
(i ) E exp [i ((s1 + s3 ) riA00 + s2 riB00 + (s4 + s5 ) riA01 + s6 riB01 + s7 viB + s8 riAB1 ) | AB]
( j) E exp [i ((s1 + s3 ) riA00 + s2 riB00 + s4 riA01 + s5 viA + (s6 + s7 ) riB01 + s8 riAB1 ) | AB]
(k) E exp [i ((s1 + s3 ) riA00 + s2 riB00 + s4 riA01 + s5 viA + s6 riB01 + s7 viB + s8 riAB1 ) | AB]
(l ) E exp [i ((s1 + s3 ) riA00 + s2 riB00 + s4 riA01 + (s5 + s8 ) riAB1 + s6 riB01 + s7 viB ) | AB]
(m) E exp [i ((s1 + s3 ) riA00 + s2 riB00 + (s4 + s5 + s8 ) riA01 + s6 riB01 + s7 viB ) | AB]
(n) E exp [i ((s1 + s3 ) riA00 + s2 riB00 + (s4 + s8 ) riA01 + s5 viA + (s6 + s7 ) riB01 ) | AB]
(o ) E exp [i ((s1 + s3 ) riA00 + s2 riB00 + (s4 + s8 ) riA01 + s5 viA + s6 riB01 + s7 viB ) | AB]
( p) E exp [i ((s1 + s3 ) riA00 + s2 riB00 + (s4 + s8 ) riA01 + s5 riAB1 + s6 riB01 + s7 viB ) | AB]
We use the same basic approach as above: we set various values of s j to zero we can identify the
components. To see how to identify all of these terms, setting s3 = s8 = s5 = 0 all of the terms
simplify to either
E exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riB00 + s4 riA01 + s6 riB01 + s7 viB ) | AB]
or
E exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riB00 + s4 riA01 + (s6 + s7 ) riB01 ) | AB]
However, we have already shown identification of latter of these terms which means the former is
identified. Identification of this gives identification of term (m). Using a similar argument, setting
s3 = s8 = s7 = 0 we can identify term (n). Given these setting s3 = s5 = 0 we can show that ( p),(i )
and (l ) are identified. Setting s3 = s8 = 0 we can identify (o ), s3 = s7 = 0 gives ( j), s5 = s8 = 0
gives (e), and s7 = s8 = 0 gives ( f ). Now with these setting s3 = 0 gives (k ), s8 = 0 gives ( g),
s5 = 0 gives ( a), (d), and (h), and s7 = 0 gives (b). This leaves only term (c) which is identified
59

by varying all 8 terms given knowledge of all the other terms. This is the characteristic function
for the joint distribution. Thus, we have shown that the joint distribution of wages for type AB
workers can be non-parametrically identified.
Identification of the Distribution of Wages for the Other Types
Using a symmetric argument reversing A and B we can show that the distribution of

( RiA00 , πiA , RiBA0 , RiB00 , πiB , RiA01 , RiBA1 , RiB01 )
for the BA types is also identified.
Next consider the A0 types. We will use an argument similar to above, though it will be much
simpler as there are fewer labor market statuses to worry about.
Table AA2
Labor Market Statuses for A0 workers
j(i, t) h(i, t) `(i, t) h0 (i, t)
Wage
A
0
0
0
RiA00
A
0
A
0
πiA
A
1
0
0
RiA00 ψ1
A
1
A
0
πiA ψ1
A
1
0
1
RiA01
A
1
A
1
πiA ψ1
From Table AA2 one can see that for an A0 worker wages depend on the joint distribution of
just three objects (in addition to ψ1 )

( RiA00 , πiA , RiA01 ).
We consider the following the transition path. People begin non-employed at time zero and
we will take d4 > 1
Transition
Start at A
Move to non-employment
Start at A
Move to non-employment

Time
1 − d1
1 + d2
2 − d3
2 + d4

We can identify
E exp [i (s1 wi1 + s2 wi2 + s3 wi3 ) | d] = P( AB | d) E exp [i (s1 wi1 + s2 wi2 + s3 wi3 ) | AB, d]

+ P( BA | d) E exp [i (s1 wi1 + s2 wi2 + s3 wi3 ) | BA, d]
+ P( A0 | d) E exp [i (s1 wi1 + s2 wi2 + s3 wi3 ) | A0, d]
60

Since everything else in this expression is identified, we can identify E exp [i (s1 wi1 + s2 wi2 + s3 wi3 ) | A0, d] .
Furthermore, analogous to the argument above using d7 , now by varying d2 , we can identify
the expected value of f (wi1 , ..., wi3 ) conditional on human capital arriving between time 1 and
1 + d2 (write this conditioning as Hi2 = 1). Then we can identify
E exp [i (s1 wi1 + s2 wi2 + s3 wi3 ) | A0, d, Hi2 = 1] .
Thus taking d1 ↓ 0 and d3 ↓ 0 we can identify
lim

d1 ,d3 ↓0

E exp [i (s1 wi1 + s2 wi2 + s3 wi3 ) | A0, d, Hi2 = 1]
φξ (s1 ) φξ (s2 ) φξ (s3 )

=e−λ A E exp [i (s1 riA00 + [s2 + s3 ] riA01 ) | A0]


+ 1 − e−λ A E exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riA01 + s3 viA ) | A0] .
Set s3 = 0 and we can identify E exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riA01 ) | A0] . Knowledge of this gives knowledge of E exp [i (s1 riA00 + [s2 + s3 ] riA01 ) | A0] and then allowing s3 to vary means we can identify
E exp [i (s1 riA00 + s2 riA01 + s3 viA ) | A0].
An analogous argument gives identification of E exp [i (s1 riB00 + s2 riB01 + s3 viB ) | B0].
Thus, we have shown that wages, turnover parameters, and type proportions are identified.

Non-Identification of β
The next question is whether we can identify the bargaining parameter β. The answer turns out
to be no. To see why, suppose that we could observe all of the wages for a particular AB worker
(which is similar to observing the distribution of wages after filtering out the measurement error).
We could observe the 8 wages (WiA00 , πiA , WiAB0 , WiB00 , πiB , WiA01 , WiAB1 , WiB01 ) and know their
d j ’s. Assume even further that the utility function takes the form
Uij (W ) = log(w) + vij .
Even in this restrictive case, β is not identified. Table AA1 showed that for the AB types, there are
seventeen different possible labor market statuses. We can write the Bellman equation for each of
the seventeen where we impose the restrictions from bargaining (e.g. ViA0 ( RiA00 ) = βViA0 (πiA ) +

(1 − β) Vi00 ). We present them in the exact same order as in the table.
The first nine are associated with employment at an A firm

61

(ρ + δ + λeB + λeA + λh ) [ βViA0 (πiA ) + (1 − β) Vi00 ]

(A-1)

=riA00 + viA + λeA ViA0 (πiA )
∗
+ λeB [ βViA0 (πiA ) + (1 − β) ViB0 (πiB )] + δi Vi00
+ λh ViA1 ( RiA00 )

(ρ + δ + λeA + λh ) [ βViA0 (πiA ) + (1 − β) ViB0 (πiB ))]

(A-2)

∗
=riAB0 + viA + λeA ViA0 (πiA ) + δi Vi00
+ λh ViA1 ( RiAB0 )
∗
+ λh ViA1 (πiA )
(ρ + δ + λh ) ViA0 (πiA ) = log (πiA ) + viA + δi Vi00

(ρ + δ + λeB + λeA )ViA1 ( RiA00 )

(A-3)
(A-4)

=riA00 + log(ψ1 ) + viA + λeA ViA1 (πiA )
∗
+ λeB [ βViA1 (πiA ) + (1 − β) ViB1 (πiB )] + δi Vi01

(ρ + δ + λeB + λeA )ViA1 ( RiAB0 )

(A-5)

=riAB0 + log(ψ1 ) + viA + λeA ViA1 (πiA )
+ λeB max {ViA1 ( RiAB0 ψ1 ) , ViA1 ( RiAB1 )} + δi Vi01
∗
(ρ + δ) ViA1 (πiA ) = log (πiA ) + log(ψ1 ) + viA + δi Vi01

(ρ + δ + λeB + λeA ) [ βViA1 (πiA ) + (1 − β) Vi01 ]

(A-6)
(A-7)

=riA01 + viA + λeA ViA1 (πiA )
∗
+ λeB [ βViA1 (πiA ) + (1 − β) ViB1 (πiB )] + δi Vi01

(ρ + δ + λeA ) [ βViA1 (πiA ) + (1 − β) ViB1 (πiB )]

(A-8)

∗
=riAB1 + viA + λeA ViA1 (πiA ) + δi Vi01
∗
(ρ + δ) ViA1 (πiA ) = log (πiA ) + log(ψ1 ) + viA + δi Vi01

The next six are associated with employment at a B type firm.

62

(A-9)

(ρ + δ + λeB + λeA + λh ) [ βViB0 (πiA ) + (1 − β) Vi00 ]

(A-10)

=riB00 + viB + λeA [ βViA0 (πiA ) + (1 − β) ViB0 (πiB )]
∗
+ λeB ViB0 (πiB ) + δi Vi00
+ λh ViB1 ( RiB00 )

(ρ + δ + λ A + λh ) ViB0 (πiB ) = log (πiB ) + viB + λeA [ βViA0 (πiA ) + (1 − β) ViB0 (πiB )]

(A-11)

∗
+ δi Vi00
+ λh ViB1 (πiB )

(ρ + δ + λeB + λeA )ViB1 ( RiB00 )

(A-12)

=riB00 + log(ψ1 ) + viB + λeA [ βViA1 (πiA ) + (1 − β) ViB1 (πiB )]
∗
+ λeB ViB1 (πiB ) + δi Vi01

(ρ + δ + λeA ) ViB1 (πiB ) = log (πiB ) + log(ψ1 ) + viB

(A-13)

∗
+ λeA [ βViA1 (πiA ) + (1 − β) ViB1 (πiB ))] + δi Vi01

(ρ + δ + λeB + λeA ) [ βViB1 (πiA ) + (1 − β) Vi01 ]

(A-14)

=riB01 + viB + λeA [ βViA1 (πiA ) + (1 − β) ViB1 (πiB )]
∗
+ λeB ViB1 (πiB ) + δi Vi01

(ρ + δ + λeA ) ViB1 (πiB ) = log (πiB ) + log(ψ1 ) + viB

(A-15)

∗
+ λeA [ βViA1 (πiA ) + (1 − β) ViB1 (πiB )] + δi Vi01

Finally, workers can be non-employed with two different levels of human capital. This leads
∗
to four more equations because of the distinction between Vi00 and Vi00

(ρ + λnA + λnB ) Vi00 =Ui00 + λnA [ βViA0 (πiA ) + (1 − β) Vi00 ]

∗
Vi00

+ λnB [ βViB0 (πiB ) + (1 − β) Vi00 ]
λn [ βViA0 (πiA ) + (1 − β) Vi00 ] + λnB [ βViB0 (πiA ) + (1 − β) Vi00 ]
= P∗ A
+ (1 − P∗ ) Vi00
λnA + λnA
(A-17)

(ρ + λnA + λnB ) Vi01 =Ui01 + λnA [ βViA1 (πiA ) + (1 − β) Vi01 ]

∗
Vi01

(A-16)

(A-18)

+ λnB [ βViB1 (πiB ) + (1 − β) Vi01 ]
λn [ βViA1 (πiA ) + (1 − β) Vi01 ] + λnB [ βViB1 (πiA ) + (1 − β) Vi01 ]
= P∗ A
+ (1 − P∗ ) Vi01
λnA + λnA
(A-19)

Note that equations (A-6) and (A-9) are identical as are (A-13) and (A-15). Thus we have 17

63

equations in 16 unknowns:
∗
∗
(ViA0 (πiA ), Vi00 , Vi00
, viA , ViB0 (πiB ) , ViA1 ( RiA00 ) , ViA1 ( RiAB0 ) , Vi01 , Vi01
, ViA1 (πiA ) , viB ,

ViB1 ( RiB00 ) , Ui00 , Ui01 , β).
We can also normalize Ui00 = 0 as a location normalization leaving 17 equations in 15 unknowns. However working through the algebra, one can show that these equations are linearly
dependent. Specifically the following three linear relationships exists.
riAB1 + (riB01 − riA01 ) = log (πiB ) + log (ψ1 )
riAB0 + (riB00 − riA00 ) = log (πiB )
riAB1 − riAB0 = log (ψ1 )
This leaves 12 linear equations and 13 unknowns, so β is not separately identified from viA
and viB . The basic reason is that revealed preferences can only identify the ordering of jobs, but
not the cardinal utility associated with each of them.

Appendix B: Data
Data Selection We define labor market entry to be the month of graduation from the highest
completed education recorded.48 We disregard spells that are before this date. We disregard workers who are observed in education after the date of highest completed education. For example,
if the highest recorded education for a worker is high school and he graduated in 2001 and we
later observe him in education, say in 2003 then we delete him. Workers with changing codes for
highest completed education and where age minus education length is less than 5 years are also
disregarded. We censor workers after age 55.
Temporary non-employment (unemployment and non-participation) spells shorter than 13
weeks where the previous and next establishment id are the same as one employment spell, i.e. unemployment and non-participation spells are treated as one type of spells. Short unemployment
or non-participation spells between two employment spells shorter than 3 weeks are allocated to
the last of the two employment spells.
We censor workers when they enter a self-employment state. We delete workers that have
gaps in their spell histories. This could arise if the worker for some reason have missing IDA data
48 We have information on highest completed education back to 1971, so highest completed education is missing for
workers who took it before 1974. Also, immigrants and workers who never finished primary school have missing
values. We keep these workers since we suspect that the problems with immigrants and workers who never finished
primary school are quit small, and workers who took there education before 1971 have entered the labor market.

64

in a given year. Wages are detrended in logs (but not trimmed). We label the states unemployment, retirement and non-participation as non-employment. For some of the employed workers
in the final sample we do not observe the establishment ID. However, this is a relatively small
fraction, see Table 2. In the calculations of the moments we will take this into account, and only
use observations for which we do observe the establishment. E.g. if a transition happens from
establishment 1 to an unknown establishment we will not count this as a transition. Likewise, if a
transition from an unknown establishment to firm 1 will not be counted as a transition.
In the identification strategy we heavily rely on the fact that observed job-to-job transitions are
likely to be voluntary. One might suspect that workers in closing establishments might move to a
new establishment without actually preferring it compared to the old one. In order to avoid drawing inference from such observations we do not count job-to-job transitions from an establishment
in the year that it closes. E.g. if a workers is employed in establishment 1 in week 1 to 40 in 1995
(and we do not observe the establishment in the data after 1995) and in week 41 he is employment
in establishment 2 then we do not count that as job-to-job separation for establishment 1 nor a jobto-job hire in establishment 2, although we will count them as a separation and a hire. However,
if the worker had transitioned into non-employment we would have counted a job destruction.
Likewise, we also ignore job-to-job transitions from mass layoffs. A mass lay-off is defined as the
establishment having more than 15 workers in year t and less than 30 percent left in year t + 1. We
define an establishment to be closing if we do not observe it in the data any longer. We calculate
calculate establishment closings and mass lay-offs from the raw data without imposing any of our
sample selection criteria.
Estimating Labor Market Entry: We observe graduation times from 1971 and forward. Our
sample starts in 1985 which means that we observe some individuals with labor market entry
before 1971 (around 1/3 of all workers). We therefore need to approximate the entry year. We
use population data (not just those in our sample) graduating in 1971 and 1972 to derive the
age distribution at graduation time by gender-education group. This gives us around 70 groups.
However a few workers in the sample cannot be matched, so we use a more rough groups for
those. We now use the gender-education specific graduation age distribution conditional on the
fact that we know the individual did not graduate after 1970. If the minimum age in the estimated
distribution implies entry after 1970 we set entry to 1970. This is the case for 1 percent of the
workers we approximate.

65

Estimating Experience Experience is observed yearly from 1964 (although with different degrees of precision). We define experience to be experience accumulated from labor market entry.
Given that we have approximated entry time we need to approximate experience up to 1970. To
do this, we again use those entering the labor market in 1971 and 1972. There are several ways to
do this. However, one of the simplest is to calculate the yearly mean experience increase. Assuming that individuals either work full time or not at all we approximate experience up to 1970 using
a binomial distribution with probability estimated by gender-education-time since entry groups.
We thus divide workers into 4 groups based on time since entry. These are 1-5, 6-10, 11-15, and
above 15 years since entry. An example of a group could be female Kindergarten teachers with 1
to 5 years in the labor market.

66

67

385,833

3,967,419
3,461,332
3,346,165
3,322,994

Labor market entry

Delete under education

Changing hffsp codes

To early labor market entry

365,959

3,041,336
2,969,454

Censoring retirement

Delete workers with gabs

2,375,046
2,143,752
2,137,499
2,127,965

Labor market entry

Delete under education

Changing hffsp codes

To early labor market entry

100,568
99,802

1,872,217
1,763,850
1,722,319

Censoring self-employment

Censoring retirement

Delete workers with gabs

100,595

2,120,247

106,635

106,353

106,470

106,593

non-employment

Clean for temporary

116,688

2,700,370

110,346

124,084

2,894,716

Delete obs. below age 19

124,084

124,698

129,506

educational variables (hffsp)

Delete workers with gaps in

educational variables (hffsp)

2,894,716

2,955,775

Censoring at age 56

Delete workers with all missing

3,717,692

Merged data

Average over yearly cross-sections

368,747

3,118,361

368,839

3,313,246

Censoring self-employment

384,988

385,289

400,670

non-employment

Clean for temporary

386,894

3,967,419

Delete obs. below age 19
420,223

4,147,463

445,298

445,298

446,957

455,054

educational variables (hffsp)

Delete workers with gaps in

educational variables (hffsp)

4,147,463

4,348,157

Censoring at age 56

Delete workers with all missing

5,116,625

Number of Firms

1,722,319

1,763,850

1,872,217

2,120,247

2,127,965

2,137,499

2,143,752

2,375,046

2,700,370

2,894,716

2,894,716

2,955,775

3,717,692

25,630,532

26,462,593

26,920,923

29,495,476

36,540,726

36,778,315

37,007,709

43,406,322

51,494,700

54,714,582

54,714,582

56,090,810

60,914,366

Number of Spells

Table 1: Overview of data creation
Number of workers

Merged data

In total

135,375

136,269

136,301

142,777

142,423

142,548

142,682

146,898

153,681

161,285

161,285

161,952

167,882

467,983

472,095

472,219

494,275

494,727

495,453

496,792

517,710

550,388

594,070

594,070

596,777

610,130

Number of Establishments

0.83

0.83

0.78

0.72

0.72

0.72

0.72

0.71

0.70

0.69

0.69

0.68

0.60

Fraction Employed

Table 2: Summery Statistics: Pooled Cross-sections
Mean Std. Dev.
Number of years in sample
11.06
6.27
Number of Establishments per worker

2.70

Female

0.49

Preparatory educations
Highschool
Vocational education
Short further education
Medium-length further education/Bachelor-degree
Master-degree and PhD

0.30
0.04
0.42
0.04
0.14
0.05

1.85

Average years of education

11.69

3.18

Age

38.31

9.63

Employed
Public Employed
Missing Establishment ID

0.83
0.32
0.01

Real Experience in Years

13.46

9.47

4.50

0.35

Log Hourly Wages

68

Table 3: Auxiliary Model and Estimates: Full Sample
Moment
Data
Model
Avg. Length Emp. Spell
377
382
(0.202)
Avg. Length Nonnemp. Spell
91.4
91.5
(0.086)
Avg. Length Job
108
107
(0.101)
E(Sei` j e
h−i` j ) × 100
1.53
1.51
(0.003)
Between Persons×100
8.03
8.02
(0.012)
Between Jobs×100
2.87
2.89
(0.006)
Within Job×100
1.49
1.49
(0.003)
Sample mean wit
4.50
4.50
(0.000)
eit w
e−it ) × 100
E( w
0.284
0.284
(0.002)
eit e
E(w
h−it ) × 100
0.108
0.108
(0.001)
Fraction Wage Drops
0.400
0.408
(0.000)
Coeff Exper×100
2.48
2.44
(0.008)
Coeff Exper2 × 1000
-0.291
-0.295
(0.002)
Coef Tenure2 × 1000
-0.460
-0.462
(0.005)
Var(Nonemployment)
16000
15992
(47.472)
Cov(wi , Non-employment)
-3.42
-3.43
(0.013)
Var(Employment Dur)
102000 99688
(71.434)
Invol Job to Job
0.205
0.205
(0.011)

69

Table 4: Parameter Estimates: Full Sample
Parameter
d0
λn
λe
Eθ
σθ
σξ
f1
f2
f3
σvw
α
b1
b2
β
P∗
σν0
γθ
σd

Estimate
-2.89
(0.035)
0.98
(0.007)
2.07
(0.061)
4.34
(0.013)
0.231
(0.002)
0.134
(0.001)
2.207
(0.139)
0.122
(0.001)
-0.000
(0.009)
0.197
(0.003)
2.82
(0.123)
0.019
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.000)
0.812
(0.008)
0.435
(0.019)
0.434
(0.003)
-0.387
(0.025)
1.99
(0.026)

70

Table 5: Model Decompositions: Variance of log wages, Full Sample
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
Total
0.106 Total
0.106 Total
0.106 Total
No HC
0.101 No HC
0.101 No HC
0.101 No HC
No Monop 0.093 No Monop 0.093 No Monop 0.093 No Monop
No Roy
0.006 No Search 0.090 No Comp
0.089 No Comp
0.005 No Search 0.068 No Roy
No Search 0.005 No Roy

71

0.106
0.101
0.093
0.087
0.002

Table 6: Model Decompositions: Variance of flow utility, Full Sample
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
Total
0.315 Total
0.315 Total
0.315 Total
No HC
0.303 No HC
0.303 No HC
0.303 No HC
No Monop 0.284 No Monop 0.284 No Monop 0.284 No Monop
No Roy
0.218 No Search 0.098 No Comp
0.089 No Comp
0.060 No Search 0.068 No Roy
No Search 0.060 No Roy

72

0.315
0.303
0.284
0.087
0.002

Table 7: Auxliary Model and Estimates: Demographic Groups
Col
HS
Col
Men
Men
Women
Moment
Data
Model
Data
Model
Data
Model
Avg. Length Emp. Spell
430
435
379
382
392
391
(0.173)
(0.200)
(0.165)
Avg. Length Nonnemp. Spell
60.1
60.3
80
80
63
63
(0.073)
(0.086)
(0.072)
Avg. Length Job
119
120
104
103
109
109
(0.087)
(0.091)
(0.081)
1.59
1.61
1.45
1.44
1.08
1.08
E(Sei` j e
h−i` j ) × 100
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.003)
Between Persons×100
9.88
9.92
6.20
6.23
5.05
5.04
(0.013)
(0.010)
(0.008)
3.21
3.21
3.13
3.11
2.55
2.55
Between Jobs×100
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.006)
Within Job×100
1.83
1.83
1.39
1.39
1.44
1.44
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.014)
Sample mean wit
4.78
4.78
4.56
4.56
4.48
4.48
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
eit w
e−it ) × 100
E( w
4.60
4.61
0.407
0.407
0.203
0.203
(0.004)
(0.002)
(0.002)
eit e
1.74
1.74
0.113
0.113
0.083
0.083
E(w
h−it ) × 100
(0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.335
0.342
0.408
0.410
0.409
0.404
Fraction Wage Drops
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
Coeff Exper×100
4.26
4.38
2.34
2.40
2.62
2.57
(0.008)
(0.009)
(0.007)
Coeff Exper2 × 1000
-0.640 -0.648 -0.259
-0.259 -0.352 -0.356
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
2
Coef Tenure × 1000
-0.793 -0.759 -0.470
-0.468 -0.493 -0.498
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.005)
Var(Nonemployment)
7830
7775
12057
12000
8571
8550
(33.52)
(43.23)
(35.92)
Cov(wi , Non-employment)
-1.96
-1.96
-3.02
-3.02
-1.38
-1.38
(0.005)
(0.008)
(0.003)
Var(Employment Dur)
102000 98663 106032 107000 96283 98100
(54.24)
(71.39)
(65.26)
0.182
0.182
0.243
0.243
0.086
0.086
Invol Job to Job
(0.010)
(0.011)
(0.007)

73

HS
Women
Data
Model
346
348
(0.175)
119
119
(0.104)
109
109
(0.098)
1.68
1.67
(0.003)
4.49
4.50
(0.008)
2.57
2.55
(0.006)
1.50
1.50
(0.003)
4.33
4.33
(0.000)
1.81
1.81
(0.002)
0.726
0.726
(0.001)
0.414
0.494
(0.000)
1.83
1.79
(0.010)
-0.207 -0.211
(0.002)
-0.286 -0.287
(0.006)
22800 22231
(54.97)
-1.43
-1.43
(0.007)
94700 90903
(69.65)
0.218
0.218
(0.012)

Table 8: Parameter Estimates By Group

Parameter
d0
λn
λe
Eθ
σθ
σξ
f1
f2
f3
σvw
α
b1
b2 × 10
β
P∗
σν0
γθ
σd

Col
Men
-4.38
(0.131)
1.92
(0.011)
2.59
(0.039)
4.64
(0.009)
0.264
(0.005)
0.095
(0.011)
5.067
(0.199)
0.202
(0.006)
-0.043
(0.088)
0.177
(0.014)
15.85
(1.00)
0.015
(0.033)
-0.021
(0.053)
0.310
(0.047)
0.691
(0.057)
0.188
(0.015)
0.583
(0.021)
2.42
(0.053)

HS
Men
-2.76
(0.026)
1.14
(0.016)
2.35
(0.015)
4.41
(0.009)
0.181
(0.003)
0.128
(0.001)
2.85
(0.198)
0.145
(0.002)
-0.015
(0.010)
0.202
(0.002)
3.07
(0.067)
0.012
(0.001)
-0.005
(0.001)
0.791
(0.009)
0.451
(0.020)
0.358
(0.053)
-1.221
(0.182)
2.25
(0.014)

74

Col
Women
-3.57
(0.018)
1.78
(0.036)
2.34
(0.037)
4.35
(0.006)
0.150
(0.001)
0.124
(0.000)
0.91
(0.007)
0.121
(0.003)
0.095
(0.006)
0.201
(0.002)
2.64
(0.123)
0.041
(0.007)
-0.006
(0.002)
0.665
(0.009)
0.258
(0.018)
0.331
(0.024)
-0.357
(0.050)
2.05
(0.013)

HS
Women
-2.41
(0.022)
0.737
(0.006)
1.57
(0.093)
4.169
(0.012)
0.134
(0.001)
0.143
(0.001)
2.92
(0.394)
0.103
(0.001)
0.044
(0.008)
0.198
(0.003)
4.61
(0.312)
-0.001
(0.003)
0.008
(0.002)
0.845
(0.018)
0.409
(0.018)
0.366
(0.013)
-0.595
(0.041)
1.65
(0.024)

Table 9: Model Decompositions: Variance of log wages by Demographic Groups
Col
HS
Col
HS
Men Men Women Women
Total
0.141 0.091
0.075
0.065
No HC
0.140 0.087
0.073
0.061
No Monop
0.099 0.076
0.063
0.057
No Roy
0.011 0.008
0.006
0.004
No Search
0.086 0.071
0.060
0.047
No Comp
0.095 0.071
0.056
0.053
No Roy/Search
0.006 0.007
0.005
0.003
No Roy/Comp
0.004 0.003
0.002
0.002
No Search/Comp 0.080 0.047
0.036
0.029

75

Figure 1: K APLAN -M EIER S URVIVAL E STIMATES

76

Figure 2: L IFE - TIME WAGE P ROFILES

Figure 3: L IFE - TIME U TILITY P ROFILES

77

