                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE LABOR MARKET EFFECTS OF CREDIT MARKET INFORMATION

                                       Marieke Bos
                                        Emily Breza
                                      Andres Liberman

                                     Working Paper 22436
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22436


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2016




We thank Manuel Adelino, Tony Cookson, Nathan Hendren, Andrew Hertzberg, Wei Jiang, Emi
Nakamura, Matthew Notowidigdo, Daniel Paravisini, Thomas Philippon, Enrique Seira, Nicolas
Serrano-Velarde, Jose Tessada, Daniel Wolfenzon, Jonathan Zinman, and numerous seminar and
conference participants for helpful comments. Jesper Bojeryd provided excellent research
assistance. Funding from VINNOVA is gratefully acknowledged. All errors are our own. The
views expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Marieke Bos, Emily Breza, and Andres Liberman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Labor Market Effects of Credit Market Information
Marieke Bos, Emily Breza, and Andres Liberman
NBER Working Paper No. 22436
July 2016
JEL No. D12,D14,G21,G23,J20

                                          ABSTRACT

Credit information affects the allocation of consumer credit, but its effects on other markets that
are relevant for academic and policy analysis are unknown. This paper measures the effect of
negative credit information on the employment and earnings of Swedish individuals at the
margins of the formal credit and labor markets. We exploit a policy change that generates quasi-
exogenous variation in the retention time of past delinquencies on credit reports and estimate that
one additional year of negative credit information causes a reduction in wage earnings of $1,000.
In comparison, the decrease in credit is only one-fourth as large. Negative credit information also
causes an increase in self-employment and a decrease in mobility. We exploit differences in the
information available to employers and banks to show suggestive evidence that this cost of
default is borne inefficiently by the relatively more creditworthy individuals among previous
defaulters.

Marieke Bos                                      Andres Liberman
Stockholm University                             New York University
SE-106 91 Stockholm                              Stern School of Business
Sweden                                           KMC 9-53
marieke.bos@sofi.su.se                           44 West Fourth Street
                                                 New York, NY
Emily Breza                                      10012
Graduate School of Business                      aliberma@stern.nyu.edu
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 821
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
ebreza@gsb.columbia.edu
1       Introduction
        “Credit reports touch every part of our lives. They affect whether we can
        obtain a credit card, take out a college loan, rent an apartment, or buy
        a car – and sometimes even whether we can get jobs ...” – New York
        Attorney General, 2015.

Credit registries are an important tool used by lenders worldwide to obtain better
information about their borrowers and to strengthen repayment incentives. As a
result, credit registries are thought to improve the allocation and extent of consumer
credit (Djankov et al. (2007)). Multilateral institutions such as the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank urge countries to adopt registries, citing them
as a fundamental step toward financial development. Indeed, several studies have
documented that credit information affects borrowers’ access to credit.1
    However, much less is known about the effects of credit information on non-credit
outcomes such as employment that are critical for welfare and policy analysis. Credit
information may impose an employment cost of default indirectly through its effects
on credit supply, but more direct channels are also possible. While credit registries
were largely established to improve the efficiency of credit markets, over time, non-
credit actors have increasingly sought out their information. In particular, insurance
companies, utilities, landlords, and mobile phone providers typically check an individ-
ual’s credit history before entering into long-term contracts. There is ample anecdotal
(and some survey) evidence that many employers around the world also query credit
registries when making hiring decisions.2
    In this paper, we provide one of the first measurements of the causal effect of
negative credit information on employment and earnings, with a focus on individuals
at the margins of the formal credit and labor markets. To do this, we exploit a natural
experiment in Sweden that generated plausibly exogenous variation in the amount of
    1
     For example, see Musto (2004), Brown and Zehnder (2007), De Janvry et al. (2010), Bos and
Nakamura (2014), González-Uribe and Osorio (2014), Liberman (2016).
   2
     In the U.S. 47% of the firms check the credit information of their prospective employees accord-
ing to: http://www.shrm.org/research/surveyfindings/articles/pages/creditbackgroundchecks.aspx.
According to estimates obtained from the leading credit registry, in Sweden, roughly 15% percent
of all inquiries to the credit registry are made by nonfinancial institutions conducting background
checks of potential employees. These non-financial institutions employ approximately 37% percent
of the Swedish labor force. The Swedish Government Employment Agency lists jobs that cur-
rently require a clean credit record: financial, transportation, real estate, retail, and security (See
http://www.arbetsformedlingen.se).


                                                  2
time that records of past delinquencies were retained on consumer credit reports.
We pair this policy experiment with detailed tax, employment, and demographic
records merged with data from the Swedish credit registry for a sample of individuals
drawn from the universe of pawn-loan borrowers in Sweden. These individuals form a
sample well suited to measure the employment effects of credit information: they are
exposed to financial distress and delinquencies, face periods of exclusion from formal
labor markets, and have fewer ways to signal their quality to employers.
    In Sweden, as in most countries, information on the past repayment of debts
and other obligations is collected and disseminated through credit registries. When a
borrower defaults in Sweden, she receives an arrear in her file. Further, a nonpayment
flag appears prominently on the credit report of each individual with any arrears.3
Third-parties can only learn about this information on past delinquencies by querying
the credit registry.4 Swedish law mandates that each arrear must be deleted from an
individual’s credit record three years after it was registered. In turn, the nonpayment
flag at the top of the report remains until all arrears have expired. Before October
2003, arrears were deleted on the last calendar day (i.e., December 31) of the third
year after first being recorded. Beginning in October 2003, the law was reinterpreted
and arrears were deleted exactly three years to the day after they were registered.
Importantly for identification, the key impetus for this change was technological and
coincided with an upgrade of the computer systems used by the registry.5
    A schematic representation of the policy change is shown in Figure 1. Consider,
for example, an individual who defaulted in February 2000. Note that the record of
this individual’s default was publicly available in the credit registry until the end of
September 2003, three years and eight months later. Next, consider an individual
who defaulted in February 1, 2001. The record of her default was publicly available
in the credit registry only until February 1, 2004, exactly three years later. Thus,
defaulting in February 1, 2000 or February 1, 2001 led to different retention times
   3
     Arrears, in turn, are inputs into the credit score. However, non-financial actors typical receive
only a strict subset of the information housed in the credit registry and are not able to observe the
credit score. In the US, employers are not allowed to observe the FICO score or any other aggregated
score. In Sweden, employers cannot see the summary credit score or other key details about the
nature of the past delinquencies, but importantly, they do observe the non-payment flag.
   4
     This is an important institutional feature for the power of our test and guarantees that changes in
retention time change the marginal information available to financial and non-financial institutions.
   5
     We note that this policy change was first exploited by Bos and Nakamura (2014), who find
that shorter retention times result in an increased access to credit. Our research question and
identification strategy differ significantly from Bos and Nakamura (2014).


                                                   3
of the nonpayment flag, namely an eight month reduction in retention time for the
February 2001 defaulter relative to the February 2000 defaulter. Importantly, given
that the policy change was announced in March 2003, all individuals who defaulted
in 2000 or 2001 did so under the same beliefs about arrear retention time.
    We use this variation in retention time caused by the policy change to identify
the causal effect of the removal of the past default flag on employment outcomes.
We refer to the 2001 cohort of defaulters in our sample as the New regime group
and the 2000 cohort of defaulters as the Old regime group and note that the policy
caused a decrease in the average retention time of past defaults for members of the
New regime group relative to the Old regime group. However, a simple comparison
of individuals in the New and Old regime groups before and after the removal of their
respective nonpayment flags would confound any causal effect of credit information
with other annual trends in the Swedish economy. Instead, we take advantage of the
fact that the policy change modified the retention time of the indicator of past default
differentially for individuals who defaulted in different calendar months.
    In our example above, an individual in the New regime group who defaulted in
February 1 experienced an eight month reduction in retention time relative to an
individual in the Old regime who also defaulted in February. However, because the
policy took effect in October 2003, New and Old regime individuals who defaulted in
October, November, or December experienced a retention time of exactly three years.
Thus, our main empirical strategy compares employment outcomes for individuals in
the New regime and Old regime who received a nonpayment flag early in the year
(February to May) with those who received one late in the year (August to November).
We track how these outcomes change after the nonpayment flag is deleted.6
    We find that the removal of information on past defaults has large effects on em-
ployment. An individual in the New regime group who defaulted early in the calendar
year is approximately three percentage points more likely to be employed the year
in which her nonpayment information is removed from the credit registry, relative to
an individual in the Old regime, and relative to an individual who defaulted late in
the year. This difference persists (at least) one year after the information is removed
from the registry, albeit with a smaller magnitude. Consistent with our identification
   6
    We restrict our sample to those individuals who did not default again in the subsequent 20
months. This restriction ensures that individuals are not classified simultaneously in multiple treat-
ment groups and improves the power of our tests. Note that both the default and repayment decisions
that affect treatment status were made before the announcement of the Swedish policy change.


                                                  4
assumption, we find a positive monotonic relationship between the size of the reduc-
tion in retention time–e.g., seven and a half months for February defaulters, six and
a half months for March defaulters— and the employment probability.
    Further, individuals whose information is removed earlier earn higher wages and
incomes, are less likely to be self-employed, are less likely to pursue additional years
of education, and are more likely to change residence. We estimate that removing
an individual’s past nonpayment flag one year earlier raises yearly wages by approx-
imately $1,000. This effect is four times larger than the increase in consumer credit,
which implies that among individuals at the margins of the credit and labor markets,
the loss of access to formal labor markets may indeed be the most important cost of
default mediated through credit information.
    Credit information may affect employment through several channels. First, as
discussed above, employers may use credit information directly to screen employees.7
Second, improved credit information increases an individual’s access to credit, which
may in turn impact employment in many ways. For example, more credit may allow
individuals to make investments necessary for finding a job or keeping that job.8 In-
creased credit may also allow individuals to invest in entrepreneurship, thus reducing
the relative value of wage labor.9 Further, if individuals use labor hours to smooth
negative shocks in a precautionary manner, they may reduce their labor supply fol-
lowing an increase in access to credit.10 Distinguishing between these mechanisms is
important insofar as policy responses that emerge from each are very different.
    Our baseline results rule effects predominantly arising from the entrepreneurship
and labor smoothing channels, by which more access to credit leads to more wage
employment.11 We provide two additional tests that point to employer screening
as the main driver of our results. First, we study the intra-household effects of
   7
     Screening by landlords may also contribute to the causal effect of information on employment
by affecting mobility. We perform a bounding exercise and show that increased mobility following
the removal of credit information can explain at most a quarter of the magnitude of our results.
   8
     See, e.g., Karlan and Zinman (2009), Mullainathan and Shafir (2013), and Kehoe et al. (2014).
   9
     See Chatterji and Seamans (2012), Hombert et al. (2014), Greenstone et al. (2014), Schmalz
et al. (2015), and Adelino et al. (2015).
  10
     See Low (2005), Pijoan-Mas (2006), Jayachandran (2006), and Blundell et al. (2016).
  11
     Our results on the extensive margin of employment are also inconsistent with Herkenhoff (2013)
and Herkenhoff and Phillips (2015), who study a matching model of the labor market, where access
to credit leads to higher unemployment through an increase in the employee’s outside option. Their
model also suggests that wages are higher conditional on employment, a test we do not pursue given
the fact that conditioning on employment most likely leads to a selection bias.



                                                5
nonpayment flag removal. If credit constraints impede a household’s labor supply,
then we should expect employment effects on both the individual whose information is
deleted as well as the spouse. However, we find no detectable treatment effect on the
income of the spouse. Second, we explore differences in the information available to
financial institutions versus employers. Crucially, employers are only able to observe
a strict subset of the lender’s information. In particular, lenders can observe the
number of arrears, while employers can only observe the presence of at least one
arrear. We find that access to credit increases upon removal of the nonpayment
flag but only for individuals who have many (above median) arrears removed from
their record together with the nonpayment flag. There is no increase in credit upon
removal of the nonpayment flag for individuals with few arrears. In contrast, we
find that the effect of the removal of the past default flag on employment is positive,
similar in magnitude, and statistically indistinguishable for individuals with many or
few arrears.12 This pattern of heterogeneity is inconsistent with a model in which
employment is mainly determined by differences in access to credit.13
    This latter result also suggests a potential inefficiency in the use of credit market
information by employers. One interpretation of this result is that banks use all of the
available information in their underwriting policies and recognize that borrowers with
few arrears are more creditworthy. However, employers are forced to pool individuals
with few or many arrears, leading to a uniform increase in employment post-deletion.
Unless the information contained in past repayment behavior that is relevant for
banks is not relevant for employment, such pooling disadvantages those individuals
with fewer initial arrears and also likely disadvantages firms.14
    In summary, our contribution to the literature is threefold. First, we document
and measure a large employment cost of default associated with credit information
among individuals at the margins of formality. The magnitude of this cost is a crucial
parameter for policy analysis and for modeling unsecured credit markets (Chatterjee
et al. (2007); Livshits et al. (2007)).15 Second, our evidence shows that this employ-
  12
     We also find that our main effects are stronger among those with fewer years of schooling, consis-
tent with a model in which employers choose to weigh multiple signals of productivity differentially.
  13
     An important caveat to keep in mind is because the number of arrears is not randomly assigned,
these two groups could also exhibit differences in their demand for credit and their labor supply.
  14
     The fact that banks and non-financial institutions, like employers, have access to different sets
of information is a prevalent feature of credit registries around the world, an asymmetry that arises
to provide banks with incentives to report (Pagano and Jappelli (1993)).
  15
     The large costs may also serve to amplify negative shocks. In aggregate and under some condi-



                                                  6
ment cost of default is largely driven by employer screening. Thus, our findings speak
to the current debate surrounding the appropriate scope of use for credit information
by employers, in particular in the context of the increasing use of large data sets in
economic decisions, i.e. “big data” (e.g., see Einav and Levin (2013)). Third, we
show suggestive evidence that this employment cost of default is inefficiently borne
by relatively more creditworthy individuals. This finding derives from differences in
the credit information available to banks and non-financial institutions.
    Our paper has been recently joined by an active and original academic litera-
ture studying the effects of credit information on labor markets. Clifford and Shoag
(2016) and Bartik and Nelson (2016) study equilibrium effects of bans imposed by
U.S. states on the use of credit information on hiring decisions.16 Herkenhoff and
Phillips (2015) exploit the removal of bankruptcy flags in the U.S. and document
increased flow into and out of self-employment; some previously-employed become
self-employed when credit access increases, while some previously self-employed find
formal employment when job prospects improve. Dobbie et al. (2016) estimate that
the removal of bankruptcy flags in the U.S. has no effect on employment for the
average individual who filed for bankruptcy protection in the past. We study the
removal of information pertaining to any type of past arrear three to four years after
it occurred. These papers study the impacts of the deletion of only the bankruptcy
flag from 7 to 10 years prior.
    Our work also speaks to several strands of household finance research. First,
we contribute to the literature on the impacts of credit market information on credit
market outcomes.17 Second, we add to work studying the effects of debt renegotiation
on households.18 Third, our paper is relevant for the literature on the interaction
between entrepreneurship and credit supply (e.g., see cites in footnote nine).
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data,
setting, and empirical strategy. In Section 3 we present the results. In Section 4 we
show additional tests that suggest that employer screening is likely to explain part of
our results. Section 5 concludes.
tions, our findings suggest an avenue complementary to Mian and Sufi (2010) through which large
debt build-ups followed by financial distress may result in large fluctuations in consumption.
   16
      Given that nonpayment information is removed from US credit registries after 7 years, these
policy changes remove information that is on average three and half years old.
   17
      Aside from the empirical evidence cited above, theoretical contributions to this literature include
Pagano and Jappelli (1993), Padilla and Pagano (2000), and Elul and Gottardi (2015), among others.
   18
      See, for example, Dobbie and Song (2015) and Liberman (2016).


                                                   7
2      Measuring the employment cost of default
2.1     Setting and policy change
Swedish credit registries and policy change

Credit registries are repositories of information on the past repayment of debts and
other claims, such as utility bills, credit cards, and mortgage payments (Miller (2000)).
In Sweden, credit registries collect registered data from three main sources: the na-
tional enforcement agency (Kronofogden), the tax authorities, and the Swedish bank-
ing sector.19 Each reported default triggers an arrear on the borrower’s credit report.
In Sweden, any individual or company can view the credit records of any individual.20
Financial institutions that report to the registry are able to view the entire credit file,
including the summary credit score and number of arrears, while non-contributing
institutions and private individuals are only shown a strict subset of the recorded in-
formation. Non-contributing entities observe neither the credit score nor the number
of arrears. They instead see a non-payment flag, which indicates at least one arrear.
    Before October 2003, Swedish law mandated that all arrears be removed from each
individual’s credit report three years after the nonpayment occurred. In practice,
the credit registries removed all arrears on December 31 of the third year after the
nonpayment occurred. Beginning in October 2003, the Swedish government changed
the interpretation of the law to remove every arrear from the credit registries exactly
three years after the day the nonpayment was recorded.21 Notably for identification,
the change was motivated by an upgrade to the registries’ IT capabilities and not by
changes to the type or frequency of defaulters or a political movement.
    As shown in Figure 2, the adjustment to the law induced a sharp change in the
time series pattern of arrear removals by the credit registries. The figure plots the
bimonthly number of individuals whose arrears were no longer reported in the credit
registry. The figure shows that before 2003, arrears were almost only removed from
  19
     Swedish banks typically report a borrower to be in default when 90 days past due. Other entities,
such as phone companies, exercise discretion when a consumer is reported as delinquent. Individuals
have the option of filing a protest to the courts to correct potential errors.
  20
     The law states that credit records are available to other parties as long as the intent is to enter
into a contractual relationship.
  21
     The Swedish government announced their decision to change Paragraph 8 of the law
that regulates the handling of credit information (KreditUpplysningsLagen or credit in-
quiry law) on July 2003, and the law change took effect in October 2003.                             See
http://rkrattsdb.gov.se/SFSdoc/03/030504.PDF


                                                   8
the credit registry on the last day of the year.22 Further, the figure shows a noticeable
spike in the frequency of removals in October 2003. This spike corresponds to the
removal of the stock of arrears that had occurred between January and the end of
September 2000 and that had not yet been deleted from the credit registry. After
October 2003, the frequency is more smoothly distributed over the year, in effect
following the distribution of nonpayments across the year, three years earlier.

Identification intuition

We attempt to identify the causal effects of past nonpayment information on em-
ployment and other labor market outcomes. A simple correlation between credit
information and employment would likely be plagued by both reverse causality and
omitted variable bias.23 Rather, an idealized experiment to identify this causal effect
would consider two identical groups of individuals who defaulted in the past and sub-
sequently repaid but, as a result, have a bad credit record. In that experiment, the
credit registry would delete the information for one group earlier than scheduled.
    In our empirical setting, we use the variation in the retention time of publicly
observable arrears induced by the 2003 policy change in Sweden to approximate this
idealized setting. One naive empirical strategy would be to focus on nonpayment
cohorts before the policy change and to compare individuals who defaulted earlier in
the year to those who defaulted later in the year. After all, the early defaulters did
experience longer retention times than the end-of-year defaulters. However, it is likely
that individuals who default at different times during the year differ in ways that may
be correlated with labor market outcomes. Further, individuals may have been aware
of the pattern of deletions and chose to time their defaults accordingly if possible.
Hence, a comparison of the employment prospects of individuals who defaulted early
and late in the same year before the policy change is likely to be biased.
    Instead, the policy change induced unexpected variation in the length of time that
information was retained in the credit registries. Hence, individuals who defaulted
in 2000, three years prior to the policy change, did so under the same beliefs about
retention time as individuals who defaulted in 2001, two years before the policy
  22
      In our bimonthly data, an individual who had an arrear on December 1, but had that arrear
removed on December 31, is first observed without an arrear in February.
   23
      For example, individuals who lose their jobs and remain unemployed may have a higher propen-
sity to default on their debts (Foote et al. (2008a) and Gerardi et al. (2013)). Further, loan repayment
and job performance may both be affected by traits such as responsibility and trust-worthiness.


                                                   9
change. The unexpected nature of the policy change allows us to rule out any strategic
behavior of individuals timing their default so as to experience shorter retention times.
    An alternative identification strategy is to compare individuals who defaulted in
2000, which we define as the “Old regime” group, with those who defaulted in 2001,
which we define as the “New regime” group, observing that the average retention
time is lower for the New regime group. However, this strategy is also problematic as
there may be other differences between individuals who defaulted in 2000 and 2001
that may be correlated with labor market outcomes.
    Instead, we combine the two empirical strategies–New versus Old regime cohorts
and early versus late defaulters within the calendar year– for identification. We
compare the difference in the employment prospects of individuals whose default was
reported early and late in the year 2001 (New regime), with the same difference
but for individuals whose default was reported the previous year, 2000 (Old regime).
We observe that individuals in the New regime group who defaulted at any point
in 2001 and individuals in the Old regime group who defaulted late in 2000 were
subject to the same three-year retention times. Individuals in the Old regime group
who defaulted early in 2000 were subject to more than three years of retention time.
For example, individuals in the Old regime group who defaulted in March 1 were
subject to three years and seven months of retention time. This double-difference
analysis is the basis of our identification strategy. We then take a third difference
and compare outcomes for each individual before and after the three-year post-arrear
date. The identification assumption we make is that, in the absence of the policy
change, the difference in employment outcomes of individuals in the Old and New
regime groups whose defaults were reported early and late in the year would have
remained constant before and after the deletion of the nonpayment flag. In Section
3.3.1 we provide pre-trends evidence that is consistent with this assumption.
    Finally, note that among individuals in the New regime group, those who defaulted
earlier in the year experienced a larger decrease in retention time than those who
defaulted later in the year. This suggests an additional test of our identification
strategy: the effects of the policy change should be monotonically decreasing in the
time of the year during which individuals’ defaults were initially reported. In Section
3 we provide evidence that is consistent with this intuition.




                                           10
2.2     Data
Our sample comprises the near universe of borrowers of alternative credit in Sweden.
This sample was generously supplied by the Swedish pawnbroker industry and con-
tains registered information about the 332,351 individuals who took out at least one
pawn loan between 1999 and 2012.24 Because these individuals experience financial
distress with a higher frequency, they are likely to bear disproportionately the costs
of default, including any employment effects of credit information. Furthermore, this
group is poorer and less educated than the general population, and exclusion from
the the labor market is likely to be quite costly. Policy-makers also often take special
interest in these populations at the margins of the labor and credit markets.
    We obtained a bimonthly panel of credit data from the leading Swedish credit reg-
istry, Upplysningscentralen. Each bimonthly observation from 2000 to 2005 contains
a snapshot of the individual’s full credit report. Swedish credit registries also have
access to data from the Swedish Tax authority and other agencies. This enables us
to further observe variables such as home ownership, age, marital status, yearly in-
come from work, and self-employment. Importantly, we observe when an individual’s
nonpayment was first reported and subsequently removed by the credit registry.
    To measure labor market outcomes, we match the credit registry data with in-
formation obtained from Statistics Sweden (SCB). These data are at the yearly level
from 2000 to 2005 and include information on each individual’s employment status.
This status can take one of three categories: employed, defined as fully employed
during the entire year, partially employed, defined as having been previously unem-
ployed during part of the year, and not employed. The data also include measures of
individual pretax income, wages, and income from self-employment as well as total
household disposable income. We defer an analysis of summary statistics of our main
outcome variables until after we have presented our sample selection criteria.


2.3     Implementation of empirical strategy
To implement our empirical strategy, we make three necessary restrictions to our
sample. First, we include in our analysis sample only individuals who received an
arrear for nonpayment in 2000 or 2001 and thus had those nonpayment flags removed
 24
    This corresponds to approximately five percent of the Swedish adult population as of 2000. See
Bos et al. (2012) for a comparison of the sample to the Swedish and US populations.



                                               11
in 2003 or 2004. Second, we further restrict the sample to those individuals who
did not receive additional arrears in the subsequent 20 months (i.e., who repaid their
delinquencies), all before the policy change. Note that all individuals in our final
analysis sample made their nonpayment (and subsequent payment) decisions under
the same beliefs about the Swedish credit registry data retention policies. Thus, the
actions that caused an individual to fall into our analysis sample are predetermined
relative to the policy change. Our a priori hypothesis is that individuals will have
the greatest change in outcomes when their nonpayment flag is erased from the in-
formation registry, which happens upon deletion of the last arrear. Thus, this second
sample restriction criterion allows us to approximate this group of individuals using
predetermined decisions.25 Third, because of the bimonthly nature of the credit reg-
istry data shared with the researchers (e.g., December-January defaulters are first
reported in the February snapshot, February-March in the April snapshot, etc.), we
restrict our sample to defaults occurring strictly after January 2000.26 For a similar
reason we omit individuals whose defaults are removed from the credit registry in the
December-January 2001 bimonth. Finally, we focus on individuals who are between
18 and 75 years old the year before information on past defaults is removed from
the credit registry. These selection criteria, which are necessary to implement our
empirical strategy, result in a sample of 15,232 individuals.
    Figure 1 depicts the time line of the policy change and how it affected the length
of time in which nonpayments were reported for the individuals in our sample. In
particular, Old regime group individuals whose nonpayments were recorded in the first
months of the year were reported in the credit registries for a maximum of almost
three years and eight months until the end of September 2003, while New regime
group individuals whose nonpayments were recorded in the first months of the year
were reported in the credit registries for exactly three years. Figure 1 also shows
the number of past defaulters in each of the bimonthly bins. We note that while in
both cohorts there are substantially more early defaulters than late defaulters, these
patterns are remarkably consistent between the New and Old regime groups.
    Table 1 reports the excess number of months above three years that the nonpay-
  25
     Note that some individuals in our sample obtained a new arrear after this 20 month period.
Thus, they maintain a nonpayment flag in their records after the original arrear received in 2000 or
2001 is removed, which reduces the power of our tests.
  26
     Note that the credit registry updates its information on a daily basis. The research team,
however, was only allowed access to bimonthly snapshots of the data.



                                                12
ment flag of individuals in each of the four cells–New regime-Early, New regime-Late,
Old regime-Early and Old regime-Late– is retained in the credit registry after the
policy change. All individuals in the New regime have a retention time of three years
(reported in the table as zero excess months above three years). Old regime individ-
uals who defaulted early in the year have on average six extra months of retention
time, calculated as follows: February defaulters have on average 7.5 extra months of
retention time of their nonpayment flag–from any day in February to the first day
of October–, March defaulters have 6.5 extra months, April defaulters have 5.5 extra
months, and May defaulters have 4.5 extra months. Assuming a uniform distribution
of individuals across all four months results in an average extra retention time of
six months. Finally, Old regime individuals who defaulted late in the year have one
extra month of retention time, calculated as follows: August defaulters have 1.5 extra
months, September defaulters have 0.5 extra months, and October and November
defaulters have exactly three years of retention time given that the policy change
occurred precisely on the first day of October.
    The variable newi , which equals one if borrower i’s last nonpayment occurred
during 2001 and zero if it occurred during 2000, identifies each individual’s regime.
We interact newi with the dummy variable earlyi , which distinguishes between indi-
viduals whose nonpayments occurred early and late during the year. Because in our
data each individual is assigned to a bimonthly cohort of defaulters, earlyi equals one
for individuals whose last nonpayment occurred in the February-March or April-May
bimonths, and zero for individuals whose last nonpayment occurred in the August-
September or October-November bimonths.27 Finally, we create a dummy, posti,t ,
which equals one for all event years after borrower i’s nonpayment signal is removed
(2003 for the Old regime and 2004 for the New regime). Note that the variable posti,t
is measured in event time t, which is normalized to zero in 2000 for the Old regime
group and in 2001 for the New regime group. Thus, event time year three represents
the year in which the nonpayment flag is deleted from the credit registry for any
individual in our sample. We include individual fixed effects Êi , year fixed effects Ê· ,
and event time fixed effects Êt , as well as all double interactions that are not absorbed
  27
    Note that to make the early and late groups comparable in size we exclude the June-July
cohort. However, below we do include individuals in this cohort when we measure differential effects
by differential intensity of the treatment by month of nonpayment.




                                                13
by fixed effects. Our main specification is the following reduced form model:

        employedi,t = Êi + Êt + Ê· + —newi ◊ earlyi ◊ posti,t + ”posti,t +
                          “newi ◊ posti,t + ⁄earlyi ◊ posti,t + Ái,t .             (2.1)

Note that Êi absorbs the baseline and interaction coefficients of newi and earlyi . The
coefficient —, our key parameter of interest, measures the differential probability of
being employed for the New and Old regime group, for individuals whose nonpayment
was reported early in the year relative to those whose nonpayment was reported late in
the year, the year(s) after each individual’s nonpayment is no longer reported relative
to the three prior years. The coefficients ” and ⁄ capture differences in employment
for individuals in the Old regime whose nonpayment occurred late and early in the
year, respectively, the years after the arrear is deleted. Finally, “ captures differen-
tial employment trends for all New regime group individuals after their nonpayment
information is no longer publicly available.


2.4    Summary statistics
Before presenting the regression results, we show in Table 3 selected summary statis-
tics. We focus our analysis on employment outcomes, broadly construed. In addition
to earnings and whether an individual has a job, we also consider alternatives to
labor income, including seeking more education and turning to self-employment in-
come. The top panel presents a brief definition for each of our outcome variables, and
the lower panel displays selected sample statistics.
    Our summary stats are estimated the three years before these individuals’ non-
payment flags are removed, which correspond to 2000 to 2002 for the Old regime
group and 2001 to 2003 for the New regime group. During those years, an average
of 43 percent of individuals in our sample are employed during the full year, while
79 percent received some positive wage income. We use a log transformation of our
income measures, which are in units of hundreds of Swedish Kronor (SEK). On aver-
age, log(income + 1), the log of pretax income, equals 5.6, which corresponds roughly
to 102,000 SEK or $12,200 in levels. Roughly five percent of all individuals in our
sample are self-employed. Finally, individuals are 42.8 years old on average and 60
percent male. The low rates of formal employment and average wage earnings confirm
that our sample is indeed situated at the margins of formality, where negative credit

                                           14
information could lead to costly labor market exclusion.


3     Results
3.1    Graphical evidence
We start by showing graphically the event-time evolution of the average outcomes,
which provides evidence in support of our identification assumption. The identifica-
tion assumption for regression (2.1) is that, in the absence of the regime shift, the
probability of being employed for the New and Old regime groups, between early and
late in the year defaulters would have evolved in parallel. We provide evidence that
supports this assumption in Figure 3. The top panel shows the average of employed
(we omit subindeces for brevity), defined as a dummy for whether the individual was
fully employed throughout the entire year, as well as 1(wages > 0), the average of a
dummy that equals one for individuals who receive any positive wage during the year.
The x-axis shows event time years, which are defined starting at zero in 2000 for the
Old regime group and in 2001 for the New regime group. There are no detectable
differences in the trends of the difference of either variable between early and late
defaulters in the New and Old regime groups during the three years before removal of
the nonpayment flag (i.e., in event times 0 to 2). Similar effects can be observed for
the average log income and log wage income where zeros have been replaced by ones,
shown in the lower panel. These graphs provide evidence that is consistent with our
identification assumption.
    The figures also hint at our main results: individuals in the New regime group who
defaulted early in the year exhibit a higher probability of employment and earn higher
incomes after their nonpayment flags are removed relative to similar individuals in
the Old regime. The graphs also suggest that the effect is driven by a relatively lower
probability of employment for individuals in the Old regime who defaulted early in
the year. This is consistent with the credit information mechanism, precisely because
for these individuals, the past nonpayment flag remains in the credit records for an
extra six months (above three years), relative to half an extra month of retention time
for Old regime individuals who defaulted late and no extra months for individuals in
the New regime group, as is shown in Table 1.



                                          15
3.2     Main results
Table 3 presents the results of regression (2.1). Columns 1, 2, and 3 present the regres-
sion results when the outcome is employed. Column 1 documents that the probability
of employment for an individual whose information is reported for a shorter period in-
creases by 2.8 percentage points the year the nonpayment is removed from the registry
(year three). This effect is a 6.5 percent increase relative to the preperiod average
employment rate (43 percent). Column 2 shows that this effect is also significant
for the combined two years after removal, although with a lower magnitude. Col-
umn 3 shows that focusing only on the second year after removal, the point estimate
continues to be positive, although statistical significance is lost.
    Columns 4, 5, and 6 of Table 3 show the same pattern when employment is de-
fined instead as receiving any positive labor market income during the year. Indeed,
Column 4 shows that New regime group individuals who defaulted early in the year
are 3 percentage points more likely to earn positive labor income, and this effect per-
sists two years post information removal. Furthermore, the probability of receiving
positive income from work is positive (and statistically significantly so) and of the
same magnitude during the second year (column 6). The persistence of these effects
suggests that default induces a longer-term cost in the labor market, which is consis-
tent with the findings in the labor economics literature that a longer unemployment
spell has a persistent effect on future unemployment (e.g., Kroft et al. (2013)).
    We explore the impact of credit market information on additional labor market
outcomes. Columns 1 through 3 of Table 4 display the output of our main regression
model (2.1), where the postperiod corresponds to two years after the removal of the
nonpayment flag, for an array of additional labor market outcomes including the log
of income from work, log(wages + 1), the probability of being self-employed, and the
log of total pretax income, log(income + 1). Income measures are in hundreds of
SEK.28 In column 1 we find that individuals whose nonpayment flag was retained for
less time earn statistically significantly higher wage incomes.
    But how large is this earnings effect? In Table IAII in the Internet Appendix
we show that running our our main regression in wage levels implies an increase in
wages of 3,987 SEK, or roughly $480. Recall from Table 1 that this $480 treatment
  28
    In the Internet Appendix Table IAII we present the results of specifications with alternative
transformations of the dependent variable: a) using the hyperbolic sine transformation as an alter-
native to replacing zeros in the logarithm, and b) using the level of wages.


                                                16
effect is the result of a reduction in retention time of only 5.5 months. Thus, this
cost annualizes to $1,047 per year or $3,142 over the three years in which default is
flagged publicly. This effect is economically large, approximately 7% of the average
annual earnings for individuals in our sample.29
    Recall that improved credit information may also directly increase the amount
of credit financial institutions are willing to supply. To get a sense of the relative
magnitudes of the earnings and credit supply effects, in Internet Appendix Table
IAIII we run our main regression on credit outcomes. We find that the removal of the
nonpayment flag leads to an increase in credit of 903 SEK (column 2), which implies
a total annualized effect of $236 in credit per extra year of retention time. Thus, the
effect of credit information on wages is roughly four times the effect on credit, and
suggests that, quantitatively, the labor costs of default may be more important than
the loss of access to credit, at least among individuals at the margins of formality.
    Note that the earnings effect combines the extensive margin effect documented
above with an intensive margin effect of higher salaries conditional on employment.
We estimate in a back-of-the-envelope calculation that approximately 53 percent of
the earnings effect is driven by the extensive margin.30 These calculations imply
important effects on both intensive and extensive margins, which is consistent with
the existence of labor market frictions that prevent an adjustment on wages alone.31
    In addition to wages, individuals may also earn incomes from self-employment
activities. Column 2 of Table 4 shows that shortened retention times lead to a decrease
in self-employment activities. This decrease is despite an increase in the availability
of credit, which suggests that many individuals in our sample use self-employment
as a response to unemployment rather than as a high-growth venture.32 Summing
across the increase in wage earnings and the decrease in self-employment income, we
find an overall increase in pre-tax income in column 3 of Table 4.
  29
      We also find that the impacts on credit are short-lived and only last one year, while the earnings
impacts persist across (at least) two years.
   30
      We obtain this fraction as follows. First, the average wage of individuals who transitioned from
zero wages to positive wage income in event time 2, the year before the past default flag is removed,
is 71,200 SEK. Thus, a 3% extensive margin effect from Column 4 in Table 3 corresponds to a wage
effect of 2,129 SEK. Thus, the extensive margin represents a 2,1293,987 = 53.4% of the total wage effect
of 3,987 SEK shown in Table IAII in the Internet Appendix.
   31
      E.g., the typically high level of unionization in Sweden contributes to a limited scope for adjust-
ment along the wage margin. For statistics on the trade union density in Sweden see for example
https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=UN_DEN.
   32
      See Banerjee et al. (2015) for an application of this idea in India.



                                                   17
    As a robustness test, in Internet Appendix Table IAIV we present the results of
running our main regression test on a sample where we shift the definition of New and
Old regime groups one year ahead. That is, we define a Placebo New regime group
as individuals who defaulted in 2001 and a Placebo Old regime group as individuals
who defaulted in 2002, and use employed, a dummy for positive wage income, and
the log of wages plus one as outcomes. In all three cases, the estimated coefficient of
interest is not significantly different from zero at conventional levels and even takes
the opposite sign to our main results, which supports the assumption that our main
results are not driven by differential secular employment trends of defaulters.


3.3     Results by treatment intensity
Our identification strategy relies on variation in the retention times of nonpayment
information induced by the policy change. To further support our identification, we
exploit the bimonthly nature of our credit data and study whether individuals who
were exposed to differential retention times, measured by the time of the year in
which they defaulted, experience differential labor market responses.
    We proceed by categorizing individuals in our sample into five groups according to
the bimonth in which they defaulted: February-March, April-May, June-July, August-
September, and October-November.33 This categorization of default cohorts induces a
monotonic ordering of exposure to the policy change, defined as the average reduction
in the number of months during which the nonpayment flag was available in the credit
registry, for New relative to Old regime group individuals: the August-September
cohort has a one month average reduction, June-July has a three month average
reduction, April-May has a five month average reduction, and February-March has
a seven month average reduction. If information about nonpayments affects the
probability of being employed, we hypothesize that the measure of months of exposure
to the policy, i.e. the number of fewer months in which past arrears are reported,
should be positively correlated with the probability of being employed during a given
year. Note that the October-November cohort has, by construction, a zero month
reduction in retention time.
    To test this hypothesis, we modify regression (2.1) by changing the interaction
variable earlyi , which divided individuals into early and late defaulters, with a set of
  33
    In this section, the sample includes individuals who defaulted in the June-July bimonth, which
increases the number of individuals and observations relative to previous tests.


                                               18
indicators for the different values of exposuremonthsi (1, 3, 5, or 7, depending on the
bimonth of default). Thus, we estimate the following specification:
                                            ÿ
1 (wages > 0) i,t = Êi + Ê· + Êt +                    —t 1 (exposuremonthsi = t) ◊ newi ◊ posti,t +
                                          t=1,3,5,7
                      ” ◊ posti,t + “newi ◊ posti,t +                                         (3.1)
                        ÿ
                                  ⁄t 1 (exposuremonthsi = t) ◊ posti,t + Ái,t .
                      t=1,3,5,7


The excluded category of exposuremonths corresponds to individuals who defaulted
in November-December, who have zero months of exposure to the policy. We run
this regression using the dummy 1 (wages > 0) as the outcome, and limit the post
period to the year during which the nonpayment flag is removed. Figure 4 shows a
plot of the regression coefficients —t and the associated 95 percent confidence inter-
vals. Consistent with our identification assumption, the measured effect is stronger
for individuals who experienced greater reductions in retention times because of the
month in which their default occurred. Further, the pattern is monotonic for three,
five, and seven months of exposure. The pattern is very similar for log(wages + 1),
also shown in the lower panel of Figure 4. One month of exposure corresponds to a
increase of 0.14 log wage points, while seven months of exposure corresponds to an
increase of 0.28 log wage points. As an additional test, Internet Appendix Table IAV
presents the results of a regression where we allow the effect of a shorter retention
time of past defaults to be linear in the length of exposure. The results confirm the
pattern shown in Figure 4.


3.4    Other Results: Mobility and Education
We explore two additional margins that may be affected by changes in credit market
information. First, we measure whether increased retention time affects an individ-
ual’s geographic mobility. Because landlords commonly check a prospective lessee’s
credit history before signing a lease agreement, we hypothesize that individuals may
be more able to relocate if negative information is held by the credit registry for a
shorter period. Moreover, improved access to employment opportunities may also
induce mobility. We test this hypothesis in columns 1 and 2 of Table 5 and define the
outcome variable relocatesi,t as an indicator for whether an individual moved to a
different municipality between years t ≠ 1 and t. In column 1, we consider the treat-

                                                19
ment effect for the entire analysis sample and find that individuals who experienced
a shorter retention time are 1.1 percentage points more likely to move, relative to a
baseline mean of 7.7 percent. Although the coefficient is large in relative terms, it
is not statistically significant at standard levels (p-value = 0.19). Given that mem-
bers of our sample have very low home ownership rates (9.6 percent) and that credit
checks for residential rental leases are common in Sweden, in column 2, we restrict
the sample to the set of individuals who did not own a home in the preperiod. Here
we find that individuals who are not home owners are 1.6 percentage points more
likely to move across postal codes when their negative credit market information is
available to the credit market for less time. While the results are only significant at
the 10 percent level, we find them highly suggestive of a type of mobility lock-in the
rental market caused by credit market information.34
    Improvements in mobility to better labor markets induced by the removal of bad
credit information may have a causal role explaining the employment results. To test
for this possibility, we perform a bounding exercise and find that this lock-in effect
can explain at most 27 percent of the baseline effect of information on employment in
Table 3.35 Again, the direction of causality may also flow the opposite direction – a
change in employment status may facilitate relocation. Thus, it is likely that mobility
is not the main driver of the effects of credit information on employment and wages.
    Second, we ask whether some individuals respond to decreased labor market op-
portunities by adjusting their demand for additional schooling. When wage jobs
become more scarce, the opportunity cost of schooling decreases, which may in turn
increase the demand for schooling.36 This may be especially true in Sweden, where
educational loans do not require credit checks and where the costs of education are
relatively low. In column 3 of Table 8, we find evidence that education is indeed one
margin of adjustment used by individuals. Decreased retention time decreases the
number of years of education by 0.0355. While the effect is small in magnitude, it is
significant at the 5 percent level.
  34
      This pattern is similar to the housing lock-in documented by Struyven (2014) in the case of
Dutch homeowners with high loan-to-value ratios.
   35
      We estimate this fraction as follows. We repeat the mobility regression result conditioning on
individuals who moved who also changed employment status, which implies a coefficient of 0.8%.
If we fully attribute this coefficient to the causal effect of increased mobility following the early
removal of credit information, then mobility can explain up to 0.8% 3% = 27% of the baseline effect on
employment (denominator from Column 4 in Table 3).
   36
      See Charles et al. (2015) for evidence of this idea in the US.



                                                 20
    Taken together, our results provide a consistent characterization of the effects of
credit market information on labor markets. We interpret these results as the inverse
of our baseline effects: information on past defaults reduces the probability that an
individual is and remains employed. Individuals respond to this decrease in employ-
ment opportunities by turning to self-employment activities and seeking additional
education. As a result, individuals earn lower wages and lower total incomes two
years after the information is removed from the credit registry.


4     Mechanisms and Additional Evidence
4.1    Credit Information or Credit Supply?
We document an economically large employment cost of default among individuals
at the fringes of the labor and credit markets. Two possible channels could drive this
effect. First, in Internet Appendix Table IAIII we show that credit supply increases
when negative information is deleted. Thus, it is possible a priori that such an
increase in credit supply might facilitate investments in job search or investment in
labor productivity. For example, credit may allow an individual to pay for a car
repair, which in turn may improve punctuality at work. Second, employers might use
credit information directly to screen workers. While both effects may be at play, we
present five pieces of evidence that suggest that employer screening plays a key role
above and beyond the role of credit supply in rationalizing our findings.
    First, recall that the magnitudes of the labor market earnings effects in Section
3.2 are four times larger than the commensurate increase in credit supply. Thus, for
the credit effects to explain the entire earnings result, the labor market returns to
capital would need to be on the order of 400%, a probably implausibly high number.
Second, recall from Table 4 that improved credit information (and subsequent access
to credit) leads to a reduction, rather than an increase, in self-employment activities.
That implies that a subset of individuals with a bad credit record are unconstrained
to pay any costs required of self-employment. It seems unlikely that the costs of
entering the labor market would be of a larger magnitude.
    Third, we study how the removal of negative credit information affects the affected
individual’s spouse’s employment. Intuitively, if households are restricted in their
access to credit, then a relaxation of credit constraints would also allow an individual’s


                                           21
spouse to supply more labor or invest in becoming more productive at work. At
the margin, this would result in more employment for both the individual and the
individual’s spouse.
    Although we cannot observe the spouse’s employment directly, for each individual
in our sample we observe measures of household disposable income and individual
disposable income. At the household and individual levels, disposable income is
calculated by our data provider by adding up all income sources and subtracting al-
lowances for dependents (children) and adjusting for the cost of living in a particular
area. From these measures, we construct the spouse’s disposable income by subtract-
ing the individual’s disposable income from the household’s disposable income.37
    In columns 1, 2 and 3 of Table (7) we present the output of regression (2.1)
using as outcomes the individual’s disposable income, the household total disposable
income, and the spouse’s disposable income, respectively. The spouse’s disposable
income can be negative due to government transfers and adjustments, which makes
it impossible to use a logarithm plus one approach.38 We restrict the sample of
individuals to those that appear as non-single as of event time 2, whose measures of
household and individual disposable income are different. Although underpowered,
these tests show that the individual’s and household’s disposable incomes increase
when their information on past defaults is removed.39 However, column 3 shows that
the spouse’s disposable income does not vary in a statistically significant manner with
negative credit information, and, if anything, the point estimate is negative. This
evidence suggests that access to credit, brought about through deletion of negative
information, does not necessarily relax household-level credit constraints that prevent
access to labor markets. This non-result is perhaps even more surprising given that
the credit information of spouses is likely correlated due to joint accounts.40
    Fourth, if individuals changed their job search behavior in response to improved
access to credit, then we would expect increases in applications for both credit and
  37
      We winsorize each of these these variables at the 99th percentile.
  38
      These specifications using levels are comparable to the one we present in the Internet Appendix
Table IAII using wage as the outcome.
   39
      For comparability with our previous results, we present estimates using the logarithm of indi-
vidual and household disposable income plus one on columns 4 and 5 of Table (7) and note strongly
significant effects of the removal of past of defaults on these outcomes, consistent with the evidence
in the previous section.
   40
      Thus, it is possible that the spouse actually increases labor supply when the individual is unable
to find a job due to negative credit information (Blundell et al. (2016)).



                                                  22
jobs in response to the shortened retention time. In Internet Appendix Table IAVII we
show that credit inquiries do increase following the deletion of negative information.
While individuals are likely unaware of the exact timing of their information deletion,
credit card companies and other lenders actively pursue individuals they deem to
be credit-worthy by monitoring credit records. However, there is no evidence that
inquiries by non-financial institutions, which include employers, also increase.
    Fifth, and lastly, we exploit the information structure of the credit registries to
further unpack the two mechanisms. In most countries, members of the credit reg-
istry–e.g., banks and other financial institutions that share information about their
borrowers– have access to all the information that is collected in the credit registry,
but nonmembers–e.g., employers, telephone and insurance companies and private in-
dividuals– do not.41 This asymmetry in information exists to provide members with
incentives to report. Pertinently for our setting, employers cannot observe any de-
tails about individuals’ arrears except whether they have an active nonpayment flag.
Whereas banks are able to discriminate between a prospective borrower with ten
arrears and a prospective borrower with only one arrear, employers observe iden-
tical information for a prospective employee with ten versus one arrear. If having
fewer arrears is predictive of better repayment and better job performance, then both
lenders and employers should want to use this information when making lending and
hiring decisions. However, employers are unable to do so. This implies that in the
credit market, individuals with fewer arrears should have less to gain from arrear
flag deletion, while all individuals with non-payment flags should experience similar
employment screening benefits, regardless of the underlying number of arrears.
    In Table 6 we measure the credit and employment effects of arrear flag deletion
separately for individuals with an above-median number of arrears and individuals
with a below-median number of arrears.42 Columns 1 and 2 show that the effect of
the removal of the past nonpayment flag on the probability of receiving any wages
  41
     Internet Appendix Figure IA1 illustrates what information is available to members and non-
members in Sweden.
  42
     Recall that individuals in our sample are selected based on whether their last nonpayment for
the next 20 months occurred as of 2000 or 2001. We measure the quantity of arrears at the time of
the last nonpayment as well. In our sample, individuals with many arrears experience the deletion
of many arrears in response to the policy change, while individuals with only one arrear experience
the deletion of that singular arrear in response to the policy change. The median number of arrears
in the sample is five. We recognize that the number of arrears is not randomly assigned and may be
correlated with other types of heterogeneity. Nonetheless, we find the results highly suggestive.



                                                23
is similar for individuals with many and few arrears. In column 3 we run the main
regression model with full interactions with an indicator for many arrears (manyi ). As
expected, the coefficient on the interaction of the main treatment effect with manyi
is small and insignificant. In contrast, columns 4 and 5 show that the effect of the
removal of the nonpayment flag on credit is positive and significant only for individuals
with many arrears, while column 6 shows that this difference is large and statistically
significant. These patterns are, again, consistent with employer screening effects. If
the employment effects were instead due strictly to improved access to credit, then
we would expect symmetric patterns in labor and credit outcomes.
    The findings illustrate that banks likely adjust their underwriting decisions ac-
cording to the severity of an individual’s past defaults. In contrast labor markets
are unable to do so and are forced to pool all individuals with a non-payment flag.
Unless the information contained in the number of arrears is relevant for banks but
not for employers, then the labor cost of default imposed by credit information may
be excessive for those individuals with few arrears, for example. In other words, the
asymmetry of information provided to credit and non-credit market participants may
lead to an inefficiency. Given that credit registries were largely designed to reduce
information asymmetries in the credit market, their use in labor markets is likely only
second best.


4.2    Incidence
We end our analysis by asking, for which types of individuals are the employment
effects of negative credit information strongest? This question is relevant both for
policy-makers and for learning about what the credit score may convey to employers.
     First, we study how the effects vary for individuals with different levels of educa-
tion. In Table 8 we present results for two sub-samples: individuals with 11 or fewer
years of completed schooling (the median number of years of schooling), and indi-
viduals with more than 11 years of schooling. Columns 1 and 2 show that a shorter
retention time strongly increases the probability of employment for individuals with
little education, but it has almost no effect on individuals with many years of school-
ing (p-value of difference 0.035). Columns 3 and 4 show that this pattern is repeated
for log wages (p-value of difference 0.095). Thus, the employment impact of negative
credit information is felt more acutely by those with lower levels of education.


                                           24
    One possible interpretation of this heterogeneity is that past credit information
is only one of many signals used by employers to infer an individual’s unobserved
productivity. For well-educated individuals, this information may be less relevant
than other types of information (such as experience), and as such it may be down-
weighted by employers. Individuals with little formal education may also have fewer
ways to signal their types.43
    Second, we explore whether the effects differ by employment history, namely the
preperiod (event time 2) employment status.44 There is reason to believe that both
the previously unemployed and previously employed may experience negative impacts.
For example, negative credit information may hinder the ability of unemployed indi-
viduals to find work. This might also be the case for the many underemployed and
part-time workers coded as previously employed in our sample.45 However, individu-
als with long prior unemployment spells may already be severely handicapped in the
labor market (e.g.., Kroft et al. (2013)), even in the absence of negative credit infor-
mation, and may have stopped their active job search. Thus, the additional impact
of negative credit market information may be muted for this group.
    In columns 1 and 2 of Table 9, we run our main specification (Equation 2.1)
separately for those employed and unemployed at event time 2 (i.e., the year before
arrear removal), respectively. We find similar positive effects on wage employment
and on log wages for both groups (these results are statistically indistinguishable).
In columns 3 and 4 we further subdivide the previously unemployed into chronic and
non-chronic groups. We define the chronically unemployed to be those without em-
ployment at event time 2 and who additionally worked at most one year out of the the
three preperiod years. We find that the effects on formal employment and log wages
are relatively small in magnitude (indeed, indistinguishable from zero) for the chron-
ically unemployed, while the effects are large in magnitude for the non-chronically
unemployed (p-value of difference on log wages 0.114). While underpowered, the
differences in magnitudes are nonetheless striking. These results suggest that credit
information may be most informative when individuals do not have other ways to
  43
     Low levels of education may also be correlated with other measures of labor market opportunities,
such as industry or type of job. It might also be possible that different types of employers are more
or less likely to use credit information when making hiring decisions
  44
     We would have liked to explore other characteristics of an individual’s employment history.
However, Statistics Sweden was unwilling to match other job characteristics such as type of job or
industry of the employer to our credit information dataset.
  45
     Our data set does not allow us to differentiate part-time from full-time employment.


                                                 25
signal their productivity. Long unemployment spells may provide employers with
information that makes credit records superfluous.
    Finally, in Internet Appendix Table IAVI we show that the employment effect of
shorter retention times is concentrated in geographical areas with low unemployment.
Although again the results are under-powered, one interpretation of this result is that
the employment cost of default is more severe for “bad” individuals in “good times”
(i.e., low unemployment areas) than for average households in high unemployment
areas.46


5      Conclusion
We combine a unique natural experiment in Sweden with detailed credit and labor
market data to document that credit market information has economically important
effects that spill over onto other domains of a borrower’s life, namely success in the
labor market. We focus on a marginal population for whom exclusion from the credit
and labor markets is likely quite costly and to whom policy-makers tend to pay close
attention. In particular, we find robust evidence that an earlier deletion of negative
credit information makes individuals more likely to be employed, and as a result, they
earn higher incomes. These results highlight an understudied interlinkage between
credit and labor markets.
    We also show that when labor market opportunities become scarce, individuals
seek out self-employment and schooling as alternatives. These results indicate that
for our sample of low income Swedes, self-employment is often an inferior alterna-
tive to the wage labor market. This finding resonates with the narrative in the
entrepreneurship literature that many businesses owned by low income groups are
not primed for transformative growth. The schooling response to the unemployment
caused by negative credit information is also consistent with prior literature.
    While credit supply is also responsive to the deletion of negative credit informa-
tion, we further provide evidence that a large portion of our estimated effects is likely
explained by employer screening, a practice that has increased dramatically over the
past decade and that has garnered the attention of many policy-makers. Our results
  46
     It may also be the case that idiosyncratic shocks are punished more severely than aggregate
shocks. This result is also consistent with credit information being more valuable when employers
are faced with an average pool of lower-quality applicants (i.e,. during periods of low unemployment).



                                                 26
present some of the first causal evidence that in vulnerable populations, negative
credit information can indeed impede success in the labor market. This implies that
a temporary shock that causes an individual to default may have lasting and profound
consequences. These results also imply that damage from credit information errors
may be amplified through the labor market channel.47 Further, it may be difficult for
households to use labor supply to smooth consumption when their credit record is
poor. We also find suggestive evidence that asymmetries in the information available
to non-credit entities may cause inefficiencies in the use of credit information.
    Our paper estimates the employment costs of default, which is an important input
for the policy debate. However, we acknowledge that a full welfare analysis of em-
ployer credit screening policies requires many additional inputs and several questions
remain unanswered. For example, what are the countervailing benefits from using
credit information on the efficiency of matching between firms and employees? Does
the employment cost of default strengthen repayment incentives and result in deeper
financial markets?48 These are all important questions for future work.
    While we do not attempt such a welfare analysis, our results can provide guidance
to policy-makers regarding other types of interventions that might or might not limit
the negative labor market consequences from experiencing a negative shock. We find
very little evidence to indicate that access to credit alone dramatically improves access
to labor markets. This suggests that policies such as social transfers or subsidized
government credit would be unlikely to lead to large employment benefits. Instead,
policy makers might want to consider policies that either help individuals to improve
their credit records, such as credit counseling, or that help individuals to improve the
non-credit information that they can report to prospective employers. Our results
suggest that negative credit information is most detrimental for those workers with
fewer alternate signals that employers can use for screening.49
  47
      For example, see http://www.forbes.com/sites/halahtouryalai/2013/12/17/should-your-credit-
score-matter-on-job-interviews-senator-warren-says-no-aims-to-ban-employer-credit-checks/.
   48
      For example, individuals may want to continue to service underwater mortgages if the labor
market costs are sufficiently high. Extrapolating to a different market and context, labor market
costs may help to explain why strategic default was not even more common during the housing crisis
(Foote et al. (2008b)).
   49
      These findings are consistent with Pallais (2014), who measures benefits to future employment
from certification by previous employers in an online labor market.




                                                27
References
Adelino, M., A. Schoar, and F. Severino (2015): “House prices, collateral,
 and self-employment,” Journal of Financial Economics, 117, 288 – 306.

Banerjee, A., E. Breza, E. Duflo, and C. Kinnan (2015): “Do Credit Credit
 Constraints Limit Entrepreneurship? Heterogeneity in the Returns to Microfi-
 nance,” Working Paper.

Bartik, A. W. and S. T. Nelson (2016): “Credit Reports as Resumes: The
 Incidence of Pre-Employment Credit Screening,” Working Paper.

Blundell, R., L. Pistaferri, and I. Saporta-Eksten (2016): “Consumption
 Inequality and Family Labor Supply,” American Economic Review, 106, 387–435.

Bos, M., S. Carter, and P. M. Skiba (2012): “The Pawn Industry and Its Cus-
 tomers: The United States and Europe,” Vanderbilt Law and Economics Research
 Paper.

Bos, M. and L. I. Nakamura (2014): “Should defaults be forgotten? Evidence
 from variation in removal of negative consumer credit information,” Federal Reserve
 Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper.

Brown, M. and C. Zehnder (2007): “Credit reporting, relationship banking, and
 loan repayment,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 39, 1883–1918.

Charles, K. K., E. Hurst, and M. J. Notowidigdo (2015): “Housing Booms
 and Busts, Labor Market Opportunities, and College Attendance,” .

Chatterjee, S., D. Corbae, M. Nakajima, and J.-V. Ríos-Rull (2007): “A
 quantitative theory of unsecured consumer credit with risk of default,” Economet-
 rica, 75, 1525–1589.

Chatterji, A. K. and R. C. Seamans (2012): “Entrepreneurial finance, credit
 cards, and race,” Journal of Financial Economics, 106, 182–195.

Clifford, R. and D. Shoag (2016): “"No More Credit Score" Employer Credit
 Check Banks and Signal Substitution,” Working Paper.



                                        28
De Janvry, A., C. McIntosh, and E. Sadoulet (2010): “The supply-and
 demand-side impacts of credit market information,” Journal of development Eco-
 nomics, 93, 173–188.

Djankov, S., C. McLiesh, and A. Shleifer (2007): “Private credit in 129
 countries,” Journal of Financial Economics, 84, 299–329.

Dobbie, W., P. Goldsmith-Pinkham, N. Mahoney, and J. Song (2016):
 “Bad Credit, No Problem? Credit and Labor Market Consequences of Bad Credit
 Reports,” Working Paper.

Dobbie, W. and J. Song (2015): “The Impact of Loan Modifications on Repay-
 ment, Bankruptcy, and Labor Supply: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment,”
 Working Paper.

Einav, L. and J. D. Levin (2013): “The data revolution and economic analysis,” .

Elul, R. and P. Gottardi (2015): “Bankruptcy: Is It Enough to Forgive or Must
 We Also Forget?” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, forthcoming.

Foote, C. L., K. Gerardi, and P. S. Willen (2008a): “Negative equity and
 foreclosure: Theory and evidence,” Journal of Urban Economics, 64, 234–245.

——— (2008b): “Negative equity and foreclosure: Theory and evidence,” Journal of
 Urban Economics, 64, 234–245.

Gerardi, K., K. F. Herkenhoff, L. E. Ohanian, and P. Willen (2013):
 “Unemployment, negative equity, and strategic default,” Working Paper.

González-Uribe, J. and D. Osorio (2014): “Information Sharing and Credit
 Outcomes: Evidence from a Natural Experiment,” Working Paper.

Greenstone, M., A. Mas, and H.-L. Nguyen (2014): “Do credit market shocks
 affect the real economy? Quasi-experimental evidence from the Great Recession
 and ’normal’ economic times,” NBER Working Paper.

Herkenhoff, K. F. (2013): “The impact of consumer credit access on unemploy-
 ment,” mimeo.



                                      29
Herkenhoff, K. F. and G. Phillips (2015): “How Credit Constraints Impact
 Job Finding Rates, Sorting & Aggregate Output,” Working Paper.

Hombert, J., A. Schoar, D. Sraer, and D. Thesmar (2014): “Can Unem-
 ployment Insurance Spur Entrepreneurial Activity?” NBER Working Paper.

Jayachandran, S. (2006): “Selling labor low: Wage responses to productivity
  shocks in developing countries,” Journal of Political Economy, 114, 538–575.

Karlan, D. and J. Zinman (2009): “Expanding credit access: Using randomized
 supply decisions to estimate the impacts,” Review of Financial studies, hhp092.

Kehoe, P., V. Midrigan, and E. Pastorino (2014): “Debt constraints and
 employment,” Working Paper.

Kroft, K., F. Lange, and M. J. Notowidigdo (2013): “Duration Dependence
 and Labor Market Conditions: Evidence from a Field Experiment,” The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 128, 1123–1167.

Liberman, A. (2016): “The Value of a Good Credit Reputation: Evidence from
  Credit Card Renegotiations,” Journal of Financial Economics, 120, 644–660.

Livshits, I., J. MacGee, and M. Tertilt (2007): “Consumer Bankruptcy: A
  Fresh Start,” American Economic Review, 97, 402–418.

Low, H. W. (2005): “Self-insurance in a life-cycle model of labour supply and
 savings,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 8, 945 – 975.

Mian, A. and A. Sufi (2010): “The great recession: Lessons from microeconomic
 data,” The American Economic Review, 51–56.

Miller, M. J. (2000): “Credit reporting systems around the globe: the state of
 the art in public and private credit registries,” Credit reporting systems and the
 international economy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Mullainathan, S. and E. Shafir (2013): Scarcity: Why having too little means
 so much, Macmillan.

Musto, D. K. (2004): “What happens when information leaves a market? evidence
 from postbankruptcy consumers,” The Journal of Business, 77, 725–748.

                                        30
Padilla, A. J. and M. Pagano (2000): “Sharing default information as a borrower
  discipline device,” European Economic Review, 44, 1951–1980.

Pagano, M. and T. Jappelli (1993): “Information sharing in credit markets,”
  The Journal of Finance, 48, 1693–1718.

Pallais, A. (2014): “Inefficient hiring in entry-level labor markets,” The American
  Economic Review, 104, 3565–3599.

Pijoan-Mas, J. (2006): “Precautionary savings or working longer hours?” Review
  of Economic Dynamics, 9, 326–352.

Schmalz, M., D. Sraer, and D. Thesmar (2015): “Housing Collateral and
  Entrepreneurship,” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Struyven, D. (2014): “Housing Lock: Dutch Evidence on the Impact of Negative
  Home Equity on Household Mobility,” Working Paper.




                                        31
Figures

                                                                                                                                                                Figure 1: Time line
This figure depicts the time line of the policy change that enforced a three year retention time for
reporting defaults and how this policy generated variation in the retention time of the nonpayment
flag. In particular, individuals whose nonpayment occurred early 2001 had a reduced retention
time of past nonpayments. In contrast, individuals whose nonpayment occurred early in 2000 were
reported in the credit registries until October 2003.

                                Sample size                                                    Event time 0                                                                    Event time 1                                                              Event time 2                                                                   Event time 3                                                Event time 4
                        April                               1893
             Exposure
               High




                        June                                1800
Old Regime




                        Aug                                 1300
                        Oct                                 1348
             Exposure
               Low




                        Dec                                 1303
                                                                               Feb April June Aug Oct Dec                                                    Feb April June Aug Oct Dec                                                 Feb April June Aug Oct Dec                                                    Feb April June Aug Oct Dec                                              Feb April June Aug Oct Dec

                                                            7644                                            2000                                                                         2001                                                                        2002                                                                         2003                                                  2004

                        April                               1726
             Exposure
               High
New Regime




                        June                                1932
                        Aug                                 1268
                        Oct                                 1347
             Exposure
               Low




                        Dec                                 1315
                                                                               Feb April June Aug Oct Dec                                                    Feb April June Aug Oct Dec                                                 Feb April June Aug Oct Dec                                                    Feb April June Aug Oct Dec                                              Feb April June Aug Oct Dec

                                                            7588                                            2001                                                                         2002                                                                        2003                                                                         2004                                                  2005




                                                            Figure 2: Frequency of removal of nonpayment flag over time
This figure displays the distribution of the removal of nonpayments over time. In the Old regime the
credit registry removed all eligible arrears once a year, on December 31. Because of the bimonthly
feature of our data, and because removals are inferred as differences in the stock of reported defaults,
these nonpayments corresponds to the February-March bi-month (labeled February). This regime
ended at the end of September 2003, when the law change came into effect and the credit registry
removed arrears exactly three years to the day after the default was first reported.
                                                            4250

                                                            4000

                                                            3750

                                                            3500

                                                            3250
                                Number of arrears removed




                                                            3000

                                                            2750

                                                            2500

                                                            2250

                                                            2000

                                                            1750

                                                            1500

                                                            1250

                                                            1000

                                                             750

                                                             500

                                                             250

                                                               0
                                                                   Feb-00
                                                                            Apr-00




                                                                                                       Oct-00


                                                                                                                         Feb-01
                                                                                                                                  Apr-01
                                                                                                                                           Jun-01
                                                                                                                                                    Aug-01
                                                                                                                                                             Oct-01
                                                                                                                                                                      Dec-01
                                                                                                                                                                               Feb-02
                                                                                                                                                                                        Apr-02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Oct-02


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Feb-03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Apr-03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Oct-03


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Feb-04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Apr-04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Oct-04


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Feb-05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Apr-05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Jun-05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Aug-05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Oct-05
                                                                                              Aug-00




                                                                                                                                                                                                          Aug-02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Aug-03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Aug-04
                                                                                     Jun-00




                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jun-02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jun-03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Jun-04
                                                                                                                Dec-00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Dec-02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Dec-03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Dec-04




                                                                                                                                                                                                            32
                                                      Figure 3: Pre-trends
This figure shows that there is no difference in the preperiod trends (before the policy change) of
the difference between Early and Late defaulters, in the New regime and Old regime groups for our
main outcomes. The top panel shows preperiod trends for employed and 1(wages>0), which equals
one if an individual received any wage income, the lower panel for log(wages+1) and log(income+1)
where zeros have been replaced by 1. The solid lines represent the differences in averages of the
respective outcome variables between individuals who defaulted early in the year (high exposure)
and individuals who defaulted late in the year (low exposure), for individuals in the Old regime
group. The dashed line represent the same difference for individuals in the New regime group.
                         Employed                                                           1(wages>0)
                  Early minus Late defaulters                                         Early minus Late defaulters
 0.10




                                                                       0.08
 0.08




                                                                       0.06
 0.06




                                                                       0.04
 0.04




                                                                       0.02
 0.02




        0     1                   2             3             4               0   1                   2             3     4
                           Event time                                                          Event time
                     Old regime          New regime                                      Old regime          New regime




                       log(wages+1)                                                       log(income+1)
                  Early minus Late defaulters                                         Early minus Late defaulters
 0.70




                                                                       0.70
 0.60




                                                                       0.60
 0.50




                                                                       0.50
                                                                       0.40
 0.40




                                                                       0.30
 0.30




                                                                       0.20
 0.20




        0     1                   2             3             4               0   1                   2             3     4
                           Event time                                                          Event time
                     Old regime          New regime                                      Old regime          New regime




                                                                  33
               Figure 4: Retention time exposure and employment status
The effect of credit information on labor market outcomes is monotonically stronger with exposure
to the policy. The graphs show the estimated coefficients of the regression model with varying
intensity of exposure (regression (3.1)), defined as the reduction in number of retention months of
the New regime group relative to the Old regime group, holding fixed the calendar month of arrear
receipt. The top panel uses a dummy for positive wages as an outcome, and the lower panel uses
the logarithm of wage income as outcome.
                                                   10%$

                                                    8%$

                                                    6%$
                 1(wages>0)$




                                                    4%$

                                                    2%$

                                                    0%$

                                                   !2%$
                                                           1$Month$   3$Months$   5$Months$   7$Months$
                                                                 Average$Reduced$RetenAon$Time$

                                                   70%%
                  Log(Wages%+%1)%(SEK%hundreds)%




                                                   60%%
                                                   50%%
                                                   40%%
                                                   30%%
                                                   20%%
                                                   10%%
                                                    0%%
                                                   !10%%
                                                   !20%%
                                                           1%Month%   3%Months%   5%Months%   7%Months%
                                                                 Average%Reduced%RetenDon%Time%




                                                                          34
Tables

                              Table 1: Average retention months
Average retention months of the nonpayment flag in the credit registry in excess of three years are
shown for the New and Old regimes, who defaulted early (Feb. - May) or late (Aug. - Nov.).

                                                   Early Late
                                  New regime         0     0
                                  Old regime         6    0.5




                   Table 2: Outcome variables and summary statistics
Panel A defines key outcomes. Panel B presents sample stats during the three years before flag
deletion, including 2000, 2001 and 2002 for the New and 2001, 2002 and 2003 for the Old regimes.
Panel A: definitions of dependent variables
 employed                  dummy; one if the individual is employed conditional on being in labor force.
 1(wages > 0)              dummy; one if the individual has positive income from work.
 log(income + 1)           Log of pretax income, in 100 SEK; zeros replaced by 1.
 log(wages + 1)            Log of income from work, in 100 of SEK; zeros replaced by 1.
 Self-employed             dummy; one if the individual received positive wages from entrepreneurship.
 Relocates                 dummy; equals one if individual’s residence is in a different county from previous year.
 Years of schooling        Number of years of completed education, inferred from end of year level of education.
 Financial inquiries       number of requests for an individuals’ credit report by financial institutions.
 Non-financial inquiries number of requests for an individuals’ credit report by nonfinancial institutions.
Panel B: summary statistics
                                                     (1)      (2)   (3)
                        Dependent variables        mean    std dev median
                        employed                    0.43     0.50
                        1(wages > 0)                0.79     0.40
                        log(income + 1)            5.62      2.91   7.03
                        log(wages + 1)             5.57      2.97   7.04
                        Self-employed               0.05     0.21
                        Relocates                   0.07     0.27
                        Years of schooling         10.70     1.76    11
                        Financial inquiries         0.52     1.05
                        Non-financial inquiries     0.54     0.95
                        Age                        42.83    13.00    42
                        Male                        0.60     0.49
                        Home owner                  0.09     0.29
                        Number of individuals                15,232


                                                  35
                                  Table 3: Employment outcomes
This table shows that public information on past defaults causally reduces employment. The table
shows the coefficient — from regression:

                employedi,t      = –i + Êt + ‹· —earlyi ◊ newi ◊ posti,t + ” ◊ posti,t
                                     +“newi ◊ posti,t + ⁄earlyi ◊ posti,t + Ái,t .

Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. *, **, and *** represent 10, 5, and 1 percent
significance level, respectively.
                 (1)            (2)           (3)               (4)              (5)             (6)
 Coefficient   employed       employed      employed       1 (wages > 0)    1 (wages > 0)   1 (wages > 0)

      —         0.0280**        0.0203*      0.0125          0.0298**        0.0299***        0.0295**
                 (0.013)        (0.012)      (0.014)          (0.012)         (0.011)          (0.014)

 Post period     1 year         2 years    only year 2        1 year           2 years       only year 2
    Obs          50,623         63,113       50,482           50,623           63,113          50,482
     R2           0.002          0.003        0.003            0.007            0.024           0.027
 Individuals     12,664         12,664       12,664           12,664           12,664          12,664




                       Table 4: Wages, income, and self-employment
This table shows the effects of credit information on (log)wage income, self-employment, and
(log)income, using our main regression model:

                outcomei,t      = –i + Êt + ‹· —earlyi ◊ newi ◊ posti,t + ” ◊ posti,t
                                    +“newi ◊ posti,t + ⁄earlyi ◊ posti,t + Ái,t .

Zeros are replaced by one in the log outcomes. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level.
*, **, and *** represent 10, 5, and 1 percent significance level, respectively.
                                        (1)                  (2)               (3)
                  Coefficient     log(wages + 1)       self-employed    log(income + 1)

                      —              0.1995***           -0.0137**          0.1410*
                                      (0.077)             (0.005)           (0.075)

                 Post period          2 years             2 years           2 years
                    Obs               63,113              63,113            63,113
                     R2                0.030               0.003             0.040
                 Individuals          12,664              12,664            12,664




                                                    36
                   Table 5: Additional results: mobility and education
This table demonstrates effects of credit market information on household mobility and education.
The table contains the coefficients and standard errors for our linear triple difference in difference
estimations, using relocates, which is a dummy that equals one if a individual’s residence is in a
different county and not missing from the previous event time year, and “years of schooling”, which
measures the number of years of education as per the individual’s last completed level of education
as outcomes. The number of observations is lower for “relocates” as it is defined in differences from
the previous event time year, so sample period only includes event times 1 through 4 (drops event
time 0). Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. *, **, and *** represent 10, 5, and 1
percent significance level, respectively.
                                           (1)              (2)               (3)
                   Coefficient          relocates        relocates     years of schooling

                        —                0.0118          0.0159*            -0.0355**
                                         (0.009)         (0.009)             (0.014)

                Post period              2 years         2 years             2 years
           Sample (at event time 2)        full      non-homeowners            full
                     Obs                 50,229           45,356             60,313
                     R2                   0.001            0.001              0.015
                 Individuals             12,664           11,441             12,414




                                                    37
                      Table 6: Differential effects by number of arrears
This table shows differential effects of credit information on employment and credit by the number
of arrears at default. The table shows the regression output of our main regression model (2.1)
for different sub-samples. Columns 1 and 4 restrict the sample to individuals who had the median
(five) or less arrears at the time of the last default, while columns 2 and 5 restrict the sample to
those with more arrears than the median. Columns 3 and 6 use the entire sample and run the main
regression model (equation 2.1) where all right hand side variables are interacted with a dummy that
equals one for individuals with many arrears at the time of the last nonpayment. Outcomes include
1 (wages > 0), a dummy for positive wages, and consumer, which measures the level of consumer
credit in Swedish Kronor. The post period includes 2 years after information is deleted (event times
3 and 4). Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. *, **, and *** represent 10, 5, and
1 percent significance level, respectively.
                       (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)
    Coefficient   1 (wages > 0)   1 (wages > 0)   1 (wages > 0)   consumer       consumer      consumer


        —           0.0302*         0.0285*                         -103.38      967.34***
                     (0.017)         (0.015)                       (416.697)     (338.059)


    Interaction                                      -0.0016                                   1,070.73**
                                                     (0.023)                                    (536.56)


    Post period      2 years         2 years         2 years        2 years       2 years       2 years
      Sample      Few arrears     Many arrears         All        Few arrears   Many arrears      All
       Obs           31,346          31,242          63,113         31,767         31,659       62,901
        R2            0.023           0.017           0.025          0.026         0.020         0.019
    Individuals       6,291           6,373          12,664          6,291         6,373        12,664




                                                     38
                                      Table 7: Effects on individual’s and spouse’s disposable income
     The table shows the regression output of our main regression model (2.1) using the individual’s disposable income (Column 1), the household’s
     disposable income (Column 2), and the spouse’s disposable income, calculated as the difference between the household’s and individual’s
     disposable income (Column 3). Variables are winsorized at the 99th percentile. In columns 4 and 5 we use the logarithm of the individual’s
     disposable income and the household’s disposable income respectively, with zeros replace by one. The sample correspond to all individuals
     that are not single as of event time 2. The post period includes 2 years after information is deleted (event times 3 and 4). Standard errors
     are clustered at the individual level. *, **, and *** represent 10, 5, and 1 percent significance level, respectively.
                                 (1)                     (2)                   (3)                       (4)                            (5)
         Coefficient     individual disp. inc.   household disp. inc.   spouse disp. inc.   log(individual disp. inc. +1)   log(household disp. inc. +1)



             —                  37.27*                  34.25                 -5.64                   0.1204*                         0.1466*
                               (20.462)               (26.307)              (22.802)                  (0.068)                         (0.085)

      Preperiod mean
39




        Post period            2 years                2 years               2 years                   2 years                        2 years
           Obs                  23,154                 23,154                23,154                    23,154                         23,154
            R2                  0.026                  0.021                 0.002                      0.003                          0.002
        Individuals             4,667                  4,667                 4,667                      4,667                          4,667
                   Table 8: Heterogeneity by preperiod education levels
This table shows differential effects of credit information on employment depending on preperiod
level of education. The table shows the regression output of our main regression model (2.1) for
different sub-samples: individuals with 11 or less completed years of schooling, and individuals with
more than 11 years of schooling. Outcomes are positive wage income and log(wages+1), where zeros
have been replaced by 1, as defined previously. The post period includes 2 years after information
is deleted (event times 3 and 4). Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. *, **, and
*** represent 10, 5, and 1 percent significance level, respectively.
                                    (1)             (2)              (3)               (4)
          Coefficient          1 (wages > 0)   1 (wages > 0)    log(wages + 1)    log(wages + 1)

               —                 0.0440***         -0.0003         0.2982***          0.0102
                                  (0.013)          (0.021)          (0.091)           (0.147)

        Post period               2 years         2 years           2 years           2 years
   Sample (at event time 2)      Æ 11years       >11 years         Æ 11years         >11 years
             Obs                  44,543          16,240            44,543            16,240
             R2                    0.022           0.042             0.029             0.051
         Individuals               8,914           3,249             8,914             3,249




                                                 40
                  Table 9: Heterogeneity by preperiod employment history
This table shows differential effects of credit information on employment depending on preperiod
employment status. The table shows the regression output of our main regression model (2.1) for
different sub-samples. In both panels A and B, column 1 restricts to a sample of individuals who
are employed (employedi,t =1) as of event time 2, the year before their information on nonpayments
is removed. Column 2 restricts the sample to individuals who are unemployed as of event time
2. columns 3 and 4 split the sample of unemployed individuals. Column 3 restricts the sample to
individuals who are chronically unemployed as of event time 2, defined as those individuals who have
been unemployed for 2 or more years in the 3 year preperiod. Column 4 restricts to unemployed
individuals who are not chronically unemployed. Panel A uses a dummy for positive wage income
as outcome. Panel B uses log(wage+1), where zeros have been replaced by 1, as outcome. The
post period includes 2 years after information is deleted (event times 3 and 4). Standard errors are
clustered at the individual level. *, **, and *** represent 10, 5, and 1 percent significance level,
respectively.
Panel A
                                  (1)              (2)                  (3)                       (4)
          Coefficient        1 (wages > 0)    1 (wages > 0)        1 (wages > 0)             1 (wages > 0)

              —                0.0336**          0.0319*              0.0196                    0.0578*
                                (0.014)          (0.016)              (0.019)                   (0.030)

      Post period               2 years         2 years              2 years                    2 years
 Sample (at event time 2)      employed       unemployed        unemployed: chronic     unemployed: non-chronic
           Obs                  27,114          34,682                24,071                    10,611
           R2                    0.050           0.016                0.009                      0.065
       Individuals               5,424           6,942                4,819                      2,123
Panel B
                                   (1)               (2)                  (3)                       (4)
          Coefficient        log(wages + 1)    log(wages + 1)       log(wages + 1)            log(wages + 1)

              —                 0.2704**          0.1970*               0.0761                   0.4505**
                                 (0.109)          (0.107)               (0.124)                   (0.202)

      Post period                2 years          2 years              2 years                    2 years
 Sample (at event time 2)       employed        unemployed        unemployed: chronic     unemployed: non-chronic
           Obs                   27,114           34,682                24,071                    10,611
           R2                     0.072            0.018                0.014                      0.067
       Individuals                5,424            6,942                4,819                      2,123




                                                41
Supplemental Appendix: For Online Publication Only

A      Supplemental tables and figures

                      Table IAI: Sweden macroeconomic indicators
The table shows selected macroeconomic indicators for Sweden for the sample period. Source:
Statistics Sweden.
                                              1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
           GDP growth (annual %)              4.53 4.74 1.56 2.07 2.39 4.32 2.82
    Inflation, consumer prices (annual %)     0.45 1.04 2.41 2.16 1.93 0.37 0.45
 Unemployment, total (% of total labor force) 7.10 5.80 5.00 5.20 5.80 6.50 7.70



                Table IAII: Alternative specifications of wage outcome
The table shows alternative specifications for our baseline wage regressions shown in Table 4. In
particular, we define wages using the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation, which can be inter-
preted as a percentage change (Column 1), and the level of wages in 100 SEK winsorized at the
99th percentile (Column 2) and 95th percentile (Column 3). Standard errors are clustered at the
individual level. *, **, and *** represent 10, 5, and 1 percent significance level, respectively.
                                          (1)                 (2)        (3)
                 Coefficient     inv. hyp. sine(wages)       wages      wages

                       —                0.2321***           39.88* 39.96*
                                         (0.087)            (21.93) (20.80)

                 Post period              1 year             1 year    1 year
                    Obs                   50,623             50,623    50,623
                     R2                    0.018             0.060     0.060
                 Individuals              12,664             12,664    12,664




                                               42
                                  Table IAIII: Credit effects
This table shows the baseline effect of the removal of the nonpayment flag on access to consumer
credit. We focus on two outcomes: 1 (consumeri,t ), a dummy that equals 1 if individual i has any
outstanding consumer credit at event time t, and consumeri,t , the level of consumer credit at time
t in Swedish Kronor. Details of estimation are as in Table 3. Standard errors are clustered at the
individual level. *, **, and *** represent 10, 5, and 1 percent significance level, respectively.
                                              (1)             (2)
                      Coefficient     1 (consumeri,t > 0) consumeri,t

                            —                 0.0413***          903.87***
                                               (0.008)            (216.83)

                      Post period              1 year              1 year
                         Obs                   50,515              50,515
                          R2                    0.009              0.005
                      Individuals              12,664              12,664


                                   Table IAIV: Placebo test
This table shows the results of running our main regression test on a placebo sample. Here we define
the Placebo New regime group as individuals who defaulted in 2001 and the Placebo Old regime
group as individuals who defaulted in 2002. The coefficient — measures the difference in the outcome
for individuals in the Placebo New regime group who defaulted early and late in the year, relative to
the same difference for individuals in the Placebo Old regime group, before and after the deletion of
their past nonpayment flag, which occurs on event time 3 (2004 for the Placebo New regime, 2005
for the Placebo Old regime). The post period includes only one event time year as our sample ends
in 2005. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. *, **, and *** represent 10, 5, and 1
percent significance level, respectively.
                                    (1)              (2)           (3)
                  Coefficient     employed      1 (wages > 0) log(wages + 1)

                        —           -0.0080           -0.0038          -0.0708
                                    (0.012)           (0.013)          (0.090)

                  Post period       1 year            1 year           1 year
                     Obs            50,802            50,802           50,802
                      R2            0.001              0.025            0.026
                  Individuals       12,713            12,713           12,713




                                                 43
          Table IAV: Employment outcomes with varying treatment intensity
This table shows the output of a regression that estimates the effect of longer retention time of
nonpayment flags on the probability of receiving any wage income during the year. The table shows
contains the coefficient — from regression:

           1 (wages > 0) i,t     = Êi + Êt + Ê· + —exposuremonthsi ◊ newi ◊ posti,t +
                                    ” ◊ posti,t + “newi ◊ posti,t +
                                      ÿ
                                            ⁄t 1 (exposuremonthsi = t) ◊ posti,t + Ái,t ..
                                    t=1,3,5,7

There are 15,232 individuals in this sample instead of 12,664 as in previous tables because we include
the June-July cohort of defaulters, which is not included in the previous tests to balance individuals
with high and low exposure to the longer retention time. Standard errors are clustered at the
individual level. *, **, and *** represent 10, 5, and 1 percent significance level, respectively.
                             (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)
          Coefficient   1 (wages > 0)      1 (wages > 0)    log(wages + 1)     log(wages + 1)

               —           0.0051**             0.0059***      0.0364***         0.0398***
                            (0.002)              (0.002)        (0.013)           (0.013)

         Post period           1 year            2 years        1 year             2 years
            Obs                60,891            75,911         60,891             75,911
             R2                 0.007             0.024          0.018              0.030
         Individuals           15,232            15,232         15,232             15,232




                                                     44
                            Table IAVI: Effects by labor market tightness
This table shows differential effects of credit information on employment by the local unemployment
rate by kommun. The table shows the regression output of our main regression model (2.1) for
different sub-samples. Column 1 restricts the sample to communities where the unemployment
rate is higher or equal than the cross sectional median of the average in in 2003-2004 (3.85%),
while column 2 restricts the sample to communities where the unemployment rate is lower than the
median. Column 3 corresponds to the same sample as column 2, but excluding Stockholm kommun.
Outcomes are positive wage income (Panel A) and log(wage+1) (Panel B), where zeros have been
replaced by 1, as defined previously. Panel C presents the same regression output using the logarithm
of credit line as outcome. The post period includes 2 years after information is deleted (event times
3 and 4). Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. *, **, and *** represent 10, 5, and
1 percent significance level, respectively.
                                                 (1)                 (2)                      (3)
              Coefficient                   1 (wages > 0)       1 (wages > 0)            1 (wages > 0)


                   —                           -0.0061           0.0523***                  0.0348*
                                               (0.019)             (0.014)                  (0.018)


              Post period                      2 years             2 years                  2 years
 Sample (average at event time 3 and 4)   high unemployment   low unemployment   low unemployment ex-Stockholm
                  Obs                           23,419             37,979                   20,982
                  R2                            0.016               0.032                    0.030
              Individuals                       4,697               7,623                    4,210

                                                 (4)                 (5)                      (6)
              Coefficient                   log(wages + 1)     log(wages + 1)           log(wages + 1)


                   —                           -0.0693           0.3687***                 0.2561**
                                               (0.125)             (0.100)                  (0.127)


              Post period                      2 years             2 years                  2 years
 Sample (average at event time 3 and 4)   high unemployment   low unemployment   low unemployment ex-Stockholm
                  Obs                           23,419             37,979                   20,982
                  R2                            0.024               0.038                    0.035
              Individuals                       4,697               7,623                    4,210




                                                       45
   Table IAVII: Effects on number of credit inquiries: financial and non-financial
The table shows the regression output of our main regression model (2.1) using financial (Column
1) and non-financial inquiries (Column 2) as outcomes. The post period includes 2 years after
information is deleted (event times 3 and 4). Standard errors are clustered at the individual level.
*, **, and *** represent 10, 5, and 1 percent significance level, respectively.
                                                                                  (1)                     (2)
                                       Coefficient                non-financial inquiries    financial inquiries


                                              —                                0.0035               0.1256**
                                                                               (0.030)                  (0.057)


                                  Preperiod mean                                0.542                   0.523
                                      Post period                              2 years                  2 years
                                            Obs                                62,929                   62,929
                                             R2                                 0.044                   0.017
                                      Individuals                              12,664                   12,664




      Figure IA1: Credit registry information set for members and nonmembers
This figure depicts the set of variables that are available to members of the credit registry i.e. those
banks and financial institutions who also contribute and share their information, and nonmem-
bers who purchase reports from the credit registry, including employers, telephone companies, and
insurance companies, among others.
                                                                                         Creditbureau       Non creditbureau     Identity
                                                                                          members              members         confirmation

          1    Summary
               Name and address                                                               ✔                    ✔               ✔
               Social security number                                                         ✔                    ✔               ✔
               The individual data is protected (dummy variable)                              ✔                    ✔               ✔
               Arrear flag, bankruptcy flag (dummy variables)                                 ✔                    ✔
               Income information (last tax filing)                                           ✔                    ✔
               Credit relationships summarized (current total balance, limit, no.)            ✔
               5 arrear types (bankruptcy, debt reconstruction, prohibition to trade,         ✔                    ✔
               collection attempt, no show at court)
          2    Last registered activities (12 months)                                         ✔
          3    Personal information (age gender, civil status etc)                            ✔                    ✔
          4    Income information from tax authorities (2 years)                              ✔                    ✔
          5    Credit engagements (per credit line, the limit, balance)                       ✔
          6    Real estate engagements (date, ownership share and tax values)                 ✔
          7    Bankruptcy application (date)                                                  ✔                    ✔
          8    Arrears, 99 types with date and amount, (3 year)                               ✔
          9    Current debt balance at Kronofogden* (amount, date)                            ✔
          10   Number of credit inquiries (12 months)                                         ✔
          11   Credit score (probability to default in 12 months)                             ✔




                                                                                   46
