NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CEO PERSONALITY AND FIRM POLICIES
Ian D. Gow
Steven N. Kaplan
David F. Larcker
Anastasia A. Zakolyukina
Working Paper 22435
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22435

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2016

We thank Geoff Smart, Randy Street and Alan Foster of ghSMART and Charles O’Reilly for
providing the data on CEO personality. We thank discussants Christopher Parsons and Clifton
Green, seminar participants at the Northwestern Law School Law and Economics Colloquium,
Rice University, UC Irvine, UCLA, NBER Behavioral Finance Meeting, Wharton Business
School, Miami Behavioral Finance Conference, Boston University, Duke University, INSEAD
Accounting Symposium and brown bag participants at University of Chicago and Harvard
Business School for helpful comments. We are grateful to Michelle Gutman, Maria Kamenetsky,
Sarah Kervin, Mary Moon, Helen Park, Vincent Pham, Brian Tayan, and Robin Weiss for
providing excellent research assistance. This research was funded in part by the Fama-Miller
Center for Research in Finance at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. Anastasia
Zakolyukina thanks the Neubauer Family Foundation, Harry W. Kirchheimer Faculty Research
Fund, IBM Corporation Faculty Research Fund and University of Chicago Booth School of
Business for financial support. We acknowledge support of the University of Chicago Research
Computing Center for this study. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Ian D. Gow, Steven N. Kaplan, David F. Larcker, and Anastasia A. Zakolyukina. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

CEO Personality and Firm Policies
Ian D. Gow, Steven N. Kaplan, David F. Larcker, and Anastasia A. Zakolyukina
NBER Working Paper No. 22435
July 2016
JEL No. D22,D23,G3,G34
ABSTRACT
Based on two samples of high quality personality data for chief executive officers (CEOs), we
use linguistic features extracted from conferences calls and statistical learning techniques to
develop a measure of CEO personality in terms of the Big Five traits: agreeableness,
conscientiousness, extraversion, neuroticism, and openness to experience. These personality
measures have strong out-of-sample predictive performance and are stable over time. Our
measures of the Big Five personality traits are associated with financing choices, investment
choices and firm operating performance.
Ian D. Gow
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
igow@hbs.edu
Steven N. Kaplan
Booth School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
steven.kaplan@chicagobooth.edu

David F. Larcker
Gradusate School of Business
Knight Management Center
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
dlarcker@stanford.edu
Anastasia A. Zakolyukina
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Ave.
Chicago, IL 60637
aaz@chicagobooth.edu

I.

Introduction

Recent research in economics and finance has started to explore the relations between individual traits of senior executives, the investment and financing choices made by these executives, and
firm performance. Bertrand and Schoar (2003) use manager fixed effects to assess whether managerial “style” has an impact on various firm outcomes. While their results suggest a managerial
“style” effect, they provide limited insight into the specific executive characteristics comprised by
the fixed effects. Perhaps the most obvious characteristics are personality traits (Almlund et al.,
2011). But, with the exception of Kaplan et al. (2012) and O’Reilly et al. (2014b), very little research examines how (or whether) differences in personality traits are associated with executive
decision-making and firm performance. This gap in the literature is puzzling given the extensive
literature on personality psychology (e.g., Goldberg, 1993) and the fact that personality is a predictor of work performance for different occupations, including (usually lower level) executives
(e.g., Barrick, 2005, Judge et al., 2002).
A fundamental challenge for research into the effects of executive personality is the cost and
difficulty of measuring personality. Measuring personality traits typically requires the administration of costly instruments or detailed interviews which are difficult to implement for large
samples of top level executives. The purpose of this paper is to suggest an alternative approach.
In this paper, we (i) develop and validate measures of CEO personality that can be obtained for a
large sample of observations and (ii) examine the associations of these personality measures with
investment choices, financing choices and firm performance.
Our approach to measuring personality is based on the so-called “Big Five” framework, which
has attained a central place in psychological research (Goldberg, 1993) and identifies five broad
personality traits: agreeableness, conscientiousness, extraversion (versus introversion), neuroticism (versus emotional stability), and openness to experience. Personality psychology views these
personality traits as the “patterns of thoughts, feelings and behaviors that reflect the tendency to
respond in certain ways in certain circumstances” (Roberts, 2009, p.140).
Rather than attempting to measure personality traits using questionnaires or interviews, we
develop our measures using the linguistic features exhibited by CEOs during conference calls.
That is, we develop models to score linguistic features that allow us to assess the degree to which
each CEO is likely to be characterized along the Big Five dimensions of agreeableness, consci-

1

entiousness, extraversion, neuroticism, and openness to experience. We develop this predictive
scoring approach by statistically linking linguistic features of the CEOs during the question-andanswer (Q&A) portion of conference calls to their known personality traits from Kaplan et al.
(2012) and Kaplan and Sorensen (2016). We validate our measures of CEO personality traits by
showing that they exhibit substantial out-of-sample predictive ability using an independent sample obtained from O’Reilly et al. (2014b).
Our approach relies on research in psychology and linguistics (e.g., Pennebaker and King,
1999) that explores whether differences in the way language is used by individual executives reflects differences in personalities. This research finds that language is not only predictive of personality (e.g., Mairesse et al., 2007, Schwartz et al., 2013, Park et al., 2015), but that language-based
personality scores are also stable over time (Park et al., 2015). Our findings are consistent with
these studies. Using the O’Reilly et al. (2014b) sample of 28 CEOs, we find out-of-sample correlations between predicted and actual personality scores that range from 0.23 for agreeableness to
0.49 for neuroticism.1 These out-of-sample correlations are similar to the out-of-sample correlations that range between 0.21 and 0.54 reported in prior studies linking personality to language
in different contexts, such as student essays and random conversation snippets (Mairesse et al.,
2007) and Facebook messages (e.g., Schwartz et al., 2013, Park et al., 2015).
Having validated these models, we apply them to 70,329 conference calls from StreetEvents,
a product of ThomsonReuters, to estimate scores for Big Five personality traits for 4,591 individual CEOs and examine the associations between these estimated personality traits and investment
choices, financing choices and performance for the CEOs’ firms.2 Openness is positively associated with R&D intensity and negatively with net leverage. Conscientiousness is negatively associated with growth. Extraversion is negatively associated with both contemporaneous and future
return on assets and cash flows. Although our results are suggestive of possible sources of “manager effects,” it is important to emphasize and caution that, like Bertrand and Schoar (2003), our
paper is meant to be descriptive. We are not ascribing causality to our results.
Our study contributes to the recent literature that explores the relations between elements of
“managerial style” in firm policies and performance. These studies have examined traits such
1

Correlations for the other Big Five traits are 0.29 for openness to experience, 0.35 for extraversion, and 0.46 for
conscientiousness.
2
We exclude CEOs for which we have personality data from either Kaplan et al. (2012), Kaplan and Sorensen (2016)
or O’Reilly et al. (2014b).

2

as overconfidence (e.g., Malmendier and Tate, 2005, Goel and Thakor, 2008, Gervais et al., 2011,
Hirshleifer et al., 2012, Ben-David et al., 2013), optimism (e.g., Heaton, 2002, Hackbarth, 2009,
Graham et al., 2013), risk-taking (e.g., Graham et al., 2013), and past experiences and credentials
(e.g., Adams et al., 2005, Malmendier et al., 2011, Benmelech and Frydman, 2014, Falato et al.,
2014). Similar to the recent work by Kaplan et al. (2012) and Green et al. (2016), we find that CEO
personality is associated with organizational strategy choices and firm performance. Moreover,
our linguistic measures can be easily employed in future research examining executive personality.
This paper also complements Kaplan and Sorensen (2016) who use a larger sample of ghSMART
assessments to study how CEO characteristics differ from those for other top executives.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section II describes prior research on personality, including
research linking personality to decision-making and firm performance. Section III describes the
data used in our study. Section IV describes how we develop and evaluate our measures of CEO
personality. Section V studies the relationship between CEO personality and firm policies and
performance. Section VI concludes.

II.

Personality and firm outcomes

While the Big Five is the “most widely accepted taxonomy of personality traits” in personality
psychology (Almlund et al., 2011, p.48), its use in research in economics and finance has been
limited. Most of the few papers that have studied the economic consequences of personality using
Big Five traits rely on either laboratory experiments (e.g., Borghans et al., 2009, Daly et al., 2009,
Dohmen et al., 2010) or questionnaires (e.g., Sharpe et al., 2011). Research in economics and finance
has instead focused primarily on psychological constructs such as ability, optimism, confidence,
risk aversion, and time preference.
Nonetheless, there is an extensive literature in psychology examining the role of the Big Five
personality traits in various decisions and dimensions of job performance. In the following discussion, we draw on this literature to describe each of the Big Five traits and to generate predictions
regarding associations between the Big Five traits of CEOs and firm outcomes.

3

A.

Agreeableness
Agreeableness is associated with tendencies to be trusting (Costa and McCrae, 1992), compli-

ant (Hogan and Ones, 1997), to avoid conflict (Graziano et al., 1996), and to get along with others
(Barrick et al., 2002). It is related to beliefs about the importance of working hard and thus positively associated with career success (e.g., Holland et al., 1993). However, Boudreau et al. (2001)
suggest that agreeable individuals have a tendency to follow rather than lead. Agreeable leaders can also lack decision-effectiveness since they may easily yield to others’ views (LePine and
Van Dyne, 2001, Judge et al., 2009) and even be passive (Nadkarni and Herrmann, 2010). Indeed,
in business settings, some find that agreeableness is not associated with leadership effectiveness
(Judge et al., 2002). Because agreeable CEOs foster a cooperative (Giberson et al., 2009) and less
hierarchical cultures (Peterson et al., 2003), they create a less competitive and less result-oriented
environment (O’Reilly et al., 2014a). Agreeable individuals also tend to be modest, a trait not
generally associated with effective leadership (e.g., Goldberg, 1990, Bass and Stogdill, 1990). For
a sample of CEOs of private equity-funded companies, Kaplan et al. (2012) do not find any relation between subsequent performance and characteristics related to agreeableness. Thus prior
research does not suggest an unambiguous prediction for the relation between agreeableness and
performance.
While few clear predictions for the association between agreeableness and risk-taking behavior
are found in prior research, Borghans et al. (2009) find that less agreeable individuals are less risk
averse. Accordingly with regard to firm policies, the relation between agreeableness and risk
aversion suggests that less agreeable CEOs are likely to associate with firms that are innovative
(e.g., have higher levels of research and development and investment and, in turn, lower book-tomarket ratios) and employ financing strategies consistent with higher levels of risk-taking (e.g.,
higher leverage).

B.

Conscientiousness
Some studies suggest that conscientious leaders have a strong sense of direction, self-discipline,

persistence, and performance motivation (Bono and Judge, 2004). They are ambitious, practical, scrupulous, and careful (Costa and McCrae, 1992). Conscientiousness is also associated with
achievement and dependability (Mount and Barrick, 1995, Bono et al., 2014) and affects perfor-

4

mance through the willingness to follow rules, to exert effort (e.g., Barrick, 2005, Barrick and
Mount, 1991), and to set goals and remain committed to those goals (e.g., Barrick et al., 1993,
Gellatly, 1996). Also, since they are ambitious, conscientious CEOs are likely to be attracted to
outcome-oriented cultures with high expectations and norms for personal achievement (Sheridan, 1992) and to reward-oriented cultures that emphasize rewards for performance (O’Reilly
et al., 1991). Consistent with both of these points, Kaplan et al. (2012) find that subsequent performance is related to characteristics associated with conscientiousness. At the same time, highly
conscientious CEOs are likely to develop narrow fields of vision and a selective perception bias
(Nadkarni and Herrmann, 2010). Excessive conscientiousness might even result in rigidity, inflexibility, and a focus on trivial details at the cost of more important goals and, thus, negatively relate
to performance (Le et al., 2011).
Other research suggests that conscientious individuals are cautious, deliberate, and intolerant of ambiguity (e.g., Bono and Judge, 2004, McCrae and Costa Jr, 1996) and that they follow
established rules rather than changing them (Peterson et al., 2003). Conscientious individuals
tend to be controlled and risk-averse (Goldberg, 1990). Consistent with this, conscientiousness is
negatively related to adaptability (LePine et al., 2000) and strategic flexibility (Nadkarni and Herrmann, 2010). Although conscientiousness is related to leadership in government and military
settings, it is not related to leadership in business setting (Judge et al., 2002). Thus, highly conscientious CEOs are less attracted to innovative cultures that value risk-taking and inventiveness
(e.g., O’Reilly et al., 1991, Judge and Cable, 1997, O’Reilly et al., 2014a).
Drawing these together, the relation between conscientiousness and performance is ambiguous. We might expect conscientious CEOs to be less attracted to innovative firms (e.g., those with
higher levels of research and development and investment and, in turn, lower book-to-market
ratios) and employ financing strategies consistent with lower levels of risk-taking (e.g., lower
leverage).

C.

Extraversion
Some research suggests that CEO extraversion is positively associated with firm performance.

Extraverts are energetic and forceful in communicating their ideas (Judge et al., 2002). They have
greater flexibility and thus might be more likely to initiate a strategic change (Nadkarni and Her-

5

rmann, 2010) that is helped by their ability to generate positivity and enthusiasm among employees (e.g., Judge et al., 2002, Bono and Judge, 2004). In addition, extraversion implies ambition
and getting ahead (e.g., Barrick et al., 2002, Oh and Berry, 2009), and predicts both leadership
emergence and effectiveness (e.g., Barrick et al., 2001, Judge et al., 2002, Ensari et al., 2011).
However, others argue that these benefits of extraversion are conditioned on obedience and
submissiveness (e.g., Anderson et al., 2001, Barrick et al., 2002) and extraverted leaders view employee proactivity as a threat (Grant et al., 2011). As a result, extraversion might actually harm
performance by evoking resistance (e.g., Floyd and Wooldridge, 1997, Wooldridge et al., 2008).
Furthermore, extraverted CEOs may be less likely to solicit input from subordinates because they
over-estimate their own abilities; and, because extreme extraverts have short-lived enthusiasm,
they may pursue aggressive strategies and make premature changes if returns on such strategies
do not materialize quickly (Judge et al., 2009).
As such, the predicted relation between extraversion and firm performance is unclear and
thus an empirical question. With regard to firm policies, the relation between extraversion and
positivity suggests that extraverts are likely to associate with firms that are innovative (e.g., have
higher levels of research and development and investment and, in turn, lower book-to-market
ratios) and employ financing strategies consistent with higher levels of risk-taking (e.g., higher
leverage).

D.

Neuroticism
Bass and Stogdill (1990) suggest that most successful leaders are emotionally stable or low

on neuroticism. Emotional stability may enhance effective leadership, social interactions, and
complex decision-making (e.g., Boudreau et al., 2001, Judge et al., 2002). Emotional stability is associated with optimism, self-confidence, self-assurance, decisiveness and success (see references
in Boudreau et al., 2001). Emotionally stable people tend to remain calm and balanced in stressful
situations (McCrae and Costa Jr, 1997). They are less threatened by uncertainties and not afraid to
challenge the status quo and take risks (e.g., Judge and Bono, 2000, Peterson et al., 2003, Shimizu
and Hitt, 2004, Nadkarni and Herrmann, 2010). In contrast to the positive view on emotional stability, others argue that emotional stability can lead individuals to exclude relevant cues because
they are too focused (Easterbrook, 1959).

6

In contrast, individuals high on neuroticism tend to exhibit poor emotional adjustment and
experience negative affect such as anxiety, insecurity, and hostility (e.g., Judge et al., 1995, Hogan
and Ones, 1997, Watson and Clark, 1997). They can have a negative bias in the processing of information (Chan et al., 2007) and averse to uncertainty (Hirsh and Inzlicht, 2008). Neuroticism
is also negatively related to beliefs about the importance of working hard (Holland et al., 1993),
which is plausibly undesirable in a CEO. Consistent with this some studies find that neuroticism
is negatively related to job performance and career success (e.g., Salgado, 1997, Tett et al., 1991). At
the same time, neuroticism is argued to provide anticipatory ability that facilitates performance
(Nettle, 2006). Furthermore, Nettle (2006) suggests that high neuroticism can serve as a motivator
to achievement in competitive environments where a combination of other factors such as intelligence and conscientiousness allows for success, while low neuroticism may be related to a lack of
striving.
The predictions for the association between neuroticism and performance are ambiguous and
depend on the combination of other traits. With regard to organizational strategy, individuals low
on neuroticism are attracted to innovative firms, as they are more flexible, adaptable, and less inclined to fear new situations and taking risks (Wiggins, 1996). Thus, neuroticism should negatively
associate with firms that are innovative (e.g., have higher levels of research and development and
investment and, in turn, lower book-to-market ratios) and employ financing strategies consistent
with higher levels of risk-taking (e.g., higher leverage).

E.

Openness to experience
Individuals who score high on openness to experience are intellectually curious, open to stim-

uli, value unusual thought processes, and are seen as thoughtful and creative (McCrae and Costa,
1987). Open individuals have a need for change, cope better with change, and are capable of
understanding and adapting to other perspectives (e.g., Costa and McCrae, 1988, Spreitzer et al.,
1997, Judge et al., 1999). In business settings, openness is positively related to leadership (Judge
et al., 2002). Because open individuals are less likely to have selective perception and interpretation biases (e.g., Johnson et al., 2003, Shimizu and Hitt, 2004, Nadkarni and Narayanan, 2007),
there is a positive relation between CEO openness and strategic flexibility that has a positive effect on firm performance (Nadkarni and Herrmann, 2010). Notwithstanding the indications in the

7

literature that CEOs with high levels of openness are likely to be more successful, some research
has struggled to find an empirical link with CEO success (e.g., Boudreau et al., 2001).
Open leaders seek excitement and risks (Judge et al., 2002). There is a positive relation between
CEO openness and top management team intellectual flexibility and risk-taking (Peterson et al.,
2003). Although openness relates to preferences for innovative cultures (e.g., Judge and Cable,
1997), Giberson et al. (2009) do not find evidence supporting this argument, while O’Reilly et al.
(2014a) find that open CEOs encourage cultures that value innovation, speed, experimentation,
and risk-taking.
Thus predictions for the association between high openness and performance are ambiguous.
Regarding firm policies, the natural prediction is that CEOs with high openness to experience
are likely be associated with firms that are innovative (e.g., have higher levels of research and
development and investment and, in turn, lower book-to-market ratios) and employ financing
strategies consistent with higher levels of risk-taking (e.g., higher leverage).

III.

CEO personality data

We have data on personality and conference calls for 119 CEOs. The personality data come
from two sources: data on 28 CEOs of U.S. technology firms from O’Reilly et al. (2014b) and data
on 91 CEOs of public firms from Kaplan et al. (2012) and Kaplan and Sorensen (2016). We refer to
the data from these sources as the O’Reilly and ghSMART samples, respectively. Each of these data
sources relies on assessments by third-person observers, the accuracy of which has been shown to
dominate that of self-assessments (e.g., Mount et al., 1994, Oh et al., 2011, Funder, 2012).

A.

O’Reilly sample
As discussed in Appendix A, O’Reilly et al. (2014b) collected Big Five data from 246 current

employees who completed the Ten-Item Personality Inventory (Gosling et al., 2003) for the CEOs
at their respective firms. The O’Reilly et al. (2014b) data are coded on a Likert scale ranging from
“disagree strongly” (1) to “agree strongly” (7) for each of the five traits. For each trait, we rescale
the scores so they range from zero to one.

8

B.

ghSMART sample
As discussed in Appendix A, the data from Kaplan et al. (2012) and Kaplan and Sorensen (2016)

are sourced from assessments of CEO candidates by the management assessment firm ghSMART,
which conducts 4-hour interviews with candidates for CEO positions. These interviews result in
20- to 40-page reports in which each candidate is assigned a letter grade for each of 30 characteristics.3 The ghSMART data we have contain grades for 672 CEO candidates. These individuals are
CEO candidates at firms involved in private equity and venture capital transactions (a majority of
the sample) as well as other public and private companies. During our sample period, 91 of these
candidates become public company executives for whom we have conference call information.
The ghSMART and O’Reilly data are based on two different approaches to personality traits.
While the O’Reilly data provide assessments for the Big Five traits, the ghSMART data provide
assessments for multiple characteristics that have to be translated into the Big Five traits.4 Our
primary approach to doing this uses a clustering algorithm combined with the advice and insight
of Charles O’Reilly, a psychologist at Stanford University who works in the area of personality
psychology. Before performing the cluster analysis, we obtained O’Reilly’s view on how each
characteristic maps to Big Five traits.
We first apply the hierarchical item clustering algorithm (iclust) from the R package psych
(Revelle, 1979, 2015) to find groups of characteristics that capture the same underlying construct.
This algorithm combines the most similar characteristics into a new composite cluster until an
estimate of the unidimensionality or the presence of a single common underlying factor in a group
of characteristics (Revelle’s β) fails to increase. Given our focus on the Big Five personality traits,
we ask the iclust to stop at five clusters. On this basis, the iclust algorithm produces the
clusters depicted in Figure 1. We then compare the clustering and the mapping from ghSMART
characteristics to Big Five traits suggested by Charles O’Reilly (Expert Mapping).
Every characteristic in cluster C20 was expected to be in High openness, so we map this cluster
accordingly. Similarly, we map characteristics in cluster C7 to Conscientiousness and those
in cluster C8 to Extraversion. Most of the characteristics in cluster C22 were expected to be in Conscientiousness, except that s removesunderperformers and s aggressive were mapped to Agreeableness,
3

We drop two characteristics (s writtencommunications and s oralcommunication) because values for those characteristics are missing for about half of the observations.
4
Table I in Kaplan et al. (2012, pp.976–978) provides a detailed description of the ghSMART characteristics.

9

s networkoftalentedpeople to Extraversion and s proactivity to High openness. Nonetheless, we assign
all characteristics in cluster C22 to Conscientiousness.
With regard to cluster C23, we have three traits expected to be in Agreeableness, while two
are expected to be High openness and one to each of Conscientiousness, Extraversion, and Emotional
stability. We follow the plurality and map most characteristics to Agreeableness, in part because this
is the only cluster mapping to that Big Five trait. However, because one of the eight characteristics
in this cluster is the sole characteristic mapped by O’Reilly to Emotional stability, we assign that
characteristic to that remaining Big Five trait. Our final mapping is shown in Table I.5
We average the letter grades of characteristics that correspond to the same Big Five dimension
and normalize the scores to be between zero and one. Our Big Five classifications are related to,
but different from, the factor analysis derived classifications in Kaplan and Sorensen (2016) obtained from the characteristics of executives in over 2,600 ghSMART assessments. Kaplan and
Sorensen (2016) use the characteristics to create factors that explain the variation in characteristics, but are uncorrelated with each other. The second factor in Kaplan and Sorensen (2016) is
positively related to agreeableness characteristics and negatively related to some of those for conscientiousness; the third factor is positively related to some conscientiousness characteristics and
negatively related to those for extraversion; while the fourth factor is positively related to openness characteristics and, again, negatively to some conscientiousness characteristics.

C.

CEO personality samples: Descriptive statistics
Table II presents descriptive statistics on CEO personality for the 28 CEOs in the O’Reilly sam-

ple and for the 91 CEOs in the ghSMART sample for whom we have conference call data from
StreetEvents. Although the scores in both samples range from zero to one, these scores are not
directly comparable between the two samples because these are constructed using very different
methodologies.6 If a median score for agreeableness is closer to one, half of the CEOs are closer
5

One alternative approach would rely exclusively on the iclust mapping. This would mean mapping
s calmunderpressure to agreeableness, increasing the out-of-sample correlation for that trait from 0.23 to 0.29, but would
mean the loss of a measure of emotional stability. The iclust mapping implies two conscientiousness clusters with
out-of-sample correlations of 0.21 and 0.41 compared to that of our final mapping of 0.46. A second alternative would
use Expert Mapping, but the out-of-sample performance is no better, and generally worse than that of our final mapping. We believe our final mapping utilizes the strength of the statistical relationships from iclust and the advice
from O’Reilly from Expert Mapping to combine ghSMART characteristics into meaningful clusters that correspond
to the Big Five traits better than either of these approaches alone.
6
This is also the reason we use the two samples separately—estimating the model using the ghSMART sample and
validating using the O’Reilly sample.

10

in agreeableness to the most agreeable CEO on a given scale and, thus, we can loosely say that
CEOs are generally more agreeable than disagreeable. In both samples, CEOs are generally more
agreeable, conscientious, extraverted, emotionally stable, and open on the corresponding scale.
From 2001 to early 2013, we have an average of 13 earnings conference calls for each ghSMART
CEO resulting in 1,186 calls and an average of 27 conference calls for each O’Reilly CEO resulting
in 771 calls.
Firm characteristics in these two samples are substantially different. Because we use ghSMART
data to estimate personality prediction models and O’Reilly data to evaluate their accuracy, these
differences ensure that firm-specific features are not the primary determinants of our personality
measures. Table III presents descriptive statistics on industry composition for the personality
CEOs sample. As expected, the O’Reilly sample is dominated by technology firms in computer
software and hardware industries, represented by 16 and 7 firms, respectively. In contrast, the
ghSMART sample has an equal number of CEOs from computer software and pharmaceuticals
industries, both represented by 11 firms. Overall, the ghSMART data cover 28 industries out of 49
Fama-French industries; whereas the O’Reilly sample covers only 7 industries.
Table IV compares characteristics of firms with ghSMART CEOs, firms with O’Reilly CEOs
and all other firms with no CEO personality data. Because the sample of firms with CEO personality data is significantly smaller than the sample with no personality data, extreme observations
are potentially more important when computing average values in this sample. Accordingly, we
focus our comparisons on median differences. The ghSMART sample firms are similar to the sample of firms with no personality data. For ghSMART firms and firms with no personality data,
median total assets are, respectively, $0.93 and $0.75 billion; the book-to-market ratios are 48.58%
and 44.66%; return on assets are 11.45% and 12.42%; cash flows deflated by lagged total assets
are 8.07% and 9.05%; and the net leverage is 5.94% and 3.35%. Both samples have lower R&D
intensity compared to the O’Reilly sample. The O’Reilly firms are larger with median assets of
$7.44 billion; higher-growth firms with book-to-market of 24.89%; more profitable, with return
on assets of 15.95% and cash flow of 18.85%; higher-R&D, with R&D intensity of 14.79%; and
lower-net-leverage firms with the net leverage of −24.51%.

11

IV.
A.

Measuring personality

Prior research on personality and language
Because interviews and questionnaires of executives are not feasible for a large sample of pub-

lic company executives, we follow prior research in psychology and linguistics (e.g., Pennebaker
and King, 1999) in exploring whether differences in the way individual executives use language
reflect differences in personality. For example, an early study in this literature, Pennebaker and
King (1999), applies the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) categories to examine a variety of sources, including diaries from substance abuse inpatients, daily writing assignments from
students, and journal abstracts from social psychologists, and finds that these demonstrate internal consistency and out-of-sample classification power. The study concludes “that linguistic style
is an independent and meaningful way of exploring personality.”
Much of this research relies on written text, such as e-mail messages (Oberlander and Gill,
2006), essays (Mairesse et al., 2007), self-narratives (Hirsh and Peterson, 2009), and text messages
(Holtgraves, 2011). Some studies have focused on written language used in less formal settings,
such as Twitter and blogs. Qiu et al. (2012) examine the tweets of 142 participants to study how Big
Five personality traits are associated with linguistic markers in posts on Twitter and find evidence
of associations between use of words (in terms of LIWC categories) and Big Five traits. Yarkoni
(2010) analyses the blogs of 576 personality survey respondents to derive mappings from LIWC
categories and individual words to Big Five traits. Overall, a number of studies find significant
associations between LIWC categories and Big Five traits (see also Hirsh and Peterson, 2009,
Holtgraves, 2011).7 A challenge with using written text in our setting is that published writing
by CEOs likely involves the active participation of other managers and advisers such as lawyers
and communication specialists which would reduce our ability to discern personality traits from
such text. Relatively informal writing such as that used by Qiu et al. (2012) and Yarkoni (2010) is
difficult to obtain or identify for a large sample of CEOs.
Other research relies on spoken language, but generally focuses on features observable from
transcripts. For instance, Mehl et al. (2006) follow 96 participants over two days using electronic
recorders. While they use elements relying on third-party assessments of audible properties, such
7

Mairesse and Walker (2010) reverse the process by applying results from psycholinguistic studies to develop a
system that produces utterances matching particular personality profiles. They find that human judges perceive the
personality of system utterances in the intended fashion.

12

as mood, they focus on features observable from transcripts (e.g., talking more or using shorter
words). Mehl et al. (2006) find evidence of Big Five traits manifesting in features of recorded
language. Mairesse et al. (2007) use two corpora, the first corpus contains 2,479 essays from psychology students (1.9 million words); the second contains recorded speech of 96 students (97,468
words) from Mehl et al. (2006) . Even though they use speech and include some voice features,
their focus is on features observable in transcripts, such as word categories from LIWC, features
from the MRC Psycholinguistic database, and utterance type (command, question, etc.). They find
that linguistic markers are helpful in classifying participants Big Five personality traits. While
some research has focused on audible properties of spoken language, e.g., Hobson et al. (2012),
this research has focused on a limited set of cues, such as vocal dissonance, with a view to detecting deception.
In recent work, Green et al. (2016) apply models provided by Mairesse et al. (2007) to CEO
comments in the Q&A portion of earnings conference calls to construct a measure of extraversion. Because the Mairesse et al. (2007) algorithms were developed in a very different context
(i.e., student essays and random conversation snippets), Green et al. (2016) validate their measure using student assessments of CEO extraversion from 100 audio excerpts of conference calls.
They show that the correlation between the listener-based assessments of extraversion and the
linguistic-based measure is 0.40 and the agreement rises to 75% for the binary measure when listeners are more confident in their assessments. In contrast to Green et al. (2016), we leverage
unique data on CEO personality to develop our own mapping between linguistic features and
personality traits. We also measure all Big Five traits and evaluate out-of-sample predictive performance of our models against high-quality personality assessments.

B.

Selection of linguistic features
The first task in our analysis is to construct linguistic features from conference calls. Our source

of conference calls transcripts is StreetEvents. We parse these transcripts into individual utterances. For each utterance, we have data on its relative position, the name of the speaker who made
it, his or her employer and title, and whether the utterance was part of the corporate presentation
or Q&A portion of the call. For each CEO-call observation, we aggregate all utterances made by

13

a CEO during Q&A. We require a minimum of 150 words.8 This provides us with linguistic data
on 4,710 CEOs—119 with data on Big Five and 4,591 with no data on Big Five—participating in
72,286 earnings conference calls.
B.1.

Features considered

We follow Pennebaker and King (1999) in using counts of words from categories as the primary
features for our analysis. Most of the word categories we use come from LIWC. According to
Pennebaker and King (1999, p.1297), LIWC’s “subjective dictionaries were independently rated
by judges. In addition to careful construction of language categories, most LIWC dimensions
were subsequently validated by having judges rate hundreds of files of written text.” We use
the most recent version of the LIWC, LIWC2007 (Pennebaker et al., 2007). While LIWC has 64
word-list categories, we omit several categories unlikely to be common in the context of corporate
conference calls (e.g., categories grouped under “social processes,” which include words such as
daughter, baby, and neighbor and those under “biological processes,” which include words such as
spit, love, and eat).
We further augment LIWC features with two additional sets of word categories. The first set of
word categories comes from Larcker and Zakolyukina (2012). These additional categories modify
LIWC categories by breaking them into smaller subcategories, such as extreme and non-extreme
positive emotion words. The second set of word categories comprises four categories constructed
for this paper that add dimensions missing from LIWC, but hypothesized to be related to the Big
Five traits in prior research. These are thanks (e.g., thank you, you’re welcome), vague quantifiers
(e.g., a load of, a lot of ), qualifiers (e.g., arguably, as a whole), and generalizations (e.g., all that stuff,
almost).
Alternative approaches to feature selection common in finance and accounting tend to use significantly larger sets of features (e.g., measures of the presence or absence of individual words as in
Antweiler and Frank, 2004, Li, 2010, Balakrishnan et al., 2010) or significantly fewer features (e.g.,
Loughran and McDonald, 2011, propose the six alternative single-feature measures of the “tone”
of 10-K filings using the proportion of words falling into specific categories, namely, positive tone,
negative tone, uncertainty, litigious, strong modal words, and weak modal words).
While feature selection and the approach used to develop classification models using those
8

This requirement reduces the number of calls by 3% and the number of CEOs by less than 1%

14

features are, in principle, distinct, they are often closely related. Models that use a large number
of features often use the Naive Bayes algorithm, which Hastie et al. (2009, pp.210–211) point out
is “especially appropriate when the dimension p of the feature space is high, making [other approaches] unattractive.” Following prior research on personality, we have chosen a much smaller
feature set. Accordingly, issues of high-dimensionality should not be as problematic for our approach.
Papers that construct models using a smaller number of features tend not to examine the performance of their models directly. For example, Loughran and McDonald (2011) propose six alternative single-feature measures of the “tone” of 10-K filings, but have no benchmark measure of
tone to evaluate the performance of their measures. Instead, they examine the stock market reaction at the time of 10-K filings, which amounts to a test of joint hypotheses that the market reacts
to the tone of 10-K filings and that their measures successfully capture tone.9 Similarly, Li (2008)
proposes “fog” as a single-feature measure of managerial obfuscation, but also has no benchmark
measure against which to evaluate it. Our approach differs in that we have benchmark measures
of personality with which to evaluate the classification performance of the models we estimate.
We draw on prior research on the relation between personality and language to identify linguistic features for our analysis. Based on Qiu et al. (2012), Gill and Oberlander (2003), and Iacobelli et al. (2011), we consider Self-references, measured as the number of uses of the words “I” and
“we” by the speakers. Based on Qiu et al. (2012), Mairesse and Walker (2010), and Pennebaker
and King (1999), we consider linguistic markers of Negative emotion (e.g., absurd, adverse), Positive
emotion (e.g., fantastic, nice), Agreement (e.g., agree, thanks), Certainty (e.g., always, a lot), markers of
Cognitive processes (e.g., admitting, except), and use of Hesitation and fillers phrases (e.g., you know).
Finally, we consider markers of Linguistic processes such as the use of conjunctions, adverbs, and
words with more than six letters (e.g. Qiu et al., 2012), as well as measures of the number of times
spoken relative to others on the conference call. We consider 33 linguistic features in total.
We standardize all features so that they are comparable across calls with different lengths of
CEOs’ comments. For word categories, we divide the raw word count by the words spoken by
the CEO and multiply by the median words spoken by CEOs, i.e., 1,950. For times spoken, we
divide the raw number of times the CEO spoke by the number of times all speakers spoke and
multiply by the median number of times all speakers spoke on a call, i.e., 15. For words spoken,
9

An alternative explanation is that a common underlying cause determines both tone and market reaction.

15

we divide the raw word count of the CEO by the total word count of all speakers and multiply by
the median word count of all speakers on a call, i.e., 5,650.
B.2.

Feature selection and prediction models

We use gradient boosting of regression trees (Freund and Schapire, 1997, Friedman, 2001) to
relate linguistic features to personality traits.10 Boosting methods have proved remarkably successful in producing highly accurate out-of-sample predictive performance by combining many
relatively inaccurate models such as regression trees (Schapire and Freund, 2012). A regression
tree partitions the feature space into a set of regions and uses the mean of the dependent variable
as the fitted value for each partition.11 For instance, a tree can split CEOs by Words spoken and use
the average neuroticism score in each region as the estimate for CEOs. The algorithm can further
split these regions by, for instance, Adverbs. The second split produces a regression tree with an
interaction depth of two because both Words spoken and Adverbs define a region.
As discussed in Hastie et al. (2009) (Section 10.7), of all of the predictive methods, trees are
the best candidates for the off-the-shelf predictive algorithms because they are fast to construct,
interpretable, invariant to strictly monotone transformations of features, and immune to the effects of outliers in features. Regression trees also perform internal feature selection and, as a
result, are resistant to the inclusion of irrelevant predictor features. Thus, when we include all
33 linguistic features, the algorithm tends to ignore features that are irrelevant for predicting personality. However, a single tree is inaccurate and a gradient boosted model often dramatically
improves its accuracy while maintaining desirable properties. The boosted tree model is essentially a weighted sum of trees that minimizes a loss function. Each iteration adds a new tree that
maximally improves the fit to the data given the already existing model and its fit (Friedman,
2001). This procedure divides the feature space with much higher granularity than a single tree.
We choose the squared error criterion as our loss function. This is a standard choice for prediction
problems with continuous outcomes.
The gradient boosting algorithm depends on three meta-parameters. The first parameter is
10
We use gradient boosting of regression trees as implemented in the gbm R package by Ridgeway (2015) with
the following parameters: distribution = "gaussian", n.trees = 60,000, interaction.depth = 2,
shrinkage = 0.01.
11
Strictly speaking, this is the approach that minimizes squared error; other loss functions will yield different estimators, such as the median.

16

the interaction depth of the regression trees, which is the number of splits considered for each
tree. As the optimal value of interaction depth is low in most problems (Hastie et al., 2009), we
set this parameter equal to two (i.e., each tree involves two splits).12 The second parameter is the
shrinkage or learning parameter, which scales the contribution of each new tree that is added to
the model. This parameter controls the learning rate with smaller values reducing over-fitting and
thus improving out-of-sample performance (Friedman, 2001). We set the shrinkage parameter to
0.01, which James et al. (2013, p. 323) identifies as a “typical value.” The third parameter is the
number of trees in the model. There is a trade-off between shrinkage and the optimal number
of trees in the model. Smaller values of shrinkage require correspondingly larger values for the
number of trees. We set the maximum number of trees to 60,000. Because the algorithm starts
with a single tree and grows the model one tree at a time, this means we fit 60,000 models and
select among these the model that minimizes mean squared error when applied out of sample to
the O’Reilly data.
B.3.

Results

We estimate models for predicting personality based on the ghSMART data without using
information from the O’Reilly data. We use the O’Reilly data to choose the best model among
those estimated and to evaluate the classification performance of the model selected for each trait.
Figure 2 depicts the basic elements of this analysis. For each Big Five personality trait, Figure
2 includes a pair of plots. The top plot of each pair depicts the out-of-sample mean squared error
(MSE) calculated after applying the model estimated using the ghSMART data at each step of
the boosting algorithm (represented by the number of trees included at that step) to the O’Reilly
data. For each CEO, we compute the fitted personality scores as the median predicted scores over
all conference calls. We then compare the fitted personality scores with the actual personality
scores to calculate MSE. For each Big Five trait, we select the model (i.e., the number of trees) that
minimizes the out-of-sample MSE for that trait. The final models are depicted by vertical lines on
the MSE plots.
The size of the final models varies by trait. Extraversion and conscientiousness correspond
12
In untabulated analysis, we examine the sensitivity of out-of-sample performance to setting this parameter equal
to one (a single-split regression tree) or three. For some traits, increasing the interaction depth improves the outof-sample performance, while for others decreasing it improves performance. To optimize performance across traits
while minimizing the risk of over-fitting, we chose a single value of two.

17

to the smallest models with under 500 trees, and agreeableness corresponds to the largest model
close to 50,000 trees. Relatively large models are not surprising because the shrinkage parameter is
small. The small shrinkage parameter allows for slower learning that improves the out-of-sample
performance at the cost of computing larger models. Indeed, smaller models for extraversion and
conscientiousness indicate the importance of slow learning as fast learning causes rapid deterioration in the predictive performance. As the top plots consistently show, there are a large number
of models that correspond to the MSE that is close to the minimum MSE of the best performing
models; the performance of the final models is not driven by an isolated drop in the MSE. Because
we do not use the O’Reilly sample for estimating these models, the predictive performance on
these CEOs is an unbiased estimate of how the final models would perform on the new sample of
CEOs.
The bottom plot of each pair depicts the relation between the value of the respective Big Five
trait assigned to each CEO in the O’Reilly data with the predicted value of that trait for the model
selected. Underneath the plot is the regression equation for that relation. Because the regressor
(actual Big Five score) and regressand (predicted Big Five score) have been standardized to have
mean zero and unit standard deviation, the slope coefficient from this univariate regression represents the correlation between the actual and predicted Big Five scores, which is also the square root
of the R2 for the regression. The lowest correlations are 0.23 for agreeableness and 0.29 for openness with both being statistically insignificant. The lack of statistical significance could be due to
the small sample of 28 CEOs in the O’Reilly data. The remaining three correlations are larger and
statistically significant. The correlations are 0.35 for extraversion, 0.46 for conscientiousness and
0.49 for neuroticism. Because of concerns about outliers in the estimated scores, we also examine
the impact of winsorizing these outliers on the regression analysis. This impact is depicted in the
bottom plots by the dashed regression lines. As can be seen, winsorizing standardized predicted
personality scores at 3 generally does not materially affect the correlation between the actual and
predicted personality scores for the O’Reilly sample.
These out-of-sample correlations are consistent with prior findings. Similar to this paper, a
number of recent studies (e.g., Mairesse et al., 2007, Schwartz et al., 2013, Park et al., 2015) used
linguistic features to predict continuous Big Five scores in different contexts. Schwartz et al. (2013)
analyzed Facebook messages of 75,000 volunteers to predict their Big Five traits. Large sample
allows them to use phrases and topics with LIWC providing a lower bound on the predictive
18

performance. When the authors use LIWC, the correlation is 0.25 for agreeableness and 0.29 for
openness, and 0.27 for extraversion, 0.29 for conscientiousness, and 0.21 neuroticism. In contrast,
when the authors combine LIWC, phrases, and topics, the highest correlation is 0.42 for openness,
similar to the highest value in our sample of 0.49 for neuroticism. Again based on a large Facebook
sample, Park et al. (2015) report similar correlations for self-reported and observer-assessed Big
Five traits. The out-of-sample correlations with the actual self-reported personality range from
0.35 for neuroticism and agreeableness to 0.43 for openness. The out-of-sample correlations with
observer-assessed personality are, on average, 0.32 and statistically similar to correlations with
self-reported personality. Finally, using the sample of student essays from Pennebaker and King
(1999), random conversation snippets from Mehl et al. (2006), and the expanded set of linguistic
and prosodic features, Mairesse et al. (2007) report the highest out-of-sample correlation of 0.33
for openness based on the student essay data and 0.54 for extraversion based on the conversation
data.

C.

Relation between features and personality
While the tree-based boosting approach appears to provide robust predictive models, one po-

tential disadvantage relative to regression-based or simpler tree-based approaches is lower model
interpretability. Nonetheless, it is possible to gain some understanding of the relation between
features and predicted personality by considering the relative importance of various features and
examining partial dependence plots. Figure 3 depicts, for each Big Five trait, the importance of
each predictor (i.e., linguistic feature) in the model relative to the most important feature for that
model. Importance is computed as the reduction of the squared error attributable to this predictor
as described in Friedman (2001).
For the five most important predictors for each Big Five trait, we also examine partial dependence plots to understand the relation between linguistic features and estimated personality
(Friedman, 2001). Figure 4 depicts, for each Big Five trait, single-variable partial dependence plots
for that trait on the most important features. Each partial dependence plot depicts the relation
between the given linguistic feature and the estimate of the given Big Five trait averaged over
all other linguistic features in the ghSMART sample.13 Because the tree-based boosting approach
13

The plot is produced by averaging estimated Big Five traits over the training (ghSMART) sample as the given
feature is varied while the other features are held at their observed values. Because the tree-based models are not

19

allows for discontinuities, the partial dependence plots need not be smooth.
In the following discussion, we highlight some general patterns of the fitted specifications
and relate these to prior research on the relation between linguistic features and personality. We
note that relative importance is not based on the statistical significance of the linguistic features
selected by the boosting algorithm. As discussed in Shmueli (2010), the statistical significance of
regression coefficients plays little or no role in assessing the out-of-sample predictive performance.
Specifically, a variable that is not significantly associated with an outcome in a model estimated
using training data can nonetheless provide useful information for predicting outcomes out of
sample.
While we relate our models to predictions based on prior research, we make a number of
caveats in doing so. First, prior research does not yield sharp predictions and associations documented appear to vary from one study to the other (Ireland and Mehl, 2014).
Second, the context that we study—corporate earnings conference calls—is arguably different
from those studied in prior research which examine relatively informal or personal settings such
as tweets (Qiu et al., 2012), everyday speech (Mehl et al., 2006), email (Oberlander and Gill, 2006),
psychology students’ essays and students’ recorded speech (Mairesse et al., 2007), self-narratives
of undergraduate students (Hirsh and Peterson, 2009), blogs (Yarkoni, 2010), text messages (Holtgraves, 2011), and Facebook posts (Schwartz et al., 2013). At the same time, word use is highly
contextual and many of the findings may not hold in a wide range of settings (e.g., Tausczik and
Pennebaker, 2010, Park et al., 2015). One advantage of our setting, however, is that the circumstances of communication are narrower, meaning that variations in speech patterns are more likely
to be attributable to personality differences than they would be when the situation of speech varies
more widely. One disadvantage of our setting is that its constrained nature may lead to speech
being less personal and, hence, less revealing of personality.
Third, the goal of our study is to classify CEOs’ personality based on language features. This
goal differs from that of most prior research which has generally focused on predicting language
features using measures of personality rather than using language to classify individuals in terms
of their Big Five traits.
constrained to be linear, this is not equivalent to the estimates that would result from holding the other features at the
mean of their observed values.

20

C.1.

Agreeableness

Based on Goldberg (1992) and John and Srivastava (1999), agreeableness is associated with
adjectives such as appreciative, considerate, gentle, and trustful. The most important predictors
for agreeableness are Words spoken, Adverbs, Words per sentence, Vague quantifiers, and Quantifiers. A
relation between the number of words and agreeableness is consistent with Mairesse and Walker
(2010). In a blog context, agreeable individuals have shorter posts than disagreeable individuals
because they are more considerate of others. Indeed, when the number of words per sentence is
high, the agreeableness score is low.
C.2.

Conscientiousness

Based on Goldberg (1992) and John and Srivastava (1999), conscientiousness is associated with
adjectives such as careful, deliberate, dependable, disciplined, planning, and thorough. The most
important predictors for conscientiousness are General knowledge references, Hesitations, Words > 6
letters, Qualifiers, and Words per sentence. General knowledge references and Hesitations can capture
fillers and there is a negative association between fillers and conscientiousness (Schwartz et al.,
2013). Indeed, the conscientiousness score decreases in the highest values of General knowledge
references and Hesitations. The complexity of comments as captured by Words per sentence is also
negatively related to conscientiousness.
C.3.

Extraversion

Based on Goldberg (1992) and John and Srivastava (1999), extraversion is associated with adjectives such as adventurous, aggressive, confident, sociable, and vigorous. The most important
predictors for extraversion are Words per sentence, Quantifiers, Adverbs, Anxiety, and Discrepancy.
These results are similar to Hirsh and Peterson (2009), Holtgraves (2011), and Schwartz et al.
(2013). Extraverts are more talkative than introverts (Mehl et al., 2006) and produce more complex
utterances (Oberlander and Gill, 2006) and, thus, extraverts should have higher Words per sentence.
In contrast, Words per sentence have a negative relation to extraversion in our study. Extraverts also
have a lower preference for precision than introverts and, thus, use less Quantifiers (Oberlander
and Gill, 2004), and a lower preference for explicitness and less formal style of speaking (e.g., Oberlander and Gill, 2006, Mairesse and Walker, 2010) and, thus, use more Adverbs. Indeed, Quantifiers
21

are negatively and Adverbs are positively associated with extraversion. Extraverts are also predisposed to positive affect and, thus, use fewer anxiety words (Schwartz et al., 2013). However,
the other findings on this are mixed with some studies (e.g., Mairesse et al., 2007, Yarkoni, 2010,
Qiu et al., 2012) reporting a positive association between positive emotion words and extraversion,
and Holtgraves (2011) reporting no association between positive emotion words and extraversion.
The use of Anxiety words is positively associated with extraversion in our study.
C.4.

Neuroticism

Based on Goldberg (1992) and John and Srivastava (1999), neuroticism is associated with adjectives such as anxious, fearful, nervous, and worrying. The most important predictors for neuroticism are Words spoken, Adverbs, Words per sentence, Conjunctions, and Certainty. That Words spoken is
an important predictor is consistent with Mehl et al. (2006) and that for Conjunctions is consistent
with Oberlander and Gill (2004) and Qiu et al. (2012). Prior research has found both negative (e.g.,
Mehl et al., 2006, Mairesse et al., 2007) and no association (Holtgraves, 2011) of neuroticism with
the number of words. The relation we find is U-shaped. The importance of Adverbs is consistent
with the implicit nature of neurotics (Oberlander and Gill, 2006). However, Oberlander and Gill
(2006) report a negative association between the use of adverbs and neuroticism, and Schwartz
et al. (2013) report a positive association; while we find a generally negative relation.
C.5.

Openness

Based on Goldberg (1992) and John and Srivastava (1999), openness is associated with adjectives such as artistic, curious, innovative, insightful, philosophical, and witty. The most important
predictors for openness are Conjunctions, Words > 6 letters, Numbers, Words spoken, and Generalizations. Schwartz et al. (2013) report a positive association between Conjunctions, Numbers and
openness. While we find a generally positive association between Conjunctions and openness, the
association between Numbers and openness is negative which is consistent with Yarkoni (2010).
The result for Words > 6 letters is in line with Pennebaker and King (1999) and Mairesse et al.
(2007). Both papers find a positive association between Words > 6 letters and being high on openness. Similarly, we find a generally positive association for Words > 6 letters.

22

D.

Calculating the personality measure
Our Big Five personality models map linguistic features into personality scores. Thus we can

apply these models to linguistic features extracted from the transcripts of CEO utterances on the
Q&A portion of quarterly earnings conference calls to estimate personality traits for the full sample of CEOs drawn from StreetEvents. For a given CEO i, we measure each Big Five personality
trait for the fiscal year t as the median score over all quarterly earnings conference calls up to (and
including) the last call for the fiscal year t. Because the overwhelming majority of conference calls
for the first quarter start four months after the fiscal year-end, we allow for a three-month lag
after the fiscal year end for the last call. To compute our final measures, we require at least three
quarterly conference calls.14 Table V reports descriptive statistics for the linguistic features for the
samples of CEOs with and without personality data.
As discussed in Section IV.B.1, most of our word categories are from LIWC by Pennebaker et al.
(2007) supplemented by categories drawn from Larcker and Zakolyukina (2012). We construct an
additional four categories for this paper; these are described in Table VI. Descriptive statistics of
linguistic features are very similar for CEOs from ghSMART, O’Reilly, and CEOs with no personality data. The most frequently used word categories are inclusive words (e.g., each, including),
first-person plural pronouns (e.g., we, us, our), non-extreme positive emotion words (e.g., nice, accept), and quantifiers (e.g., all, a lot, bit). Two categories in hesitations and fillers—hesitations (e.g.,
ah, um) and general knowledge references (e.g., you know, investors well know)—and two categories
in negative emotion words—anxiety (e.g., worried, fearful) and anger (e.g., hate, annoyed)—are the
most rare.

E.

Personality measure: Descriptive statistics
Research in personality psychology shows that Big Five personality traits change relatively

slowly over an individual’s lifetime with the least change in the middle adulthood (ages 40-60)
(e.g. Srivastava et al., 2003, Roberts and Mroczek, 2008). Accordingly, we expect the true underlying personality to be relatively stable over our sample period because most CEOs fall into the late
middle adulthood cohort—the median CEO is 55 years old and has 5 years of tenure. We evaluate
the stability of our measures using the ratio of between-CEO to within-CEO variability and the
14

This requirement reduces the number of CEOs by 6.82% from 4,591 to 4,278.

23

correlation between personality measured in two different firms for the CEOs who changed firms.
Table VII presents the ratios of between-CEO to within-CEO mean squared error for the measures based on quarterly conference calls and our final measures. For both types of measures,
the between-CEO variation is greater than the within-CEO variation. The lowest ratio is 3.45
(14.93) for neuroticism and the highest ratio is 5.74 (22.45) for extraversion for the quarterly (final)
measures. These ratios are consistently higher for our final measures by construction. In addition, Panel B of Table VII reports correlations between personality measured at two different firms
for the 41 CEOs who changed firms in our sample. All correlations are positive and statistically
significant. The lowest correlation is for openness of 0.23 and the highest correlation is for extraversion and conscientiousness of 0.55. For Facebook messages, Park et al. (2015) also find that
language-based personality scores are stable across 6-month intervals with the lowest correlation
for neuroticism and the highest for conscientiousness. Overall, our measures are stable and, thus,
plausibly capture relatively stable personality traits.
Table VII shows that CEOs score high on conscientiousness (median of 0.76), openness (median
of 0.74), extraversion (median of 0.73) and agreeableness (median of 0.71) while scoring low on
neuroticism (median of 0.23). Agreeableness has the highest standard deviation (0.045) while
conscientiousness has the lowest (0.008). It is not possible to assign a meaning to these values, as
they merely reflect the grades assigned (e.g., A or B+) by ghSMART to the characteristics that map
to the Big Five traits. However, this is not essential for our task, which only requires cross-sectional
variation in personality scores and the ability to rank CEOs on these traits.
Table VIII reports the correlations of the Big Five personality traits. This allows us to compare our results to those in Van der Linden et al. (2010) who provide a meta-analysis of 212 Big
Five studies that report intercorrelations among Big Five traits. The signs of the correlations in
Table VIII are identical to those in Van der Linden et al. (2010) except for the correlation between
openness and extraversion (−0.12). As in Ones et al. (1996), neuroticism has the strongest average
(and negative) correlation with the other Big Five traits. Agreeableness has a positive correlation
with conscientiousness (0.18), extraversion (0.28), and openness (0.16); and negative with neuroticism (−0.51). Conscientiousness has a positive correlation with extraversion (0.19) and openness
(0.16); and negative with neuroticism (−0.26). Whereas extraversion has a negative correlation
with both neuroticism (−0.28) and openness (−0.12). Finally, the correlation between openness
and neuroticism is negative (−0.16).
24

V.

Firm policies and performance

In this section, we examine the association of CEO personality with firm policies and performance measures that prior research in psychology suggests might be associated with Big Five
traits. We consider four firm policy variables (labels in parentheses are Compustat data codes):
R&D intensity, Investment, Book-to-market, and Net leverage. R&D intensity is R&D expense (XRD)
divided by sales (SALE). Investment is capital expenditure (CAPX) scaled by lagged net property
plant and equipment (PPENT). The two performance variables are Return on assets and Cash flow.
Return on assets equals EBITDA (OIBPD) divided by lagged total assets (AT). Cash flow equals cash
from operations (OANCF or, if this is missing, computed using balance sheet method as in Klein
and Marquardt (2006)) divided by lagged total assets (AT).
We include the following control variables in our analyses: Size is the natural logarithm of
total assets (AT), in 2013 dollars. Book-to-market is the book-to-market ratio where book equity is
computed as in Cohen et al. (2003). Net leverage equals total debt (DLTT + DLC) minus cash and
cash equivalents (CHE) divided by total assets (AT).15
We winsorize all variables at the 1st and 99th percentiles and present descriptive statistics in
Table IX. We exclude financial firms (SIC codes 6000–6999) and utilities (SIC codes 4900–4999).
When estimating the regressions, we scale Big Five measures and control variables by their interquartile ranges to facilitate the assessment of the economic magnitudes of the coefficients.
An important qualification for our analyses is that CEOs may not be randomly assigned to
firms, making it difficult to ascribe causal explanations to the associations we document. It seems
plausible that personality affects the type of firm at which an executive chooses to work, the type
of CEO that a firm chooses to hire, as well as the policies that a CEO pursues once he or she is
hired. It is difficult to distinguish among these alternative explanations. Accordingly, we follow
the approach of Bertrand and Schoar (2003), who argue that because “there is no such thing as a
random allocation of top executives to firms . . . we are not hoping . . . to estimate the causal effect
of managers on firm practices.”
15

In our regressions, we examine the following permutations of controls and fixed effects: year fixed effects only,
industry fixed effects and year fixed effects, and industry fixed effects and year fixed effects with controls. We do not
include firm fixed effects because the limited number of observations where CEOs change for any given firm means
that introducing such effects would mean that the effect of personality would be largely limited to year-to-year changes
in these measures. Given the stability of personality in middle adulthood, this would largely limit our analyses to
measurement error in personality. We cluster standard errors by industry which is conservative relative to the two-way
clustering by industry and year.

25

A.

Firm policies
Table X presents results for firm policies. We find a positive relation between openness and

R&D intensity and between conscientiousness and book-to-market ratio, as well as a negative
relation between net leverage and openness. An increase in openness by its interquartile range
(i.e., from 0.71 to 0.76) is associated with an increase of between 2.10 and 14.87 percentage points
in R&D intensity (relative to a mean of 13.60 percentage points and a median of 0.33 percentage
points) and with a decrease of between −2.24 and −9.25 percentage points in Net leverage (relative
to a mean of −0.58 percentage points and a median of 3.96 percentage points) depending on the
specification. An increase in conscientiousness by its interquartile range (i.e., from 0.76 to 0.77) is
associated with an increase of between 4.45 and 6.24 percentage points in Book-to-market (relative
to a mean of 62.49 and a median of 44.70 percentage points).
The positive association between openness and R&D intensity is intuitive and consistent with
the characterization of CEOs who score high on openness as creative (McCrae and Costa, 1987)
and open to change (e.g., Costa and McCrae, 1988, Spreitzer et al., 1997, Judge et al., 1999). Similarly, Judge and Cable (1997) argue that openness relates to preferences for innovative cultures
and O’Reilly et al. (2014a) find that open CEOs encourage cultures that value innovation, speed,
experimentation, and risk-taking. CEOs high on openness have a preference for risk (Judge et al.,
2002, Peterson et al., 2003, O’Reilly et al., 2014a) and the negative association between openness
and Net leverage is not consistent with these CEOs having a preference for riskier debt financing.
At the same time, the choice of leverage is endogenous to profitability and business risk. For instance, industry leverage tends to be lower when profitability and business risk are high (Myers,
2001). The sign of association between openness and Net leverage is consistent with these firms
being exposed to a greater business risk, e.g., through higher R&D, and, thus, lower leverage.
The positive association between conscientiousness and Book-to-market (i.e., low growth) is
consistent with these CEOs having a preference for rules and low adaptability (LePine et al., 2000,
Nadkarni and Herrmann, 2010). Several extant studies argue that highly conscientious CEOs are
less attracted to innovative cultures that value risk-taking and inventiveness (e.g., O’Reilly et al.,
1991, Judge and Cable, 1997, O’Reilly et al., 2014a), which is likely to result in lower growth.
To examine the robustness of these results, we also estimate regressions of firm policies from
Table X when we include Big Five traits with 1-, 2-, and 3-year lags. We expect the lags of Big

26

Five traits to be associated with future firm policies because personality is relatively stable over
time. In addition, these tests reduce the possibility that our personality measures capture dimensions of contemporaneous firm policies reflected in linguistic features rather than personality
traits of CEOs. The results (untabluated) are very similar to Table X both in terms of the statistical significance and magnitude of the coefficients. Conscientiousness is positively associated with
Book-to-market (i.e., negatively associated with growth), and openness is positively associated with
R&D intensity and negatively associated with Net leverage. The only exception is the association
between openness and R&D intensity, which while similar in magnitude, is no longer statistically
significant in the specification that omits industry fixed effects.

B.

Performance
Table XI presents results for current and future return on assets; Table XII presents results for

current and future cash flow. Because Big Five traits are relatively stable, we expect them to be
associated with current and future firm outcomes. For this reason, in Tables XI and XII, we report
results using profitability measured contemporaneously and up to three years in the future. When
interpreting the coefficients, we focus on associations that are robust beyond the year in which Big
Five traits are measured.
There is a robust negative association between extraversion and return on assets and cash flow.
The increase in extraversion by an interquartile range (i.e., from 0.72 to 0.73) is associated with a
decrease of between −0.39 and −2.27 (between −0.24 and −0.28) percentage points in Return
on assets for year t (t + 3) (relative to a mean of 11.96 percentage points and a median of 13.03
percentage points) and with a decrease of between −1.09 and −1.64 (between −0.31 and −0.50)
percentage points in Cash flow (relative to a mean of 9.32 percentage points and a median of 10.01
percentage points). Similarly, openness is negatively associated with profitability. However, the
statistical significance of coefficients is not as robust across different horizons. An increase in
openness by its interquartile range (i.e., from 0.71 to 0.76) is associated with a decrease of between
−0.34 and −3.52 (between −0.17 and −0.34) percentage points in Return on assets for year t (t + 2)
and with a decrease of between −1.00 and −2.68 (between −0.28 and −0.57) percentage points in
Cash flow for year t (t + 3).
The negative association between extraversion and performance is consistent with the argu-

27

ment that extraverts like to dominate and the benefits of extraversion are conditioned on obedience and submissiveness (e.g., Anderson et al., 2001, Barrick et al., 2002) that may not help
decision-making in the corporate setting. Moreover, short-lived enthusiasm of extreme extraverts
can result in aggressive strategies that tend to be prematurely terminated (Judge et al., 2009). The
negative results on extraversion are also suggestive of the negative results on overconfidence in
Malmendier and Tate (2005) and Malmendier et al. (2011). At the same time, however, Kaplan
et al. (2012) find no correlation between extraversion (enthusiasm and persuasiveness) in the subsequent performance of private equity-funded companies.

VI.

Conclusion

Recent research in economics and finance has started to explore the relations between individual senior executive traits, investment and financing choices made by these executives, and firm
performance. Very few papers, however, examine how (or whether) differences in personality
traits are associated with executive decision-making and firm performance. We develop and validate measures of Big Five personality traits for CEOs and examine the associations between these
measures and investment and financing choices and firm performance.
Our measures are based on a statistical learning approach linking linguistic features of CEO
speech during Q&A portion of conference calls with known personality traits drawn from data
used in Kaplan et al. (2012) and Kaplan and Sorensen (2016). We validate our measures of CEO
personality traits by showing that they exhibit substantial out-of-sample predictive ability using
an independent sample obtained from O’Reilly et al. (2014b).
Finally, we examine associations between CEO personality traits with observed investment
and financing choices and firm performance. We find that openness is positively associated with
R&D intensity and negatively with net leverage; whereas conscientiousness is negatively associated with growth. In performance tests, extraversion is negatively associated with both contemporaneous and future return on assets and cash flow. However, our results are descriptive
and further work is necessary to understand the nature of the causal relations, if any, between
personality and firm policies and performance.

28

REFERENCES
Adams, Renée B., Heitor Almeida, and Daniel Ferreira, 2005, Powerful CEOs and their impact on
corporate performance, Review of Financial Studies 18, 1403–1432.
Almlund, Mathilde, Angela Lee Duckworth, Heckman James J., and Tim Kautz, 2011, Personality
psychology and economics, in Stephen Machin Eric A. Hanushek, and Ludger Woessmann,
eds., Handbook of The Economics of Education, volume 4 of Handbook of the Economics of Education,
1 – 181 (Elsevier).
Anderson, Cameron, Oliver P. John, Dacher Keltner, and Ann M. Kring, 2001, Who attains social
status? Effects of personality and physical attractiveness in social groups, Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 81, 116–132.
Antweiler, Werner, and Murray Z. Frank, 2004, Is all that talk just noise? The information content
of internet stock message boards, Journal of Finance 59, 1259–1294.
Balakrishnan, Ramji, Xin Ying Qiu, and Padmini Srinivasan, 2010, On the predictive ability of
narrative disclosures in annual reports, European Journal of Operational Research 202, 789–801.
Barrick, Murray R., 2005, Yes, personality matters: Moving on to more important matters, Human
performance 18, 359–372.
Barrick, Murray R., and Michael K. Mount, 1991, The big five personality dimensions and job
performance: A meta-analysis, Personnel Psychology 44, 1–26.
Barrick, Murray R., Michael K. Mount, and Timothy A. Judge, 2001, Personality and performance
at the beginning of the new millennium: What do we know and where do we go next?, International Journal of Selection and Assessment 9, 9–30.
Barrick, Murray R., Michael K. Mount, and Judy P. Strauss, 1993, Conscientiousness and performance of sales representatives: Test of the mediating effects of goal setting, Journal of Applied
Psychology 78, 715–722.
Barrick, Murray R., Greg L. Stewart, and Mike Piotrowski, 2002, Personality and job performance:
Test of the mediating effects of motivation among sales representatives, Journal of Applied Psychology 87, 43–51.
Bass, Bernard M., and Ralph M. Stogdill, 1990, Handbook of Leadership, volume 11 (New York: Free
Press).
Ben-David, Itzhak, John R. Graham, and Campbell R. Harvey, 2013, Managerial miscalibration,
Quarterly Journal of Economics forthcoming.

29

Benmelech, Efraim, and Carola Frydman, 2014, Military CEOs, Journal of Financial Economics 117,
43–59.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Antoinette Schoar, 2003, Managing with style: The effect of managers on
firm policies, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1169–1208.
Bono, Joyce E., and Timothy A. Judge, 2004, Personality and transformational and transactional
leadership: A meta-analysis, Journal of Applied Psychology 89, 901–910.
Bono, Joyce E., Winny Shen, and David J. Yoon, 2014, Personality and leadership: Looking back,
looking ahead, in David V. Day, ed., The Oxford Handbook of Leadership and Organizations, 199–220
(Oxford University Press, New York).
Borghans, Lex, James J. Heckman, Bart H. H. Golsteyn, and Huub Meijers, 2009, Gender differences in risk aversion and ambiguity aversion, Journal of the European Economic Association 7,
649–658.
Boudreau, John W., Wendy R. Boswell, and Timothy A. Judge, 2001, Effects of personality on
executive career success in the United States and Europe, Journal of Vocational Behavior 58, 53–81.
Chan, Stella W. Y., Guy M. Goodwin, and Catherine J. Harmer, 2007, Highly neurotic neverdepressed students have negative biases in information processing, Psychological Medicine 37,
1281–1291.
Cohen, Randolph B., Christopher Polk, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2003, The value spread, Journal
of Finance 58, 609–642.
Costa, Paul T., and Robert R. McCrae, 1988, Personality in adulthood: A six-year longitudinal
study of self-reports and spouse ratings on the NEO Personality Inventory, Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 54, 853–863.
Costa, Paul T., and Robert R. McCrae, 1992, Revised NEO Personality Inventory (NEO-PI-R) and NEO
Five-Factor Inventory (NEO-FFI) (Psychological Assesment Resources).
Daly, Michael, Colm P. Harmon, and Liam Delaney, 2009, Psychological and biological foundations of time preference, Journal of the European Economic Association 7, 659–669.
Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde, 2010, Are risk aversion and
impatience related to cognitive ability?, The American Economic Review 100, 1238–1260.
Easterbrook, James A., 1959, The effect of emotion on cue utilization and the organization of behavior, Psychological Review 66, 183–201.

30

Ehrhart, Mark G., Karen Holcombe Ehrhart, Scott C. Roesch, Beth G. Chung-Herrera, Kristy
Nadler, and Kelsey Bradshaw, 2009, Testing the latent factor structure and construct validity
of the Ten-Item Personality Inventory, Personality and individual Differences 47, 900–905.
Ensari, Nurcan, Ronald E. Riggio, Julie Christian, and Gregory Carslaw, 2011, Who emerges as a
leader? Meta-analyses of individual differences as predictors of leadership emergence, Personality and Individual Differences 51, 532–536.
Falato, Antonio, Dan Li, and Todd Milbourn, 2014, Which skills matter in the market for CEOs?
Evidence from pay for CEO credentials, Management Science 61, 2845–2869.
Floyd, Steven W., and Bill Wooldridge, 1997, Middle management’s strategic influence and organizational performance, Journal of Management Studies 34, 465–485.
Freund, Yoav, and Robert E. Schapire, 1997, A decision-theoretic generalization of on-line learning
and an application to boosting, Journal of computer and system sciences 55, 119–139.
Friedman, Jerome H., 2001, Greedy function approximation: A gradient boosting machine, The
Annals of Statistics 29, 1189–1232.
Funder, David C., 2012, Accurate personality judgment, Current Directions in Psychological Science
21, 177–182.
Gellatly, Ian R., 1996, Conscientiousness and task performance: Test of cognitive process model,
Journal of Applied Psychology 81, 474–482.
Gervais, Simon, JB Heaton, and Terrance Odean, 2011, Overconfidence, compensation contracts,
and capital budgeting, Journal of Finance 66, 1735–1777.
Giberson, Tomas R., Christian J. Resick, Marcus W. Dickson, Jacqueline K. Mitchelson, Kenneth R.
Randall, and Malissa A. Clark, 2009, Leadership and organizational culture: Linking CEO characteristics to cultural values, Journal of Business and Psychology 24, 123–137.
Gill, Alastair J., and Jon Oberlander, 2003, Perception of e-mail personality at zero-acquaintance:
Extraversion takes care of itself; neuroticism is a worry, in Proceedings of the 25th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 456–461.
Goel, Anand M., and Anjan V. Thakor, 2008, Overconfidence, CEO selection, and corporate governance, Journal of Finance 63, 2737–2784.
Goldberg, Lewis R., 1990, An alternative “description of personality”: The Big-Five factor structure, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 59, 1216–1229.
Goldberg, Lewis R., 1992, The development of markers for the Big-Five factor structure, Psychological Assessment 4, 26–42.
31

Goldberg, Lewis R., 1993, The structure of phenotypic personality traits, American Psychologist 48,
26–34.
Gosling, Samuel D., Peter J. Rentfrow, and William B. Swann, 2003, A very brief measure of the
Big-Five personality domains, Journal of Research in Personality 37, 504–528.
Graham, John R., Campbell R. Harvey, and Manju Puri, 2013, Managerial attitudes and corporate
actions, Journal of Financial Economics 109, 103–121.
Grant, Adam M., Francesca Gino, and David A. Hofmann, 2011, Reversing the extraverted leadership advantage: The role of employee proactivity, Academy of Management Journal 54, 528–550.
Graziano, William G., Lauri A. Jensen-Campbell, and Elizabeth C. Hair, 1996, Perceiving interpersonal conflict and reacting to it: The case for agreeableness, Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 70, 820–835.
Green, T. Clifton, Russell Jame, and Brandon Lock, 2016, It pays to be extraverted: Executive
personality and career outcomes, Working paper, Emory University, University of Kentucky
and Northwestern University.
Hackbarth, Dirk, 2009, Determinants of corporate borrowing: A behavioral perspective, Journal of
Corporate Finance 15, 389–411.
Hastie, Trevor, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman, 2009, The Elements of Statistical Learning:
Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction (New York, NY: Springer-Verlag New York).
Heaton, James B., 2002, Managerial optimism and corporate finance, Financial management 33–45.
Hirsh, Jacob B., and Michael Inzlicht, 2008, The devil you know: Neuroticism predicts neural
response to uncertainty, Psychological Science 19, 962–967.
Hirsh, Jacob B., and Jordan B. Peterson, 2009, Personality and language use in self-narratives,
Journal of Research in Personality 43, 524–527.
Hirshleifer, David, Angie Low, and Siew Hong Teoh, 2012, Are overconfident CEOs better innovators?, Journal of Finance 67, 1457–1498.
Hobson, Jessen L., William J. Mayew, and Mohan Venkatachalam, 2012, Analyzing speech to detect financial misreporting, Journal of Accounting Research 50, 349–392.
Hogan, Joyce, and Deniz S. Ones, 1997, Conscientiousness and integrity at work, in Robert Hogan,
John A. Johnson, and Stephen R. Briggs, eds., Handbook of Personality Psychology, 849–870 (Academic Press, San Diego).

32

Holland, John L., Joseph A. Johnston, N. Francis Asama, and Suzanne M. Polys, 1993, Validating
and using the career beliefs inventory, Journal of Career Development 19, 233–244.
Holtgraves, Thomas, 2011, Text messaging, personality, and the social context, Journal of Research
in Personality 45, 92–99.
Iacobelli, Francisco, Alastair J. Gill, Scott Nowson, and Jon Oberlander, 2011, Large scale personality classification of bloggers, in Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction, 568–577 (Springer).
Ireland, Molly E., and Matthias R. Mehl, 2014, Natural language use as a marker, in Thomas M.
Holtgraves, ed., The Oxford Handbook of Language and Social Psychology, 201–237 (Oxford University Press).
James, Gareth, Daniela Witten, Trevor Hastie, and Robert Tibshirani, 2013, An Introduction to Statistical Learning with Applications in R, Springer Texts in Statistics (Spring-Verlag, New York).
John, Oliver P., and Sanjay Srivastava, 1999, The Big Five trait taxonomy: History, measurement,
and theoretical perspectives, Handbook of Personality: Theory and Research 2, 102–138.
Johnson, Jean L., Ruby Pui-Wan Lee, Amit Saini, and Bianca Grohmann, 2003, Market-focused
strategic flexibility: Conceptual advances and an integrative model, Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science 31, 74–89.
Judge, Timothy A., and Joyce E. Bono, 2000, Five-factor model of personality and transformational
leadership, Journal of Applied Psychology 85, 751–765.
Judge, Timothy A., Joyce E. Bono, Remus Ilies, and Megan W. Gerhardt, 2002, Personality and
leadership: A qualitative and quantitative review, Journal of Applied Psychology 87, 765–780.
Judge, Timothy A., and Daniel M. Cable, 1997, Applicant personality, organizational culture, and
organization attraction, Personnel Psychology 50, 359–394.
Judge, Timothy A., Daniel M. Cable, John W. Boudreau, and Robert D. Bretz, 1995, An empirical
investigation of the predictors of executive career success, Personnel psychology 48, 485–519.
Judge, Timothy A., Ronald F. Piccolo, and Tomek Kosalka, 2009, The bright and dark sides of
leader traits: A review and theoretical extension of the leader trait paradigm, The Leadership
Quarterly 20, 855–875.
Judge, Timothy A., Carl J. Thoresen, Vladimir Pucik, and Theresa M. Welbourne, 1999, Managerial
coping with organizational change: A dispositional perspective, Journal of Applied Psychology 84,
107–122.
Kaplan, Steven N., Mark M. Klebanov, and Morten Sorensen, 2012, Which CEO characteristics and
abilities matter?, Journal of Finance 67, 973–1007.
33

Kaplan, Steven N., and Morten Sorensen, 2016, Are CEOs different? Characteristics of top managers, Working paper, University of Chicago.
Klein, April, and Carol A. Marquardt, 2006, Fundamentals of accounting losses, The Accounting
Review 81, 179–206.
Larcker, David F., and Anastasia A. Zakolyukina, 2012, Detecting deceptive discussions in conference calls, Journal of Accounting Research 50, 495–540.
Le, Huy, In-Sue Oh, Steven B. Robbins, Remus Ilies, Ed Holland, and Paul Westrick, 2011, Too
much of a good thing: Curvilinear relationships between personality traits and job performance,
Journal of Applied Psychology 96, 113–133.
LePine, Jeffrey A., Jason A. Colquitt, and Amir Erez, 2000, Adaptability to changing task contexts:
Effects of general cognitive ability, conscientiousness, and openness to experience, Personnel
Psychology 53, 563–593.
LePine, Jeffrey A., and Linn Van Dyne, 2001, Voice and cooperative behavior as contrasting forms
of contextual performance: Evidence of differential relationships with Big Five personality characteristics and cognitive ability, Journal of Applied Psychology 86, 326–336.
Li, Feng, 2008, Annual report readability, current earnings, and earnings persistence, Journal of
Accounting and Economics 45, 221–247.
Li, Feng, 2010, The information content of forward-looking statements in corporate filings: A
Naı̈ve Bayesian machine learning approach, Journal of Accounting Research 48, 1049–1102.
Loughran, Tim, and Bill McDonald, 2011, When is a liability not a liability? Textual analysis,
dictionaries, and 10-Ks, The Journal of Finance 66, 35–65.
Mairesse, François, and Marilyn A. Walker, 2010, Towards personality-based user adaptation: Psychologically informed stylistic language generation, User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction
20, 227–278.
Mairesse, François, Marilyn A. Walker, Matthias R. Mehl, and Roger K. Moore, 2007, Using linguistic cues for the automatic recognition of personality in conversation and text, Journal of Artificial
Intelligence Research 30, 457–500.
Malmendier, Ulrike, and Geoffrey Tate, 2005, CEO overconfidence and corporate investment, Journal of Finance 60, 2661–2700.
Malmendier, Ulrike, Geoffrey Tate, and Jon Yan, 2011, Overconfidence and early-life experiences:
The effect of managerial traits on corporate financial policies, Journal of Finance 66, 1687–1733.

34

McCrae, Robert R., and Paul T. Costa, 1987, Validation of the five-factor model of personality
across instruments and observers, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 52, 81–90.
McCrae, Robert R., and Paul T. Costa Jr, 1996, Toward a new generation of personality theories:
Theoretical contexts for the five-factor model, in Jerry S. Wiggins, ed., The Five-factor Model of
Personality: Theoretical Perspectives (Guilford Press, New York).
McCrae, Robert R., and Paul T. Costa Jr, 1997, Personality trait structure as a human universal,
American Psychologist 52, 509–516.
Mehl, Matthias R., Samuel D. Gosling, and James W. Pennebaker, 2006, Personality in its natural
habitat: Manifestations and implicit folk theories of personality in daily life, Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 90, 862–877.
Mount, Michael K., and Murray R. Barrick, 1995, The Big Five personality dimensions: Implications for research and practice in human resources management, Research in Personnel and
Human Resources Management 13, 153–200.
Mount, Michael K., Murray R. Barrick, and J. Perkins Strauss, 1994, Validity of observer ratings of
the Big Five personality factors, Journal of Applied Psychology 79, 272.
Muck, Peter M., Benedikt Hell, and Samuel D. Gosling, 2007, Construct validation of a short fivefactor model instrument, European Journal of Psychological Assessment 23, 166–175.
Myers, Stewart C., 2001, Capital structure, The Journal of Economic Perspectives 15, 81–102.
Nadkarni, Sucheta, and POL Herrmann, 2010, CEO personality, strategic flexibility, and firm performance: The case of the Indian business process outsourcing industry, Academy of Management
Journal 53, 1050–1073.
Nadkarni, Sucheta, and Vadake K. Narayanan, 2007, Strategic schemas, strategic flexibility, and
firm performance: The moderating role of industry clockspeed, Strategic Management Journal 28,
243–270.
Nettle, Daniel, 2006, The evolution of personality variation in humans and other animals, American
Psychologist 61, 622–631.
Oberlander, Jon, and Alastair Gill, 2004, Language generation and personality: Two dimensions,
two stages, two hemispheres, in Proceedings from the AAAI Spring Symposium on Architectures for
Modeling Emotion: Cross-Disciplinary Foundations, 104–111.
Oberlander, Jon, and Alastair J. Gill, 2006, Language with character: A stratified corpus comparison of individual differences in e-mail communication, Discourse Processes 42, 239–270.

35

Oh, In-Sue, and Christopher M. Berry, 2009, The five-factor model of personality and managerial performance: Validity gains through the use of 360 degree performance ratings, Journal of
Applied Psychology 94, 1498–1513.
Oh, In-Sue, Gang Wang, and Michael K. Mount, 2011, Validity of observer ratings of the five-factor
model of personality traits: A meta-analysis, Journal of Applied Psychology 96, 762–773.
Ones, Deniz S., Chockalingam Viswesvaran, and Angelika D. Reiss, 1996, Role of social desirability in personality testing for personnel selection: The red herring, Journal of Applied Psychology
81, 660–679.
O’Reilly, Charles A., David F. Caldwell, Jennifer A. Chatman, and Bernadette Doerr, 2014a, The
promise and problems of organizational culture CEO personality, culture, and firm performance, Group & Organization Management 39, 595–625.
O’Reilly, Charles A., Jennifer Chatman, and David F. Caldwell, 1991, People and organizational
culture: A profile comparison approach to assessing person-organization fit, Academy of Management Journal 34, 487–516.
O’Reilly, Charles A., Bernadette Doerr, David F. Caldwell, and Jennifer A. Chatman, 2014b, Narcissistic CEOs and executive compensation, The Leadership Quarterly 25, 218–231.
Park, Gregory, Andrew H. Schwartz, Johannes C. Eichstaedt, Margaret L. Kern, Michal Kosinski,
David J. Stillwell, Lyle H. Ungar, and Martin E.P. Seligman, 2015, Automatic personality assessment through social media language, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 108, 934—952.
Pennebaker, James W., Cindy K. Chung, Molly Ireland, Amy Gonzales, and Roger J. Booth, 2007,
The development and psychometric properties of LIWC2007.
Pennebaker, James W., and Laura A. King, 1999, Linguistic styles: Language use as an individual
difference, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 77, 1296–1312.
Peterson, Randall S., D. Brent Smith, Paul V. Martorana, and Pamela D. Owens, 2003, The impact
of Chief Executive Officer personality on top management team dynamics: One mechanism by
which leadership affects organizational performance, Journal of Applied Psychology 88, 795–808.
Qiu, Lin, Han Lin, Jonathan Ramsay, and Fang Yang, 2012, You are what you tweet: Personality
expression and perception on Twitter, Journal of Research in Personality 46, 710–718.
Revelle, William, 1979, Hierarchical cluster analysis and the internal structure of tests, Multivariate
Behavioral Research 14, 57–74.
Revelle, William, 2015, psych: Procedures for Psychological, Psychometric, and Personality Research,
Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, R package version 1.5.8.
36

Ridgeway, Greg, 2015, gbm: Generalized Boosted Regression Models, R package version 2.1.1.
Roberts, Brent W., 2009, Back to the future: Personality and assessment and personality development, Journal of Research in Personality 43, 137–145.
Roberts, Brent W., and Daniel Mroczek, 2008, Personality trait change in adulthood, Current Directions in Psychological Science 17, 31–35.
Salgado, Jesus F., 1997, The Five Factor Model of personality and job performance in the European
Community, Journal of Applied Psychology 82, 30–43.
Schapire, R.E., and Y. Freund, 2012, Boosting: Foundations and Algorithms (MIT Press).
Schwartz, Andrew H., Johannes C. Eichstaedt, Margaret L. Kern, Lukasz Dziurzynski,
Stephanie M. Ramones, Megha Agrawal, Achal Shah, Michal Kosinski, David Stillwell, Martin E.P. Seligman, et al., 2013, Personality, gender, and age in the language of social media: The
open-vocabulary approach, PLOS ONE 8, 1–16.
Sharpe, J. Patrick, Nicholas R. Martin, and Kelly A. Roth, 2011, Optimism and the Big Five factors
of personality: Beyond neuroticism and extraversion, Personality and Individual Differences 51,
946–951.
Sheridan, John E., 1992, Organizational culture and employee retention, Academy of Management
Journal 35, 1036–1056.
Shimizu, Katsuhiko, and Michael A. Hitt, 2004, Strategic flexibility: Organizational preparedness
to reverse ineffective strategic decisions, The Academy of Management Executive 18, 44–59.
Shmueli, Galit, 2010, To explain or to predict?, Statistical Science 289–310.
Smart, G., and R. Street, 2008, Who: The A Method for Hiring (Random House Publishing Group).
Spreitzer, Gretchen M., Morgan W. McCall, and Joan D. Mahoney, 1997, Early identification of
international executive potential, Journal of Applied Psychology 82, 6–29.
Srivastava, Sanjay, Oliver P. John, Samuel D. Gosling, and Jeff Potter, 2003, Development of personality in early and middle adulthood: Set like plaster or persistent change?, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 84, 1041–1053.
Tausczik, Yla R., and James W. Pennebaker, 2010, The psychological meaning of words: LIWC and
computerized text analysis methods, Journal of Language and Social Psychology 29, 24–54.
Tett, Robert P., Douglas N. Jackson, and Mitchell Rothstein, 1991, Personality measures as predictors of job performance: A meta-analytic review, Personnel Psychology 44, 703–742.

37

Van der Linden, Dimitri, Jan te Nijenhuis, and Arnold B. Bakker, 2010, The general factor of personality: A meta-analysis of Big Five intercorrelations and a criterion-related validity study,
Journal of Research in Personality 44, 315–327.
Watson, David, and Lee Anna Clark, 1997, Extraversion and its positive emotional core, in Robert
Hogan, John A. Johnson, and Stephen R. Briggs, eds., Handbook of Personality Psychology, 767–793
(Academic Press, San Diego).
Wiggins, Jerry S., 1996, The Five-factor Model of Personality: Theoretical Perspectives (Guilford Press,
New York).
Wooldridge, Bill, Torsten Schmid, and Steven W. Floyd, 2008, The middle management perspective on strategy process: Contributions, synthesis, and future research, Journal of Management
34, 1190–1221.
Yarkoni, Tal, 2010, Personality in 100,000 words: A large-scale analysis of personality and word
use among bloggers, Journal of Research in Personality 44, 363–373.

38

Appendix A
A.1

Personality data

ghSMART data

The data from Kaplan et al. (2012) and Kaplan and Sorensen (2016) are sourced from the assessments of CEO candidates by the management assessment firm ghSMART. Smart and Street (2008),
Kaplan et al. (2012), and Kaplan and Sorensen (2016) contain details on the assessment methodology. Because ghSMART does not receive a fee contingent on hiring, Kaplan and Sorensen (2016)
conclude that it has no incentives to bias assessments since its main objective is to sustain its reputation.
These assessments are based on interviews in which a candidate answers questions about his
or her past behavior. The interviewers generally hold doctoral or MBA degrees and have worked
at top consulting firms. ghSMART reports a high degree of consistency of assessments across
interviewers. Interviewers do not ask the same questions, but they use the same methodology.
Based on the description of the candidate’s past behavior, interviewers then provide an assessment on 30 individual characteristics placed into five general categories: Leadership, Personal,
Intellectual, Motivational, and Interpersonal as described in Table 1 in Kaplan et al. (2012).

A.2

O’Reilly data

O’Reilly et al. (2014b) rely on observer ratings of CEO personality, which have been shown
to be more accurate than self-assessments (e.g., Funder, 2012, Mount et al., 1994). In spring 2011,
the authors contacted 648 current employees at 32 technology firms. Of these 648, 250 individuals
completed a survey asking them to assess their CEO’s personality using the Ten-Item Personality
Inventory. This instrument was developed by Gosling et al. (2003) and has been shown to be
reliable and valid (e.g, Ehrhart et al., 2009, Muck et al., 2007).
After requiring at least five responses per firm, O’Reilly et al. (2014b) have data from 246 respondents from 29 firms. There are between 5 and 25 observers per CEO personality assessment
with a mean of 8.48 and a standard deviation of 4.73. O’Reilly et al. (2014b) report that 34% of the
respondents are female with the average tenure of 7.19 years. All had earned a bachelors degree
and 69% of respondents had earned an MBA.
The scale ranges from “disagree strongly” (score of 1) to “agree strongly” (score of 7) and the
ten items are (1) extraverted, enthusiastic; (2) critical, quarrelsome; (3) dependable, self-disciplined;
(4) anxious, easily upset; (5) open to new experiences, complex; (6) reserved, quiet; (7) sympathetic, warm; (8) disorganized, careless; (9) calm, emotionally stable; (10) conventional, uncreative.
Extraversion corresponds to (1) and the reverse of (6). Agreeableness corresponds to (7) and the
reverse of (2). Conscientiousness corresponds to (3) and the reverse of (8). Emotional stability
corresponds to (9) and the reverse of (4). High openness to experience corresponds to (5) and the
reverse of (10).

39

Figure 1. Results of clustering analysis of ghSMART data
s_enthusiasm

C8: Extraversion

s_persuasion
s_brainpowerlearnsquickly
s_analysisskills

C4

s_strategicthinking

C10

C20: High openness

s_creativeinnovative
s_organizationandplanning

C7: Conscientiousness

s_attentiontodetail
s_integrityhonesty

C23: Agreeableness

Emotional stability
s_calmunderpressure

C19

s_developspeople

C17

s_flexibleadaptable
s_listeningskills

C14
C5

C13

s_opentocriticism
s_treatspeoplewithrespect

C9

s_teamwork
s_workethic
C22: Conscientiousness

s_setshighstandards
s_efficiencyofexecution
s_followsthroughoncommitments
s_removesunderperformers

C2

C12

C1

C15

C16

s_holdspeopleaccountable
s_hiresaplayers

C11

s_networkoftalentedpeople
s_aggressive

C3

C18

s_movesfast
s_persistent

C6

s_proactivity

40

C21

Figure 2. Model Selection for the Big Five Personality Traits
The top panels depict the out-of-sample mean squared error (MSE) and Pearson correlation for the O’Reilly data against the number of trees for the models
estimated using the ghSMART data. The trees involve up to two splits. The vertical lines show the number of trees in our final models—the minimum-MSE
models. The bottom panels depict the actual personality scores versus predicted personality scores for each CEO and a regression line of predicted scores on
actual scores for the minimum-MSE models applied to the O’Reilly data. For each CEO, we compute predicted personality as the median predicted personality
over all conference calls for the CEO. Actual and predicted scores are standardized. If a predicted score is more than three standard deviations away from the
mean, we replace the corresponding score with the three-standard-deviations value (depicted by an empty circle) and re-estimate the regression line (depicted
by a dashed line). The arrows show the replacement score.
(a) Agreeableness

(b) Conscientiousness

(c) Extraversion

0.0132

0.072

0.05150
0.070

0.0131

0.0130

0.05100

0.066

0.05075

0.0129

0.064

MSE

0.05125

MSE

MSE

0.068

0.15
0.10
0.05

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

0.00

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●●

●

● ●
●

●

●

●

−2

●
●

−1

●

●

0
1
Standardized Agreeableness

^
X = −0.00 + 0.23[0.19] ⋅ X , R 2 = 5.21%

2

●
●

●

● ●

●

●

●
●
●

●

0

●
●

●
●
●

●

−1

●

●

●

●

●

−2

2
●
●

1

●

●
●

●

●
●

0

●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
● ●●

●

●

−1

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

1
●

100
200
300
400
500
Number of trees in the model
Minimim MSE for Extraversion is 0.051 at 249

●

●

●
●

● ●

●
●●

0.0
200
400
600
800
Number of trees in the model
Minimim MSE for Conscientiousness is 0.013 at 379

●

●

●
●

−4

0.1

0

Standardized predicted Conscientiousness

Standardized predicted Agreeableness

1

−3

0.2

Standardized predicted Extraversion

20000
40000
60000
Number of trees in the model
Minimim MSE for Agreeableness is 0.064 at 49,783

−1

0.3

0.0
0

0

0.4

Pearson correlation

0.20

Pearson correlation

Pearson correlation

41

0.5

−1
0
1
Standardized Conscientiousness
^
X = −0.00 + 0.46**[0.17] ⋅ X , R 2 = 20.96%

−2

●

−2

−1
0
1
Standardized Extraversion
^
2
X = −0.00 + 0.35*[0.18] ⋅ X , R = 12.18%

Figure 2. —Continued
(e) Openness

(d) Neuroticism
0.0300

0.046

0.0295

0.044

0.040

MSE

MSE

0.042

0.0290
0.0285

0.038
0.0280

0.036
0.5

0.3
0.2
0.1

0.3
0.2
0.1

42

0.0

0.0
0

10000
20000
30000
Number of trees in the model
Minimim MSE for Neuroticism is 0.036 at 17,020

0

20000
40000
60000
Number of trees in the model
Minimim MSE for Openness is 0.028 at 30,569

2

3

●

2
●
●

●

●

●
●

●

0

●

●

Standardized predicted Openness

Standardized predicted Neuroticism

●

1

●

Pearson correlation

Pearson correlation

0.4

● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
● ●

●

●

●

●

●

0

●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●● ●

●
●

●
●

−2

●
●

−1

●

●

●

●
●

●

−4
−1

0
1
Standardized Neuroticism
^
X = 0.00 + 0.49***[0.17] ⋅ X , R 2 = 24.33%

2

−2

−1
0
Standardized Openness

1

^
X = −0.00 + 0.29[0.19] ⋅ X , R 2 = 8.28%

Figure 3. Importance of Linguistic Features for Predicting Big Five Personality Traits
This figure depicts the relative importance of the top fifteen linguistic features for predicting Big Five traits. For each linguistic feature, importance is computed
as the reduction of the squared error attributable to this feature as described in Friedman (2001) using the training (ghSMART) sample. The bars indicate the
relative importance of each linguistic features normalized by the relative importance of the most influential linguistic feature (on the bottom).
(a) Agreeableness

(b) Conscientiousness

(c) Extraversion

Generalizations

Times spoken

Thanks

Qualifiers

Sadness

Inhibition

Tentative

Adverbs

Words spoken
Qualifiers

1st person singular pronouns

Words>6 letters

Causation

Vague quantifiers

Words>6 letters
Assent

−140

Discrepancy
Conjunctions

Predictors

Tentative

Certainty
Predictors

Assent
Numbers

Predictors

43

Exclusive
1st person singular pronouns

1st person singular pronouns
General knowledge references
Assent

Numbers

Extreme positive emotions

Exclusive
Discrepancy

Quantifiers

Words per sentence

Vague quantifiers

Qualifiers

Anxiety

Words per sentence

Words>6 letters

Adverbs

Adverbs

Hesitations

Quantifiers

Words spoken

General knowledge references

Words per sentence

−100
−60
−20
20
60
100
Relative importance of predictors for Agreeableness
Model contains 49,783 trees

140

−140

−100
−60
−20
20
60
100
140
Relative importance of predictors for Conscientiousness
Model contains 379 trees

−140

−100
−60
−20
20
60
100
Relative importance of predictors for Extraversion
Model contains 249 trees

140

Figure 3. —Continued
(d) Neuroticism

(e) Openness

1st person singular pronouns

Extreme positive emotions

Discrepancy

1st person singular pronouns

Tentative

General knowledge references

Generalizations

Negations

Insight

Vague quantifiers

Tentative

Predictors

Inclusive

Vague quantifiers

Predictors

44

Nonextreme positive emotions

Times spoken
Causation

−140

Times spoken
Causation

Quantifiers

Qualifiers

Certainty

Generalizations

Conjunctions

Words spoken

Words per sentence

Numbers

Adverbs

Words>6 letters

Words spoken

Conjunctions

−100
−60
−20
20
60
100
Relative importance of predictors for Neuroticism
Model contains 17,020 trees

140

−140

−100
−60
−20
20
60
100
Relative importance of predictors for Openness
Model contains 30,569 trees

140

Figure 4. Partial Dependence Plots of Linguistic Features for Predicting Big Five Personality Traits
This figure depicts partial dependence plots (Friedman, 2001) for the five most important linguistic features for each of the Big Five traits. Each partial
dependence plot is produced by averaging estimated Big Five traits over the training (ghSMART) sample as the given linguistic feature is varied while the
other features are held at their observed value. The vertical gridlines and the hash marks at the base of the plot represent the deciles of the linguistic feature
distribution from the ghSMART data with the median depicted by the dashed line.
(b) Conscientiousness

(a) Agreeableness
0.750
0.725
0.700
0.675
0.650

(c) Extraversion
0.724
0.723
0.722
0.721
0.720
0.719

0.760
0.755
0.750
0.745
18.63

58.23

164.6

11.19

Quantifiers

45

0.74
0.72
0.70
0.68

21.43
Words per sentence

46.7

34.36
Vague quantifiers

78.44

0

43.4
Qualifiers

98

00.87

0.75

0.724

0.74

0.720

0.68

0.73

0.716

46.7

254.9

424.2
Words>6 letters

22.24
Anxiety

0.70

21.43
Words per sentence

83.63

0.740
0.735
0.730
0.725
0.720

0.72

11.19

21.91
Discrepancy

0.75
0.74
0.73
0.72
0.71
3.85

0

595.7

0.712

29.66

97.25
Adverbs

209.1

0.73

0.72
0.71
0.70
0.69
0.68
29.66

97.25
Adverbs

0.75

0.72

0.74

0.71

209.1

0.70
0.65
0.60

0

5.43

2,304
4,780
Words spoken
Partial dependence plots of predictors for Agreeableness
Model contains 49,783 trees

58.23

164.6
Quantifiers

0.725
0.720
0.715

0.759
0.756
0.753
114.5

18.63

Hesitations

0.82
0

40.93
General knowledge references
Partial dependence plots of predictors for Conscientiousness
Model contains 379 trees

11.19

21.43
46.7
Words per sentence
Partial dependence plots of predictors for Extraversion
Model contains 249 trees

Figure 4. —Continued
(e) Openness

(d) Neuroticism
0.80
0.78
0.76
0.74
0.72

0.250
0.245
0.240
0.235
0.230
0.225
0

22.75

67.24

0

28.26
Generalizations

69.29

114.5

2,304
Words spoken

4,780

Certainty
0.79
0.78
0.77
0.76
0.75
0.74
0.73

0.26
0.24
0.22
0.20
0.18
43.58

120.1
Conjunctions

223.2

46

0.76
0.75
0.74
0.73
0.72
0.71

0.275
0.250
0.225
0.200
11.19

21.43
Words per sentence

46.7

0 6.44

67.85
Numbers

0.26
0.25

0.76

0.24

0.74

0.23

0.72
29.66

97.25
Adverbs

209.1

0.30
0.28
0.26
0.24
0.22
114.5

2,304
4,780
Words spoken
Partial dependence plots of predictors for Neuroticism
Model contains 17,020 trees

254.9
0.79
0.77
0.75
0.73
0.71

43.58

424.2
Words>6 letters

595.7

120.1
223.2
Conjunctions
Partial dependence plots of predictors for Openness
Model contains 30,569 trees

Table I
Mapping of ghSMART characteristics to Big Five traits
This table contains details on the mapping of the ghSMART data to Big Five traits The ghSMART characteristics are
described in Table 1 of Kaplan, Klebanov, and Sorensen (2012, pp. 976–978). Mapping iclust refers to the raw output
of the clustering algorithm from the psych package. Mapping Expert Mapping refers to the mapping provided by
Charles O’Reilly, as described in the text. The mapping used in our analysis is labeled “Final Mapping” below.

Characteristic
s developspeople
s treatspeoplewithrespect
s listeningskills
s integrityhonesty
s teamwork
s flexibleadaptable
s opentocriticism
s removesunderperformers
s aggressive
s hiresaplayers
s efficiencyofexecution
s movesfast
s followsthroughoncommitments
s persistent
s workethic
s setshighstandards
s holdspeopleaccountable
s networkoftalentedpeople
s proactivity
s organizationandplanning
s attentiontodetail
s calmunderpressure
s enthusiasm
s persuasion
s brainpowerlearnsquickly
s analysisskills
s strategicthinking
s creativeinnovative

iclust
C23
C23
C23
C23
C23
C23
C23
C22
C22
C22
C22
C22
C22
C22
C22
C22
C22
C22
C22
C7
C7
C23
C8
C8
C20
C20
C20
C20

47

Expert Mapping
Agreeableness
Agreeableness
Agreeableness
Conscientiousness
Extraversion
High openness
High openness
Agreeableness
Agreeableness
Conscientiousness
Conscientiousness
Conscientiousness
Conscientiousness
Conscientiousness
Conscientiousness
Conscientiousness
Conscientiousness
Extraversion
High openness
Conscientiousness
Conscientiousness
Emotional stability
Extraversion
Extraversion
High openness
High openness
High openness
High openness

Final Mapping
Agreeableness
Agreeableness
Agreeableness
Agreeableness
Agreeableness
Agreeableness
Agreeableness
Conscientiousness
Conscientiousness
Conscientiousness
Conscientiousness
Conscientiousness
Conscientiousness
Conscientiousness
Conscientiousness
Conscientiousness
Conscientiousness
Conscientiousness
Conscientiousness
Conscientiousness
Conscientiousness
Emotional stability
Extraversion
Extraversion
High openness
High openness
High openness
High openness

Table II
Descriptive Statistics for CEOs with Data on Big Five Traits
This table provides descriptive statistics on personality scores for our sample of CEOs with data on Big Five traits from
the Kaplan et al. (2012), Kaplan and Sorensen (2016) and O’Reilly et al. (2014b) samples. We label these samples as
ghSMART and O’Reilly respectively.
ghSMART

O’Reilly

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

50th

Max

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

50th

Max

Agreeableness
Conscientiousness
Extraversion
Neuroticism
Openness high
Number of calls

0.70
0.76
0.72
0.24
0.75
13.03

0.13
0.09
0.14
0.13
0.12
10.03

0.21
0.49
0.31
0.12
0.41
1.00

0.73
0.78
0.75
0.19
0.75
12.00

0.88
0.88
0.94
0.50
1.00
41.00

0.54
0.81
0.65
0.34
0.68
27.54

0.21
0.11
0.22
0.19
0.16
13.96

0.16
0.64
0.20
0.08
0.37
1.00

0.61
0.82
0.71
0.32
0.70
29.50

0.97
0.98
1.00
0.74
0.92
52.00

CEO obs.
CEO–call obs.

91
1,186

28
771

48

Table III
Descriptive Statistics for CEOs with Data on Big Five Traits: Industry
This table provides descriptive statistics on industry for our sample of CEOs with data on Big Five traits from the Kaplan
et al. (2012), Kaplan and Sorensen (2016) and O’Reilly et al. (2014b) samples. We label these samples as ghSMART and
O’Reilly respectively. We classify firms into the 49 Fama-French industries.
CEO-firm observations
ghSMART
Num.

%

O’Reilly
Num.

%

Conference calls
ghSMART
Num.

%

Computer Software
Computer Hardware
Electronic Eq.
Control Eq.
Retail
Communication
Machinery
Pharmaceuticals
Food Products
Wholesale
Business Services
Trading
Banking
Medical Equipment
Transportation
Chemicals
Insurance
Auto. and Trucks
Agriculture
Business Supplies
Candy and Soda
Entertainment
Personal Services
Petroleum and Gas
Recreation
Rubber and Plastic
Products
Steel Works Etc

11
3
2
1
9
4
3
11
7
6
5
5
4
4
4
3
3
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

11.46
3.12
2.08
1.04
9.38
4.17
3.12
11.46
7.29
6.25
5.21
5.21
4.17
4.17
4.17
3.12
3.12
2.08
1.04
1.04
1.04
1.04
1.04
1.04
1.04

1

1.04

17

1.57

1

1.04

1

0.09

Obs.
CEO obs.

96
80

16
7
5
2
1
1
1

33
28

49

48.48 129
21.21 12
15.15 21
6.06
8
3.03 149
3.03 27
3.03 73
93
109
58
39
48
86
53
21
23
43
25
3
12
7
9
1
14
2

1083
80

O’Reilly
Num.

11.91 342
1.11 155
1.94 143
0.74 78
13.76
1
2.49 11
6.74 41
8.59
10.06
5.36
3.60
4.43
7.94
4.89
1.94
2.12
3.97
2.31
0.28
1.11
0.65
0.83
0.09
1.29
0.18

771
28

%
44.36
20.10
18.55
10.12
0.13
1.43
5.32

Table IV
Descriptive Statistics: Firm Characteristics
This table provides descriptive statistics on firm characteristics for our sample of CEOs with data on Big Five traits
from the Kaplan et al. (2012), Kaplan and Sorensen (2016) and O’Reilly et al. (2014b) and the sample of CEOs with no
data on Big Five traits. Each observation corresponds to the CEO-firm pair with median firm characteristics over the
period from January 1, 2001 to December 31, 2013. We require three years of non-missing data. Size is the total assets
(AT), in billions of 2013 dollars. Book-to-market is the book-to-market in percentage points. Book equity is computed
as in Cohen et al. (2003). Return on assets equals EBITDA (OIBPD) divided by lagged total assets (AT) in percentage
points. Cash flow equals cash from operations (OANCF or, if missing, computed using balance sheet method) divided
by lagged total assets (AT) in percentage points. R&D intensity equals R&D expense (XRD) divided by sales (SALE) in
percentage points. Net leverage equals total debt (DLTT + DLC) minus cash and cash equivalents (CHE) divided by total
assets (AT) in percentage points. All variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. Compustat data codes are
included in parentheses.
Panel A: ghSMART sample

Size
Book-to-market
Return on assets
Cash flow
R&D intensity
Net leverage
CEO-firm obs.
CEO obs.

Mean

Std.Dev.

7.91
117.40
11.84
8.05
19.84
4.04

22.01
338.31
16.49
13.16
94.13
33.02

5th
0.09
11.09
−14.90
−13.74
0.00
−46.86

25th

50th

75th

95th

0.23
31.41
4.68
4.02
0.00
−17.80

0.93
48.58
11.45
8.07
0.00
5.94

3.16
78.71
19.85
14.65
6.02
26.89

49.76
284.32
35.17
24.30
55.21
55.43

25th

50th

75th

95th

4.00
19.58
12.34
12.74
12.45
−38.38

7.44
24.89
15.95
18.85
14.79
−24.51

33.43
34.91
24.86
22.61
20.01
−16.77

76.47
46.62
29.19
29.72
30.37
3.44

87
73
Panel B: O’Reilly sample
Mean

Size
Book-to-market
Return on assets
Cash flow
R&D intensity
Net leverage
CEO-firm obs.
CEO obs.

21.18
27.65
18.05
18.30
15.97
−25.69

Std.Dev.
26.34
11.88
7.29
6.80
7.59
17.45

5th
2.07
14.49
7.88
9.05
3.69
−52.54

32
28
Panel C: Sample of CEOs without Big Five traits

Size
Book-to-market
Return on assets
Cash flow
R&D intensity
Net leverage
CEO-firm obs.
CEO obs.

Mean

Std.Dev.

4.25
53.80
9.83
7.38
23.92
−0.99

13.57
45.75
17.45
14.42
128.89
33.38

5th
0.04
11.75
−25.52
−20.09
0.00
−61.78

3,222
3,185

50

25th

50th

75th

95th

0.22
28.15
7.17
4.73
0.00
−22.79

0.75
44.66
12.42
9.05
0.41
3.35

2.66
68.70
17.93
13.82
7.97
22.95

18.83
118.13
29.17
23.61
52.09
49.35

Table V
Descriptive Statistics: Linguistic Features
This table reports descriptive statistics for the linguistic features that we include in our Big Five traits classification models. Panel A contains descriptive
statistics for the sample of conference calls of CEOs with data on Big Five traits and Panel B for the sample of conference calls of CEOs without these data.
LIWC is the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count psychosocial dictionary by James W. Pennebaker, Roger J. Booth, and Martha E. Francis Pennebaker et al.
(2007). We provide the names of the corresponding LIWC categories in the second column. LZ categories are from Larcker and Zakolyukina (2012). The lists
of words in self-constructed word categories are in Table VI. We standardize all features across conference calls. For word categories, we divide the raw word
count by the words spoken by the CEO and multiply by 1,950 (the median words spoken by CEOs). For times spoken, we divide the raw number of times the
CEO spoke by the number of times all speakers spoke and multiply by 15 (the median number of times all speakers spoke on a call). For words spoken, we
divide the raw word count of the CEO by the total word count of all speakers and multiply by 5,650 (the median word count of all speakers on a call). For each
CEO-call observation, we require a minimum of 150 words in the question-and-answer portion of the call.
Panel A: CEOs with data on Big Five
Feature

Description

ghSMART
Mean

Panel B: Without Big Five

O’Reilly

51

Std. Dev.

Mean

Std. Dev.

Mean

Std. Dev.

13.04
23.48

29.88
85.33

11.69
18.45

29.72
93.75

13.52
22.87

2.35
2.08
1.92
3.37

2.41
1.37
1.65
3.70

2.19
1.47
1.79
2.66

2.55
1.69
1.40
3.64

2.76
2.24
2.01
3.24

10.00
53.69

5.62
14.61

12.29
48.40

5.50
11.84

9.17
53.22

5.86
15.75

18.52
5.18
3.71

8.01
4.76
4.63

18.12
3.47
1.59

6.92
2.55
1.94

21.02
5.11
3.95

9.14
4.43
4.93

Personal pronouns
First per. singular
First per. plural

LIWC “I”: I, me, mine, etc.
LIWC “we”: we, us, our, etc.

29.05
97.21
Negative emotion words

Sadness
Anxiety
Anger
Extreme negative

LIWC “sad”: devastat*, disadvantage*, etc.
LIWC “anx”: worried, fearful, nervous, etc.
LIWC “anger”: hate, kill, annoyed, etc.
LZ using LIWC “negemo”: absurd, adverse, awful, etc.

2.21
1.48
1.36
3.58

Positive emotion words
Extreme positive
Nonextreme positive

LZ using LIWC “posemo”: fantastic, great, definitely, etc.
LZ using LIWC “posemo”: love, nice, accept, etc.
Agreement

Negations
Assent
Thanks

LIWC “negate”: no, not, never, etc.
LIWC “assent”: agree, OK, yes, etc.
Self-constructed: thank you, thanks, you‘re welcome, etc.

Table V—Continued

Panel A: CEOs with data on Big Five
Feature

Description

ghSMART

Panel B: Without Big Five

O’Reilly

Mean

Std. Dev.

Mean

Std. Dev.

Mean

Std. Dev.

23.71
7.92
58.88
47.70
35.13
44.70
28.88

8.49
7.07
12.99
15.05
9.94
14.21
9.46

24.22
8.62
59.67
44.15
32.99
42.12
29.84

8.10
7.22
11.47
11.70
8.79
13.23
8.44

23.09
10.32
58.67
50.20
35.16
45.70
28.93

8.60
8.93
13.51
14.89
10.65
14.37
9.57

42.17
30.90
22.85
5.21
149.26
43.26

14.31
10.28
9.28
3.75
24.44
12.64

42.89
34.51
21.23
5.42
140.91
41.79

11.55
9.18
7.11
3.54
20.25
10.14

41.37
29.35
24.38
5.66
143.36
44.60

13.53
10.69
9.78
4.27
24.22
12.82

0.08
2.10

0.36
4.30

0.23
1.97

2.32
3.61

0.21
2.53

1.32
4.75

3.75
2290.63
22.05
428.29
122.12
120.39
98.48

1.38
934.30
4.36
47.37
18.83
19.09
19.70

3.40
2422.13
23.44
433.43
124.93
123.12
100.22

1.18
854.10
4.78
41.88
14.84
16.26
17.58

4.01
2411.02
21.47
420.97
121.28
117.37
95.94

1.53
1009.34
4.44
50.61
18.77
18.26
18.71

Certainty
Certainty
Numbers
Quantifiers
Tentative
Vague quantifiers
Qualifiers
Generalizations

LIWC “certain”: always, never, etc.
Number of numbers
LIWC “quant”: all, a lot, bit, etc.
LIWC “tentat”: maybe, perhaps, guess, etc.
Self-constructed: a load of, a lot of, etc.
Self-constructed: arguably, as a whole, etc.
Self-constructed: all that stuff, almost, etc.
Cognitive process

52

Insight
Causation
Discrepancy
Inhibition
Inclusive
Exclusive

LIWC “insight”: admitting, analy*, etc.
LIWC “cause”: allow*, attribut*, based, etc.
LIWC “discrep”: besides, could, etc.
LIWC “inhib”: abandon*, abstain*, etc.
LIWC “incl”: each, inclu*, inside, etc.
LIWC “excl”: either, except, exclu* , etc.

Hesitations and fillers
Hesitations
Gen. knowledge

LZ using LIWC “filler”: ah, um, etc.
LZ: you know, investors well know, etc.
Linguistic process

Times spoken
Words spoken
Words per sentence
Words>6 letters
Articles
Conjunctions
Adverbs
Calls obs.

Number of times spoken
Number of words spoken ignoring articles
Words per sentence
Words longer than 6 letters
LIWC “article”: a, an, the
LIWC “conj”: although, and, as, etc.
LIWC “adverb”: about, absolutely, etc.

1,186

771

70,329

Table VI
Self-Constructed Word Categories
This table presents the word categories and individual words that we construct to use in estimation of Big Five traits classification models.

Thanks
Vague quantifiers

Qualifiers

53
Generalizations

thank you, thanks, you’re welcome, youre welcome, you are welcome
*ish, a bit of, a couple of, a few, a load of, a lot of, a scrap of, a touch of, about, almost, always, approximately, around, at least, billions,
few, fewer, fewest, hundreds, hundreds of billions, hundreds of millions, hundreds of thousands, like, lots of, many, masses of, millions,
millions of billions, more than, most, only a few, oodles of, or less, or so, over, probably, quite a few, round, seldom, several, so many,
some, sometimes, tens of billions, tens of millions, tens of thousands, thousands, thousands of billions, thousands of millions, tons of,
umpteen, unabashedly, usually, a tidbit of, less, less than, tons of
a bit, a couple of, a tidge, a touch, about, all things being equal, almost, anticipate, anticipated, appears, arguably, as a whole, believe,
broadly, could be, expect, expected, fairly, few months, few quarters, few weeks, few years, for the time being, generally, guesstimate,
guesstimating, guestimate, guestimating, hopefully, I am guessing, i am guessing, I believe, i believe, I guess, i guess, i think, I think, I’m
guessing, i’m guessing, in general, in that territory, in the meantime, in the range of, in the range off, in the region of, in the same range
of, kind of, largely, likely, luck, mainly, marginally, may be, maybe, more or less, most, mostly, no big, no critical, no key, no major, on
the whole, ought, overall, possibility, possibly, potential, potentially, presumably, pretty much, pretty regular, pretty similar, pretty soon,
pretty well, probably, quite, range, relatively, roughly, seems, should, slightly, some, sort of, thinks, undeniably
a couple, a few, a whole range of things, all that, all that crap, all that junk, all that stuff, almost, and all, and all that, and all that
sort of thing, and crap, and everything, and junk like this, and so on, and stuff, and stuff like that, anybody like that, anyone like that,
anywhere like that, area, as a whole, broadly, bundle, bundled, chunk, close to, etc, etcetera, evenly, eventually, few, flat, generally,
gradual improvement, gradual improvements, in many respects, in many ways, in the future, in the near future, insignificant, it can, it
may, kind of, less than more, long term, long-term, medium term, medium-term, more or less, more than less, near to, not significant,
nothing big, nothing huge, nothing major, on the whole, one of, or so forth, overall, package of, part of, partially, possibly, potential,
pretty much, probably, proliferation, quantity, quite, relatively, seems, set of, short term, short-term, slice, slightly, somebody like that,
someone like that, something like that, something of that kind, something of that sort, something of that type, sometime, sometimes,
somewhere like that, soon, spread, stuff, stuff like that, suite of, territory, the whole bit, thing, things, thingy, very open, watchmacallit,
what, what do you call it, what have you, whatchamacallit, whatever you prefer, whatnot, what-not, wherever, who, whole range of
things

Table VII
Descriptive Statistics: Big Five Traits
This table provides descriptive statistics for measures of Big Five traits for our sample of CEOs with no personality
data. We compute personality scores for each CEO using the CEO’s utterances from the question-and-answer portion
of quarterly earnings conference calls. We further aggregate these scores and define our final measures for the year t
as the median scores over all quarterly earnings conference calls up to (and including) the last call for the fiscal year
t. We require at least three quarterly conference calls. B/W denotes the ratio of between-CEO mean squared error to
within-CEO mean squared error. In Panel A, Quarterly B/W are for the Big Five traits scores estimated using quarterly
conference calls. In Panel B, Final B/W are for our final measures. Panel B also presents Pearson correlations for our
final scores when CEOs change firms, i.e., between the scores for the same CEO in the new and the old firm. These
scores are computed as the median score over all calls for the CEO-firm pair with at least two years of data. The
alternative hypothesis for the Pearson correlation test is that the correlation is greater than zero. *, **, and *** denote
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
Panel A: Quarterly Big Five traits scores
Quarterly B/W

Big Five traits based on quarterly conference calls
Mean

Agreeableness
Conscientiousness
Extraversion
Neuroticism
Openness high
Obs.

3.661
3.460
5.740
3.453
4.169

Std.Dev.

0.702
0.759
0.725
0.235
0.732

0.083
0.016
0.017
0.072
0.074

5th

25th

50th

75th

95th

0.561
0.726
0.695
0.120
0.604

0.652
0.752
0.715
0.187
0.688

0.707
0.760
0.726
0.233
0.736

0.758
0.769
0.736
0.280
0.781

0.830
0.780
0.750
0.357
0.844

70,329
Panel B: Final Big Five traits scores
Final B/W

CEOs
change firms

Big Five traits
Mean

∗∗∗

Agreeableness
Conscientiousness
Extraversion
Neuroticism
Openness high

16.213
15.102
22.451
14.934
18.388

0.413
0.545∗∗∗
0.552∗∗∗
0.240∗
0.230∗

Obs.

19,011

41

0.703
0.760
0.725
0.234
0.734

54

Std.Dev.
0.045
0.008
0.010
0.039
0.041

5th

25th

50th

75th

95th

0.627
0.748
0.707
0.174
0.667

0.678
0.756
0.719
0.210
0.710

0.706
0.761
0.726
0.233
0.736

0.731
0.765
0.732
0.257
0.759

0.770
0.772
0.741
0.300
0.799

Table VIII
Correlations: Big Five Traits
This table reports pairwise Pearson correlations between our Big Five trait measures. Big Five trait measures are standardized. t-statistics based on robust standard errors clustered by CEO are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
Agreeableness
Agreeableness
Conscientiousness
Extraversion
Neuroticism
Openness high

1.000
0.184∗∗∗
0.280∗∗∗
−0.511∗∗∗
0.157∗∗∗

Conscientiousness
1.000
0.188∗∗∗
−0.258∗∗∗
0.155∗∗∗

55

Extraversion

1.000
−0.275∗∗∗
−0.120∗∗∗

Neuroticism

1.000
−0.157∗∗∗

Openness high

1.000

Table IX
Descriptive Statistics
This table provides descriptive statistics for firm outcomes regressions. Big Five traits correspond to the personality
scores calculated as the median scores over all quarterly earnings conference calls up to (and including) the last call for
the fiscal year t. R&D intensity is R&D expense (XRD) divided by sales (SALE) in percentage points. Investment is the
capital expenditures (CAPX) scaled by lag of net property plant and equipment (PPENT) in percentage points. Bookto-market is the natural logarithm of book-to-market in percentage points. Book equity is computed as in Cohen et al.
(2003). Net leverage equals total debt (DLTT + DLC) minus cash and cash equivalents (CHE) divided by total assets (AT)
in percentage points. Size is the natural logarithm of total assets (AT), in 2013 dollars. Return on assets equals EBITDA
(OIBPD) divided by lagged total assets (AT) in percentage points. Cash flow equals cash from operations (OANCF or, if
missing, computed using balance sheet method as in Klein and Marquardt (2006)) divided by lagged total assets (AT)
in percentage points. Compustat data codes are included in parentheses. We exclude financial firms (SIC in 6000 - 6999)
and utilities (SIC in 4900 - 4999). All variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles.

Agreeableness
Conscientiousness
Extraversion
Neuroticism
Openness high
R&D intensity
Investment
Book-to-market
Net leverage
Size
Return on assets
Cash flow
∆Return on assets
∆Cash flow

Obs.

Mean

Std.Dev.

5th

25th

50th

75th

95th

14,028
14,028
14,028
14,028
14,028
14,006
14,008
14,028
14,028
14,028
14,028
14,028
12,035
12,035

0.702
0.761
0.725
0.236
0.734
13.595
31.351
62.489
-0.579
6.888
11.963
9.316
-0.281
-0.287

0.042
0.007
0.010
0.037
0.039
54.097
30.531
62.346
33.458
1.718
15.877
13.393
8.336
9.047

0.626
0.749
0.707
0.174
0.666
0.000
5.059
8.933
-63.013
4.080
-16.870
-13.509
-14.010
-14.602

0.677
0.756
0.719
0.211
0.711
0.000
12.829
25.704
-22.347
5.673
7.251
4.879
-3.078
-4.151

0.704
0.761
0.725
0.235
0.736
0.333
21.893
44.696
3.960
6.828
13.029
10.005
0.075
-0.201

0.729
0.765
0.732
0.258
0.759
7.171
38.469
76.473
23.529
8.022
19.422
15.822
2.825
3.579

0.768
0.772
0.741
0.301
0.799
38.932
89.849
173.867
48.942
9.919
34.368
28.385
12.000
13.935

56

Table X
Firm Policies
This table reports results of the regressions of firm policy variables on Big Five traits of CEOs with no personality data and controls measured at the end of the
fiscal year t, unless noted otherwise. Big Five traits correspond to the predicted personality scores calculated as the median scores over all quarterly earnings
conference calls up to (and including) the last call for the fiscal year t, unless noted otherwise. R&D intensity is R&D expense (XRD) divided by sales (SALE) in
percentage points. Book-to-market is the book-to-market ratio in percentage points. Book equity is computed as in Cohen et al. (2003). Investment is the capital
expenditures (CAPX) scaled by lag of net property plant and equipment (PPENT) in percentage points. Net leverage equals total debt (DLTT + DLC) minus
cash and cash equivalents (CHE) divided by total assets (AT) in percentage points. Size is the natural logarithm of total assets (AT), in 2013 dollars. Return
on assets equals EBITDA (OIBPD) divided by lagged total assets (AT). Cash flow equals cash from operations (OANCF or, if missing, computed using balance
sheet method as in Klein and Marquardt (2006)) divided by lagged total assets (AT). Compustat data codes are included in parentheses. We exclude financial
firms (SIC in 6000 - 6999) and utilities (SIC in 4900 - 4999) from this analysis. All variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. Big Five trait measures
and control variables are scaled by the corresponding interquartile ranges, i.e., the difference between the 75th and 25th percentiles. The dependent variables
are not scaled. Industry fixed effects are based on the 49 Fama-French industries. Robust standard errors clustered by the 49 Fama-French industries are in
parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
R&D intensity

57

Agreeableness
Conscientiousness
Extraversion
Neuroticism
Openness high
Size
Book-to-market
Return on assets
Cash flow
Net leverage
Industry FE
Year FE
Adj.R2
Obs.

Investment

Book-to-market

Net leverage

∗

∗

−1.354
−1.659
0.609
0.310
0.214
(0.921)
(1.218)
(0.659)
(0.570)
(0.502)
1.597
0.563
0.536
−1.816∗ −1.009
(2.293)
(1.139)
(1.267)
(0.950)
(0.661)
5.538∗∗
2.367∗∗∗ −0.680
−0.063
−0.581
(2.722)
(0.864)
(0.848)
(0.772)
(0.652)
1.844∗∗
0.878
0.187
1.639
2.021∗
(1.097)
(1.044)
(0.734)
(0.872)
(0.649)
14.867∗
5.718∗∗
2.094∗∗∗ 2.981∗∗∗ 1.287∗
(8.972)
(2.696)
(0.692)
(1.040)
(0.662)
1.202
(1.565)
−6.590∗∗∗
(1.747)
−18.786∗∗
(7.616)
−6.020∗∗∗
(1.316)
−12.545∗∗∗
(3.394)

0.485
−1.603
−2.020
−0.339
1.359
0.831
−0.408
(0.546)
(1.138)
(1.149)
(0.997)
(0.773)
(0.671)
(0.432)
−0.866
6.239∗∗∗ 5.793∗∗∗ 4.451∗∗∗ 2.036∗∗
0.768
1.371∗
(0.531)
(1.085)
(0.855)
(0.814)
(0.971)
(0.685)
(0.716)
−0.916
−0.514
0.807
−0.818
−3.034∗∗ −1.303∗ −0.219
(0.694)
(1.330)
(1.041)
(1.061)
(1.397)
(0.769)
(0.577)
0.519
0.729
0.231
0.068
0.430
0.603
−0.028
(0.637)
(1.164)
(0.844)
(0.818)
(1.239)
(0.602)
(0.592)
0.607
−4.299∗∗ −1.048
−1.700
−9.252∗∗∗ −3.189∗∗∗ −2.235∗∗∗
(0.640)
(1.761)
(1.226)
(1.264)
(2.413)
(0.829)
(0.557)
−6.667∗∗∗
−8.157∗∗∗
17.049∗∗∗
(0.767)
(2.079)
(1.566)
−3.675∗∗∗
4.360∗∗∗
(0.551)
(0.514)
0.882
−15.855∗∗∗
7.223∗∗∗
(1.423)
(4.254)
(1.715)
0.940
1.748
−6.447∗∗∗
(1.276)
(1.901)
(1.672)
−7.373∗∗∗
17.502∗∗∗
(0.758)
(1.857)

No
Yes
0.090
14,006

Yes
Yes
0.601
14,008

Yes
Yes
0.318
14,006

Yes
Yes
0.517
14,006

No
Yes
0.514
14,008

Yes
Yes
0.564
14,008

No
Yes
0.555
14,028

Yes
Yes
0.580
14,028

Yes
Yes
0.626
14,028

No
Yes
0.048
14,028

Yes
Yes
0.323
14,028

Yes
Yes
0.460
14,028

Table XI
Performance: Return on Assets
This table reports results of the regressions of firm outcome variables on Big Five traits of CEOs with no personality data and controls measured at the end
of the fiscal year t, unless noted otherwise. Big Five traits correspond to the predicted personality scores calculated as the median scores over all quarterly
earnings conference calls up to (and including) the last call for the fiscal year t, unless noted otherwise. Return on assets equals EBITDA (OIBPD) divided by
lagged total assets (AT) in percentage points. Size is the natural logarithm of total assets (AT), in 2013 dollars. Book-to-market is the book-to-market. Book
equity is computed as in Cohen et al. (2003). Cash flow equals cash from operations (OANCF or, if missing, computed using balance sheet method as in Klein
and Marquardt (2006)) divided by lagged total assets (AT). Net leverage equals total debt (DLTT + DLC) minus cash and cash equivalents (CHE) divided by
total assets (AT). Compustat data codes are included in parentheses. We exclude financial firms (SIC in 6000 - 6999) and utilities (SIC in 4900 - 4999) from this
analysis. All variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. Big Five trait measures and control variables are scaled by the corresponding interquartile
ranges, i.e., the difference between the 75th and 25th percentiles. The dependent variables are not scaled. Industry fixed effects are based on the 49 FamaFrench industries. Robust standard errors clustered by the 49 Fama-French industries are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and
1% level, respectively.

Return on assets

58

Agreeableness
Conscientiousness
Extraversion
Neuroticism
Openness high
Size
Book-to-market
Return on assets
Cash flow
Net leverage
Industry FE
Year FE
Adj.R2
Obs.

∆Return on assetst+1
Big Five measured at t

∆Return on assetst+1
Big Five measured at t − 1

∆Return on assetst+1
Big Five measured at t − 2

1.367∗∗∗ 1.317∗∗∗ 0.520∗∗∗ 0.137
0.142
0.160
0.191
0.187
0.187
0.075
0.060
0.065
(0.378)
(0.279)
(0.165)
(0.123)
(0.108)
(0.103)
(0.165)
(0.152)
(0.140)
(0.174)
(0.173)
(0.174)
−0.618∗∗∗ −0.472∗∗
0.253∗ −0.055
−0.061
0.010
0.045
0.031
0.110
−0.111
−0.105
−0.045
(0.211)
(0.186)
(0.142)
(0.087)
(0.088)
(0.094)
(0.110)
(0.113)
(0.103)
(0.128)
(0.130)
(0.118)
−2.272∗∗∗ −1.532∗∗∗ −0.390∗∗∗ −0.513∗∗∗ −0.458∗∗∗ −0.425∗∗∗ −0.355∗∗ −0.299∗∗ −0.234∗ −0.276∗∗ −0.236∗∗ −0.169
(0.554)
(0.346)
(0.121)
(0.159)
(0.152)
(0.139)
(0.146)
(0.139)
(0.124)
(0.115)
(0.108)
(0.105)
−0.203
−0.179
0.131
−0.158
−0.173
−0.159
0.023
−0.010
0.002
0.062
0.033
0.041
(0.365)
(0.372)
(0.143)
(0.113)
(0.116)
(0.124)
(0.131)
(0.134)
(0.140)
(0.134)
(0.152)
(0.148)
−3.522∗∗ −1.446∗∗∗ −0.341∗∗ −0.346∗∗∗ −0.165
−0.115
−0.341∗∗∗ −0.165∗ −0.105
−0.126
0.028
0.065
(1.544)
(0.489)
(0.165)
(0.133)
(0.102)
(0.119)
(0.130)
(0.095)
(0.107)
(0.136)
(0.101)
(0.106)
0.758∗∗
0.347∗
0.122
−0.068
(0.338)
(0.200)
(0.174)
(0.192)
−1.442∗∗∗
−0.304∗∗∗
−0.298∗∗
−0.163
(0.220)
(0.097)
(0.127)
(0.143)
−2.309∗∗∗ −2.566∗∗∗ −4.498∗∗∗ −2.252∗∗∗ −2.511∗∗∗ −4.390∗∗∗ −2.086∗∗∗ −2.329∗∗∗ −4.048∗∗∗
(0.330)
(0.327)
(0.314)
(0.432)
(0.442)
(0.401)
(0.399)
(0.415)
(0.424)
9.971∗∗∗
2.059∗∗∗
2.060∗∗∗
1.987∗∗∗
(0.230)
(0.315)
(0.403)
(0.360)
2.637∗∗∗
1.178∗∗∗
1.226∗∗∗
1.150∗∗∗
(0.581)
(0.265)
(0.300)
(0.259)
No
Yes
0.375
14,028

Yes
Yes
0.466
14,028

Yes
Yes
0.840
14,028

No
Yes
0.131
12,035

Yes
Yes
0.139
12,035

Yes
Yes
0.167
12,035

No
Yes
0.126
9,267

Yes
Yes
0.133
9,267

Yes
Yes
0.161
9,267

No
Yes
0.114
6,957

Yes
Yes
0.120
6,957

Yes
Yes
0.144
6,957

Table XII
Performance: Cash Flow
This table reports results of the regressions of firm outcome variables on Big Five traits of CEOs with no personality data and controls measured at the end of
the fiscal year t, unless noted otherwise. Big Five traits correspond to the predicted personality scores calculated as the median scores over all quarterly earnings
conference calls up to (and including) the last call for the fiscal year t, unless noted otherwise. Cash flow equals cash from operations (OANCF or, if missing,
computed using balance sheet method as in Klein and Marquardt (2006)) divided by lagged total assets (AT) in percentage points. Return on assets equals
EBITDA (OIBPD) divided by lagged total assets (AT). Size is the natural logarithm of total assets (AT), in 2013 dollars. Book-to-market is the book-to-market.
Book equity is computed as in Cohen et al. (2003). Net leverage equals total debt (DLTT + DLC) minus cash and cash equivalents (CHE) divided by total assets
(AT). Compustat data codes are included in parentheses. We exclude financial firms (SIC in 6000 - 6999) and utilities (SIC in 4900 - 4999) from this analysis.
All variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. Big Five trait measures and control variables are scaled by the corresponding interquartile ranges,
i.e., the difference between the 75th and 25th percentiles. The dependent variables are not scaled. Industry fixed effects are based on the 49 Fama-French
industries. Robust standard errors clustered by the 49 Fama-French industries are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
level, respectively.
∆Cash flowt+1
Big Five measured at t

Cash flow

59

Agreeableness
Conscientiousness
Extraversion
Neuroticism
Openness high
Size
Book-to-market
Cash flow
Return on assets
Net leverage
Industry FE
Year FE
Adj.R2
Obs.

∆Cash flowt+1
Big Five measured at t − 1

∆Cash flowt+1
Big Five measured at t − 2

0.712∗∗
0.702∗∗∗ −0.246
0.272∗
0.293∗∗
0.076
0.304
0.326∗
0.170
0.254
0.286
0.140
(0.343)
(0.245)
(0.162)
(0.156)
(0.135)
(0.156)
(0.212)
(0.192)
(0.202)
(0.199)
(0.202)
(0.164)
−0.825∗∗∗ −0.612∗∗∗ −0.192
−0.192∗∗ −0.157∗∗ −0.192∗∗ −0.097
−0.063
−0.139
−0.013
0.023
−0.087
(0.182)
(0.200)
(0.160)
(0.084)
(0.079)
(0.082)
(0.102)
(0.095)
(0.094)
(0.122)
(0.128)
(0.108)
−1.638∗∗∗ −1.090∗∗∗ −0.016
−0.751∗∗∗ −0.673∗∗∗ −0.473∗∗∗ −0.487∗∗∗ −0.405∗∗∗ −0.268∗ −0.495∗∗∗ −0.442∗∗∗ −0.308∗∗
(0.491)
(0.324)
(0.111)
(0.173)
(0.162)
(0.159)
(0.139)
(0.133)
(0.139)
(0.186)
(0.162)
(0.151)
−0.364
−0.392
−0.261∗∗ −0.223∗ −0.235∗ −0.306∗∗
0.052
0.047
−0.027
0.047
0.058
0.032
(0.364)
(0.332)
(0.131)
(0.125)
(0.130)
(0.135)
(0.117)
(0.116)
(0.134)
(0.147)
(0.155)
(0.148)
−2.682∗∗ −0.996∗∗ −0.087
−0.682∗∗∗ −0.350∗∗∗ −0.152∗ −0.615∗∗∗ −0.301∗∗∗ −0.156
−0.566∗∗ −0.282∗∗ −0.135
(1.302)
(0.392)
(0.154)
(0.230)
(0.108)
(0.087)
(0.186)
(0.086)
(0.118)
(0.246)
(0.137)
(0.136)
0.903∗∗∗
0.246
0.046
−0.075
(0.330)
(0.247)
(0.220)
(0.257)
0.148
0.035
0.012
0.115
(0.164)
(0.131)
(0.159)
(0.188)
−3.013∗∗∗ −3.381∗∗∗ −6.614∗∗∗ −3.023∗∗∗ −3.391∗∗∗ −6.578∗∗∗ −2.974∗∗∗ −3.314∗∗∗ −6.499∗∗∗
(0.359)
(0.311)
(0.389)
(0.416)
(0.385)
(0.477)
(0.436)
(0.417)
(0.545)
9.287∗∗∗
4.079∗∗∗
4.071∗∗∗
4.131∗∗∗
(0.360)
(0.444)
(0.465)
(0.435)
−2.193∗∗∗
0.229
0.251
0.069
(0.368)
(0.330)
(0.337)
(0.291)
No
Yes
0.331
14,028

Yes
Yes
0.420
14,028

Yes
Yes
0.817
14,028

No
Yes
0.157
12,035

Yes
Yes
0.172
12,035

Yes
Yes
0.254
12,035

No
Yes
0.154
9,267

Yes
Yes
0.168
9,267

Yes
Yes
0.251
9,267

No
Yes
0.141
6,957

Yes
Yes
0.152
6,957

Yes
Yes
0.236
6,957

