                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         INTERNATIONAL MACROECONOMIC
                             POLICY COORDINATION




                               Stanley Fischer




                           Working Paper No. 2244




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                           Caribridge, MA 02138
                                 [lay 1987




Support from the Ford Foundation project on International Coordination
of Economic Policy is gratefully acknowledged. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research program in International Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #2244
                                                    May 1987



                  International Macroeconomic Policy Coordination


                                     ABSTRACT
         Increasing integration of the world economy, in both trade and

 capital markets, holds out the promise of mutual gains to countries from

 the coordination of their macroeconomic policy decisions. In this paper

I describe the theoretical case for coordination, evaluate empirical

estimates of the potential gains, review the history of macroeconomic

policy coordination, and discuss the prospects for increased

coordination.

        The theoretical argument is seen most clearly in the

consideration of fiscal expansion. Any one country that expands will

create a current account deficit; all countries expanding together avoid

that problem. In principle coordination is always better, but empirical

estimates suggest the likely gains are small because the effects of

policy in one country on the economies of other countries are small.

Further, uncertainties about the effects of policy, reflected in

differences among econometric models, mean that countries may have very

different views on the likely outcomes of agreements——and therefore that

some of them are bound to be disappointed.

        Information exchanges and some coordination on trade policy take

place in a large number of international organizations and frameworks.

But the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system suggests that

international differences in policy goals are too large for systematic

macroeconomic policy coordination among the major economies to take
place anytime soon. Occasional agreements on particular policy packages

are possible, and coordination does take place in the framework of the

European Monetary System.
                                                   Stanley Fischer
                                                   Department of Economics
                                                  MIT E52-280A
                                                  Cambridge, MA 02139
                                                       Revised: February 1987


              INTERNATIONAL MACROECONOMIC POLICY COORDINATION.


                             Stanley Fischer.'




         International cooperation in policy-making takes place in a

 multitude of settings, including regular diplomatic contacts, the IMF,

 GATT, the EMS, the OECD, various G—'s, the BIS, and Summits. It takes a

multitude of forms, from information-sharing about current and future

policies, through consultation about decisions, to actual coordination of

policies. Coordination "implies a significant modification of national

policies in recognition of international economic interdependence."Z

        Coordination holds out the promise of mutual gains resulting from

the effects of policy decisions in one country on the economies of others.

The Bonn summit of 1978, in which Germany agreed to expansionary fiscal

policy in exchange for a United States commitment to raise the price of

oil to the world level, is a much quoted example of policy coordination.3

That agreement, followed by the second oil shock and increased inflation,

was later viewed by many as a mistake. It was used in 1986 by German

policy—makers as an argument against the trade of fiscal expansion in

Germany for fiscal contraction in the United States.


1Department of Economics, M.I.T., and Research Associate, N.B.E.R. Paper
prepared for the NBER Conference on International Policy Coordination,
April 1987. I am indebted to Robert Solomon for helpful discussions, and
to Geoffrey Carljner, Rudiger Dornbusch, and Martin Feldstein for
comments.
2The definition is from Wallich (1984)
3Robert D. Putnam and C. Randall Henning, "The Bonn Summit of 1978: How
Does International Economic Policy Coordination Actually Work?", Brookings
Discussion Papers in International Economics, No. 53, October 1986,
provide a comprehensive analysis of this episode.
                                   2




       Both the potential and the incentive for economic policy

coordination have increased as the world economy has become increasingly

integrated over the period since World War II. It was of course true over

the entire period that other economies were significantly affected by

United States economic performance. The impact of foreign economies on

the United States has increased as both their share of world GNP and the

share of imports and exports in United States GNP have risen. In Section

I of the paper I trace the connections between economies and the impacts

of foreign and U.S. fiscal and monetary policies on the respective

economies. It remains true that the United States is the most independent

of the major economies, least affected by decisions made elsewhere, but

even it can no longer make policy as if it is a closed economy.

        Research, theoretical and applied, on policy coordination has

proliferated in the last decade. The potential gains from policy

coordination, and the different types of coordination, have been clarified

by a theoretical literature that draws on the theory of games. Conditions

under which coordination may even worsen economic performance have been

identified. However empirical work based on applications of these models,

implies that the potential gains from coordinating policies may be quite

small. These developments are reviewed in Section II.

        Countries have cooperated in macroeconomic policy-making since at

least the inter—War period, when Britain's 1925 return to gold was urged

and assisted by the Federal Reserve. The breakdown of cooperation and the

world economy during the Great Depression served as powerful spurs to the

creation of the Bretton Woods system, the IMF, the World Bank, and GATT,
                                     3




 as institutions that would permit the resumption and growth of world

 trade. Those institutions, in place during a period of extraordinary

 growth and prosperity, were in many respects highly successful, even

 though in the end the Bretton Woods adjustable peg exchange rate system

 could not withstand the pressures of speculative capital flows.

         The shift to flexible exchange rates in 1973 occurred because

countries had been unable to coordinate their policies. It had been

argued that flexible rates would insulate countries from foreign shocks,

implying far greater freedom than under Bretton Woods to pursue domestic

goals independently of foreign reactions and policies. But experience

since the onset of floating has reaffirmed international
                                                            interdependence,
and led to the current search for methods of cooperation.     In Section III

I briefly describe policy cooperation and coordination since the 1920's,

and the institutions that have been put in place to facilitate that

cooperation.

        In Section IV I discuss and evaluate recent proposals for policy

coordination, including those arising from the 1986 Tokyo agreement, the

1987 Paris agreement, and exchange rate target zones. I argue that

continued systematic policy coordination on a grand scale among the major

economies is unlikely, because the largest countries are still too

insulated-—particularly in the short run--from the foreign repercussions

of their actions.   The most that can be expected in the near future is

occasional agreements when a mutually advantageous bargain can be struck,

and the continued exchange of information in the many formal and informal

international meetings in which economic policy is discussed. But
                                     4




coordination on a smaller scale, as in the European Monetary System, has

developed significantly.

        Eventually, but only in the very long run, as understanding of the

operation of policy improves and interdependence grows, countries may

begin systematically to coordinate their policy decisions for their mutual

benefit. Even then, and certainly until then, the best that each country

can do for other countries is to keep its own economy in shape.



I. The Extent of Interdependence.


        International trade has become increasingly important to all

countries in the period since World War II. Table 1 presents data for the

Group of 5 countries.4     Both exports and imports have risen sharply for

Germany, France, and the U.K. Japan's imports have not grown much as a

proportion of GNP, though the export share has risen substantially.

Although the proportionate increase in exports and especially imports has

been high for the United States, it remains by far the most closed of the

OECD economies. The importance of trade issues is seen clearly in the

fact that the three largest OECD economies each had trade gaps of at least

3% of GNP in 1985.


4Except for the U.K., the share of exports for each country in 1950 was
below its 1929 level. U.S. imports, which amounted to 10% of GNP in 1985,
have risen more rapidly than exports.
                                        5




 Table 1: SHARES OF EXPORTS AND IMPORTS IN GNP (%)

                    U.S.    Japan       Germany   France     U.K.

   1950 Exports     4.3     11.4*        11.4      15.6      22.3
         Imports    4.1     10.5*        12.7      14.6      22.9

   1970 Exports     5.6     11.3        22.6      15.2       22.3
         Imports    5.4     10.2        20.6      14.9       21.4

   1985 Exports     7.0     16.4        35.2      23.5       29.3
        Imports    10.0     12.6        31.3      24.0       28.1

Source: International Financial Statistics, Yearbook, 1986
*
  Figure is for 1955

        More impressive even than the growth of trade in goods and

services, is the increasing integration of the world's capital markets.

European currencies only became convertible in 1958; now there is

complete freedom of capital movements for the major economies, except

France and Italy-—and they have announced their intention to remove

controls. Whereas daily trading volume on the New York Stock Exchange

averages less than $10 billion, foreign exchange transactions in Tokyo,

New York and London averages more than $100 billion per day. Capital

flows were the proximate cause of the death of the Brettori Woods system.

They are a major and extraordinarily rapid transmission mechanism of

shocks in the international economy.6


5Germany allowed its residents to export capital from 1957; convertibility
in 1958 applied to external holders of the other European currencies,
while capital controls continued for domestic residents.
6They played this role too in the heyday of the gold standard, from 1880
to 1914.
                                   6




        Policy interactions among countries depend on the exchange rate

regime. In the Bretton Woods adjustable peg system, expansionary monetary

policy in the United States would cause domestic expansion, tending to

raise the domestic price level, and a current account deficit. The

current account deficit would cause an inflow of dollars to other

countries requiring foreign monetary expansion to maintain the exchange

rate. This was the source of the frequent charge that the United States

exported inflation in the Bretton Woods period. With the lifting of

capital controls, speculative capital flows provided a more immediate link

among economies. Expansionary domestic policies could lead to the

anticipation of devaluation, to a massive capital outflow, and to

devaluation or to an imposed change in policies.

        Proponents argued that flexible exchange rates would reduce

interdependence. Expansionary monetary policy in one country would lead

to inflation and depreciation of that country's currency, but not affect

other economies. There was little discussion of the international

transmission, if any, of fiscal policy changes in one economy.

        Interdependence has nonetheless increased in the flexible rate

system. The missing element in the earlier analysis was the recognition

of the slow adjustment of prices and wages. If prices and wages in the

domestic economy were fully flexible, then an increase in the money stock

would indeed lead immediately to a proportional increase in the price

level and exchange rate. In practice, the slow adjustment of domestic

prices and wages, and the rapid adjustment of the exchange rate to policy

changes, has meant that monetary and fiscal policy changes in one country
                                        7



    affect the real exchange rate rapidly. The real exchange rate changes are

    transmitted rapidly to foreign economies, affecting both the profitability

    of exports and the consumer price index as prices of imports change.

            Policy decisions in today's flexible exchange rate world are

    transmitted to other countries through three main channels:

      In the first instance, policy decisions, or their expectation, affect

    interest rates and asset prices, including the exchange rate. U.S. fiscal

    expansion increases interest rates, attracting foreign capital and

    creating a demand for dollar securities. The capital inflow causes a

    dollar appreciation, and by drawing capital out of foreign economies

    raises interest rates abroad too. U.S. monetary contraction likewise

raises interest rates and causes a dollar appreciation.

    • The rapid interest rate and exchange rate responses are transmitted

slowly to real variables. Exchange rate depreciation through the J-curve

initially worsens the trade balance measured in domestic currency, taking

up to two years (and perhaps more) to produce an improvement in the

current account and through the increase in net exports to exert an

expansionary effect on the domestic economy. By the same token, a

depreciation of the domestic currency will take several years to reduce

exports and real activity in foreign economies. Real interest rate

movements likewise affect investment slowly.

-    Aside from their effects on trade flows, changes in exchange rates also

affect domestic inflation. A depreciation directly affects domestic

inflation by raising the prices of imports. Further, by increasing the

profitability of exports and increasing aggregate demand, depreciation

affects wage claims and thereby indirectly increases the inflation rate.
                                     8




          Common sense evidence suggests these interactions are large enough

to matter. The world economy recovered in 1984 and 1985 under the impetus

of expansionary United States fiscal policy despite restrictive European

and Japanese fiscal and monetary policies. The massive appreciation of

the dollar from 1980 to 1985 made large parts of United States industry

and agriculture uncompetitive and generated strong political pressures for

protection——and to a much more limited extent, for a reversal of fiscal

policy.

          Some econometric evidence on the extent of interactions is

summarized in Table 2, which shows the effects of fiscal and monetary

policies in the U.S. and the rest of the OECD on those economies.7 The

data in the tables are estimates of the effects of the policies in the

second year after they have been introduced, by which time most of the

impact of the policy change has taken place. They are based on the

properties of twelve econometric models, representing a wide range of

views about the operation of the economy, and showing considerable

diversity of results.8


7The properties of twelve international econometric models were discussed
at a Brookings Conference on Empirical Macroeconomics for Interdependent
Economies, in March 1986. Frankel and Rockett (1986), Hickman (1986), and
Holtham (1986) all present summaries of some of the properties of those
models.
8The twelve models are: DRI multicountry; Compact (European Economic
Community); EPA (Japanese Economic Planning Agency); Project Link;
Liverpool (a rational expectations monetarist model); MSG (HcKibbin—Sachs
global); MCM (Federal Reserve Board's Multicountry Model); Minimod (based
in the IMF); Interlink (from the OECD); Taylor (from Stanford University);
VAR (a minimally structured vector autoregressive model); and Wharton.mode
                                          9



             To read the table, consider a typical entry,
                                                          say that for GNP in
 row I. Note 1 shows that the policy action in row I is a sustained

 increase in U.S. government spending of 1% of GNP (with no change in tax

 rates). The entry "1.2" under "Own" means that GNP in the U.S. is 1.2%


 Table 2: POLICY INTERACTIONS, UNITED STATES AND THE REST OF OECD.*

             GNP                CPI           Int. rate    Current acc.# Ex. Rate
       Own      For.      Own      For.       Own   For.    Own    For.
 I.
       1.2      0.3       0.3     0.3         1.1   0.4    —13.1    6.9   +1.4%
 II.
       1.5      0.2       0.3     O,5**       0.6   0.4    —7.1     5.3   +0.4%
III.
       1.2     —0.1       0.9    —0.3     —1.6 —0.5        —2.8    —2.9
Iv.
       0.6      0.1       0.5    —0.5     —1.1 —0.3        —0.2    0.1    —3.2%
* These
          data are averages of data reported in Tables la and 6a of
and Rockett (1986). They are the change in the variable shown in Frankel
                                                                 year two
 after a policy change initiated at the start of year one.
 # Measured in $billions. The GNP, CPI and exchange rate data
                                                               are
 percentage changes from a baseline value. The interest rate data are
 expressed as the change in the interest rate.
 ** These
          numbers are heavily influenced by one substantial outlier.
Notes:
1. The policy actions are:
         I. A sustained increase in U.S. government spending equal to 1% of
GNP.
        II. A sustained increase in government spending in the rest of the
OECD by 1% of GNP.
       III. An increase in the U.S. money supply of 4%.
        IV. An increase in the money supply in the rest of OECD by 4%.
2. For, means foreign.
3. These results are averages, based on simulations of twelve econometric
models. Some variables are not calculated in certain models, though in
all cases there are at least ten estimates. Ranges of estimates vary;
information on the ranges is reported in Holtham (1986).
4. The interest rate is a short rate.
5. The exchange rate is the value of the domestic currency: a depreciation
registers as a negative number.
                                   10



higher in the second year after the policy has been put in place than it

would otherwise have been. The entry "0.3" under "For." means that GNP in

the rest of the OECD in the second year after the U.S. policy change is

0.3% higher than it would otherwise have been. Similarly, moving across

row I to the CPI column, the 1% of GNP increase in U.S. government

spending raises the price level in both the U.S. and abroad by 0.3% (i.e.

very little) relative to what it would otherwise have been.

        The strongest and most consistent results found by examining the

twelve models are those for the effects of U.S. fiscal policy. The

results for monetary policy show considerable divergence across the

different models.

        U.S. fiscal expansion, line I of the table, is expansionary both

in the U.S. and abroad, resulting in higher output and higher prices in

both. Although the models concur in the inflationary effects in the U.S.,

some models show U.S. fiscal expansion reducing foreign prices.   U.S.

fiscal expansion increases interest rates both at home and abroad, and is

generally shown as leading to a dollar appreciation. Note though that the

interdependence between the U.S. and the rest of the OECD is limited:

although fiscal expansion by 1% of GNP increases U.S. GNP by more than 1%,

its impact in the rest of the OECD is only one—fifth its direct U.S.

impact. None of the twelve models studied shows GNP in the rest of the

OECD rising by as much as 1% of its GNP.

        The results of foreign fiscal expansion, summarized in line II of

the table, are consistent with the U.S. case. The foreign appreciation is

much smaller than is the dollar appreciation in line I. This is
                                     11




 consistent with the complaint by individual foreign countries that fiscal

 expansion in their countries would lead not to appreciation, as in the

 United States, but rather to depreciation, as a result of loss of

 confidence in the sustainability of their balance of payments deficit.

 The failure of the Mitterand expansion in 1981 is some evidence in favor

 of this view, though that period was marked by monetary as well as fiscal

 expansion. The spillover effects on GNP in the United States are quite

 small, though all but one of the models concurs in showing these effects

 to be positive.

         Monetary expansion in the United States is examined in line III.

A 4% increase in the U.S. money stock leads to lower interest rates, a

dollar depreciation, and an increase in U.S. GNP and the price level. The

U.S. current account is shown as worsening, probably because the effects

of the increase in income on imports are more rapid than the effects of

the dollar depreciation on the current account.   Expansionary U.S.

monetary policy is shown as having negative effects on the rest of the

OECD. This must be largely due to the worsening of their current account.

Note both that the table implies an improvement in the current accouts of

non—OECD countries'0, and that there is a greater diversity of views among

the models of the effects of monetary expansion—-particularly the

spillovers to the non—OECD countries——than about fiscal expansion.


9Oudiz and Sachs (1984) show that fiscal expansion may cause depreciation
for countries whose liabilities are not held internationally.
'°If the current accounts of both the U.S. and the rest of the OECD
worsen, the current accounts of other countries must improve.
                                      12




       Note also that foreign fiscal expansion has relatively small

effects on the U.S. current account within the two year horizon of Table

2. An increase in government spending of 1% of GNP in all the rest of the

OECD improves the U.S. current account by only $5 billion in the second

year after the policy change. The table implies that the benefits for

U.S. exports of foreign expansion are likely to be small.

        The results of the effects of monetary expansion in the rest of

the OECD on those countries are in the same direction as the "Own" columns

in line III. However U.S. monetary expansion is more powerful in the U.S.

than rest of the OECD monetary expansion is for those countries.'1

        The table confirms the interdependencies among economies. They

are stronger——or at least more reliable——for fiscal than for monetary

policy. But they have also to be qualified. In the first instance, the

"own" effects on GNP are in all cases much larger than the "foreign"

effects. The interdependence is limited. This is a fundamental finding,

that will color much of the remainder of the paper. Second, the analysis

of fiscal and monetary policy in the rest of the OECD implies a degree of

coordination that simply does not exist. The major OECD countries,

including Japan and Germany do not necessarily pursue co-ordinated

policies. Even if they did——together with France, Italy, the U.K.,

Canada, and the smaller OECD countries——the effects of expansion in those

countries on U.S. GNP would be limited, unless U.S. monetary and fiscal

policy changed in response. The table therefore indirectly emphasizes the

dominant role of the United States.


"The "foreign" effects of the monetary expansions have different signs in
some columns. However estimates of these effects show a wide range and
the precise numerical magnitudes should not be given significant weight.
                                     13




         Significant as the basic results in Table 2 are, recent experience

 suggests they omit an important, sectora]., aspect of policy

 interdependence. Exchange rate changes, and subsequent effects on trade

 flows and competitiveness, generate pressures for policy changes. In the

 case of an appreciation, the pressures are for protection, not for fiscal

 discipline. Despite governments' commitment in principle, and in a

 succession of negotiations in practice, to increased freedom of trade,

 protectionist pressures from well-organized export and import—competing

 sectors have been increasingly effective. That sectoral aspect of

 interdependence, and the dangers it brings of a breakdown of the world

 trading system that has been a major achievement of the entire post—World

War II period, is as important for the well—being of the major economies

as the direct macroeconomic interdependences which are the subject of

Table 2. Because the exchange rate adjusts very rapidly to expected and

actual policy changes, the competitive effects of macroeconomic policies

may begin to exert political pressures well before they have major

macroeconomic impacts.

        Slower moving interdependencjes also deserve attention.    Exchange
rate changes move the location of production and international investment.

The effects on the location of production go in both directions.

Producers move to countries where wages, measured in international prices,

are low——and thus to countries with undervalued currencies. But some

producers, for example Honda, move into countries where protectionist

pressures may raise import barriers——and thus to countries with overvalued

currencies.
                                      14



        Structural interdependence arises from the growing integration of

world markets, and the mobility of firms to areas of least regulation and

taxation. The United States and the United Kingdom have agreed to

coordinate capital requirements for banks. The U.S. tax reform of 1986

may well spark similar reforms in other countries, not necessarily because

the intellectual case is convincing, but because other countries want to

retain the skilled and high—paid individuals affected by the reform.



II. Policy Coordination in Theory.


        The theoretical literature on policy coordination12 has grown

rapidly in volume, sophistication and complexity. The basic argument for

coordination can be seen in the following example. Consider two

countries, for the sake of concreteness called America and Europe, each

constrained to use only fiscal policy. Suppose that fiscal expansion

produces higher output and an appreciation for the expanding country.

Each country is concerned both about its level of output, and the current

account.

           In the most independent arrangement, each country chooses its

optimal policy taking the policy action of the other country as given.

Equilibrium in each country is reached at the point where the benefits of

expansion are balanced by the costs of appreciation, given the other

country's decision. This is a non—cooperative equilibrium.'3


'2Mundell (1971) is an influential contributor. Hamada (1985), Buiter and
Narston (1985), and Cooper (1986) are useful general references to the
theoretical literature. This section draws in particular on Canzoneri and
Gray (1983), and Canzoneri and Henderson (1987); the latter provides a
comprehensive view of recent developments.
131n game theory jargon, it is called a Nash equilibrium.
                                     15




         In this situation, expansion in one country, say America, makes

 the other country better off. If America expands, Europe's output and

 current account improve, and vice versa. If both expand together, both

 will become better off, as output rises and the current account of each

 country deteriorates very little.14 If the countries can agree on the

 expansion, both improve their situation. If only one country expands, it

 becomes worse of fl5    Without coordination or cooperation a mutually

beneficial expansion is prevented.

         Perhaps the only mystery in this story is why the countries do not

reach the cooperative equilibrium without coordinating.   The explanation
lies in the football spectator problem.16 If everyone is sitting, someone

who stands has a better view. People see equally well if everyone stands

or if everyone sits. Sitting in the seats is more comfortable than

standing. In the non co—operative equilibrium, everyone stands. That is

because in the non co—operative case, each person does what is best for

him or herself given the actions of others. If everyone sits, someone


14The mutual expansion cannot continue without limit, either because
expansion worsens current accounts (vis a vis the rest of the world) or
because full employment is reached.
1The reasoning is as follows. The country had previously expanded to the
point where the benefits of expansion were balanced by the cost of
appreciation. If it now expands further, the costs of the appreciation
outweigh the benefits of the expansion.
'6The usual example is the prisoners' dilemma. Here two suspects,
questioned separately, are each offered a better deal if he confesses than
if he remains silent while the other confesses. If neither confesses, the
prosecution fails to convict. Fearing that the other will confess, each
prisoner confesses. If they had been able to coordinate, neither would
have confessed. Since it is not clear whether to be on the side of the
prisoners (in which case the cooperative equilibrium is better) or the law
(when the non—cooperative solution is socially preferable), I give a
slightly less familiar example.
                                     16




taking what others do as given, will stand. If everyone is standing, then

it is best to continue standing. The cooperative solution is for everyone

to sit. The problem though is that each person is tempted to get ahead by

standing. Thus the cooperative solution will not be achieved without an

explicit agreement on coordination——in this case that everyone stays

seated.

          Returning to the economic example, what happens if one country,

say America, goes ahead, in the hope that Europe will follow? After all

American expansion increases European income and improves its current

account. Surely Europe will expand in response. What Europe does depends

on its evaluation of American responses to its action. If it believes

America will continue to act as the leader, it will likely expand, making

both countries better off than they were in the non—cooperative

equilibrium.'7 If Europe does not respond, America is worse off for

having expanded. But even if Europe does respond when America acts as

leader, the final equilibrium is not as good for both countries as would

be possible if each could make its policy decisions with reassurance that

the other would be cooperating fully.

          This example, which underlies the locomotive case for German

expansion in 1977, captures the essential motivation for policy

coordination. But it is not always true that coordination leads to more

expansionary policies by both countries. Optimal cooperative policies


'7Technically, America is acting as a Stackelberg leader, and the new
equilibrium is a Stackelberg equilibrium. See Canzoneri and Henderson
(1987) for more precise definitions and a discussion of some problems of
the Stackelberg equilibrium.
                                     17




 depend on the objectives of the policymakers, on the nature of the

 transmission mechanism between the economies, on the policy tools that

 they have available, and on the nature of the disturbances that hit their

 economies and call for policy responses.

         Transmission between the economies in the locomotive example is

 positive: expansion in one country produces expansion and an improved

 current account in the other. Negative transmission is also possible:

under some circumstances expansionary monetary policy in one country

causes contraction in the other; if the exchange rate is viewed as an

instrument of policy, competitive devaluation can produce so—called

beggar-thy—neighbor outcomes in which a devaluing country gains exports

and increases employment at the expense of the other, which increases its

imports and loses exports. Cooperation may then result in less active use

of the policy than when the countries are independently pursuing their own

interests. For instance, suppose the targets of policy are output and

inflation, and monetary policy is the only instrument. In the non-

cooperative equilibrium, each country is balancing the costs of added

inflation against the benefit of higher output. But expansionary policy

in each economy reduces output in the other. If monetary policy in each

economy becomes less expansionary, the same income levels can be attained

at a lower rate of inflation.18

        Policies may also be transmitted asymmetrically between countries.

As in Table 2, monetary expansion in America may produce lower output in

Europe while European money growth produces higher output in America. If


18Canzoneri and Gray (1983) analyze this example in detail.
                                    18




the targets are inflation and output, the cooperative equilibrium is one

in which Europe expands relative to the non—cooperative case, while

America contracts. Despite the prominence of the locomotive theory

example, coordination does not necessarily mean more expansion all round.

        Cooperative responses depend also, obviously, on the disturbances

with which they have to deal. If transmission effects are positive, a

shift of demand between countries will call for differing policies in the

two countries. A worldwide disturbance will call for similar policy

responses in different countries if transmission effects are positive.

        Differences in objectives between countries affect the particular

policy actions that should be taken in each country, but do not affect the

basic principle of gains from cooperation. Europe (or Germany) may be

more hostile to inflation than America, but both countries can produce

lower inflation rates by cooperating than by pursuing independent

policies 19

        So far is has been assumed that there is a once—for—all decision

on policy, which takes effect immediately. Policy analysis becomes more

difficult when account is taken both of the lags with which policy works,

and of the fact that policy decisions are made period after period, and

not once—for—all. Empirical evidence shows long lags in the effects of

policy. The J—curve is a relevant example. When lags are long and


It is often pointed out in the literature that the coordination problem
disappears if each country has as many policy instruments as targets.
With perfect certainty, each country can then attain its targets exactly,
and need not worry about foreign decisions. When the effects of policy
are uncertain, international coordination may still be useful even if each
country has as many policy instruments as targets.
                                       19




 uncertain, as they are, optimal policy is cautious. The danger is that

 strong actions taken today will come into effect at an uncertain later

 date, when they might be totally inappropriate to the economic situation.20

         It is sometimes argued that the best policy is entirely inactive——

 that the government should set a constant growth rate of money, fix tax

rates and government spending at levels appropriate to the long run, and

not respond at all to disturbances to the economy. The argument is not

entirely resolved,21 but there is a clear case for active monetary policy

to counteract shifts in money demand that would cause inflation or

deflation. Similarly, the short—run inflexibility of prices combined with

the rapid adjustment of the exchange rate means that foreign monetary

disturbances change the real exchange rate, also creating a possible need

for active monetary policy to prevent the shocks being transmitted to the

domestic economy.

        Once we recognize the ongoing nature of policy interactions among

countries, reputationa]. considerations make cooperative equilibria more

likely. Each country knows it will be better off in the long run if the

cooperative equilibrium is maintained. They may develop strategies both

to punish countries that do not cooperate, and to earn a reputation for

reliability. It then becomes possible that countries will reach and stay

at the cooperative equilibrium. This reduces the force of the one period

example, by suggesting that there is more cooperation than the discussion

of the football spectators suggests.


20This is what happened after the Bonn summit, when expansionary German
fiscal policy began to take effect as the second oil shock hit.
211t is reviewed at length in Fischer (1987).
                                    20




        Coordination through reputation, without explicit international

agreements, is less likely the more countries there are. When everyone is

at the cooperative equilibrium, the temptation for one small country to

break ranks is very strong. The potential cost to it of doing so may also

be high, for it is more dependent on the world economy than is a larger

country. But because it inflicts very little damage on the rest of the

world by not cooperating, it is not certain that it will be penalized.

Coordination is probably easier to achieve among larger countries, or

groups of countries that have coordinated policies internally, despite the

inverse relationship between the size and openness of economies.

        What happens to cooperation when countries have different views

about the effects of policy? Frankel (1986) and Frankel and Rockett

(1986) have examined cooperative policy making when nations have different

models of the economy. Given each country's model, it is possible to find

a set of policies that each nation believes will improve its welfare.

Whether those policies will actually improve economic performance in their

countries depends on the true model of the economy. Frankel and Rockett

use the twelve models of the economy whose properties are summarized in

Table 2 to examine the outcome of policies that might be agreed to.

Assume that each country believes in one of the twelve models, and further

that one of the models is correct, but that no-one knows which it is.

Frankel and Rockett show that it is quite likely that cooperation makes an

economy worse off than it would be if it pursued a non—cooperative

strategy, doing what it regarded as best given the actions of other

countries.
                                     21




         The force of this calculation is that the twelve models examined

have each been advanced by reputable scholars, they come from several

countries, and several might be used in choosing policies in their

countries. If policy coordination agreements were made on the basis of

those models, they would be quite likely to turn out badly. Just how

powerful this result is depends on whether there are policies whose

effects are widely agreed upon, and which work in the agreed—upon manner.

It is then possible that policies that are not optimal in any model, but

that do well in all of them, would perform well in the real world.

        Rogoff (1985) and Kehoe (1986) have shown another condition under

which cooperative policy may produce a worse outcome than the Nash

equilibrium. In the Rogoff example22, domestic wage setting depends on

the expected price level. The policy variable is the money stock. In the

absence of cooperation, each central bank is constrained from trying to

raise output through expansionary policy by the inflationary impact of the

resultant depreciation. When the central banks cooperate, that constraint

is removed. Expecting more inflation, wage setters set a higher nominal

wage, and on average the price level is higher. If the central banks

could precommit themselves not to attempt to expand the money supply

excessively after the wage has been set, cooperation would produce better

performance than uncoordinated policy.23


22This is closely related to the Barro—Gordon (1983) analysis in which
discretionary policy raises the average rate of inflation.
2aKehoe!s example is also based on the government's inability to
precommit, in his case not to tax capital heavily.
                                    22




        Many of the qualifications to the locomotive theory example raise

doubts about the potential gains from cooperative policy-making. Another

source of doubt is the weak interaction effects examined in Table 2.

Several authors have attempted to estimate potential gains from

cooperation, using econometric models. The best—known work is that of

Oudiz and Sachs (1984), who used the Federal Reserve's MC)! (multicountry

model) and the EPA model of the Japanese Economic Planning Agency to study

coordination among the U.S., Japan, and Germany.

        Oudiz and Sachs assumed that governments target the level of GNP,

the inflation rate, and the current account. They estimated the tradeoffs

that each country was willing to make among the three goals on the basis

of experience in those countries. Japan for instance appears to put the

highest weight on the current account, Germany on the inflation rate.

        Using these tradeoffs, Oudiz and Sachs in 1984 calculated the

gains that would have been obtained in 1984—1986 by pursuing cooperative

policies. Their basic result is that the gains for the United States and

Germany would have been small (averaging, across the two models, less than

0.2% of GNP per year) while those for Japan were larger, averaging nearly

0.7% of GNP per year across the two models.24      Surprisingly, cooperation

involved expansionary fiscal and monetary policies in the United States,

and fiscal contraction with monetary expansion in Germany and Japan.

Oudiz and Sachs argued that the improvement from cooperation would

increase if the entire OECD, or the major European countries, were added

to the model.


24The differences between the results using the two models are large, e.g.
0.99% of GNP per year gain in the MC)! for Japan, versus 0.37% per year in
the EPA.
                                     23




         In a subsequent paper, Oudiz (1985) examined policy coordination

within the European Monetary System. Interaction effects are stronger

 than they are between the U.S. and the rest of the OECD in Table 2.

Nonetheless, the gains from coordination are again quite limited, except

in the case of France which would gain nearly 1% of GNP per year. Hughes

Hallett (1986) finds small gains from cooperation between the United

States and Europe, with most of the gains accruing to Europe.

        The game theory literature on policy coordination, then, makes a

convincing case that coordination is generally superior to non-cooperative

policy making. But beyond that general principle, it provides no simple

results showing how cooperative rules should operate. It shows also that

there are exceptions to this principle, most important that the

application of cooperative policies calculated in incorrect models may

worsen rather than improve economic performance. It may be better to look

for robust rules that perform well in many models than rules that are

optimal in a particular model. Finally, calculations imply that the gains

from coordination p se would be small, even if the correct model of the

economy were known.



III. The Historical Background.


        International cooperation in economic policy extends back at least

to nineteenth century cooperation between central banks. The Bank of

England and the Bank of France, the major repositories of gold in Europe,

helped each other out in several nineteenth century crises, starting as
                                    24




early as 1825 (Clapham, 1844).25 Russia and France, economically linked

through French loans to Russia, also cooperated in maintaining the

convertibility of gold in France.

        The nineteenth century gold standard imposed discipline on

monetary policies. As has often been remarked the system was far from

automatic26. Supposedly, a set of "rules of the game" developed to

describe the policies central banks should have followed. The standard

account of the operation of the gold standard, in which an expansionary

shock in one country leads to a gold outflow implies that central banks

should have permitted the money stock to be determined by gold flows.

flowever, Bloomfield (1959) has shown that gold inflows were typically

offset, rather than allowed to produce automatic changes in the domestic

money supply. Although policy had discretionary elements, one rule was

followed consistently: tighten interest rates to defend the convertibility

of gold. Thus the indirect effects of high interest rates on domestic

activity substituted for the gold flow mechanism that liume argued

equilibrated the system. Explicit cooperation between central banks was

episodic, associated with crises, but nonetheless effective. The

coordination of non—existent fiscal policies was not an issue.

        Cooperation between central banks became much more active in the

nineteen twenties.27 After Britain decided in 1918 to return to gold at


25The assistance from the Bank of France to the Bank of England in 1825
was indirect, the British Foreign Secretary finding assistance from so
recently defeated an enemy difficult to acknowledge. (Clapham, p. 101).
26Fischer (1987) discusses the automaticity of the system.
27Eichengreen (1985) provides an interesting account of this period,
drawing on the theoretical developments described in Section II above.
                                     25




 the pre—War parity, international conferences in 1920 and 1922 laid the

 foundation for the return to gold in a gold exchange standard. The

 conclusions of the 1922 Genoa conference noted the need to avoid a

 competitive struggle by central banks to acquire gold, but did not specify

how the cooperative solution was to be obtained.

        Britain's return to gold in 1925 was actively encouraged by both

the League of Nations and the Federal Reserve System. Benjamin Strong of

the New York Fed and Montagu Norman of the Bank of England were in very

close touch throughout the twenties, and the Fed supported Britain's

return to gold with a $300 million loan. Strong and Norman's attempts to

restore the gold standard system seemed to have succeeded by the end of

the twenties when over fifty countries were back on gold.

        But by that stage the weakness of the system was already becoming

clear. Britain had gone back to gold with an overvalued exchange rate,

and struggled through the rest of the twenties to bring prices down

further. Tight monetary policy, meaning high interest rates, were under

constant attack from the U.K. Treasury, implying that the coordination

imposed by the discipline of the inappropriate exchange rate might not

withstand domestic political pressures. France in 1926 undervalued the

franc and began accumulating gold with the intention of building Paris as

a major financial centre. This was the competitive struggle for gold that

the Genoa conference had warned against. Fixed exchange rate systems

create an asymmetry between creditors and debtors that enable the former

to avoid adjusting, and that create the incentive for competitive beggar-

thy—neighbor devaluations.
                                    26




        The fixed parities could not withstand the shocks of the Great

Depression and the persistent attempts of France to accumulate gold.28 By

1931 Britain was off gold, floating its exchange rate, and beginning a

period of relative recovery. In 1933 the United States left gold, in the

process torpedoing the World Monetary and Economic Conference meeting in

London that had on its agenda the stabilization of exchange rates. In

1934 the dollar attained de facto stability against gold at $35 an ounce.

All through this period France stayed on gold, devaluing eventually in

1936. A Tripartite Agreement was reached in that year to set exchange

rates among the franc, dollar, and sterling, and it operated successfully

through 1939, permitting devaluations of the franc while maintaining

stability of the dollar—sterling exchange rate.

        The lessons of the inter—War period for cooperation are mixed.

The cooperative return of Britain to gold at the pre—War parity——chosen by

Britain itself——was a mistake. France's lack of cooperation in competing

for gold showed the potential weakness of a fixed rate system. And the

unwillingess of the U.K. and the U.S. to subordinate their domestic

policies to maintenance of the gold standard when the going got tough is a

warning of the effective limitations of international contraints on

domestic policy. Issues of fiscal policy coordination did not arise in

this period either, aside from general agreement that budgets should be

balanced.


28Einzig (1937) sharply criticizes French international monetary policy in
the inter—War period.
                                     27




         The most significant breakdown of international cooperation during

 the inter—War period came in the competitive devaluations and growth of

 protection that sharply reduced the volume of world trade. That

breakdown, more than the failures of monetary coordination, is the shadow

hanging over the international economy, warning of the continued need for

cooperative policy.29

        An important question that arises from the inter—War period is

that raised by Kindleberger (1986), whether the Great Depression itself

was largely due to a failure of international monetary leadership.

Kindleberger argues that the international system cannot operate

successfully unless some country or institution takes the responsibility

for acting as lender of last resort in times of distress.

        There can be little doubt that vigorous Federal Reserve policy in

1931, directed at stopping the domestic recession, would both have

prevented the worst of the Great Depression in the United States and

reduced its impact in other countries. But given that the Fed already had

the clear task of sustaining domestic stability, it is difficult to see

that agreements on international coordination would have led it to be more

expansionary than it was.


29Devaluations per se were actually expansionary, since by raising the
value of gold they increased the nominal value of the world money stock.
It has also to be noted that there are no estimates of the cost to
individual economies of the reduction in the volume of trade. At the
macro level protectionism diverted demand from the international to the
domestic economy, and it is not certain that the total loss of demand was
necessarily high. At the micro level protectionism reduced welfare by
denying economies the benefits of comparative advantage.
                                    28




        Bretton Woods was the first, and probably the last, occasion that

the entire structure of the international economy could be considered

anew. The IMF as it emerged was closer to the American (White) plan than

to the British (Keynes) proposal. The Keynes plan was more ambitious,

particularly in encouraging adjustment on both surplus and debtor

countries. Reserves were to be held in international currency (Bancor)

units at the 11ff, and interest would have been paid on both excess and

deficient balances. A country holding excess reserves would have had to

discuss with the IMF its plans for adjustment, including appreciation or

expansion of the domestic economy. However, the INF had no power to

enforce policy decisions. The IMF would have been required to expand the

total of reserves at a rate appropriate to the expansion of world trade.

        The adjustable peg exchange rate system was common to both

proposals. Under the Bretton Woods agreement, countries could adjust the

exchange rate if they were in "fundamental disequilibrium". Except for

adjustments within a twenty percent band of the parity first established,

members would change exchange rates only with Fund approval--it was not

anticipated that they would be adjusted often. Convertibility was

expected to be restored after an initial adjustment period. The Fund

could lend to deficit countries, but was not expected to finance capital

outflows, which were instead to be handled through capital controls.3°

Policy coordination would come from the discipline of the fixed exchange

rates, and from discussion and consultation within the Fund. "What had


301n this section I draw freely on Robert Solomon's (1977) account of the
period.
                                     29




been created was the embryo of a world central bank" (Solomon, 1977,

p.13), but it did not control the world supply of money or even high

powered money.

        The IBRD, also set up at Bretton Woods, was expected to help

finance post—War reconstruction, but supplanted by the Marshall Plan has

devoted itself to development. A stillborn International Trade

Organization to promote free trade, negotiated in 1946 and 1947, was not

ratified. The GATT, a surprising success, served much that purpose.

        Bretton Woods was followed by a quarter century of substantial

exchange rate stability, rapid economic growth, and the growth of world

trade. From 1949 to the sixties, only France and Canada among the major

countries adjusted their exchange rates. In 1958 the major countries

moved to convertibility, with Japan following in 1964. The dollar had

become the world's main reserve currency; the dollar shortage was by the

end of the fifties giving way to concerns about the U.S. balance of

payments deficit. Triff in (1960) had begun to warn of the need for a more

systematic basis for regulating reserve creation than U.S. balance of

payments deficits. Despite the omens, the system had given the world

economy one of its most impressive periods of growth.

        In the early sixties the United States built up a set of measures

to defend the dollar, including swaps with other central banks, the issue

of foreign-currency denominated bonds, and the Interest Equalization Tax.

The U.S. current account deficit declined during that period, and went

into surplus, but capital outflows and later foreign (mainly French) gold

purchases kept up the pressure. Domestic policy was affected by the
                                    30




position of the dollar: expansionary policy was inhibited at the beginning

of the Kennedy administration, and monetary policy's "Operation Twist"

intended to raise the short rate relative to the long was an attempt to

encourage investment without causing a capital outflow. The investment

tax credit had the same aim.

        The sixties also saw the development of regular consultation on

economic policy among the OECD countries, outside the framework of the

IMF. The OECD's Economic Policy Committee meets three times a year, with

senior officials (from the U.S. the Chairman of the Council of Economic

Advisers) in attendance. Working Party 3, to which the ten largest

members of the OECD (G—l0) belong, meets even more frequently. There is

no lack of discussion or information about their current economic policies

among the major industrialized economies——although countries are less

likely to discuss future policy changes in these forums.

        The shift of consultations to the OECD reflected both the increase

in the membership of the 111F and the European countries' desire to meet on

more equal terms with the Americans. The possibility arose in the early

sixties that the U.S. would have to borrow from the DIE to support the

dollar, but IMF resources were inadequate. The G—lO was the locus for

discussions that set up the General Arrangements to Borrow, which would

provide--with G—l0 approval--loans to the DIE.

        In the sixties the Europeans used Working Party 3 meetings to

pressure the United States to deal with the dollar problem. The Europeans

attributed the problem to expansionary U.S. monetary policy, which was

argued to be exporting inflation to Europe. Robert Solomon (1977)
                                     31




emphasizes that there was remarkably little discussion of possible

exchange rate adjustments. Americans believed the dollar could not be

devalued against gold without completely changing the nature of the

monetary system by putting the reserve currency role of the dollar in

doubt. The Europeans did not want to revalue because the U.S. had a

current account surplus; the problem was one of capital flows, not at that

stage the current account.

        The discipline imposed by the fixed exchange rate system in the

sixties is worth emphasizing. Germany and the Netherlands revalued in

1961. The next major adjustment was the British devaluation in 1967.

That came after a three year struggle by the Labor government to avoid the

stigma of devaluation. A massive loan package assembled from the GAB,

II'W, U.S. and other sources in 1964 preserved the $2.80 parity, but crises

recurred in the next two years. Despite cooperative attempts to stave off

the devaluation, including both intervention by and loans from the Fed and

other central banks, and restrictive domestic policies, Britain in the end

succumbed. The Bretton Woods system unquestionably enforced policy

coordination——though not to the benefit of the British economy at the

time.

        Purchases of gold from the London gold pool accelerated after the

British devaluation, culminating in the closing of the pool and the

institution of the two—tier price system. The United States remained

committed to buy and sell gold at the official price in inter-central bank

dealings, but not to sell to private buyers. Dollar reserves were still

claims on gold, but the agreement was that those claims would not be
                                    32



pursued. Negotiations for the establishment of the SDR were proceeding at

the same time.3' The first SDR's were created in 1970, giving the IMP the

ability to create a reserve asset, and opening the possibility of the Fund

developing eventually into a world central bank, as the Keynes plan had

envisaged.32

        Exchange crises became more regular from 1968. Capital flowed

into Germany, creating pressure for revaluation. French political

problems created pressures for devaluation. In an Alphonse and Gerhardt

routine repeated in 1987, each preferred the other to act. Both acted in

1969, when the mark was allowed to float for a time before a new parity

was set. In 1970 the Canadian dollar was set afloat. Despite a current

account surplus of $2 billion, capital outflows produced a U.S. balance of

payments deficit (before official transfers) of $10 billion, 1% of GNP.

        The Bretton Woods system succumbed in 1971. Massive capital flows

forced the mark to float in May. In August the United States imposed the

wage—price freeze, a 10% import surcharge, and suspended gold

convertibility. In subsequent negotiations, the U.S. agreed to raise the

price of gold as part of a package leading the return to fixed rates. The

December 1971 Smithsonian agreement established a new set of parities,

which lasted, with strains, for the next fifteen months. During that

period the European currency snake, the forerunner of the European

Monetary System, was established.


31The creation of the SDR was the culmination of a process that started
with a G—10 group set up in 1964 to study the creation of reserve assets.
32Fischer (1984) discusses this possibility.
                                     33




        In February 1973, Japan, Italy and Switzerland floated their

currencies. The snake currencies followed, and the worldwide fixed

exchange rate system was dead. It had operated successfully until the

mid—sixties, and had continued to put pressure on domestic policies into

the seventies. It was a victim fundamentally of the failure of countries

fully to coordinate their macroeconomic policies. The system imposed

discipline on countries in deficit as they faced an increasing probability

of running out of reserves. But because its liabilities were the main

reserve currency, there was not the same discipline on the United States

when it ran deficits. The surplus countries were unwilling to expand at a

rate sufficient to make revaluations unnecessary; alternatively, they were

unwilling to accept foreign rates of inflation. Nor were the deficit

countries willing to accept the contractionary policies that would have

been needed for them to protect the exchanges rate.

        Proximately the Bretton Woods system succumbed to massive

international capital flows. Capital flows fast in the international

monetary system, and it is doubtful that macroeconomic policies to cure

the imbalances of the early 1970's would have taken effect quickly enough

to maintain the exchange rate. Perhaps a firm commitment by all countries

to pursue exchange rate targets, firmly believed, would have been self—

sustaining. But it is hard to imagine that all the major countries will

ever firmly commit themselves to exchange rate targets unless they use the

same money——and thus it is difficult to see among the major countries the

successful return of a fixed exchange rate system with free capital flows.
                                      34




          The fact that the capital flows precipitated exchange rate changes

does not establish that they were destabilizing. They may rather have

recognized the inevitable. In some cases capital flows were beaten back.

In 1964 Italy refused to devalue despite capital outflows, obtained

international loans, and prevailed. So for a time did Britain. The

Italian refusal to devalue, followed by rapid growth, was probably wise;

the British decision followed by three years of slow growth was not. It

can be concluded neither that speculative capital flows should always be

resisted, nor that they should always be succumbed to.

          The outstanding feature and the major surprise of the new era that

began in 1973 is the volatility of both nominal and real exchange rates,

seen in Figure 1. Exchange rates fluctuate more than prices of goods, but

less than stock prices. Table 3 presents measures of the variability



Table 3: EXCHANGE RATE VARIABILITY.

                  Exchange rate     CPI     New York Stock Exchange

U.s.                 22.8           5.0             53.9

Germany              19.3           3.9

Japan                33.1          35.3

Notes: 1. Data are standard deviations of monthly change in the variable,
expressed as a percentage at an annual rate, 1973:7 to 1986:12.
       2. Exchange rate is a trade—weighted (MERI1) index, from
International Financial Statistics.
       3. Standard deviation of Japanese CPI inflation is very high in
part because of high and variable Japanese inflation up to 1975. The
standard deviation of Japanese CPI inflation for the period starting
1976:7 is only 8.3.
       4. The stock exchange index is the Standard and Poor's 500.
                 Effective Exchange Rates




Figure 1: Edhriqe Rtes,      1974—1987.

(Source:   Goldman Sachs Econamic Research)
                                    35



of the month to month changes in the exchange rate.33 Equally surprising

have been the massive cumulative, and ultimately reversed, movements in

the dollar, dominated of course by its movements in the eighties. Note

though that the real value of the dollar is only now returning to its

value at the start of the decade.

        The issue of whether exchange rates fluctuate excessively has been

extensively though inconclusively researched.34 Pre—seventies theoretical

discussion argued that speculation was inherently stabilizing, because

successful speculators would have to buy low and sell high. More recently

it has been shown that speculative bubbles can exist without anyone

necessarily losing money. Excessive volatility of exchange rates is thus

a theoretical possibility, but empirical research has not been able to

show that rates have fluctuated more than they should have, given economic

policies, the shocks hitting the economy, and the information available to

market participants. In particular, the system had to deal with the

strains of two massive oil shocks and unprecedented divergences between

fiscal policies in the United States and the rest of the world.35

        Exchange rate movements in 1973 and 1974 led to discussions of

intervention among the central banks, which agreed to maintain orderly

conditions in the markets. It was already becoming clear that floating

rates did not insulate countries from each other's policies, and that the


331n Table 2 of his paper for the conference, Richard Marston presents
related data. Apparent differences are a result of my expressing the
rates of change as percentages at annual rates.
34Richard Marston discusses the possible excess volatility of exchange
rates in Section 1 of his paper.
I take up in the next section the question of whether the floating rate
system itself made these divergent policies possible.
                                       36




 same conflicts that had led to the breakdown of Bretton Woods could

reappear in the new floating rate world.

           Policy discussions and the sharing of information continued in the

OECD forums and in the IMF. Policy coordination continued to be

discussed, and little acted upon. It was during this period that the

Economic Summits emerged as vehicles for policy discussions and

decisions.36 Participants in the first summit, at Rambouillet in 1975,

accepted floating exchange rates, giving up the notion that a restoration

of fixed parities was likely, and agreed to intervene to maintain orderly

markets.

           After remaining reasonably stable in the first year of the Carter

administration, the dollar began to slide in 1978 as the U.S. economy,

with the aid of active fiscal and monetary policy, continued its rapid

recovery from the 1974—75 recession. With the United States' expansion

helping other countries, but the dollar under pressure, the call for

international coordination began to be heard. Germany, the strongest

economy in Europe, and the leader of its currency bloc, was the main focus

of attention, seen as the potential locomotive for the world recovery.

Japan was under less pressure because it had agreed at the 1977 summit to

seek annual growth of 7%, and had introduced an expansionary budget.

        The Europeans in turn regarded United States policy as too

expansionary. In addition, they argued that the United States' failure to

adjust the price of oil to world levels was worsening its balance of


36The six largest countries in the OECD participated in the first two
summits; since then, Canada has become a member of the group. De Menu
and Solomon (1983) describe and analyze the summits through 1982.
                                   37



payments and strengthening OPEC. As the 1978 Bonn summit approached, the

dimensions of a deal could be seen. The deal was that Germany would

increase government spending by 1% of GNP, while the United States would

put in place a program to reduce oil imports. In addition, the United

States agreed to undertake anti-inflationary measures, including a

reduction in a planned 1979 tax cut.

        In their analysis of the bargain reached in Bonn, Putnam and

Henning (1978) point to domestic disagreements on policy as an important

reason for success of the international agreements. In neither Germany

nor the United States was there a consensus for the policies agreed to by

the government at the summit. Oil price decontrol was unpopular in the

Congress; expansion was opposed by important segments of the German

political and economic system. Putnam and Henning argue that the domestic

proponents of the policies were able to use the summit process to move the

decision their way, inviting the pressure exerted by foreign governments.

They suggest that Chancellor Schmidt may have been quite willing to

expand, but preferred to conceal his preferences for domestic political

reasons. This analysis is not encouraging of the view that coordination

can easily be achieved on a regular basis.

        Whereas the previous London summit had reached agreed but not

plausible growth targets, the Bonn summit agreement was more specific, and

thus verifiable and credible, in specifying policy actions for the United

States and Germany.37 Japan was specific in agreeing to hold exports to


37The appendix of de Menu and Solomon (1983) summarizes the communiques
of the first eight summits.
                                     38




 no growth, a commitment that was achieved, but the communique again

 specified a Japanese growth target rather than specific fiscal or monetary

 actions. Germany passed the expansionary budget package within a month of

 the summit. The United States was slower in following through, but the

 commitment was an important factor in strengthening the resolve of the

administration to decontrol oil prices.

        The Bonn summit is credited by de Menil and Solomon (1983) with

contributing also to the successful conclusion of the Tokyo round of

tariff negotiations. The London summit had expressed the desire of the

participants for a prompt and positive conclusion of the tariff

negotiations, a commitment that was exploited by the United States

representative to force final agreement by the time of the Bonn summit.

        The second oil shock struck between the Bonn and Tokyo (1979)

summits. Both Tokyo and the 1980 Venice summits were dominated by the

energy problem, and no macroeconomic policy agreements were reached. This

was not only because the Germans had begun to regard the Bonn agreement as

a mistake, but also because there were no obvious macroeconomic bargains

to be reached.

        Despite the German expansion, the dollar continued to fall after

the Bonn summit. U.S. inflation was rising. The United States pressured

Germany to intervene in support of the dollar, but the Bundesbank

resisted, pushing instead for a change in U.S. domestic policy. In

October the President announced an anti-inflationary package that included

voluntary wage—price restraints. In response the dollar declined sharply.

By November the Fed had assembled an announced $30 billion fund which it
                                    39




would use in support of the dollar. This time the dollar responded

favorably, and continued to rise through the middle of 1979.

        In November 1979 the United States made the basic decision to

fight inflation through restrictive monetary policy. Although the

decision commanded wide international support, it was made largely for

domestic reasons as inflation was increasingly recognized as the number

one problem facing the nation.

        The cast of summit characters changed in the eighties. With

widespread agreement that the fight against inflation was first priority,

there was at first little need to discuss macroeconomic policy. At the

beginning of the Reagan administration the United States adopted a hands—

off policy on the exchange rate, showing remarkable equanimity about the

rise of the dollar. The vigor of the 1984 recovery kept the dollar

problem concealed from the political process through that year. But as

the nature of the U.S. twin deficit problem became clearer, and the

political pressures of declining exports and rising imports mounted,

echoes of the 1976—78 debate were heard.

        With the change of Treasury secretary in 1985, and growing

protectionist pressure in Congress, the U.S. administration began to look

for ways to reduce the trade deficit and to move the dollar down. Japan—

bashing became a popular if ineffective political activity. The

administration was unwilling to raise taxes and unable to cut spending.

Unable to attack the trade deficit through fiscal policy,38 it was


38Unless one counts the 1984 Economic Report of the President as an
administration document, there was no administration recognition through
the end of 1986 that the trade deficit is linked to the budget deficit.
                                    40



constrained to fight for the opening of foreign markets and attempts to

push down the dollar. The dollar slide that had begun in February 1985

was briefly accelerated by the announcement of the Plaza G—5 agreement of

September 1985 that agreed to intervene to push down the dollar. The

dollar continued its decline into 1986.

        Deja vu arrived in 1986. Germany and Japan were being pressured

to expand to help the United States. Neither wanted to expand, putting

the onus for the problem on United States fiscal policy. Economists could

see a clear bargain: U.S. fiscal contraction offset by domestic monetary

expansion and Japanese and German expansion. But the United States

administration was not taking that route. There were of course

differences between the 1986 and 1976—78 debates. Among them: the

inflation rate was low, and close to zero in Germany and Japan; the United

Kingdom was far less expansionary than it had been a decade earlier.

        Talk of policy coordination increased. The 1986 Tokyo summit

agreed that the G—7 finance ministers would meet at least once a year to

review the compatibility of their economic objectives. They were to

consult a large set of indicators, including policy variables. And the

finance ministers were "to make their best efforts to reach an

understanding on appropriate remedial measures whenever there are

significant deviations from an intended course." The significance of the

agreement is discussed in the next section.

        There was also some action. In October 1986 the Finance Ministers

of the U.S. and Japan agreed that Japan would reduce its discount rate, in

that the United States would continue to fight protectionism and that the
                                      41



then current yen—dollar exchange rate (154 yen to the dollar] was "broadly

consistent with the present underlying fundamentals". The agreement noted

and strengthened the fiscal expansion package Japan was undertaking, and

recorded the US, tax reform act. The agreement was thought also to be a

signal to the Germans that they might lose their seat at the very top

levels if they failed to cooperate.

        In February 1987 the G—7 met in Paris and issued a communique

stating that exchange rates were currently appropriate given the economic

policies being followed. The Germans agreed to increase slightly the tax

cut they were planning for 1987 and the Japanese pledged to pursue fiscal

expansion, as previously agreed. The U.S. for its part would attempt to

bring its budget deficit down. There was no explicit mention of

intervention to attempt to enforce the current levels of exchange rates.

        The concentration on U.S.-Europe-Japan relations should not be

allowed to obscure the importance of the EMS, set up in 1978. The EMS can

be viewed as an agreement by France and Italy to accept German leadership

in monetary policy, imposing constraints on their domestic monetary and

fiscal policies. The EMS has been surprisingly successful, withstanding

even the Mitterand expansion in 1981—82. With the announcement in 1986

that Italy and France plan to lift capital controls, the EMS now faces a

crucial test.39 British membership, which appears increasingly likely,

would also significantly change the nature of the organization by adding

another capital control free currency to the system. British and German


39Giavazzi and Giovannini (1985) argue that capital controls have been
essential to the success of the EMS.
                                     42



 policies would have to be closely coordinated if the fixed exchange rate

 within the EMS was to hold for any length of time; otherwise capital flows

 between the two currencies would quickly force changes in the parity.

         Discussions of economic policy take place also in the framework of

 the IMF, under the general heading of surveillance. The end of the

Bretton Woods system left the Fund's responsibilities for dealing with

exchange rates undefined. The Fund's Article IV, dealing with exchange

rates, was amended in 1978. Members recognized their obligation not to

manipulate exchange rates unfairly, and the Fund was given the

responsibility of exercising "firm surveillance over the exchange rate

policies of members". Bilateral Article IV discussions between the Fund

and members take place annually, but the Article IV reports are not

published.

        Multilateral surveillance is less regular and formalized. The

Managing Director attends some G—5 meetings, but is not apparently in a

position to exercise influence. The World Economic Outlook, published

since 1980, is discussed at Executive Board meetings, but is not known to

influence policy in individual countries. In 1985 both the G—1O and the

Group of 24 developing countries published proposals for multilateral

surveillance, with a greater emphasis on the international economy and

policy coordination. With the Tokyo summit agreement, these proposals are

presumably moving towards implementatioxi.°




40Kenen (1986) and Solomon (1986) contain insightful discussions and
proposals on the prospects of multilateral surveillance.
                                      43




IV. The Prospects for Coordination.


        The historical record suggests these generalizations:

• The Bretton Woods system imposed significant constraints on domestic

policies including on occasion policy in the United States.

• Under Bretton Woods countries were not willing to subordinate domestic

policy entirely to maintenance of the exchange rate. The same was true

under the gold exchange standard of the inter-War period.

• Increasingly massive capital flows made maintenance of fixed rates

progressively more difficult, perhaps because it was clear countries were

not absolutely committed to maintaining the exchange rate.

• Information sharing about economic policy has been extensive since the

sixties, and has moved to increasingly authoritative levels of government.

• Interdependence among economies did not markedly decline as a result of

the move to floating rates. Countries were revealed not to be indifferent

to the behavior of their exchange rates, and sometimes took domestic

policy actions in response. Exchange rate crises occurred, not in the

form of an attack on a fixed rate, but rather as a rapid shift out of a

currency and rapid depreciation.

  Policy coordination under the Bretton Woods system occurred more as a

result of the constraints imposed by the system than by explicit

agreement

  Explicit coordination has been rare in the post—Bretton Woods period.

The Bonn summit is a clear example of such coordination. International

political pressures to change economic policy have been common, especially
                                    44




in the last few years as the magnitude of the United States trade deficit

problem became clear. Apparent agreements on policy coordination were

reached in October 1986 and February 1987 but it is not yet clear whether

any policy actions will follow.

        The bewildering array of organizations, meetings, plans, and

activities described in the previous section should not be allowed to

obscure the basic question of what is to be gained by international

coordination. The evidence of Section II is that the gains would be

modest, and there is a possibility that the gains would be negative.

        I discuss the prospects for four different types of coordination,

in increasing order of the constraints imposed on individual countries.



1. Surveillance and Information Exchange: Information exchanges already

take place on a broad scale. The shift to regular consultation among

finance ministers envisaged in the Tokyo summit agreement makes it more

likely that the international implications of domestic policy decisions

will be weighed, as the finance minister contemplates explaining the

decision to his counterparts at the next meeting.

        Multilateral surveillance can bring an outside perspective to

economic discussions that may be clouded by domestic political

considerations. In this connection, it could be helpful if a way were

found to publish some version of the IMF's Article IV reports, which are

of a generally high standard and could serve as an outside technical

evaluation of domestic policies. These reports could eventually exercise

some influence over domestic policy decisions if they turned out over the

years to provide a good analysis of the state of the economy.
                                     45



          Useful as this type of information exchange is, it cannot be

expected to exert more than a marginal influence on policy.



2. Discretionary Policy Deals: Occasionally there is a clear

international policy deal to be made. That was true in 1978; it appears

to be true in 1987. Regularly scheduled OECD meetings, those among

finance ministers set up at Tokyo, special meetings such as that in Paris

in February 1987, and the summits are the appropriate places for such

deals to be made. They will and should continue to occur.

          It is doubtful though that continuing coordination, "significant

modification of national policies in recognition of international economic

interdependence" will emerge from these meetings. The domestic political

process is sufficiently complicated that the international input cannot be

more than a small factor in regular policymaking. Putnam and Henning's

analysis of the Bonn agreement suggests the importance of the domestic

political configurations in that case.

          In both the Bonn summit case, and the possible February 1987 trade

of German and Japanese expansion for a reduction in the U.S. budget

deficit, and resistance to protection, the proposals involve a change in

American policy that looks untenable in the long run. The supporters of

coordination in the United States call on the international factor to help

change American policy of which they disapprove. It is doubtful that they

would be as enthusiastic if in 1982 coordination had required them to

accept the current German view that there is very little to be done about

high unemployment and that budget balance is the main criterion for good

policy.
                                     46



         There is nothing in either the Bonn summit and the 1987 examples

 to refute the view that there would be little need for coordination if

 each country were taking good care of its domestic policies.



 3. Policy Harmonization through Rule Changes: The rules of the Bretton

Woods system enforced more coordination than the successor regime. A

return to fixed exchange rates among all the major economies now looks

unlikely, but suggestions for changes in the international rules are

frequent. I briefly discuss two proposals.

  The McKinnon Monetary Rule: Ronald McKinnon (1984) has suggested that

money growth rates be coordinated among the U.S., Japan, and Germany. His

proposal can be phrased alternatively as tieing national money growth

rates to the behavior of the exchange rate. An appreciation of a currency

is a cause for greater money growth in that country and less money growth

elsewhere. The assumption underlying this rule is that international

shifts in the demand for money are the main causes of exchange rate

changes. The rule could have unfortunate consequences, for instance

expansionary fiscal policy would induce an increase in the money stock.

        The rule approach to monetary and fiscal policy, exemplified by

the McKinnon monetary rule, is attractive in providing certainty about

policy. If optimal rules for all countries could be calculated, taking

into account the interactions among economies, it would be sensible to

implement them, perhaps even by law. The Bretton Woods system can be seen

as an example of such a system, which while not prescribing policy, put in

place an immediate target of policy——maintenance of the exchange rate-—
                                   47




that tightly constrained policy choices. That system ultimately broke

down, there has been no similar simple replacement suggested, and the

state of knowledge about the effects of monetary and fiscal policies is

not such as to commend the implementation of monetary and fiscal policy

rules any time soon.

 The Target Zone Proposal: Seeking to combine the virtues of floating

with the benefits of fixed rates, John Williamson (1983) has proposed

target zones for exchange rates. Countries would announce wide bands

within which the exchange rate could move, but would have to take

corrective action as the exchange rate approached the limits of the bands.

Williamson's proposals have received widespread attention41. The elusive

character of the zones suggests they will not much constrain domestic

policies, unless the exchange rate reaches the limits of the zone. At

that point countries will face the same choices they faced in the Bretton

Woods system--and it is not clear why they will not then move their zones.

The proposal is a subtle and probably ineffective one to introduce gentle

discipline on players who have been impervious to rigorous discipline in

the past.



4. A Three-Currency Bloc World: The international economy appears

increasingly to be evolving into three currency blocs: the yen, the

dollar, and the mark or the EMS currency. There are fixed rates within

each bloc, implying coordination of fiscal and monetary policies within

the blocs, and flexible rates between them.


41See for instance the symposium in Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
1986 :1.
                                      48




          Those countries that are willing to coordinate their policies

sufficiently to maintain a fixed exchange rate indicate their willingness

by joining the bloc. That is what the decision to join the EMS means——

and, if it continues to develop successfully, it may eventually evolve

into a truly fixed exchange rate regime.

          The three—bloc system is very close to the notion of optimal

currency areas discussed by Robert Mundell (1961). Nundell asked what

characteristic defined an area or group of countries in which it was

optimal to maintain a fixed exchange rate. He argued that the key was the

mobility within that area of factors of production (i.e capital and

labor).

          Consider for instance the United States. If each state had its

own currency, the Texas dollar would have appreciated in the seventies and

depreciated in the eighties. Because there is factor mobility in the

United States, the adjustment came instead by labor and capital moving

into Texas in the seventies and out in the eighties. So long as factors

are mobile, adjustment can come through movements of factors rather than

changes in the real exchange rate.

          Why would adjustment through factor mobility be preferable to

adjustment through exchange rate changes? Ultimately the argument comes

down to risk sharing. If every region in the country were an independent

currency area with no factor mobility, individuals' incomes would

fluctuate with the state of the local economy. They would do better than

average sometimes and less well at other times. With factor mobility,

individuals reduce the variability of their incomes by retaining the right

to move on to other markets when the local economy shrinks.
                                   49



        On the basis of the mobility of factors of production, Europe may

eventually become a natural currency area. Japan and the United States

already are. It seems unlikely that full freedom of factor movements,

including labor, will develop among the three areas. That is the reason

why the world is more likely to see three currency blocs than just one,

and why exchange rates among them are likely to remain flexible.


Concluding Comments.

        The notion of international policy coordination is an appealing

one, that appears to hold out the promise of major improvements in

economic performance. However, estimates of the quantitative impacts of

policy decisions in one economy on other economies are quite small. These

results, together with explicit calculations of the benefits of

coordination, suggest the gains will rarely be significant. Further,

theoretical analysis finds many circumstances under which coordination

worsens rather than improves economic performance.

        The interest in policy coordination in the United States has been

strongest when advocates of coordination were hoping to use international

policy agreements to bring about changes in domestic policies that they

regarded as either undesirable or eventually untenable. It is entirely

possible though that formal coordination would sometimes require a country

to undertake policy actions of which it disapproved.

        So long as exchange rates remain flexible——and they will likely

remain flexible among the three major currency areas—-macroeconomic policy

coordination among the major blocs is unlikely to advance beyond the
                                    50




provision of mutual information and occasional agreements for specific

policy tradeoffs. Both information interchanges and occasional policy

agreements when the circumstances are right are useful, and should be

encouraged.

        But more consistent ongoing policy coordination in which countries

including the United States "significantly modify national policies in

recognition of international policy interdependence" is not on the near

horizon. Fortunately the evidence suggests that the potential gains from

coordination are in any event small: the best that each country can do for

other countries is to keep its own economy in shape.
                                     51




                                REFERENCES.




Barro, Robert J. and David B. Gordon (1983). "A Positive Theory of

Monetary Policy in a Natural—Rate Model", Journal of Political Economy,

91, 589—610.



Buiter, Willem H. and Richard C. Marston (1985). International Economic

Policy Coordination. New York: Cambridge University Press.



Canzoneri, Matthew and Joanna Gray (1983). "Two Essays on Monetary Policy

in an Interdependent World", Federal Reserve Board, International Finance

Discussion Papers, No. 219.



               and Dale W. Henderson (1987). "Strategic Aspects of

Macroeconomic Policymaking in Interdependent Economies", manuscript,

Georgetown University.



Clapham, John (1944). The Bank of England, Vol. II. London: Cambridge

University Press.
                                      52




 Clay, Henry (1957). Lord Norman. London: Macmillan.



 Cooper. Richard N. (1986). Economic Policy in an Interdependent World,

Chapter   11. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.



de Menu, George and Anthony N. Solomon (1983). Economic Summitry. New

York: Council on Foreign Relations.



Edison, Hall 3. and Ralph Tryon (1986). "An Empirical Analysis of Policy

Coordination in the United States, Japan and Europe", Federal Reserve

System, International Finance Discussion Paper, No. 286.



Eichengreen, Barry (1985). "International Policy Coordination in

Historical Perspective: A View from the Interwar Years", in Willem H.

Buiter and Richard C. Marston, editors, International Economic Policy

Coordination. New York: Cambridge University Press.



Einzig, Paul (1937). World Finance 1935—1936. New York: Macmillan.



Fischer, Stanley (1983). "The SDR and the IMF: Toward a World Central

Bank?", in George von Furstenberg, editor, International Money and Credit:

The Policy Roles. Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund.
                                    53




          (1987). "Rules versus Discretion in Monetary Policy", mimeo,

Department of Economics, MIT.



Frankel, Jeffrey A. (1986). "The Sources of Disagreement Among

International Macro Models and Implications for Policy Coordination", NBER

Working Paper, No. 1925.



          and Katherine Rockett (1986). "International Macroeconomic

Policy Coordination when Policy—Makers Disagree on the Model", NBER

Working Paper No. 2059.



Giavazzi, Francesco and Alberto Giovannini (1986). "The EMS and the

Dollar", Economic Policy, 2, 455—474.



Hallett, A.J. Hughes (1986). "International Policy Design and Sustainable

Policy Bargains", mimeo, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, England.



Hamada, Koichi (1985). The Political Economy of International Monetary

Interdependence, Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.



Hickman, Bert G. (1986). "The U.S. Economy and the International

Transmission Mechanism: A Structural Comparison of Twelve Multicountry

Models", Center for Economic Policy Research, Stanford University, No. 78.
                                     54




 Holtham, Gerald (1986). "International Policy Co—Ordination: How Much

 Consensus is There?", Brookings Discussion Papers in International

Economics, No. 50.



Kehoe, Patrick J. (1986). "International Policy Cooperation May Be

Undesirable", Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Staff Report 103.



Kenen, Peter B. (1986). "What Role for IMF Surveillance?, forthcoming in

World Development.



Kindleberger, Charles P. (1986). The World in Depression, second edition.

Berkeley: California University Press.



MacBean, A.I. and P.N. Snowden, International Institutions in Trade and

Finance. London: George, Allen and Unwin.



McKinnon, Ronald I. (1984). A New International Standard for Monetary

Stabilization. Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics.



Mundell, Robert A. (1971). "European and American Monetary Policy", in

RA. Nundell, Monetary Theory. Pacific Palisades, California: Goodyear.



Oudiz, Gilles (1985). "European Policy Coordination: An Evaluation",

Centre for Economic Policy Research, London, England, Paper No. 81.
                                     55




        —   and Jeffrey Sachs (1984). "Macroeconomic Policy Coordination

Among the Industrial Economies", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1,

1—64.



Putnam, Robert D. and C. Randall Henning (1986). "The Bonn Summit of 1978:

How Does International Policy Coordination Actually Work?", Brookings

Discussion Papers in International Economics, Number 53.



Rogoff, Kenneth (1985). "Can International Monetary Policy Cooperation be

Counterproductive?", Journal of International Economics, 18, 199—217.



Solomon, Robert (1977). The International Monetary System 1945—1976. New

York: Harper and Row.



              (1987). "IMF Surveillance", mimeo, Brookings Institution.



Triff in, Robert (1960). Gold and the Dollar Crisis. New Haven: Yale

University Press.



Wallich, Henry C. (1984). "Institutional Cooperation in the World

Economy", in Jacob A. Frenkel and Michael L. Mussa, editors, The World

Economic System: Performance and Prospects. Dover, Mass.: Auburn House

Publishing Co.
                                    56




Williamson, John (1983). The Exchange Rate System. Washington, D.C.:

Institute for International Economics.
