                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




DO GOVERNMENT AUDITS REDUCE CORRUPTION? ESTIMATING THE IMPACTS OF
                 EXPOSING CORRUPT POLITICIANS

                                            Eric Avis
                                         Claudio Ferraz
                                         Frederico Finan

                                       Working Paper 22443
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22443


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2016




We thank Daron Acemoglu, Steve Coate, Stephan Litschig, Paul Novosad, Stephane Straub, and
Torsten Persson, and seminar participants at the Barcelona Summer Forum, Chicago, Dartmouth,
Harvard, LSE, Princeton, Toulouse, Warwick, and Wharton for helpful discussions and
comments. We are also grateful to the Controladoria-Geral da União (CGU) for providing us with
the audits data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Eric Avis, Claudio Ferraz, and Frederico Finan. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Government Audits Reduce Corruption? Estimating the Impacts of Exposing Corrupt Politicians
Eric Avis, Claudio Ferraz, and Frederico Finan
NBER Working Paper No. 22443
July 2016
JEL No. H41,H77,H83,K42,O1,O38,O43,O54

                                          ABSTRACT

Political corruption is considered a major impediment to economic development, and yet it
remains pervasive throughout the world. This paper examines the extent to which government
audits of public resources can reduce corruption by enhancing political and judiciary
accountability. We do so in the context of Brazil’s anti-corruption program, which randomly
audits municipalities for their use of federal funds. We find that being audited in the past reduces
future corruption by 8 percent, while also increasing the likelihood of experiencing a subsequent
legal action by 20 percent. We interpret these reduced-form findings through a political agency
model, which we structurally estimate. Based on our estimated model, the reduction in corruption
comes mostly from the audits increasing the perceived threat of the non-electoral costs of
engaging in corruption.

Eric Avis                                        Frederico Finan
University of California at Berkeley             Department of Economics
eavis@berkeley.edu                               University of California
                                                 508-1 Evans Hall #3880
Claudio Ferraz                                   Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
Department of Economics                          and NBER
PUC-Rio                                          ffinan@econ.berkeley.edu
Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 22453-900
Brazil
cferraz@econ.puc-rio.br
1     Introduction

Politicians throughout the world embezzle billions of dollars each year, and in so doing induce the
misallocation of resources, foster distrust in leaders, and threaten the very pillars of democracy
(Rose-Ackerman (1999)). And while the adverse consequences of corruption have been long rec-
ognized, there is little consensus over how best to fight it.1 One point of growing emphasis in the
literature has been the importance of political institutions that constrain rent-seeking, and in partic-
ular the role of elections in selecting and disciplining politicians.2 Another strand of the literature
has instead focused on the effectiveness of a country’s judicial and prosecutorial institutions: If
severe enough, the legal consequences of rent extraction should also discipline politicians (Becker
(1968) and Becker and Stigler (1974)).

Although a successful anti-corruption strategy is likely to include reforms to strengthen both sec-
tors, the efficacy of these institutions ultimately depends on a government’s ability to detect corrup-
tion in the first place. This has led several countries to adopt audit programs aimed at uncovering
the misuse of public resources, which not only increase the probability of detecting wrongdoing,
but also provide the requisite information to both voters, as well as prosecutors, to hold politicians
accountable for malfeasance.

In this paper, we investigate the role government audits play in reducing political corruption among
local government through the promotion of electoral and judicial accountability. We do so in the
context of Brazil’s anti-corruption program which began in 2003 and has since audited 1,949 mu-
nicipalities at random, many of which multiple times. Consequently, for several rounds of later
audits, we are able to compare the corruption levels discovered among the municipalities that are
being audited for the first time (control group) to the corruption levels of municipalities that had
also been audited in the past (treatment group). Because municipalities are selected at random,
this simple comparison estimates the causal effects of a past audit on future corruption levels, in a
setting in which both groups face the same ex-ante probability of being audited. As documented for
the case of tax evasion, past audits can affect future corruption levels by changing an individual’s
perceived probability of detection.3

    1 See for example Fisman et al. (2014) for estimates of wealth accumulation of politicians in India and Pande (2008)

and Olken and Pande (2012) for overviews of the economics of corruption in developing countries.
     2 See Besley (2007) and Ashworth (2012) for reviews of agency models and Ferraz and Finan (2008), Ferraz and

Finan (2011), Bobonis et al. (2015) for evidence on how elections can discipline politicians.
     3 Kleven et al. (2011) conduct a field experiment on tax enforcement in Denmark, in which tax filers were randomly

selected to be audited. In the following year, a threat-of-audit letters were sent to both groups. As in our study, they
find that prior audits have a significant effect (and even larger effect than the threat of an audit) on self-reported income.


                                                              1
We find that corruption levels are approximately 8 percent lower among treated municipalities
compared to control municipalities, suggesting that audits do affect the perceived detection proba-
bility. Consistent with this interpretation, we find that past audits also affect the corruption levels
of neighboring municipalities with local media, which are the places most likely to learn about the
outcome of another municipality’s audit. For these municipalities, having an additional neighbor
audited leads them to reduce their own corruption by 7.5 percent. The average municipality in our
sample receives R$15,000,000 in federal transfers per year. Based on our estimates of a random
sample of audit reports, 30 percent of the funds audited were found to be diverted, implying that
the audits reduced corruption by R$567,135 per year per municipality, once we account for the
spillover effects.

We interpret the main findings in the context of a simple model of political accountability, which
we then subsequently estimate. Based on our model, there are several reasons why the audits may
have led to a reduction in local corruption. First, the audits may have reduced corruption through
a political selection effect. As documented in Ferraz and Finan (2008), in places that were audited
before the election, voters were able to reward good and punish bad incumbents who were up for
re-election. Second, the audits may have led to a stronger electoral disciplining effect. If an audit
increases a mayor’s subjective probability of being detected and he has re-election concerns, then
he has less incentive to engage in corruption. Of course, an unfavorable audit can also trigger
other non-electoral costs, such as judicial punishment or reputation costs. So even if a mayor
does not have re-election concerns, an update in the probability of being found to be corrupt can
lead to a non-electoral disciplining effect. Finally, the audits may have also affected the political
environment more generally by inducing a better selection of candidates (i.e. an entry effect).4

We investigate these mechanisms both in the reduced-form and structurally. Despite the differ-
ent assumptions underlying these two approaches, we find consistent evidence for a non-electoral
disciplining effect, with minimal support for the other channels. Our model estimates suggest
the disciplining effects from non-electoral costs can explain 94 percent of the reduction in local
corruption. Consistent with this result, we also document that an audit can generate substantial
non-electoral costs. Using data on anti-corruption crackdowns and federal convictions, we find that
having been audited increases the likelihood of incurring a legal action by 20 percent.

Given our findings, we then use our structural estimates to explore three counterfactual policies

    4 Outside of the context of our model, there are two other possible explanations for the reduction in the corruption.
One interpretation for our findings is that the audits teach mayors to better hide corruption. The other interpretation is
that the federal government offered fewer transfers in response to an audit, and thus made it harder for future mayors
to engage in corruption. We test for both of these channels and do not find support for these interpretations.


                                                            2
aimed at further reducing corruption. First, we simulate changes in the probability that rents are
detected by the electorate, which would be the case if the audit program increased the frequency of
audit lotteries or the number of municipalities audited in each lottery. Second, we simulate changes
to non-electoral costs. In practice, non-electoral costs could be increased if, for example, conviction
rates conditional on corruption uncovered in audits increased. Finally, we simulate increases to the
value of holding office, which would be the case if mayoral wages were to increase.

Based on these simulations, a policy aimed at increasing the non-electoral costs of corruption would
be the most effective. Our estimated model implies that a 5 percent increase in the non-electoral
costs of corruption would decrease corruption by approximately 20 percent. In contrast, given the
uncertainty associated with electoral punishment, a 5 percentage point increase in the probability
that corruption is detected will only lead to a 9 percent reduction in corruption for first-term mayors
and a 1 percent reduction for second-term mayors. According to our estimates, an increase to
the value of holding office would be the least effective at reducing corruption, especially in an
environment in which accountability is either weak or absent. An increase in the value of holding
office by the average rents stolen would only reduce corruption by 3 percent for first-term mayors.

Our findings are related to three broad literatures. First, our study contributes to a large literature
on the determinants of political corruption and the design of policies aimed at curbing corruption.
For example, Bobonis et al. (2015) find that audit reports in Puerto Rico released just prior to the
election (compared to those released after an election) induced a significant short-term reduction
in municipal corruption levels, that then later dissipated in the subsequent rounds of audits. An
important distinction between our studies is that in our context the audits are conducted at random,
and thus politicians are not able to anticipate them. Di Tella and Schargrodsky (2003) examine the
effects of an anti-corruption crackdown and found that the prices paid for homogenous supplies
by public hospitals in Buenos Aires fell by 15 percent after the government began to disseminate
information on prices. Olken (2007) implemented a randomized experiment where prior to the start
of a national wide infrastructure project, villages in Indonesia were randomly assigned into groups
with different audit probabilities. The study found that 24 percent of reported funds were found
to be ‘missing”, but when faced with a certain audit this difference was reduced by 8 percentage
points. Zamboni and Litschig (2015) investigate the effects of a randomized experiment conducted
by the Controladoria-Geral da União (CGU) designed to test whether increased audit risk reduces
corruption and mismanagement. In this experiment, the CGU announced in May of 2009 to 120
municipalities that in one year time, 30 of them would be randomly selected for an audit. Based
on this temporary increase in audit risk of about 20 percentage points, the authors found that the
treatment reduced the proportion of local procurement processes involving waste or corruption by

                                                  3
about 20 percent. Finally, Lichand et al. (2016) also examine the effects of Brazil’s audit program
with a focus on corruption in health. Using a difference-in-differences strategy, the study tests
whether corruption is lower in municipalities that neighbor municipalities that were audited in the
past. Consistent with our spillover effects on corruption across all sectors, they find that corruption
in health reduced by 5.4 percent in places that neighbor an audited municipality.

We complement these studies in various ways. First, our findings suggest that audits can be an
effective policy instrument for not only promoting electoral accountability, but also enhancing ju-
dicial punishment. Second, there are several motives for reducing corruption in response to an
audit. In our study, we are able to decompose the effects of these various channels, and highlight
the relative importance of non-electoral costs in disciplining the behavior of politicians. Third,
our results demonstrate that even when audit probabilities are held constant, the mere act of being
audited can impact an individual’s subjective probability of being found to be corrupt. Finally,
another advantage of our data is the ability to distinguish between acts of corruption versus acts
of mismanagement.5 We do not find any evidence that the audits reduced irregularities associated
with mismanagement.

Our study also contributes to a body of research documenting the importance of legal institutions
for economic development, and in particular corruption (e.g. Glaeser and Shleifer (2002); La Porta
et al. (2004)). For example, Glaeser and Goldin (2006) argue that reduction in corruption over
time in the U.S. was due to a combination of increasing political competition, an active media
uncovering corruption scandals, and an independent judiciary that successfully prosecuted corrupt
officials. Also using variation across U.S. states, Alt and Lassen (2008) show that corruption is
much lower among states in which state supreme court judges are elected rather than appointed. Fi-
nally, Litschig and Zamboni (2015) exploit variation in the presence of the judiciary across Brazil’s
municipalities to show that corruption is lower in municipalities with a state judiciary present. In
contrast to these studies, however, we show using data on the arrests and convictions of politicians
that audits can be a critical instrument in promoting judicial accountability. As far as we know, this
is the first paper that examines how both political and judicial accountability can affect corruption.

Finally, our study also relates to a growing empirical literature that examines the relationship be-
tween electoral accountability and politician performance. There is a growing literature showing
that when voters are informed, elections can discipline corrupt politicians (e.g. Ferraz and Finan
(2008), Winters and Weitz-Shapiro (2013)). Similarly, a series of papers have exploited variation

    5 Recent studies have tried to distinguish between active and passive waste. For example, Bandiera et al. (2009)
use data on public procurement from Italy to show that more than 80 percent of waste can be classified as passive.


                                                         4
in term limits to show that incumbents respond to re-election incentives. For example, Besley and
Case (1995) show that re-election incentives affect the fiscal policy of U.S. governors, while List
and Sturm (2006) provide evidence that term limits even influence secondary policies, such as envi-
ronmental policy. In relation to the Brazilian context, Ferraz and Finan (2011) find that mayors who
are in their second term, and hence do not have opportunity for re-election, engage in much more
corruption relative to mayors with re-election incentives. Similarly, de Janvry et al. (2012) find that
Brazil’s Bolsa Escola – a conditional cash transfer program that was targeted in a decentralized
manner – performed much better in places where mayors had re-election incentives.

While these studies provide convincing evidence consistent with standard political agency models,
they are unable to quantify the electoral selection effects that are also central to models of political
accountability. Recently, some progress has been made in this direction by taking a more structural
approach. Aruoba et al. (2015) estimate a model of political accountability to quantify the disci-
pline and selection of U.S. gubernatorial elections. Using data from 1982-2012 of U.S. governors,
they find that the possibility of re-election leads to a 13 percentage point increase in the fraction of
governors who exert high effort in their first term in office, as measured by voters’ job approval.
Although set in a different context, they too find weaker selection effects: the fraction of good
governors rises by 8 percentage points from the first to second term in office. Our paper comple-
ments this study by not only disentangling selection from incentive effects, but also allowing for
the possibility a non-electoral disciplining effect.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background on the Brazil’s anti-
corruption program and presents the data used in the empirical analysis. Section 3 presents the
theoretical framework. Section 4 discusses our research design and in Section 5 we present our
reduced-form findings. In Section 6 we discuss the estimation of the model and present our coun-
terfactual simulations. Section 7 concludes.



2     Background and Data

2.1    Corruption in Brazil and the Randomized Anti-Corruption Program

Brazil is one of the most decentralized countries in the world. Each year, municipalities receive
millions of dollars from the federal government to provide basic public services such as primary
education, health care, and sanitation. An elected mayor decides how to allocate these resources in



                                                   5
conjunction with a locally-elected legislative body. With only minimal federal oversight accompa-
nying these transfers, corruption at the local level has been a serious concern.

Corruption in Brazil occurs through a combination of fraud in the procurement of goods and ser-
vices, diversion of funds, and over-invoicing of goods and services (Ferraz and Finan (2011)).
Common irregularities include incomplete public works (paid for but unfinished) and the use of
fake receipts and phantom firms (i.e., firms that only exist on paper). Places that receive more fed-
eral transfers, or where the local media and the judiciary are absent, tend to experience relatively
more corruption(Brollo et al. (2013), Zamboni and Litschig (2015)).

In response to the wide spread corruption, and a lack in the capacity to systematically detect and
punish malfeasance, the federal government implemented an institutional reform to increase the
cost of engaging in corruption. In 2003, it created Brazil’s Controladoria Geral da União (CGU)
–Office of Comptroller-General– by unifying various pre-existing agencies within the government,
and affording it the constitutional powers of a ministry. Shortly after its creation, the CGU launched
an anti-corruption program targeted at municipal governments. The program, named Programa de
Fiscalização por Sorteios Públicos (Monitoring Program with Public Lotteries), consists of random
audits of municipalities for their use of federal government funds. It originally started with the au-
dit of 26 randomly selected municipalities across different states, but then shortly moved towards
auditing 60 municipalities every two to four months. The lotteries are publicly held in conjunction
with the national lottery in Brasilia and all municipalities with a population of up to 500,000 in-
habitants are eligible for selection.6 As of February 2015, there have been 2,241 audits across 40
lotteries in 1,949 municipalities, and over R$22 billion dollars worth of federal funds audited.

Once a municipality is chosen, the CGU gathers information on all federal funds transferred to
the municipal government during the previous three to four years and issues a random selection
of inspection orders. Each one of these orders stipulates an audit task for a specific government
project (e.g. school construction, purchase of medicine, etc.) within a specific sector.7 Once these
inspection orders are determined, 10 to 15 auditors are sent to the municipality for one to two
weeks to examine accounts and documents, to inspect for the existence and quality of public work
construction, and the delivery of public services. These auditors are hired based on a competitive
public examination and earn highly competitive salaries, thus their incentives for corruption are
lower than those of other bureaucrats in the federal level administration. Moreover, the inspections

    6 Thiseligibility criteria has changed slightly over time.
    7 Auditors do not have discretion in auditing other projects. In case they find clear evidence of corruption in their
field work, they need to notify the central unit of the CGU who will then decide whether to issue a new inspection
order.


                                                           6
are done by a team which reduces the opportunity for corruption among individual auditors.8 After
the inspections are completed, a detailed report describing all the irregularities found is submitted
to the central CGU office in Brasilia. The central unit unifies the information and publishes a report
on the internet. These reports are also sent to the Tribunal de Contas da União (TCU), to public
prosecutors, the Federal Police, and to the municipal legislative branch.

Over time the program has changed in order to improve the auditing capabilities of the CGU. Be-
cause it is easier to audit several government programs and contracts in smaller municipalities, the
CGU decided in August 2005 to target the audits in larger municipalities – those above 20,000 in-
habitants – to a limited number of sectors, which are also selected at random across lotteries. In the
17th lottery that took place in August 2005, for example, the sectors chosen were social assistance,
crime prevention, and industrial policies. Municipalities smaller than 20,000 inhabitants, on the
other hand, are subject to audits in all sectors.

Although these changes affect the areas in which municipalities can be audited, they do not affect
a municipality’s audit probability. Lotteries are done by state so the probability of being audited
is constant for municipalities within the same state. The number of municipalities that get audited
within a state has varied slightly over time. For smaller states such as Alagoas only 1 or 2 munici-
palities are typically drawn in a single lottery, whereas for a large state like Minas Gerais, with over
853 municipalities, as many as 8 municipalities have been drawn in a single lottery. Overall, as we
see from Table A.1, the implied audit probabilities are quite small, with the average being only 1.3
percent (s.d.= 0.005) in a given lottery. Once a municipality is audited, it can only be audited again
after 3 lotteries have elapsed.

By various accounts, the program has served as an important weapon in Brazil’s fight against
political corruption. The information obtained from the audits has been widely used in political
campaigns and in voters’ selection of municipal politicians (Ferraz and Finan (2008)). The federal
police and federal prosecutors have also exploited the audits to better target their investigations, and
to help build their cases against corrupt politicians and public servants. Consequently, since 2004
Brazil has witnessed a steady increase the number of legal actions involving political corruption,
evidence of which can be seen in Figure 1.

Panel A of Figure 1 plots the number of police crackdowns, called Operações Especiais (Special
Operations), aimed at uncovering municipal corruption. These crackdowns, which have increased
over time and to date total 199 cases throughout Brazil, are the result of a direct collaboration
between the federal police and the CGU. The number of civil court cases of individuals charged
   8 In   Ferraz and Finan (2008), we find no evidence that auditors manipulate the audit reports.


                                                            7
with misconduct in public office has also increased since 2004. In Panel B, we plot the number
of mayors convicted of misconduct in public office who are banned for running for any public
office for at least five years. As the figure depicts, while less than 50 mayors were convicted of
irregularities in 2004, more than 400 were convicted in 2009. Although the CGU is not solely
responsible for the increase in anti-corruption crackdowns and convictions, it has undoubtedly
increased the costs of corrupt practices in Brazil, and as we will document below, its random audit
program has play a significant role in this increase.


2.2    Data

We build measures of mismanagement and corruption from a database obtained from the CGU.
The dataset includes the coding of irregularities found by the auditors for each inspection order.
While all audit reports are posted online, starting with the 20th lottery in March 2006, the CGU
began to code the information that was used as an input for the reports for internal use. For each in-
spection order, the dataset contains information on the sector and government program, the amount
transferred to the municipality, and a list of findings. For each finding, the auditors describe the
irregularity found and assign a code that classify irregularities into three categories of wrongdo-
ing, ranging from simple procedural issues, such as missing documents on a procurement process
to moderate and severe irregularities, such as large withdrawals from checking accounts with no
receipts on how the resources were spent.

To illustrate the classification scheme used by the CGU, take for example the municipality of Chaval
in Ceará, which was audited in the 20th lottery. The auditors went to the municipality with 25 in-
spection orders, one of which involved the financing of school buses for students attending primary
schooling. Here, they discovered two irregularities. For the first irregularity, which was classified
as moderate, a representative of the mayor used a check to withdrawn R$1,200 without proving
how the money was spent. The second irregularity, which was classified as severe, took place dur-
ing the procurement of transportation services. The contract was awarded to a firm that did not
match the original proposal, and the value of the contract was for a different amount than what was
offered.

Based on this information, we construct measures of corruption and mismanagement at the municipality-
lottery level. Our measure of corruption is the number of irregularities classified as either moderate
or severe. Our measure of mismanagement is the number of irregularities associated with admin-
istrative and procedural issues. In Figure 2, we plot the distributions of irregularities associated


                                                  8
with corruption and mismanagement per service order. The audits discover on average 2.5 acts of
corruption and 0.88 acts of mismanagement per service order, suggesting that 73.6 percent of the
irregularities found during an average audit involves some acts of corruption. To put these figures
in perspective, Bandiera et al. (2009) estimate only 20 percent of waste found in Italy’s public
procurement process was due to corruption. Similarly, Olken (2007) argues that the main reason
why audited villages in Indonesia did not significantly reduce their corruption is because the au-
dits mostly reveal acts of mismanagement as opposed to acts of malfeasance. Similar to Bandiera
et al. (2009) we do not find any evidence that active and passive are positively correlated (correla-
tion coefficient = 0.02). In Figure 3, we plot the average number of irregularities associated with
corruption and mismanagement by lottery. While our measure of corruption has been increasing
steadily over time, the acts of mismanagement has varied more, particularly in recent audits. Given
the changes to the auditing protocol over time, one should be cautious to interpret this temporal
variation. In the regression results, we control for time trends in audit practices and exploit only
within-audit variation.

Four other data sources are used in this paper. The political outcome variables such as reelection,
vote shares, and mayor characteristics come from the Tribunal Superior Eleitoral (TSE), which
provides results for the 2004-2012 municipal elections. These data contain vote totals for each
candidate by municipality, along with various individual characteristics, such as the candidate’s
gender, education, occupation, and party affiliation. With this information, we matched individuals
across elections to construct measures of reelection and whether mayors are serving on a first versus
second-term.

We constructed the data on the joint CGU-Federal Police crackdowns using the information avail-
able on the CGU homepage.9 For each year starting in 2003 the CGU lists the name of the Special
Operations and a description of the target. For each crackdown, we searched for the name of each
operation together with the names of the targeted municipalities and keywords such as “mayor”
or “corruption”. We created a dataset comprised of the name of each municipality targeted by the
special operation, a description of the findings, and whether the mayor or public servants of the
targeted municipalities were involved in and/or arrested during the crackdown. Using this informa-
tion we created an indicator that equals to one if a municipality was subject to a crackdown in a
given year and whether the mayor was involved in the irregularities and/or arrested.

Data on the convictions of mayors for misconduct in public office was obtained from the Cadastro
Nacional de Condenações Cíveis por ato de Improbidade Administrativa e Inelegibilidade. This

   9 See   http://www.cgu.gov.br/assuntos/auditoria-e-fiscalizacao/acoes-investigativas/operacoes-especiais


                                                           9
database, administered by the National Council for Justice (CNJ), includes the names of all indi-
viduals charged of misconduct in public office. We downloaded the data in 2013 so the dataset
includes all agents convicted up to that point. For each individual we observe the type of irreg-
ularity (e.g. violation of administrative principles or diversion of resources), the court where the
conviction took place, and the date. These data were then matched to the electoral data based on
where the individual was a mayor and the period he/she served in office. Individuals on this list are
banned from running for any public office for at least five years.

Data on municipal characteristics come from the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics
(Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística (IBGE)). The 2000 population census provides sev-
eral socioeconomic and demographic characteristics used as controls in our regressions. Some of
these key variables include income per capita, income inequality, population density, share of the
population that lives in urban areas, and share of the population that is literate.

To control for different institutional features of the municipalities, we also use information from
1999 municipality survey, Perfil dos Municípios Brasileiros: Gestão Pública. This municipal sur-
vey characterizes not only various aspects of the public administration, such as budgetary and
planning procedures, but also more structural features such as the percentage of roads that are
paved, and whether the municipality has a judge. Moreover, the survey provides our key measures
of media availability, namely the number of radio stations and the number of daily newspapers.
The richness of this dataset allows us to comprehensively check the validity of our research design,
and control for any potential confounding factors in the regressions that do not entirely rely on the
randomization.

Table 1 presents summary statistics for the municipalities in our sample, by whether they were
audited previously or not. For each characteristic, we also present the difference between these
characteristics. As expected from the random assignment, there is little difference in characteristics
between places that were audited for a first time compared to those that have previously been
audited. Importantly, included among these characteristics is the number of service orders. The
fact that the number of service orders is balanced between treatment and control verifies the fact
that the CGU does not adjust the number of service orders based on a previous audit.10 Out of
15 characteristics, only one is statistically significant at the 10 percent level. We also fail to reject
the hypothesis that all the variables are jointly significant (F-test=1.17; p-value=0.30). Overall the
results from Table 1 suggest that the lottery used by the CGU was effective.

   10 This is expected given the way inspection orders are issued. As we mentioned, within sectors inspection orders
are issued based on a random selection of government projects from the last 3 to 4 years.


                                                        10
3      Model

To disentangle the channels through which audits may reduce corruption, we consider the following
two-period model of career concerns. There are two players, a mayor and a representative voter.
In the first period, the incumbent chooses the effort he will make to extract rents taking reelection
incentives into consideration. Politicians differ along a single unobserved ability dimension. The
ability of the incumbent is randomly drawn after he chooses his action.11 First period rents are a
function of the incumbent’s effort and ability. The voter observes first period rents with a fixed
probability and chooses whether to reelect the incumbent or select a challenger who is randomly
drawn from the pool of potential politicians. In the second period, the reelected incumbent or the
newly selected politician chooses his action. If the mayor is newly elected, his ability is realized.
Finally, second period rents are realized and the game ends.


3.1         The Mayor

Mayors differ along a single dimension, which we call ability. Mayors with high ability extract
more rents than those with low ability. The ability of a mayor i is denoted by εi and is constant over
his tenure in office. We assume that ability is drawn from a normal distribution with mean 0, such
that εi ∼ N(0, σ 2 ).

Mayors face a two-term limit. The mayor seeks to maximize the discounted sum of rents r and ego
utility E, net of the costs of rent extraction c over his tenure. Rents in term t for mayor i are given
by the sum of the mayor’s effort et and the mayor’s ability εi . In period t, the mayor’s utility is

                                         uit (et ) = et + εi + E − c(et )                                       (1)

For ease of exposition, we assume that the cost of rent extraction is quadratic in rents. Thus we
                 e2
assume c(et ) = 2γt , where γ denotes the efficiency of the rent extraction technology, or equivalently,
the reciprocal of the cost parameter. In practice, these costs include the reputation and legal costs a
mayor may incur if his rents are exposed.

Now consider a first term mayor. The mayor discounts period 2 utility by β . Depending on the
mayor’s first period action, the mayor may be reelected (R = 1) or not reelected (R = 0). If the

    11 Tokeep the model tractable, we do not consider the case where the mayor observes his type before choosing
his action. In an earlier draft of this paper, we solved and estimated such a model with adverse selection and found
qualitatively the same results at the cost of greater complexity.


                                                        11
mayor is not reelected, we normalize his utility to 0 in period 2. The mayor’s maximization problem
in the first period is
                                      max u1 (e1 ) + β E[u2 |e1 ]                                (2)
                                                 e1



3.2     The Voter

We assume that there is a representative voter and adapt the standard probabilistic voting model.
Before the election, the mayor’s popularity shock δ is drawn from a uniform distribution with mean
µ and density η. Moreover, the voter observes period 1 rents with probability χ. Otherwise, the
voter does not observe rents and only bases his vote on the popularity shock. If the voter observes
r1 , he updates his belief on the mayor’s type to ε̃i = r1 − e∗1 , where e∗1 denotes the equilibrium first
period effort. Assuming a rational expectation equilibrium, the expression simplifies to ε̃i = εi .

After observing the popularity shock and (possibly) period 1 rents, the voter chooses whether to
reelect the incumbent or select a challenger who is drawn at random from the pool of potential
politicians. For tractability, we assume that the game ends at the end of the second period.12 The
voter’s value function is given by V = δ − e∗2 − ε̃i if he reelects an incumbent i or V = −e∗2 if he
selects a new candidate.


3.3     Equilibrium

To recap, the timing of the game is as follows. The first term incumbent picks an action e1 . The
incumbent’s ability εi is realized and actual first term rents are ri1 = e1 +εi . Then, the voter observes
ri1 with probability χ and the incumbent’s shock δ is realized. Elections are held. In the second
period, the incumbent selects an action e2 . Second term rents are ri2 = e2 + εi , where εi is newly
drawn if the challenger was elected.

We solve for the Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium. Consider a second term mayor. Maximizing (1) in
period 2 yields the first order condition
                                             e∗2 = γ                                       (3)

Thus period 2 rents are given by ri2 = γ + εi .

Consider next the voter’s problem. The voter seeks to maximize the sum of his period 2 utility

   12 The solution to the model is almost identical for an infinitely-lived voter, with the only change lying in a difference

in the voter’s value function. We prefer the two-period model for analytical tractability.


                                                            12
and the utility he derives from the incumbent’s popularity shock. Conditional on his belief on the
mayor’s type, the probability of the mayor’s reelection is

                           P(R = 1|ε̃i ) = χP(δ ≥ ε̃i ) + (1 − χ)P(δ ≥ 0)                          (4)
                                           1
                                         = + η µ − χη ε̃i                                          (5)
                                           2

Therefore, the mayor’s expected period 2 utility conditional on his period 1 action is
                                Z
                 E[u2 |e1 ] =  E[u2 |e1 , εi , R = 1]P(R = 1|e1 , εi ) f (εi ) dεi
                                                                                
                                                  1
                            Z
                                γ                                        ∗
                          = ( + εi + E) + η µ − χη(e1 − e1 + εi ) f (εi ) dεi
                                2                 2
                            γ       1                           
                                                               ∗
                          =     +E           + η µ − χη(e1 − e1 ) − χησ 2
                              2           2

Thus the solution to the first-term mayor’s maximization problem (2) is given by the first-order
condition                                  h         γ    i
                                    e∗1 = γ 1 − β χη    +E
                                                      2


3.4    The Effects of Audits

In this section, we consider the channels through which audits may affect corruption, which we
measure by rents in the model. The expected rents of a first-term mayor in the first period are
                                                                       γ     
                                E[r1 ] =         γ             − γβ χη     +E                      (6)
                                                |{z}
                                           non-electoral costs
                                                                 |     {z2    }
                                                              electoral discipline


We refer to the first term in (6) as the non-electoral costs channel, which is defined as the amount of
rents which would be extracted in a benchmark model without reelection incentives. In this bench-
mark, the only constraint to rent extraction are the non-electoral costs captured by the parameter
γ. We refer to the second term in the right-hand-side of (6) as the electoral discipline channel. It
denotes the decrease in first-term rents due to the reelection incentive.

To determine the expected rents of a second-term mayor, we first derive the expected type of the




                                                       13
mayors who are reelected. Using Bayes’ rule, we find that

                                                            −χησ 2
                                     E[εi |R = 1] =
                                                           1/2 + η µ

Thus, the expected rents of a second-term mayor in the second period are:

                                                                       χησ 2
                              E[r2 ] =          γ              −                                 (7)
                                               |{z}                  1/2 + η µ
                                         non-electoral costs         | {z }
                                                                   political selection


We label the first term in (7) the non-electoral costs channel. This term represents the amount of
rents which would be extracted if second-term mayors were randomly selected from the pool of
candidates. This amount is restricted only by the cost of rent extraction. The second term in (7)
is the political selection channel. It measures the decrease in second-term rents which is due to
elections selecting mayors who extract fewer rents.

Audits may affect several structural parameters in the model. We consider the following three
possibilities, highlighting the channels through which rents would be decreased in each case.

A change in the probability of detection by voters. The first possibility we consider is that audits
affect the intensity of monitoring by voters. If voters monitor politicians more closely after the
experience of an audit, then we would expect that χ, the probability that rents are detected by
voters, increases in treated municipalities. An increase in χ reduces expected rents in both terms.
The decrease in term 1 is due to the electoral discipline channel, as the audit causes the mayor’s
probability of reelection to become more sensitive to changes in rents. The decrease in term 2 is
due to the political selection channel, as voters become more likely to reelect mayors who extract
less rents.

A change in the costs of rent extraction. Recall that γ denotes the efficiency of the technology of
rent extraction. Thus, if the experience of an audit increases the expected cost of rent extraction,
then we would expect γ to decrease. The increase in the expected cost need not be objective: it
could be due to an increase in the mayor’s perception of the probability of future audits or due
to an increase in the perception of the cost of rents conditional on being audited (for example, a
mayor might update this belief after observing the arrest or conviction of a previous mayor). A
decrease in γ decreases first-term rents through two channels: it has a direct effect by increasing
the non-electoral costs of rent extraction and an indirect effect by reducing the mayor’s reelection
incentive. Furthermore, a decrease in γ reduces second term rents through the non-electoral cost


                                                      14
channel.

A change in the distribution of types of potential mayors. Audits could also lead to a change in
the pool of candidates who run for mayor. A change in the mean ability of potential mayors has the
same effect on rents as a change in γ. The economic interpretation however is different: an increase
in the mean ability of mayors would imply that better candidate types enter politics following an
audit, a political entry effect, whereas a decrease in γ would imply no effect on candidate entry.



4    Research Design

We are interested in testing whether audits reduce future corruption. To test this hypothesis, we
need to overcome the fact that we only observe corruption once a municipality has been audited.
We do so by exploiting municipalities that have been audited multiple times. As we see in Figure
4, out of the 1,949 municipalities that have been audited, 25 percent of them have been audited
multiple times: 253 audited twice, 18 three times, and 1 municipality 4 times. For a given round
of audits, we can compare the corruption levels of municipalities that had been audited prior to this
audit to those that had not (and are thus being audited for the first time).

Figure 5 shows the main variation we will exploit. The first time a municipality was audited for
a second time occurred in the 11th lottery. As expected, the number of municipalities that have
been audited more than once increases over time. For instance, in the 30th lottery out of the 60 mu-
nicipalities audited, 19 had been audited in the past. Note that because the lotteries are conducted
at random, for a given lottery at time t the probability that a municipality has been audited in the
past is the same for all municipalities within a particular state. Given this structure of the data, we
estimate the following model for municipality m in state s, audited at date t.

                                                    0
             Corruptionmst = α + β Past Auditmst + Xms γ + f (nos)mst + νs + δt + εmst             (8)


where Corruptionmst is the amount of corruption detected in municipality m during audit t, and
Past Auditmst is an indicator for whether at date t the municipality had been audited in the past.
             0 consists of a set of municipal characteristics (e.g. population, income per capita,
The vector Xms
income inequality, etc.) measured in 2000. These controls allow us to account for any socio-
economic differences across municipalities prior to the start of the program. The variable nosmst
denotes the number of service orders that auditors were sent to investigate. Since audits with more
service orders tend to discover more irregularities, it is important to account for these differences

                                                  15
in a flexible manner. In our preferred specification, the number service orders is controlled for
completely non-parametrically. The error term, εmst , captures unobserved (to the econometrician)
determinants of corruption.

Importantly, our model also adjusts for two classes of fixed-effects. We include state intercepts,
νs , to capture the fact that the randomization is stratified by state.13 We also include lottery fixed
effects, δt , which are important for two reasons. First, although municipalities are more likely to
become treated over time, within a given lottery, the probability that a municipality had been au-
dited in the past is the same for municipalities within the same state. Second, and more importantly,
starting in the 20th lottery, the CGU began to audit funds in selected areas and programs. It is thus
difficult to compare corruption levels over time, and hence we restrict our analysis to variation
within audits. Because municipalities are audited at random, we can interpret the coefficient β as
the causal effects of the audits on corruption.

In addition to estimating the effects on corruption, we also test whether mayors are more likely to
be investigated by the federal police or convicted in places that have been audited. In this case, we
estimate the following specification:

                                Legalmt = α + β Auditedmt + νm + δt + εmt                                     (9)

where Legalmt is an indicator for whether a legal action (e.g. crackdown involving political corrup-
tion or the mayor was convicted for corruption) occurred in municipality m in year t. Our treatment
variable, Auditedmt , which is equal to one after an audit, estimates the causal effect of being audited
on the likelihood of incurring a legal action. The regression adjusts for municipal and year fixed
effects, and the error term is clustered at the level of municipality.




   13 Given the population density of North Brazil, when CGU draws municipalities for audit, this region, which
includes the states of Acre, Amapá, Amazonas, Pará, Rondônia, Roraima and Tocantins, is treated as a single state.


                                                       16
5     Results

5.1    Reduced-form Estimates

Effects of the Audits on Corruption and Mismanagement

Table 2 presents OLS regression results from estimating several variants to Equation 8. The speci-
fication in the first column estimates the effects of having been audited on the total number of irreg-
ularities discovered in the audit, controlling for state and lottery intercepts, as well as the number
of service orders. Column 2 extends this specification to include various socio-economic character-
istics of the municipality. Our preferred specification is presented in Column 3, which modifies the
specification in Column 2 to control for the number of service orders in a nonparametric manner.

The results in columns 1-3 suggest that municipalities that had been audited in the past commit
significantly fewer irregularities than those that had not been previously audited. Once we control
for municipal characteristics and service-order fixed-effects, we estimate a reduction of 5.8 percent.
We also find that the number of irregularities correlates with several municipality characteristics as
we have come to expect from the cross-country literature. For example, we see strong negative
associations with income per capita and literacy rates, as well as positive correlations with income
inequality and population.

As we have discussed above, there is an important distinction to be made between corruption and
mismanagement, which we distinguish between in columns 4-9. In columns 4-6, we replicate the
previous specifications using as a dependent variable the log of total acts of mismanagement. In
columns 7-9, we use the log of total acts of corruption as the dependent variable.

We do not find any evidence that audits affect mismanagement. Under our preferred specification,
the point estimate is small and statistically indistinguishable from zero (coefficient = -0.023, robust
standard error=0.041). In contrast, we find that having been audited in the past leads to a signifi-
cant reduction in corruption. Municipalities that had experienced a previous audit committed 7.9
percent less acts of corruption compared to those that had not. In order to interpret this magnitude,
consider that the average municipality in our sample receives R$15,000,000 in federal transfers per
year. Based on our estimates of a random sample of audit reports, 30 percent of the funds audited
were found to be diverted, implying that audits reduced corruption by R$355,000 per year per mu-
nicipality. The municipal characteristics are also quite predictive of corruption levels: for example,
a 10 percent increase in per capita income is associated with a 1.8 percent decline in corruption.


                                                  17
In Table A.2, we test whether the effects of the audits vary according local characteristics. Overall,
we find little evidence of heterogenous effects. There is modest evidence that the effects of the
audits may have been more pronounced in places with a larger share of college graduates or in more
urban places, but the effects are not robust once we account for the interaction terms jointly (see
column 10). The lack of heterogeneous effects is not too surprising given our specification. Ideally,
we would also like to condition on a municipality’s prior level of corruption, but unfortunately and
by construction, we do not observe prior levels of corruption in places that had not been audited in
the past.


Spillover Effects

The estimates presented in Table 2 are likely to represent a lower bound for the reduction of cor-
ruption caused by the audits. If control municipalities are learning about the audits either through
the media or from an audited neighbor, then they too might be refraining from corruption. We
explore this possibility in Table 3. In column 1, we re-estimate Equation 8, adding the number of
neighboring municipalities that have experienced an audit as an additional independent variable.
To account for the fact that municipalities have different numbers of neighbors, we also control
non-parametrically for the number of neighbors. Moreover, because a municipality might not learn
about another municipality’s audit, even if neighbors, in columns 2 and 3 we introduce an interac-
tion term for whether local media is present, which increases the likelihood that one learns about
neighboring audits.

In column 1, we estimate that for each additional treated neighbor, a municipality reduces its cor-
ruption by 2.0 percent, but this effect is not statistically significant. The coefficient on our main
treatment variable is nearly identical to those presented in Table 2, suggesting that even when
controlling for spillover effects from neighboring municipalities, fewer acts of corruption are un-
covered in municipalities that have been audited in the past.

In columns 2-3, we test whether the spillover effects are more pronounced when the media has a
presence in the municipality. For both AM radio (column 2) and television (column 3), we find
evidence of significant spillover effects. We estimate that an additional audited neighbor decreases
corruption by 7.5 percent when AM radio is present, and by 10.4 percent for local television. We
find no evidence of spillover effects in municipalities without the presence of the media. In column
4, we re-estimate the equation, allowing for the spillover effects to vary by share of the population
with a college degree, income per capita, and the share of urban population. Even after allowing
for differential effects along these other characteristics, the heterogeneous effects by AM radio and

                                                 18
local television remain robust.14

Overall, these findings suggest that we are underestimating the audit program’s true impact on
corruption. Municipalities that are presumably learning about the potential effects of the audits are
engaging in less corruption, even if they had not experienced an audit themselves.


Effects of the Audits on Legal Actions

After an audit, the municipality (and its neighbors) has learned about not only the audit process
and the extent to which corruption can be detected, but also its legal consequences. As we depicted
in Figure 1, both police crackdowns and convictions have increased substantially over time, pre-
sumably in response to the program. In Table 4, we investigate the effects of being audited on the
likelihood that the municipality faces a subsequent legal action. In columns 1-6, we estimate vari-
ants of Equation 9 with three sets of dependent variables: a police crackdown involving political
corruption occurred (columns 1 and 2), mayor was convicted for corruption (columns 3 and 4), and
either a crackdown occurred or a mayor was convicted (columns 5 and 6). Because we are not lim-
ited to municipalities that have been audited at some point in time, we estimate these specifications
for the entire sample of municipalities eligible for an audit.

Compared to non-audited municipalities, municipalities that have experienced an audit are much
more likely to face a subsequent legal action, as measured by either a police crackdown or a mayor
conviction. Municipalities that have been audited in the past are 0.5 percentage points more likely
to face a legal action than those that have not been audited. Given that only 2.6 percent of control
municipalities have experienced a legal action, the treatment effect represents an increase of 20
percent. In columns 2, 4 and 6, we find that the effects of the treatment are largely concentrated in
places with a judiciary district. Among these municipalities, the treatment increased the likelihood
of a legal action by 35.4 percent, relative to control municipalities with a judiciary district.

While informative, the specifications presented in columns 1-6 would ideally also condition on the
level of corruption in the municipality. Because we do not observe this information in places that
have not been audited, in columns 7-9 we estimate the simple correlations between legal actions
and acts of mismanagement and corruption. Not surprising, we find that corruption is strongly
associated with the likelihood of a legal action. For example, a 1 percent increase in number of
corruption acts is associated with a 8.8 percent increase in the likelihood of a legal action. In con-

   14 We also replicate these findings when using a dummy for the presence of at least one neighboring audit, instead
of the number of neighboring audits.


                                                         19
trast, we do not find any evidence that acts of mismanagement are associated with any legal costs.
Overall these findings suggest that the non-electoral costs of engaging corruption are substantial.


5.2     Mechanisms

Thus far, the evidence suggests that having been audited in the past substantially reduces future
corruption and increases the likelihood of a legal action in the municipality. In Section 3, we
discussed four reasons why the audits may reduce corruption. The first is a political selection effect
among mayors that are reelected. If audits allow voters to punish corrupt mayors and reward good
ones, then we would expect better politicians in places where the incumbent was audited prior
to the election and still re-elected. The second channel is an electoral disciplining effect. If audits
increase the objective (or perceived) future probability of being exposed to voters, then mayors who
have re-election concerns will refrain from corruption. The third channel is what we have termed
a non-electoral disciplining effect. Mayors may refrain from corruption even in the absence of re-
election incentives, lest they incur reputation or legal costs. If the experience of a previous audit in
the same municipality increases the mayor’s subjective belief on the probability or the magnitude
of these costs, then such mayors will refrain from corruption. The fourth channel is a political entry
effect, which would occur if audits induce a change in the distribution of mayor types who choose
to enter into the candidate pool.

In this section, we present reduced-form tests of these various mechanisms, and isolate their effects
under the assumption that they are constant and additive. In Section 6, we relax these restrictive
assumptions and instead disentangle the channels by structurally estimating the model.


Electoral and Non-Electoral Disciplining Effects. To isolate the effects from electoral and non-
electoral discipline, we consider the set of municipalities in which a mayor experiences an audit
early in his term (often over funds that he did not administer), and is then effectively audited again
in the same term.15 In these cases, no election has occurred, which rules out the possibility of any
audit-induced political selection or entry effect. Any difference in corruption levels between these
municipalities and those that have not been audited (control group) can only be due to an electoral
or non-electoral disciplining effect. We can then further distinguish between these two effects by
estimating whether the effects vary by whether the mayor was in his first or second term. Because

   15 Note that the audit may have even occurred in the subsequent term, but the funds audited referred to those admin-
istered under the previous term.


                                                         20
second-term mayors are term-limited, they should only respond to non-electoral costs, whereas
first-term mayors will respond to both types of costs.16

We perform these comparisons in columns 1 and 2 of Table 5. In column 1, we compare to non-
audited places, municipalities in which the mayor experienced multiple audits within the same term.
Based on this comparison, we find that the audits led to 12.7 percent reduction in corruption, which
can be attributed to either an electoral disciplining effect, a non-electoral disciplining effect, or
both. In column 2, however, we do not find a differential effect based on whether or not the mayor
is in his second term, although the standard errors are admittedly large. But overall, these results
provide suggestive evidence that for this subsample of mayors the reduction is coming primarily
from a non-electoral disciplining effect.


Political Selection. The effect of political selection on corruption stems from voters reelecting at
greater rates the mayors who are less corrupt. Thus, to test for the existence of the political selection
channel, we compare mayors that were audited and re-elected to mayors who were not audited but
were also re-elected. If, as documented in Ferraz and Finan (2008), the audits enable voters to
punish corrupt politicians while rewarding non-corrupt ones, then places that were audited prior
to the election and where the mayor was subsequently reelected should be, on average, positively
selected, compared to those places that were not audited and the mayor was still reelected.

We present this comparison in column 3. Among municipalities where the mayor was re-elected,
corruption levels were 14.9 percent lower in audited municipalities compared to non-audited mu-
nicipalities. Note however, that this difference in corruption levels reflects both the change in the
composition of mayor types (political selection), as well as a non-electoral disciplining effect. Thus
given our previous estimate of the non-electoral disciplining effect (in column 1), and under the as-
sumption of constant and additive treatment effects, these results suggest that political selection is
actually playing a relatively minor role (i.e. a 2.2 percentage point difference) in how these audits
   16 An  alternative approach would be to explicitly test whether voters punished corrupt politicians during the 2008
election. As documented in Ferraz and Finan (2008) for the 2004 elections, one could exploit the random timing of
the audits to compare places that were audited prior to elections to those audited afterwards, conditional on the level of
corruption discovered in the audit. Unfortunately, there are three drawbacks to replicating this approach for the 2008
elections. First, after the 2008 elections, audits became much less frequent, which in effect reduces the size of the
control group. Second, as we mentioned in Section 2, after the 20th lottery, the CGU changed how it conducted the
audits. As a result, it is difficult to condition on corruption over time because the outcomes in one round of audits are
not necessarily comparable to the outcomes in subsequent rounds of audits. Third, after the 16th lottery, the CGU also
changed the manner in which it disseminated its findings. It now posts the entire reports instead of summaries, which
served as press releases. Those press releases were much more accessible to voters and media outlets. Nevertheless,
when we use this approach to test whether voters punish corrupt politicians during the 2008 elections, we do not find
any statistical evidence of an electoral disciplining effect.


                                                           21
are reducing corruption.


Political Entry. A fourth channel through which audits may reduce corruption is political entry.
This would be the case if the audits shifted the political equilibrium, whereby better candidates
entered into politics. We test for this mechanism by comparing corruption levels in places that
were audited at t − 1 to those that were not, conditional on having a new mayor in time t due to an
open seat election. Conditional on having a new mayor at time t, there are three effects that could be
driving this difference: electoral and non-electoral disciplining effects, and a political entry effect.
With estimates of the first two effects, we can isolate the effects of audits through political entry.

In column 4, we find that compared to non-audited municipalities, corruption is 12.2 percent lower
in places that were audited in the prior administration. Based on our estimates for the non-electoral
disciplining effect, these results suggest that the political entry effect is zero and provide additional
support for the importance of non-electoral costs.

As a further test for political entry, we examine whether the audits impacted the types of candidates
that ran for office during open-seat elections. By focusing on open-seat elections, we obviate the
direct effects of the audits on any potential candidate, given that the audits had taken place on a
term-limited mayor. As such, any effects of the audits would have to come from changes to the
political environment more generally. In Table 6, we examine whether the audits impacted the
competitiveness of the elections, as well as the characteristics of the candidate pool and elected
mayor. Consistent with a negligible entry effect, we find no evidence that the audits affected any of
these election characteristics.

In sum, the results from Table 5 suggest that the audits’ impact on corruption came largely from
mayors updating their beliefs about the expected cost of rent extraction, which as we discussed
need not be objective: it could be due to an increase in the mayor’s perception of the probability
of future audits or due to an increase in the perception of the cost of rents conditional on being
audited.


5.3    Alternative Mechanisms

Displacement An alternative interpretation of our reduced-form findings is that politicians from
previously audited municipalities are learning how to better hide corruption. In this case, corrup-
tion has not necessarily been reduced, but perhaps displaced. There are five reasons, however, why


                                                   22
displacement is an unlikely interpretation. First, it is unlikely that displacement would have gen-
erated the spillover effects we documented in Table 3. Second, the set of programs and sectors
that are subject to an audit vary over time, making it difficult for mayors to predict which specific
areas and programs will be audited in the future. Third, based on the audit reports, we can classify
how the corruption occurred. If places that have been audited in the past learned how to displace
corruption, then we might expect an audit to affect the type of corruption committed in subsequent
audits.

We explore this possibility in Table 7. Here, we estimate the effects of having been audited in the
past on the share of corrupt acts associated with embezzlement, procurement contracts, and over-
invoicing; three of the most common forms of corruption.17 In column 1-3, we estimate the effects
for the entire sample, and find no evidence that in places that had been audited in the past, mayors
are more likely to shift away from or into these types of corruption. In columns 4-6, we restrict
the sample to consider only those cases in which the mayor experienced multiple audits, which
presumably is where the learning effects would be easiest to detect. But again, we find no evidence
that the audits affected the nature of corruption in these places.

To further test the displacement hypothesis, we explore whether, across municipalities that are
audited multiple times, less corruption is uncovered when the same sectors are audited. We estimate
in column 7 the association between the amount of corruption detected during a second audit and
the share of sectors investigated in both this and the municipality’s previous audit. If mayors in
treated municipalities are learning to better hide corruption, then presumably less corruption should
be uncovered in places where the audits investigated funds in the same sectors. But as the result in
column 7 indicates, the correlation, instead of negative, is positive and not statistically significant.

As a final test of displacement, we examine whether the audits affect how municipalities spend their
budgets. If local governments are displacing corruption by shifting their expenditures to sectors
where corruption is harder to detect, then expenditure shares should be different in municipalities
that have been audited in the past. For each audit, we compute the share of public expenditures
spent in each sector during the given year using data from the Instituto de Pesquisa Econômom-
ica Aplicada (IPEA). As Table 8 documents, we find no evidence that the treatment affected the
manner in which municipalities allocated their budgets. In light of our previous discussion that
mayors cannot anticipate which sectors and projects will be audited in the future, this result is not
surprising.
   17 For each audit report, we create these shares by first counting keywords which are associated respectively with
embezzlement, procurement contracts, and over-invoicing. We then divide the counts by the number of corrupt acts
and finally we normalize the measures.


                                                         23
Punishment from the Federal Government Another impact of the audits may have come from
a reduction in the amount of block grants a municipality receives from the federal government. If
this response in turn lowered the opportunity for mayors to engage in corruption, then this could
explain the reduction in corruption we observe among previously audited places. As shown in
Table 9, we do not find any evidence that having been audited in the past leads to a reduction in
subsequent block grants.18



6      Structural Estimation

The key empirical challenge to distinguishing non-electoral discipline from electoral discipline
and selection is that a decrease in first and second term rents could equally be caused, on the one
hand, by non-electoral discipline, or on the other, by the combination of electoral discipline and
selection (see equations (6) and (7)). The main advantage of the structural model over the reduced-
form model is that it allows us to disentangle non-electoral discipline from other channels without
restricting the treatment sample to mayors who are audited twice in the same term. Instead, by
exploiting data on the responsiveness of voters to corruption exposed before an election, we can
structurally estimate the importance of the electoral and non-electoral channels in reducing rents.


6.1      Data and Estimation

We estimate the model for the sample of mayors audited in the year and a half preceding the 2012
mayoral elections.19 The sample consists of 319 audits, of which 87 are in the treatment group
and 232 are in the control group. As in the reduced-form analysis, the treatment is defined as the
previous experience of an audit in the same municipality. Each observation i consists of the vector
(ti , ri , Ri , ai ), where ti ∈ {1, 2} indicates the mayor’s term, ri is the log of acts of corruption in the
audit report, Ri is a dummy for the mayor’s reelection in 2012 and ai is a dummy for the treatment.

We estimate the model using maximum likelihood. Let θ := {γ, χ, µ, σ } denotes the vector of
parameters we seek to estimate. We allow the treatment to affect any of these parameters and hence


    18 We   also do not find an effect when we interact the treatment with amount of corruption discovered in the audits.
    19 We restrict the sample to these audits in order to exploit variation in reelection rates as a function of the corruption

that is exposed through the audits. As a result, we need to select audits sufficiently late in a mayoral term so that they
do not capture any corrupt acts of the previous term’s mayor. We then focus on the 2009-2012 term because there are
few treatment audits that occur shortly before the 2008 elections.


                                                              24
estimate θ separately for the treated and control municipalities. We fix the remaining parameters
β , η and E. For a municipality i where the mayor is in his first term, the likelihood is given by

      L(ri , Ri |ti = 1, θ ) = f (ri |ti = 1, θ )P(Ri |ri , θ )
                                                                        Ri                        1−Ri
                                    ri − e∗1
                                            
                                                  1                  ∗        1                  ∗
                             =φ                     + η µ − χη(ri − e1 )        − η µ + χη(ri − e1 )
                                         σ        2                           2

where we substituted in equation (5) and as we derived above, e∗1 = γ 1 − β χη                          γ
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                        2   + E . If the
mayor is in his second term, then the likelihood is given by

                    L(ri , Ri |ti = 2, θ ) = f (ri |ti = 2, θ )
                                                                            
                                                1                       ri − γ      1
                                           =      + η µ − χη(ri − γ) φ           1
                                                2                          σ     2 +ηµ

where the second line follows from Bayes’ rule, and equations (3) and (5). We estimate the vector
of parameters θ which maximizes the likelihood function:

                     L (r, R|t, θ ) = ∏ L(ri , Ri |ti = 2, θ )1(ti =2) L(ri , Ri |ti = 1, θ )1(ti =1)
                                         i

The parameter χ is identified by the responsiveness of the reelection rate to the amount of rents
revealed by first term mayors. The mean popularity shock µ is identified by the reelection rate.
The technology of rent extraction γ and the ability shock on rents σ 2 are identified by the moments
of the rent distributions.20


6.2      Results

Parameter estimates. Table 10, Panel A reports the estimates of the structural parameters. We
find that the probability of rents being revealed to voters is statistically indistinguishable from zero
for both the control and treatment groups. This result is consistent with the reduced-form results
presented earlier where we found no evidence for a link between reelection rates and corruption
uncovered by audits after 2004. Since the estimate of the probability of rents being revealed is
similar in both treatment and control groups, voter monitoring is unlikely to explain why rents
are lower in treated municipalities. In contrast, rent extraction efficiency is significantly lower

   20 Since we do not find evidence for entry in section 5, we assume that the pool of candidates is fixed, allowing γ to
be identified.


                                                           25
in the treatment group. The difference in the estimates for γ in the treatment and control groups
is statistically significant at the 10 percent level in a likelihood ratio test (χ12 = 2.89, p = 0.089).
Furthermore, the estimates for the standard deviation of ability and the mean incumbent shock are
larger in the treatment group, but neither of these two increases is statistically significant. Using a
likelihood ratio test, we reject the hypothesis that the structural parameters are equal in the treatment
and control groups (χ42 = 13.73, p < 0.01).

Equilibrium outcomes. Given the estimated parameters, we estimate some measures of interest
and report them in Table 10, Panel B. Estimates for expected first term rents decrease from 4.02
in control to 3.88 in treated municipalities. Estimates for second term rents similarly decrease
from 4.04 to 3.88. We break down these differences into the three channels: electoral discipline,
non-electoral discipline and political selection.

The decrease in first-term rents is broken down into two channels (see equation (6)). Electoral
discipline refers to the difference in rents between treatment and control which are caused by the
change in reelection incentives. Non-electoral discipline refers to the residual change in first term
rents between treatment and control. In the model, this difference is caused solely by a change in the
mayor’s rent extraction costs. We find that the decrease in first-term rents is entirely explained by
the increase in non-electoral discipline. Furthermore, the change in rents due to electoral discipline
is found to be insignificant.

We also separate the decrease in second-term rents into two channels. The first channel is polit-
ical selection, which is the change in rents due to the change in the distribution of types which
are reelected into a second term. The second channel, non-electoral discipline, is again given by
the residual change in rents, which is due to the change in rent extraction costs. We find that the
decrease in second period rents is entirely due to the change in non-electoral discipline. The dif-
ference in rents due to selection is a precisely estimated zero. In sum, the structural results are
consistent with the hypothesis that rents are lower in previously audited municipalities because
non-electoral discipline increases. We do not find evidence that electoral discipline or political
selection are responsible for the decrease in corruption.

Simulations. We parameterize the model with the estimates reported in Table 10 for the control
municipalities and conduct a number of policy simulations, which we report in Table 11.21 We
first simulate changes in the probability that rents are detected by the electorate. For example,
this could be caused by the CGU increasing the frequency of audit lotteries or the number of
municipalities audited in each lottery. Alternatively, this could occur if, conditional on an audit,
  21 We   find very similar results when parameterizing the model with the treatment estimates.


                                                          26
the CGU increased its efforts in uncovering corruption and disseminating it to voters. We find
that increasing the probability of detection reduces first-term rents significantly more rapidly than
second-term rents. For example, a 5 percentage point increase in the detection rate leads to a 9
percent decrease in first-term rents and a 1 percent decrease in second-term rents. This result is
also consistent with Ferraz and Finan (2011), who found that first-term mayors were significantly
less corrupt than second-term mayors when the audit policy first began prior to the 2004 election.

Second, we simulate changes in γ, which reflect changes in non-electoral costs.22 In practice,
non-electoral costs could be increased if, for example, conviction rates conditional on corruption
uncovered in audits increased. In the simulations, we find that first-term and second-term rents
decrease proportionally by the same amounts when γ decreases. For instance, reducing γ by 5
percent leads to approximately 20 percent decreases in rents in both terms. Thus, according to our
parameter estimates, in order to reduce the corruption of term-limited mayors, it is more effective
to increase non-electoral costs than to attempt to improve selection through elections.

Finally, we simulate increases in ego rents, E. Suppose that mayoral wages increased by the amount
that the average mayor already extracts through rents, holding the pool of potential candidates
constant. We find that this increase in ego rents only decreases first-term rents by 3 percent, from
4.02 to 3.99 log acts of corruption. Thus, unless such a policy induced significant changes in
the pool of candidates, the simulations suggest that because of limited political accountability,
increasing the value of office is unlikely to be an effective way to curb corruption.



7         Conclusions

This paper shows that the use of anti-corruption audits can be an effective policy in the fight against
corruption. We find that corruption is 8 percent lower in places that have been audited in the past
compared to municipalities that have not been audited. Naturally, this estimated impact captures
only partial equilibrium effects. In the presence of spillovers, our estimates are likely to represent
underestimates of the true impact, and we provide some evidence of this by showing that corruption
is lower in municipalities where a neighbor was audited and local media is present to diffusive the
information. We also show that audits increase the legal actions taken against corrupt mayors by
increasing the chances of a police crackdown or a conviction in court.


    22 According   to the model, we would find similar results by improving the mean ability of candidates running for
office.


                                                          27
By highlighting how audits can help spur legal sanctions, our findings offer important policy impli-
cations. While the existing literature has shown that information obtained through audits can help
promote electoral accountability, this channel alone might not be sufficient to reduce corruption in
the long run, especially if in response, public officials are able to adjust their electoral strategies or
find alternative forms of corruption (Bobonis et al. (2015), Olken and Pande (2012)). A sustain-
able reduction in corruption may instead require policies aimed at improving the state’s capacity to
detect and prosecute corrupt politicians (e.g. Besley and Persson (2011)). Our results suggest that
channeling resources to anti-corruption agencies who can implement well-executed random audits
may be an important step towards this direction.

Although we have emphasized the importance of legal accountability for reducing political cor-
ruption, our understanding of how best to improve a country’s legal system remains limited, par-
ticularly in a context where corruption is endemic. More research is needed to better understand
how we can improve the selection of public prosecutors and judges, and the incentives they face to
punish corrupt politicians.



References
Alt, J. E. and Lassen, D. D. (2008). Political And Judicial Checks on Corruption: Evidence from
  American State Governments. Economics and Politics, 20(1):33–61.

Aruoba, S. B., Drazen, A., and Vlaicu, R. (2015). A Structural Model of Electoral Accountability.
  NBER Working Papers 21151, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Ashworth, S. (2012). Electoral Accountability: Recent Theoretical and Empirical Work. Annual
  Review of Political Science, 15:183–201.

Bandiera, O., Prat, A., and Valletti, T. (2009). Active and Passive Waste in Government Spending:
  Evidence from a Policy Experiment. American Economic Review, 99(4):1278–1308.

Becker, G. (1968). Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach. Journal of Political Economy,
  76.

Becker, G. and Stigler, G. (1974). Law enforcement, malfeasance, and compensation of enforcers.
  The Journal of Legal Studies, 3(1):1–18.

Besley, T. (2007). Principled Agents?: The Political Economy of Good Government. Number
  9780199283910 in OUP Catalogue. Oxford University Press.


                                                   28
Besley, T. and Case, A. (1995). Does Electoral Accountability Affect Economic Policy Choices?
  Evidence from Gubernatorial Term Limits. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(3):769–98.

Besley, T. and Persson, T. (2011). Pillars of Prosperity: The Political Economics of Development
  Clusters. Princeton University Press.

Bobonis, G. J., Camara Fuertes, L. R., and Schwabe, R. (2015). Monitoring Corruptible Politicians.
  American Economic Review, Forthcoming.

Brollo, F., Nannicini, T., Perotti, R., and Tabellini, G. (2013). The political resource curse. Ameri-
  can Economic Review, 103(5):1759–96.

de Janvry, A., Finan, F., and Sadoulet, E. (2012). Local Electoral Incentives and Decentralized
  Program Performance. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(3):672–685.

Di Tella, R. and Schargrodsky, E. (2003). The Role of Wages and Auditing during a Crackdown on
  Corruption in the City of Buenos Aires. Journal of Law and Economics, 46(1):269–92.

Ferraz, C. and Finan, F. (2008). Exposing Corrupt Politicians: The Effects of Brazil’s Publicly
  Released Audits on Electoral Outcomes. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2):703–745.

Ferraz, C. and Finan, F. (2011). Electoral accountability and corruption: Evidence from the audits
  of local governments. American Economic Review, 101(4):1274–1311.

Fisman, R., Schulz, F., and Vig, V. (2014). The Private Returns to Public Office. Journal of Political
  Economy, 122(4):806 – 862.

Glaeser, E. L. and Goldin, C. (2006). Corruption and Reform: Introduction. In Corruption and Re-
  form: Lessons from America’s Economic History, NBER Chapters, pages 2–22. National Bureau
  of Economic Research, Inc.

Glaeser, E. L. and Shleifer, A. (2002). Legal Origins. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  117(4):1193–1229.

Kleven, H. J., Knudsen, M. B., Kreiner, C. T., Pedersen, S., and Saez, E. (2011). Unwilling or Un-
  able to Cheat? Evidence From a Tax Audit Experiment in Denmark. Econometrica, 79(3):651–
  692.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Pop-Eleches, C., and Shleifer, A. (2004). Judicial Checks and
  Balances. Journal of Political Economy, 112(2):445–470.




                                                 29
Lichand, G., Lopes, M., and Medeiros, M. (2016). Is corruption good for your health? Working
  Paper.

List, J. A. and Sturm, D. M. (2006). How Elections Matter: Theory and Evidence from Environ-
  mental Policy. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(4):1249–1281.

Litschig, S. and Zamboni, Y. (2015). Judicial Presence and Rent Extraction. Working Papers 796,
  Barcelona Graduate School of Economics.

Olken, B. A. (2007). Monitoring Corruption: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia.
  Journal of Political Economy, 115:200–249.

Olken, B. A. and Pande, R. (2012). Corruption in Developing Countries. Annual Review of Eco-
  nomics, 4(1):479–509.

Pande, R. (2008). Understanding political corruption in low income countries. volume 4, chap-
  ter 50, pages 3155–3184. Elsevier, 1 edition.

Rose-Ackerman, S. (1999). Corruption and Government: Causes, Consequences, and Reform.
  Corruption and Government: Causes, Consequences, and Reform. Cambridge University Press.

Winters, M. S. and Weitz-Shapiro, R. (2013). Lacking information or condoning corruption: When
 will voters support corrupt politicians? Comparative Politics, 45(4):418–436.

Zamboni, Y. and Litschig, S. (2015). Audit Risk and Rent Extraction: Evidence from a Randomized
  Evaluation in Brazil. Working Papers 554, Barcelona Graduate School of Economics.




                                              30
                                50
                    Number of Police Crackdowns
                   10     20    0    30      40




                                                  2004   2005   2006   2007    2008   2009   2010   2011   2012


                                                                Panel A: Police Crackdowns
                              500       400
                  Number of Convictions
                    200       300
                              100
                              0




                                                  2004   2005   2006   2007    2008   2009   2010   2011   2012


                                                                   Panel B: Convictions

                                                    Figure 1: Number of Legal Actions over Time

Notes: This figures plots the number of convictions and police crackdowns involving political corruption during the
period 2004 to 2012.




                                                                              31
                       .4
                                                                mean= 2.678; sd= 1.224
                       .3
                   Density
                    .2 .1
                       0




                               0           2                4                 6                8
                                          Number of Corrupt Acts per Service Order


                                                     Corruption
                       1




                                                                 mean= 0.912; sd= 0.615
                       .8 .6
                   Density
                       .4
                       .2
                       0




                               0                   2                     4                         6
                                          Acts of Mismanagement per Service Order


                                                  Mismanagement

      Figure 2: Distribution of Irregularities Associated with Corruption and Mismanagement

Notes: This figure displays the distribution of irregularities per service order associated with corruption and misman-
agement. These data are based on the audits conducted from lotteries 22 to 38.




                                                         32
                                         3.5
                      Number of Corrupt Acts per Service Order
                                2.5      2       3




                                                             1/1/06    1/1/07   1/1/08     1/1/09     1/1/10   1/1/11   1/1/12   1/1/13
                                                                                             Date of Lottery


                                                                                           Corruption
                                      2.5
                   Acts of Mismanagement per Service Order
                           1        1.5
                                      .5         2




                                                         1/1/06       1/1/07    1/1/08     1/1/09     1/1/10   1/1/11   1/1/12   1/1/13
                                                                                             Date of Lottery


                                                                                         Mismanagement

                                                                 Figure 3: Average Number of Irregularities By Lottery

Notes: This figure displays by lottery the average number of irregularities per service order associated with corruption
or mismanagement. These data are based on the audits conducted in lotteries 22-38.




                                                                                               33
                          2000




                                                       1677
                                  1500
               Number of Municipalities
              500     1000




                                                                       253

                                                                                      18             1
                          0




                                           0             1            2             3                4
                                                                   Number of Audits


                                          Figure 4: Distribution of Times a Municipality has been Audited

Notes: This figures plots the distribution of the number of times a municipality has been audited during the duration of
the program.




                                                                        34
                                                        60
              Number of Municipalities Audited Per Lottery
                  10     20     30 0     40     50




                                                               10111213141516171819202122232425262728293031323334353637383940

                                                                                      Treatment           Control



                                                             Figure 5: Distribution of Times a Municipality has been Audited

Notes: This figure plots the number of municipalities that had been audited in the past for a given lottery. The solid
blue bars denote the number of treated municipalities (i.e. previously audited). The solid red bars denote the number
of control municipalities.




                                                                                           35
                          Table 1: Mean Comparisons Between Audited and Non-audited

                                                                          Control                             Treatment
                                                                  Mean             Std Dev.             Mean             Std Dev.         Difference
                                                                   (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)               (5)
 Population                                                   22992.720          45069.940          26000.850          43799.660           436.700
                                                                                                                                          [2553.579]
 Share female                                                     0.495              0.015              0.496              0.014             0.000
                                                                                                                                            [0.001]
 Share urban                                                      0.574              0.235              0.576              0.234             0.008
                                                                                                                                            [0.014]
 Human Development Index                                          0.507              0.105              0.492              0.101             -0.002
                                                                                                                                            [0.004]
 Income inequality (Gini)                                         0.550              0.068              0.563              0.069             0.003
                                                                                                                                            [0.005]
 Income per capita (log)                                          5.575              0.580              5.499              0.582             -0.001
                                                                                                                                            [0.026]
 % Poor                                                           0.445              0.229              0.486              0.215             0.502
                                                                                                                                            [0.821]
 Share illiterate                                                 0.247              0.136              0.268              0.134             0.303
                                                                                                                                            [0.494]
 % bureaucracy with a college degree                              0.192              0.123              0.180              0.118             -0.007
                                                                                                                                            [0.006]
 % population with a colllege degree                              0.207              0.212              0.204              0.229             0.009
                                                                                                                                            [0.011]
 Has AM Radio                                                     0.211              0.408              0.243              0.430             0.017
                                                                                                                                            [0.032]
 Has a Judiciary District                                         0.447              0.497              0.523              0.501             0.002
                                                                                                                                            [0.038]
 Effective Number Candidates for Mayor                            2.150              0.550              2.204              0.648             0.044
                                                                                                                                            [0.038]
 Reelection rates for Mayors                                      0.405              0.491              0.437              0.497             0.026
                                                                                                                                            [0.048]
 Mayor’s Years of Education                                      12.009              4.194             11.868              4.355             -0.229
                                                                                                                                            [0.387]
 Share of Votes Mayor received                                    0.561              0.125              0.564              0.133             0.006
                                                                                                                                            [0.010]
 Number of Service Orders                                        25.205              9.264             24.802              9.983             -0.169
                                                                                                                                            [0.618]
 N                                                                 881                                   222
Notes: This table shows means and standard deviations of various municipal characteristics by places that have been audited in the past (treatment) and
places that have not been audited in the past (control). The difference and corresponding standard error (in brackets) are computed based on a regression
that controls for both state and lottery fixed effects. All of these characteristics are based on information collected in 2000, except for the share of the
bureaucracy with a college degree, which is based on a 2005 survey.




                                                                          36
                                    Table 2: The Effects of the Audits on Corruption and Mismanagement

                                                  Number of Irregularities                    Acts of Mismanagement                         Acts of Corruptions
                                                  (1)      (2)        (3)                     (4)       (5)     (6)                       (7)       (8)       (9)
      Audited in the past                      -0.034         -0.045+        -0.058*         0.010         0.001         -0.023        -0.059*        -0.070*        -0.079*
                                               [0.021]        [0.022]        [0.021]        [0.052]       [0.048]       [0.041]        [0.024]        [0.025]        [0.027]

      Population (log)                                        0.057*         0.064*                       0.047*        0.037+                        0.053*         0.064*
                                                              [0.011]        [0.012]                      [0.015]       [0.021]                       [0.015]        [0.018]

      Income inequality (Gini)                                0.337*         0.361*                        0.137         0.177                        0.449*         0.459*
                                                              [0.111]        [0.112]                      [0.295]       [0.249]                       [0.158]        [0.177]

      Income per capita (log)                                  -0.085        -0.102*                       0.111         0.103                        -0.158*        -0.176*
                                                              [0.056]        [0.045]                      [0.086]       [0.087]                       [0.064]        [0.059]
37




      Illiteracy                                               0.003         0.003*                        0.001         0.000                        0.004*         0.005*
                                                              [0.002]        [0.001]                      [0.003]       [0.002]                       [0.002]        [0.002]

      Share of urban population                               0.123+         0.118*                        -0.056        -0.068                       0.190*         0.182*
                                                              [0.067]        [0.045]                      [0.091]       [0.136]                       [0.086]        [0.058]

      Controls                                     N             Y              Y              N             Y              Y             N              Y              Y
      f(Service Orders)                           log           log          nonpar           log           log          nonpar          log            log          nonpar
      R2                                         0.414         0.449          0.539          0.364         0.374          0.434         0.303          0.337          0.483
      N                                           983           983            983            983           983            983           983            983            983
     Notes: This table reports the effects of being audited in the past on corruption and mismanagement. The dependent variable in columns 1-3 is the total number of
     irregularities discovered in the audit. In columns 4-6, the dependent variable is the log of total acts of mismanagement, and in columns 7-9 the dependent variable is
     the log of total acts of corruption. In addition to the controls presented in the table, each regression controls for state and lottery fixed effects. In columns 3, 6, 9 the
     number of service items audited is controlled for in a fully nonparametric fashion. In the other columns, we control for the log of the number of service items audited.
     Robust standard errors are reported in brackets, + p<0.10, * p<0.05.
        Table 3: Spillover Effects of Neighboring Audits on Acts of Corruption

                                                                              Acts of Corruption
                                                                  (1)           (2)       (3)                     (4)
      Audited in the past                                     -0.078*         -0.081*         -0.084*         -0.084*
                                                              [0.027]         [0.028]         [0.028]         [0.028]

      Neighbors Audited                                         -0.020          0.003           -0.002          0.163
                                                               [0.014]         [0.016]         [0.016]         [0.162]

      Radio AM                                                                  0.065                           0.074
                                                                               [0.046]                         [0.047]

      Neighbors Audited × Radio AM                                            -0.075*                         -0.074*
38




                                                                              [0.028]                         [0.035]

      TV                                                                                        0.032           0.026
                                                                                               [0.053]         [0.054]

      Neighbors Audited × TV                                                                  -0.104*         -0.084*
                                                                                              [0.036]         [0.037]

      Full Set of Interactions                                    N               N               N               Y
      N                                                          983             983             983             983
      R2                                                        0.486           0.650           0.653           0.660
     Notes: This table reports the effects of past own or neighboring audits on acts of corruption. The dependent vari-
     able is the log of the total acts of corruption discovered in the audit. In addition to the municipal controls presented
     in Table 2, each regression controls for state, lottery, service order, and number of neighbors fixed effects. In col-
     umn 4, we interact Neighbors Audited with the full set of municipal controls. Robust standard errors are reported
     in brackets, + p<0.10, * p<0.05.
                                                                Table 4: The Effects of the Audits on Legal Actions

                                                    Crackdowns                          Convictions                      Legal Action                Crackdowns           Convictions         Legal Action
                                                  (1)       (2)                       (3)         (4)                   (5)        (6)                   (7)                 (8)                  (9)
      Audited                                  0.00139        -0.0000887         0.00443+         0.000195         0.00562*         0.000241
                                               (0.001)          (0.001)           (0.002)          (0.003)          (0.003)          (0.003)

      Audit × Judiciary District                               0.00325+                           0.00933*                           0.0119*
                                                                (0.002)                            (0.004)                           (0.005)

      Corruption (logs)                                                                                                                                 0.0369+              0.0601*              0.0882*
                                                                                                                                                        (0.021)              (0.029)              (0.035)

      Mismanagement (logs)                                                                                                                              -0.0116             -0.00647              -0.0146
                                                                                                                                                        (0.016)               (0.02)              (0.024)

      Control group mean                        0.003             0.024             0.027            0.003            0.024            0.027              0.047               0.202                 0.240
39




      N                                        70,902            70,902            70,902           70,902           70,902           70,902               982                 982                   982
     Notes: This table investigate the effects of the audits on the occurrence of a legal action. In columns 1, 2 and 7, the dependent variable is whether a police crackdown on political corruption was conducted
     in the municipality in a given year. In columns 3, 4, and 8, the dependent variable is whether a mayor was prosecuted for corruption in a given year. In columns 5, 6 and 9, the dependent variable is whether
     a police investigation or a conviction occurred. Each regression controls for our set of municipal controls. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets, + p<0.10, * p<0.05.
                          Table 5: The Effects of the Audits on Corruption

                                                                       Acts of Corruption
                                                                Same Term      Reelected Open Seat
                                                               (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)
 Audited in the past                                       -0.127*         -0.113           -0.149*              -0.122
                                                           [0.061]         [0.070]          [0.060]             [0.076]

 Audited in the past × Second term                                         -0.050
                                                                           [0.098]

 Second-term mayor                                                         -0.032
                                                                           [0.029]

 R2                                                           0.47           0.47              0.50               0.53
 N                                                            821            821               596                665
Notes: This table reports the effects of being audited in the past on corruption. The dependent variable is the log of the total
acts of corruption discovered in the audit. In addition to the municipal controls presented in 2, each regression controls for
state, lottery, service order fixed effects. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets, + p<0.10, * p<0.05.




                                                              40
                                                                       Table 6: The Effects of the Audits on Entry

                                                                                                      Characteristics of the Candidate Pool                                 Mayor Characteristics
                                         Win           Number of Number of                      Elementary             High                  Campaign                    White
                                        Margin         Candidates Parties                         School              School         College Spending                    Collar          Male          College
                                         (1)              (2)       (3)                             (4)                 (5)            (6)      (7)                       (8)             (9)           (10)
      Audited in the past                0.010            -0.002               0.000                -0.024             0.026          0.000             -0.018          -0.009          -0.027          0.030
                                        [0.020]           [0.029]             [0.028]               [0.023]           [0.028]        [0.028]           [0.068]          [0.043]         [0.030]        [0.047]

      R2                                  0.07              0.30                 0.31                 0.15              0.23            0.21             0.65              0.24           0.11           0.12
      N                                   665               684                  684                  684               684             684              672               662            679            685
     Notes: This table reports the effects of being audited on the candidate pool. The dependent variable is specified at the top of each column. The number of candidates, number of parties, and campaign
     spending are measured in logs. In addition to the municipal controls presented in 2, each regression controls election and state fixed effects. The sample is restricted to open-seat elections. Robust standard
     errors clustered at the municipality level are reported in brackets, + p<0.10, * p<0.05.
41
                                                                Table 7: The Effects of the Audits on Displacement

                                                                              Full Sample                                                         Same Term
                                                                                                           Over-                                                              Over-            Acts of
                                                       Embezzlement               Procurement            invoicing         Embezzlement              Procurement            invoicing         Corruption
                                                           (1)                        (2)                   (3)                (4)                       (5)                   (6)               (7)
      Audited in the past                                     0.031                    0.011               -0.026                -0.132                   0.117                -0.050
                                                             [0.084]                  [0.060]             [0.029]               [0.128]                  [0.103]              [0.061]

      Share of same sectors audited                                                                                                                                                               0.200
                                                                                                                                                                                                 [0.266]

      R2                                                       0.13                     0.21                0.03                   0.14                    0.21                 0.04               0.69
      N                                                        983                      983                 983                    821                     821                  821                217
     Notes: This table reports the effects of being audited in the past on type of corruption detected. Embezzlement, Procurement, Over-invoicing correspond to the number of acts of corruption involving
42




     these procedures as a share of the total number of corrupt violations. In columns 1-3, the regressions are estimated for the entire sample. In columns 4-6, the treatment is restricted to those mayors that
     were audited twice in a single term. In addition to the municipal controls presented in 2, each regression controls for state, lottery, service order fixed effects. Robust standard errors are reported in
     brackets, + p<0.10, * p<0.05.
                                                  Table 8: The Effects of Audits on Public Spending

                                       Education           Health        Administration             Housing          Welfare        Transportation              Other
                                          (1)               (2)              (3)                      (4)             (5)                (6)                     (7)

      Audited in the past                 -0.006           -0.006               0.009                 0.005           0.000                -0.004               0.001
                                         [0.006]          [0.005]              [0.008]               [0.005]         [0.003]              [0.003]              [0.004]

      R2                                  0.598             0.235               0.204                 0.290           0.275                0.502                0.421
      N                                    773               773                 773                   773             773                  773                  773
     Notes: This table reports the effects of being audited in the past on public spending. Public spending data are obtained from the IPEA. The dependent variable is the
     share of public spending on one of seven mutually exclusive categories: education, health, administration, housing, welfare, transportation, and other spending. In
     addition to the municipal controls presented in 2, each regression controls for state, lottery and service order fixed effects. The sample size is less than 983 due to
     missing data on public spending, in particular for audits which occurred in 2012 as the IPEA data ends in 2011. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets, +
     p<0.10, * p<0.05.
43
          Table 9: The Effects of the Audits on Federal Block Grants

                                    Number of               Amount of                  Share of
                                   Block Grants            Block Grants             Funds Disbursed
                                       (1)                     (2)                        (3)
 Audited in the past                    -0.027                   -0.053                     0.018
                                       [0.050]                  [0.077]                    [0.018]

 R2                                       0.55                    0.42                       0.34
 N                                        794                     794                        793
Notes: This table reports the effects of being audited in the past on the amount of blocks grants the munic-
ipality received in the subsequent years of the administration. The dependent variables in columns 1 and 2
are expressed in logs. In addition to the municipal controls presented in 2, each regression controls for state,
lottery, service order fixed effects. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets, + p<0.10, * p<0.05.




                                                      44
                            Table 10: Structural Estimates

                                                                      Control        Treatment
                                                                        (1)             (2)
 Panel A: Parameter estimates

 Probability rents revealed (χ)                                         0.01            0.001
                                                                       [0.03]           [0.05]

 Rent extraction efficiency (γ)                                         4.04             3.88
                                                                       [0.04]           [0.07]

 Standard deviation of ability (σ )                                     0.36             0.42
                                                                       [0.02]           [0.03]

 Mean incumbent popularity shock (µ)                                   -0.56             -0.32
                                                                       [0.17]           [0.24]

 Panel B: Equilibrium outcomes

 Expected first term rents                                              4.02             3.88
                                                                       [0.03]           [0.06]

 Expected second term rents                                             4.04             3.88
                                                                       [0.04]           [0.07]
 Change in first-term rents
 - due to electoral discipline                                                    -0.01
                                                                                 [0.09]

 - due to non-electoral discipline                                                -0.16
                                                                                 [0.09]
 Change in second-term rents
 - due to selection                                                               0.00
                                                                                 [0.01]

 - due to non-electoral discipline                                                -0.16
                                                                                 [0.09]
Notes: Standard errors in brackets. The log-likelihood is -267. Rents are measured by the log of to-
tal acts of corruption compiled by the CGU. The sample consists of 319 audits from the last two years
of the 2009-2012 mayoral term. Treated muncipalities are those that have been previously audited and
control municipalities are those audited for the first time. The annual discount rate is set to 4%. Ego
rents are set to 0. The estimates are also adjusted for lottery and state fixed effects.




                                                 45
                                          Table 11: Simulations

                                                                                   Expected rents
                                                                             First-term Second-term
                                                                                 (1)          (2)
 Variation in the probability of detection by voters

 Baseline (χ = 0.01)                                                             4.02                  4.04
 5 percentage point increase                                                     3.93                  4.03
 10 percentage point increase                                                    3.85                  4.03

 Variation in the efficiency of rent extraction

 Baseline (γ = 4.04)                                                             4.02                  4.04
 5 percent decrease                                                              3.82                  3.83
 10 percent decrease                                                             3.62                  3.63

 Variation in ego rents

 Baseline (E = 0)                                                                4.02                  4.04
 Ego rents equal to 4 (average rents)                                            3.99                  4.04
 Ego rents equal to 8 (double average rents)                                     3.95                  4.04
Notes: Expected rents are measured by the log of total acts of corruption compiled by the CGU. The baseline estimates
are those obtained for the sample of control municipalities in Table 10. See the notes of that table for more details.




                                                         46
A   Appendix A

                   Table A.1: Audit Probabilities

                  Acre                                  0.019
                  Alagoas                               0.014
                  Amapá                                 0.019
                  Amazonas                              0.016
                  Bahia                                 0.011
                  Ceará                                 0.016
                  Espírito Santo                        0.013
                  Goiás                                 0.011
                  Maranhão                              0.011
                  Mato Grosso                           0.013
                  Mato Grosso do Sul                    0.016
                  Minas Gerais                          0.008
                  Paraná                                0.008
                  Paraíba                               0.011
                  Pará                                  0.019
                  Pernambuco                            0.014
                  Piauí                                 0.011
                  Rio Grande do Norte                   0.015
                  Rio Grande do Sul                     0.009
                  Rio de Janeiro                        0.023
                  Rondônia                              0.019
                  Roraima                               0.019
                  Santa Catarina                        0.008
                  Sergipe                               0.018
                  São Paulo                             0.008
                  Tocantins                             0.011

                  Total                                 0.013
                 Notes: This table shows the ex-ante probability of
                 being audited by state.




                                        47
                            Table A.2: The Effects of the Audits on Corruption and Mismanagement By Local Characteristics

                                                                             Acts of Mismanagement                                                       Acts of Corruption
                                                               [1]           [2]       [3]     [4]                       [5]            [6]            [7]       [8]       [9]                     [10]
      Audited in the past                                   -0.025         -0.024        -0.024        -0.023         -0.026        -0.077*        -0.080*        -0.085*        -0.079*        -0.082*
                                                            [0.041]        [0.041]       [0.040]       [0.041]        [0.043]       [0.027]        [0.028]        [0.030]        [0.028]        [0.028]
      Treatment Interacted with
      Radio                                                 -0.038                                                    -0.061         -0.053                                                       -0.014
                                                            [0.113]                                                   [0.132]        [0.078]                                                     [0.078]

      Share of pop with a college degree                                    0.001                                      0.004                        -0.018                                       -0.008
                                                                           [0.014]                                    [0.029]                       [0.014]                                      [0.019]

      Income per capita (log)                                                             -0.011                       -0.054                                       -0.061                        -0.018
                                                                                         [0.063]                      [0.105]                                      [0.052]                       [0.078]

      Share of urban population                                                                         0.091          0.191                                                       -0.159         -0.077
48




                                                                                                       [0.205]        [0.289]                                                     [0.117]        [0.124]

      P-value (Joint test)                                                                                             0.95                                                                        0.68
      R2                                                     0.433          0.432         0.434          0.433         0.435          0.479          0.480          0.481          0.486          0.488
      N                                                       983            983           983            983           983            983            983            983            983            983
     Notes: In columns 1-5, the dependent variable is the log of total acts of mismanagement, and in columns 6-10 the dependent variable is the log of total acts of corruption. In addition to the
     interaction terms presented in the table, each regression controls for the direct effect, the controls presented in 2, as well as state, lottery, service order fixed effects. Robust standard errors are
     reported in brackets, + p<0.10, * p<0.05.
