                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THE GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM IMPACTS OF UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE:
               EVIDENCE FROM A LARGE ONLINE JOB BOARD

                                        Ioana Marinescu

                                      Working Paper 22447
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22447


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2016




I would like to thank Sanggi Kim and Sarah Sajewski for excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Ioana Marinescu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The General Equilibrium Impacts of Unemployment Insurance: Evidence from a Large Online
Job Board
Ioana Marinescu
NBER Working Paper No. 22447
July 2016
JEL No. J63,J64,J65

                                          ABSTRACT

During the Great Recession, U.S. unemployment benefits were extended by up to 73 weeks.
Theory predicts that extensions increase unemployment by discouraging job search, a partial
equilibrium effect. Using data from the large job board CareerBuilder.com, I find that a 10%
increase in benefit duration decreased state-level job applications by 1%, but had no robust effect
on job vacancies. Job seekers thus faced reduced competition for jobs, a general equilibrium
effect. Calibration implies that the general equilibrium effect reduces the impact of
unemployment insurance on unemployment by 40%: increasing benefit duration by 10%
increases unemployment by only 0.6% in equilibrium.


Ioana Marinescu
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
ioanamarinescu@uchicago.edu
1. Introduction
During the Great Recession, the duration of unemployment benefits in the US was extended from 26 to
up to 99 weeks. A vast amount of empirical evidence based on prior extensions in unemployment
benefits unambiguously shows that extensions increase the unemployment duration of benefit
recipients (e.g. Katz and Meyer 1990; Meyer 2002; Schmieder, Wachter, and Bender 2012). Empirical
evidence from the Great Recession in the US confirms the prevailing wisdom by showing that extensions
had a positive effect on the unemployment duration of likely benefit recipients (Rothstein 2011; Farber
and Valletta 2013). Since extensions contribute to increasing unemployment in a situation where
unemployment is already high, there is a legitimate concern that unemployment benefits extensions
may have been a bad policy choice.

However, the partial equilibrium effect of benefit extensions on benefit recipients does not capture the
full impact of the extensions on aggregate unemployment during the Great Recession. Indeed,
unemployment benefit extensions could also have general equilibrium effects through search
externalities. Theoretically, as unemployment benefit recipients reduce their job search effort in
response to the extensions, competition for jobs decreases and it becomes easier for unemployed job
seekers who are not affected by the extensions to find a job. Levine (1993) and Lalive, Landais, and
Zweimüller (2013) document empirically the presence of such search externalities for US extensions
prior to the Great Recession, and for Austrian extensions respectively. Even for benefit recipients
themselves, UI benefit extensions can increase the job finding rate per application. Thus, a UI induced
decrease in applications leads to a less than proportional decrease in job finding for UI recipients. Due
to this search externality, the impact of the extensions on aggregate unemployment could be smaller
than the partial equilibrium impact of increasing potential benefit duration for a small number of benefit
recipients.

Extensions could also have general equilibrium2 effects through firm behavior, generating a labor
demand externality. If benefit extensions reduce the number of applicants for each job, it may become
harder for firms to fill job vacancies, and the value of vacancies may decrease. Extensions can also
decrease the value of vacancies by increasing the reservation wage of benefit recipients, so that
employers face more demanding applicants. If extensions decrease the value of a vacancy, firms may
post fewer job vacancies. A decrease in the number of vacancies makes it harder for all job seekers to

2
 General equilibrium is used here as in labor economics (e.g. Landais, Michaillat, and Saez, 2014) to mean that the
extensions generate externalities in the labor market. It does not mean to imply that we will analyze the impact of
the extensions on markets other than the labor market.

                                                        2
find a job. Through this labor demand externality, extensions contribute to further increasing aggregate
unemployment. Hagedorn et al. (2013) show evidence that extensions during the Great Recession
decreased the number of vacancies, suggesting that the impact of the extensions on aggregate
unemployment during the Great Recession is larger than the impact of these extensions on benefit
recipients.

However, whether the negative impact of extensions on the number of vacancies (labor demand
externality) dominated the positive impact of extensions on job finding (search externality) during the
Great Recession is unknown. In particular, while Hagedorn et al. (2013) provide evidence on the labor
demand externality, we have no evidence on the search externalities generated by extensions during
the Great Recession. Therefore, whether the macro impact of extensions on aggregate unemployment is
larger or smaller than the micro effect on benefit recipients remains an open question.

To answer this question, this paper uses new data on state‐level job applications and job vacancies from
CareerBuilder.com, arguably the largest American online job board3. If extensions during the Great
Recession resulted in a decrease in aggregate job search effort, we should observe a decrease in the
total number of job applications in the aftermath of an extension. All other things equal, such a decrease
in job applications increases the hiring rate per application sent, a search externality, and therefore
contributes to reducing unemployment. I can also ascertain whether extensions decreased the number
of job vacancies posted, a labor demand externality, and therefore contributed to increasing
unemployment. Thus, a key innovation of this paper is to estimate the impact of extensions on both job
applications and job vacancies during the Great Recession.

If extensions reduce the total number of job applications more than they reduce the total number of job
vacancies, then extensions increase the vacancy to applications ratio (a measure of search‐intensity
adjusted labor market tightness), and therefore increase the job finding probability per application sent.
In this case, economic theory predicts that the macro impact of extensions on aggregate unemployment
is smaller than the micro impact on the unemployment of benefit recipients (Landais, Michaillat, and
Saez, 2014), so that the general equilibrium effect dampens the partial equilibrium effect. Conversely, if
benefit extensions decrease labor market tightness, then the macro impact of extensions on aggregate
unemployment is larger than the micro impact on benefit recipients.


3
 Monster.com is similar in size, and whether Monster or CareerBuilder is largest depends on the exact size
measure used.

                                                    3
To identify the impact of unemployment insurance on applications and vacancies, I use state‐level
variation in potential unemployment benefits duration (PBD) induced by the federal Emergency
Unemployment Compensation (EUC) and state‐run extended benefits (EB). My first identification
strategy is a timing of events approach, and shows that the number of vacancies in the state stays flat as
far as seven months before and after a state’s largest benefit extension. By contrast, state‐level job
applications significantly decline in the first month of a benefit extension, and continue to decline for
several months thereafter. Using this strategy, a one‐week increase in potential benefit duration (PBD)
leads to a 0.4% decline in applications at the state level. Equivalently, a 10% increase in PBD decreases
state‐level applications by 1% (an elasticity of ‐0.1).

A second identification strategy uses the fact that benefit extensions (EUC and EB) depend on state‐level
unemployment rates reaching specific thresholds. I exploit this source of variation by using a global
parametric fuzzy regression discontinuity approach that relies on nonlinearities in PBD as a function of
the state unemployment rate. I find that PBD decreases the total number of applications at the state
level, but has no robust impact on the number of vacancies. Furthermore, only the federal EUC program
has a negative impact on PBD, while the state‐level EB has no significant effect. Overall, this second
identification strategy confirms that PBD extensions decrease the total number of applications at the
state level, but have no robust impact on the number of vacancies.

One may be concerned that the impact of PBD extensions on job applications and vacancies is biased by
the lack of representativity of my data or by unobserved changes in the composition of job vacancies.
However, I show that the negative impact of PBD on applications is robust to controlling for changes in
the composition of job vacancies by industry and education requirement. I also show that the absence
of an impact of PBD on vacancies is maintained when using all online vacancies from Help Wanted
Online rather than just CareerBuilder vacancies. Finally, I find that PBD does not affect posted wages or
how choosy job seekers are. The lack of an impact of extensions on posted wages and job seeker
choosiness is consistent with the fact that extensions do not affect the number of vacancies: since
extensions do not have an impact on how choosy job seekers are nor posted wages, they do not
contribute to decreasing the value of vacancies.

In contrast to my results, Hagedorn et al. (2013) found a negative impact of unemployment insurance
extensions on vacancies during the Great Recession. Hagedorn, Manovskii, and Mitman (2016) suggest
that the difference between our results is due to a difference in data source. However, I still find no
effect of the extensions on the number of vacancies when using the Help Wanted Online data with my

                                                          4
identification strategy. Their identification strategy relies on comparing counties along state borders.
Borrowing their identification strategy and using county level data, I find no effect of the extensions on
vacancies. Furthermore, I show that the border county design cannot recover the causal impact of
unemployment insurance on applications and vacancies due to large across‐county spillover effects.
More generally, these results suggest that one should be wary of using border county designs to assess
the impact of labor market policies that have geographic spillover effects.

Overall, this paper’s main empirical results are informative about the general equilibrium impacts of
unemployment insurance: they indicate that unemployment insurance extensions during the Great
Recession did not lead to a labor demand externality (no impact on the number of vacancies or posted
wages), but did generate a job search externality (a negative impact on the number of applications). On
net, extensions had a positive and significant impact on labor market tightness, implying that the macro
effect of unemployment insurance on unemployment is smaller than the micro effect. This result has
important implications for policy design. Indeed, to the extent that labor market tightness is inefficiently
low during recessions and inefficiently high during booms, the fact that unemployment insurance
increases labor market tightness implies that optimal unemployment insurance generosity should be
high in recessions and low in booms, i.e. countercyclical (Landais, Michaillat, and Saez 2014).

To quantify the macro impact of unemployment insurance, I calibrate the theoretical model by Landais,
Michaillat, and Saez 2014 in which this macro impact is the sum of the micro impact and the general
equilibrium effect. I find that the macro impact is smaller than the micro impact: the general equilibrium
effect reduces the micro impact by 40%. In equilibrium, a 10% increase in unemployment benefit
duration increases aggregate unemployment by only 0.6%.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses how unemployment benefit
extensions were decided, describes the data and presents the theoretical framework. Section 3
discusses the identification strategy and the results for the timing of events approach, and the
parametric fuzzy regression discontinuity designs. Section 4 presents robustness tests and discusses the
results. In particular, section 4 presents the calibration results for the impact of PBD extensions on
aggregate unemployment. Section 5 presents interpretations and discussion of findings. Finally, Section
6 concludes.




                                                     5
2. Policy background, data, and theoretical framework

2.1 Policy background
By default, PBD in the United States is 26 weeks. During times of high unemployment, the extended
benefits (EB) program provides additional weeks of benefits if one of two conditions is satisfied:

       the state's 13‐week average insured unemployment rate (IUR) in the most recent 13 weeks is at
        least 5.0 percent and at least 120 percent of the average of its 13‐week IURs in the last 2 years
        for the same 13‐week calendar period; or
       at state option, the current 13‐week average IUR is at least 6.0 percent, and regardless of the
        experience in previous years. The IUR option is in place for the months when a state chose this
        option4.

States have the option of electing an alternative trigger authorized by the Unemployment Compensation
Amendments of 1992 (Public Law 102‐318). The TUR option is in place for the months when a state
chose this option. This trigger is based on a 3‐month average total unemployment rate (TUR) using
seasonally adjusted data:

        If this TUR average exceeds 6.5 percent and is at least 110 percent of the same measure in
         either of the prior 2 years, a state can offer 13 weeks of EB.
        If the average TUR exceeds 8 percent and meets the same 110‐percent test, 20 weeks of EB can
         be offered.

Normally, extended benefits are financed 50% by states and 50% by the federal government. Under the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA) passed on Feb. 17, 2009, benefits are financed
entirely by the federal government. As a result, many states chose the TUR option5. Federal funding of
EB was still in place at the end of this paper’s sampling frame (July 2011).

The Tax Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of (P.L. 111‐312,
December 2010) temporarily changed the look‐back timeframe to three years, as unemployment

4
  78% of states choose this option, and this share is stable over the sample frame of this paper.
5
  In this paper’s sample frame, and before ARRA, only 21% of state‐week observations had the TUR option on,
while after ARRA 63% of state‐week observations had the TUR option on. As of January 2011, Arkansas, Iowa,
Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, Montana, Oklahoma, Utah, and Wyoming could qualify for extended benefits (EB)
under TUR but chose not to use that option. Legislators in these states were afraid of adopting extended benefits
under TUR because they were afraid of having to raise taxes when the federal funding expires. Furthermore, many
legislators were afraid that more benefits would increase unemployment.

                                                       6
indicators in most states had been consistently high for the past two years and would have resulted in
many states being unable to meet the conditions. This three‐year look‐back exception was still in place
at the end of the sampling frame (July 2011).

The federal Emergency Unemployment Compensation Act (EUC) 2008 further extended benefits. EUC‐08
is an emergency federal benefits program that is payable to individuals who have exhausted all rights to
regular compensation with respect to a benefit year that ended on or after May 1, 2007. Typically, a
jobseeker collects EUC benefits before EB benefits. EUC evolved in the following way:

       The EUC08 program (June 30, 2008), provides up to 13 weeks of 100 percent federally‐financed
        compensation in all states. Public Law (P.L.) 110‐449 expanded the EUC08 program on
        November 21, 2008 to provide up to 20 weeks of benefits. This constitutes tier 1 or EUC1.
       Tier 2 of EUC (EUC2) was created by Public Law (P.L.) 110‐449. It provides 13 weeks of benefits
        in states where TUR (defined as for EB) is above 6% or IUR (defined as for EB) is above 4%.
       Public Law No. 111‐92, enacted on November 6, 2009, expanded the EUC08 program:
            o   It increased the maximum EUC2 entitlement from 13 weeks to 14 weeks of benefits in
                all states, and established that this Tier was no longer triggered by a state reaching a
                specified rate of unemployment;
            o   It created EUC3 providing up to 13 additional weeks of benefits in states with IUR above
                4 percent or TUR above 6 percent;
            o   It created EUC4 providing up to 6 additional weeks of benefits in states with IUR above 6
                percent or TUR above 8.5 percent.

The impact of the EUC and EB extensions on the job search effort of benefit recipients may be different
for three reasons. First, because EB benefits only become available after workers have exhausted their
regular and EUC benefits, the impact of EB on job search is likely to be smaller due to discounting.
Second, EB has more stringent job search requirements than EUC (see Federal‐State Extended
Unemployment Compensation Act of 1970), so EB may have a lower impact on job search effort. Third,
the estimated impact of EB and EUC could differ because EB partially depends on states’ choice while
EUC does not. Therefore, some of the variation in weeks of EB may be endogenous: for example, states
with high unemployment prospects may choose to provide more EB by adopting the TUR option. Since
estimated impact of EUC and EB on aggregate job search effort may be different, I will be investigating
the contrasting effects of EUC and EB.


                                                    7
For both EUC and EB, TUR conditions are much more likely to be satisfied than the IUR conditions. For
example, EUC2 and EUC3 require that TUR be above 6% or IUR above 4%. In the data sample, when TUR
is above 6%, IUR is above 4% in 97% of the cases. On the other hand, when IUR is below 4%, TUR is
nonetheless above 6% in 54% of the cases. If TUR is below 6%, IUR is above 4% in only 1.8% of cases, so
IUR is unlikely to trigger increases in PBD.

Since the conditions governing the maximum weeks of UI benefits are fairly complex, Figure 1
summarizes the regulation in a simplified form. The figure ignores some of the finer points of the
regulation discussed above and simply shows how PBD depends on TUR during different time frames
and in states that had the TUR option for EB (i.e. the majority of states). This overview of the policies
suggests that one can use sharp changes in benefit duration at 6.5% and 8% TUR (for EB) and 6% and
8.5% TUR (for EUC) to identify the impact of benefit duration on applications and vacancies.

2.2 Data
The data on applications and job vacancies comes from proprietary data provided to me by
CareerBuilder.com. Job vacancies are defined as the total number of online job advertisements posted
by firms in a given state during a given month. CareerBuilder charges firms several hundred dollars to
post a job ad on the website for one position for one month. A firm that wishes to advertise multiple
positions needs to pay for each position separately, though quantity discounts are available. By contrast,
the service is free for job seekers.

One can compare job vacancies in CareerBuilder.com with data on job vacancies in the representative
JOLTS (Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey). The number of vacancies on CareerBuilder.com
represents 35% of the total number of vacancies in the US in January 2011 as counted in JOLTS.
Compared to the distribution of vacancies across industries in JOLTS, some industries are
overrepresented in CareerBuilder data, in particular information technology, finance and insurance, and
real estate, rental and leasing. The most underrepresented industries are state and local government,
accommodation and food services, other services, and construction. When comparing the distribution of
jobs across US regions in JOLTS vs CareerBuilder, I find that CareerBuilder has the same geographic




                                                    8
distribution of jobs as JOLTS. As for the time series properties of the CareerBuilder vacancy data,
vacancies in CB follow very closely the trends in the JOLTS data6 (correlation of 0.57, P‐value<0.01).

In Marinescu and Rathelot (2014), we use a representative sample of vacancies and job seekers from
CareerBuilder.com in 2012. The distribution of vacancies across occupations is essentially identical
(correlation of 0.95) to the distribution of vacancies across all jobs on the Internet as captured by the
Help Wanted Online data. Furthermore, the distributions of unemployed job seekers on
CareerBuilder.com across states and occupations are similar to those of the nationally representative
Current Population Survey (correlations of more than 0.7). Overall, the vacancies and job seekers on
CareerBuilder.com are broadly representative of the US economy as a whole, and they form a
substantial fraction of the market.

In the CareerBuilder data, for each state, information is available on the distribution of vacancies by
industry, the level of education required7, and the posted wage. The posted wage is reported in seven
bins8, and, when a wage range is offered, these bins are based on the upper bound of the offered wage.
Among vacancies that post a wage, the median is $50,000: indeed, 52% of vacancies with posted wages
post a wage of $50,000 or more. This median wage is somewhat higher than the $45,230 US average
wage in 2011 (BLS Occupational Employment Statistics), but again the CareerBuilder compensation is
based on the upper bound of the offered wage.

The CareerBuilder data spans September 2007 to July 2011. An individual application is defined as a
person clicking on the “Apply Now” button in a job ad9. The variable “Applications” is the number of
individual applications received by all jobs in a given state and month.

The recorded applications are from any job seeker, including unemployment benefit recipients, non‐
employed job seekers who do not receive unemployment benefits, and employed workers. According to




6
  Labor market tightness as measured by log(jobs in JOLTS)‐log(unemployed in CPS) is also highly correlated with
search intensity adjusted labor market tightness measured as log(jobs on CareerBuilder)‐log(applications on
CareerBuilder). The correlation is 0.57, P‐value<0.01.
7
  When there is no education requirement, it just means that the field was not filled by the employer. The
employer can still specify an education requirement within the text of the ad.
8
  The wage bins are: $1‐$30000, $30001‐$50000, $50001‐$75000, $75001‐$100000, $100001‐$200000, $200001‐
$500000, higher than $500000.
9
  Tracking cookies, resumes, and other variables are ways that CareerBuilder limits the ability for any job seeker to
apply to the same job more than once.

                                                         9
CarrerBuilder’s applicant survey, just under half of the applicants are employed10. Therefore, given that
applications by non‐UI recipients constitute a substantial share of total applications, if we only had data
on the applications of UI recipients, we would not be able to adequately quantify the impact of PBD on
labor market tightness. Because we have the number of vacancies as well as the number of applications
to these vacancies coming from all types of job seekers, this data is uniquely suited to study the impact
of PBD on labor market tightness.

To reproduce the border‐county design used by Hagedorn et al. (2013) to identify the impact of PBD on
vacancies, I exploit an additional sample that aggregates vacancies and applications at the county level
rather than at the state level. To identify border counties, I use the publicly available border counties
pair data from Dube, Lester, and Reich (2010).

To determine how many weeks of extended benefits are effectively available for each state and week, I
use data from the Department of Labor EB and EUC trigger notices. These notices report the Potential
benefit duration (PBD) in weeks, which is an upper bound on the duration of UI for two reasons. First,
regulations entail lower maximum durations for some workers, in particular those who have only
worked for a short period of time prior to becoming unemployed11. Second, many job seekers find a job
early and do not receive the maximum possible duration of benefits. Trigger notices also contain the
TUR, IUR, and look‐back criteria. This allows me to determine when the conditions for each extension
are realized. Since this data has weekly frequency while the CareerBuilder data has monthly frequency, I
take the monthly average of the PBD, IUR and TUR to merge it with the monthly data on applications
and vacancies.

Data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics was used to supplement the above information on jobs and
jobseekers. First, I use data on the total number of unemployed people and the labor force (Labor Force
Statistics from the Current Population Survey). Second, I use data on vacancies and hires from the Job
Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS).

Table 1 shows summary statistics for key variables. Particularly noteworthy are the large numbers of
applications per state. The number of CareerBuilder applications is about twice as high as the number of
unemployed individuals in the state; on average, each vacancy receives about 30 applications per

10
   This statistic is interesting but cannot be taken at face value since it is based on the selected sample of those
applicants who were willing to answer the survey.
11
   Benefit durations are capped through the maximum total amount that people can collect based on their prior
earnings (Meyer 2002).

                                                        10
month. Figure 2 shows the evolution of the unemployment rate, job vacancies (from Job Openings and
Labor Turnover Survey) and PBD at the national level. This graph shows that PBD and unemployment are
positively correlated, consistent with the fact that PBD is increased when unemployment exceeds some
thresholds.

2.3 Theoretical framework
An increase in PBD increases the unemployment duration of UI recipients (e.g. Katz and Meyer 1990; J.
F. Schmieder, Wachter, and Bender 2012; Rothstein 2011; Farber and Valletta 2013), chiefly because of
a decrease in job search effort rather than an increase in the reservation wage (Card, Chetty, and Weber
2007; Lalive 2007; van Ours and Vodopivec 2008; Krueger and Mueller 2011; J. Schmieder, von Wachter,
and Bender 2012)12. Therefore, we expect the number of job applications sent by UI recipients to
decrease when PBD increases and, hence, we expect the unemployment duration of UI recipients to
increase. This phenomenon is the micro or partial equilibrium effect.

But what is the impact of a decrease in applications coming from UI recipients on the aggregate
unemployment rate? To estimate the macro effect of unemployment insurance, we need to take into
account general equilibrium effects through job search and labor demand externalities. If the number of
vacancies stays the same, then the decrease in applications by UI recipients decreases competition for
jobs. This decrease in the competition for jobs increases the chances of finding a job for non‐UI
recipients (Levine 1993; Lalive, Landais, and Zweimüller 2013). Furthermore, this decrease in the
competition for jobs will also increase the rate at which UI recipients find jobs for each application
made. Therefore, this job search externality dampens the impact of UI on aggregate unemployment.

However, since a lower number of applications per vacancy reduces an employer’s choices for potential
hires, it may discourage further vacancy creation. Moreover, if PBD increases the reservation wage, this
may discourage vacancy creation as employers may not be able to meet the wage demands of
applicants. If fewer vacancies are created, all job seekers find it more difficult to get a job. This labor
demand externality amplifies the impact of UI on aggregate unemployment. Therefore, if the search
externality dominates, the macro impact of UI on aggregate unemployment is smaller than the micro
effect, while the opposite is true if the labor demand externality dominates.



12
  The impact of unemployment insurance on re‐employment wages or reservation wages is estimated to be close
to zero by this literature. Lalive, Landais, and Zweimüller (2013) and Nekoei and Weber (2013) are the exceptions
to the rule and find a small positive impact of unemployment insurance extensions on re‐employment wages.

                                                       11
Landais, Michaillat, and Saez (2014) formalize this reasoning and show that, when unemployment
insurance increases labor market tightness, the macro effect is smaller than the micro effect, and vice‐
versa when unemployment insurance decreases labor market tightness. Furthermore, they demonstrate
that optimal unemployment insurance should be countercyclical if the elasticity of labor market
tightness with respect to unemployment benefits is positive, and pro‐cyclical otherwise.

Here, the generosity of unemployment benefits is measured by potential benefit duration (PBD). If PBD
increases labor market tightness, then the impact of PBD on aggregate unemployment is lower than the
impact of PBD on the unemployment of UI recipients, and the opposite is true if PBD decreases labor
market tightness. I will estimate the impact of PBD on log vacancies, log applications, and log tightness
(log vacancies‐log applications). If the impact of PBD on tightness is positive, then the macro impact of
PBD is lower than its micro impact, and optimal unemployment benefit duration is counter‐cyclical.



3. Main results

3.1 Timing of events approach
The timing of events approach uses the timing of PBD increases at the state level to identify the impact
of PBD on applications and vacancies. If PBD has a negative impact on job search as measured by
applications, we expect the number of applications to significantly drop in the first month after a PBD
increase. More generally, if PBD has an impact on the outcome of interest, then this outcome should
vary over time in the same way as PBD at the state level. The key identification assumption is that there
is no omitted variable that evolves according to the same monthly timing as PBD and determines the
outcome of interest.

3.1.1 Methodology for timing of events approach
For each state, I identify the largest increase in PBD13 that is not due to a change in the benefit
schedule14 (see Figure 1) nor to a temporary lapse in EUC15. Emphasis is placed on the largest increase in

13
   The date of the largest increase in PBD and the amount of the increase for each state can be found in Appendix
1, Table 8.
14
   This is because changes in schedule yield the largest increases in PBD for most states, but they all happen at the
same time, which makes it impossible to separate the impact of PBD from a pure time effect.
15
   During the sample period, there were two lapses in extended benefits because legislators struggled to reach an
agreement. These two lapses were in April to July 2010 and in November‐December 2010. Ultimately, any benefits
lost from these lapses were reinstated once the legislative agreement was reached. There was little reaction of job
applications to these EUC lapses (Appendix 1, Figure 5); presumably, jobseekers were expecting these EUC lapses
to be temporary.

                                                         12
PBD16 for two reasons. First, when there are at least two increases in PBD in a state, some months of
observation are both after the first increase and before the second increase, which makes it difficult to
uniquely assign these observations to a “before” or “after” period. Second, given that it is more
transparent to focus on just one increase in PBD, choosing the largest one should maximize power.

For each state, I only keep observations around the largest increase in PBD that do not involve any
further change in PBD. As a result of this restriction, benefit duration is constant during the months prior
to the largest PBD increase and also constant during the months after the largest PBD increase17. I then
use the following specification to estimate the impact of the largest increase in benefit duration on
various outcomes:




where        is the outcome of interest in state        and month .            is a dummy equal to 1 in month
relative to the largest increase in PBD in a given state, where              0 is the first month when the higher
PBD is available during all weeks of the month. The dummy for month                     2 is the omitted category18.
     is a quarter fixed effect to capture seasonality.       is a year fixed effect and      is a state fixed effect. I
cluster standard errors at the state level. To obtain the impact of one week of PBD on the outcome of
interest, one can replace the           dummies by PBD. Given the sample selection, PBD is constant before
the largest increase in PBD, then goes up to a new value and stays constant. Therefore, replacing the
       dummies by PBD in this specification is similar to adding one “after the largest increase in PBD”
dummy while allowing for a dose response effect.




16
   In Appendix 1, Table 10, I also report regression results for alternative definitions of the event (a PBD increase of
10 weeks or more and a PBD increase of less than 10 weeks); the results are similar to those obtained for the
largest increase in PBD.
17
   This restriction also implies that, in practice, we have an unbalanced panel of states (see Appendix 1, Figure 6). I
also used a balanced panel sample of 18 states that have a constant PBD three months before and after the largest
increase in PBD. Using this sample, there is a significant decline in applications after the largest increase in PBD,
while there is no significant change in the number of vacancies (Appendix 1, Figure 7). Thus, the balanced panel
results are consistent with the results from the unbalanced panel (Figure 3).
18
   Because the data on applications is at the monthly level while PBD is defined weekly, the largest increase in
benefit duration defined as above will typically occur over three months, with the first month having the lower
potential benefit duration (PBD), the second month having a mix of lower and higher PBD, and the third month
having the higher PBD. Therefore, I use the largest increase in benefit duration relative to two months prior (e.g.
May to July). Any month that contained a mix of weeks with high and low benefit levels was excluded.

                                                          13
The key assumption needed to identify the causal effect of PBD on the outcome of interest is that there
are no omitted variables that follow the same time course as PBD around the maximum increase in PBD
and affect the outcome of interest. This assumption is made more likely by the fact that these PBD
increases occur at different times in different states and are mostly driven by states crossing thresholds
in the state unemployment rate (TUR or IUR) that qualify them for additional weeks of benefits19.

As an additional robustness test, I add to the sample a control group for each state. For each state, I
added all the states that had a constant PBD around the time of that state’s largest PBD increase20. I
define an experiment          as the set of observations that includes a state X around its largest increase in
PBD, as well as all the control states for that particular state X. One single natural experiment              allows
for a classic difference‐in‐differences specification. Here I am stacking all these difference‐in‐differences
regressions for all the states. The stacked difference‐in‐differences specification is then defined as
follows:




        is the outcome of interest in experiment , state              and month .             is the Potential Benefit
Duration in weeks,         is a quarter fixed effect to capture seasonality,        is a year fixed effect.       is a
dummy for the date being after the largest increase in PBD in experiment .                        is an experiment by
state fixed effect. Each state will appear at least once, during the time when it experiences its largest
increase in PBD. Furthermore, each state appears whenever it can serve as a control for another state
experiencing its largest increase in PBD: thus, there can be multiple observations for each state and
month. Therefore,            is the error term, and standard errors are clustered by state. I include the PBD
        rather than the interaction between a treatment dummy and an after dummy (as would be
standard for a difference‐in‐differences specification) to allow for a dose response reaction, i.e. to
quantify the impact of a one week increase in PBD on the outcomes of interest.

This difference‐in‐differences specification can control for variation over time in the outcomes of
interest that is unrelated to PBD and is common between treatment and control states. The key
assumption needed to identify the causal effect of PBD on the outcome of interest is that control states




19
     In a minority of states (20%), the largest increase is due to the state adopting the TUR option.
20
     On average, each state has 21 control states.

                                                            14
are a valid counterfactual for treated states (common trends assumption21). If an unobserved variable
exists that follows the same time course as PBD around the maximum increase in PBD and affects the
outcome of interest, then this variable should also affect the control states. Therefore, the difference‐in‐
differences specification serves as a robustness test on the simple timing of events approach.

3.1.2 Results from the timing of events approach
I start by showing graphically how applications evolved around the largest increase in PBD (Figure 3,
Panel A). While there was no significant trend in the number of applications prior to the largest increase
in benefit duration, there was a significant drop in applications during the first month (month 0) after
the increase in benefit duration. Given that the average increase in benefit duration was 15 weeks22, the
estimated effect implies that a 1 week increase in PBD leads to a 0.4% decline in applications.

Applications continues to decline after the first period post benefit increase and the impact in the third
month (month 2) is significantly higher than the impact in the first month, implying that a 1 week
increase in PBD leads to a 1% decline in applications three months after the increase. This decline in
applications after the PBD increase is robust to taking into account sample selection: if we restrict the
sample to states that are in the sample in months 0, 1 and 2 (23 states), the impact in month 2 is still
significantly larger than the impact in month 0. This decline in applications may be explained by the fact
that more and more UI recipients become aware of the benefit extensions over time. Indeed, most
states only notify UI recipients of their eligibility for extended benefits once they exhaust their regular
benefits. To summarize, I find that a PBD increase coincides with a significant decline in job applications
in the very first month of the PBD increase and this decline deepens in following months.

I next examine the impact of PBD on vacancies. There is no significant trend23 in job vacancies around
the largest increase in PBD (Figure 3, Panel B). This implies that, as far as seven months after the largest
increase in PBD, employers do not respond to a higher PBD by posting fewer vacancies. Since
applications decrease after the largest increase in PBD and vacancies stay constant, labor market
tightness (log vacancies‐log applications) increases after the largest increase in PBD (Appendix 1, Figure
9).


21
   In practice, applications in the control states follow the same time path prior to the largest PBD increase as
applications in the treated states, and the same holds for vacancies (Appendix 1, Figure 8). Therefore, the control
group seems to satisfy the common trends assumption.
22
   The level of PBD around the largest increase in PBD is plotted in Appendix 1,Figure 6.
23
   Even though a few pre‐event point estimates are significant, this is probably due to sampling variability as these
estimates are based on fewer than 20 states (see Appendix 1, Figure 6).

                                                         15
To summarize these graphical results in a regression format, I use the simple difference specification,
which corresponds to Figure 3, and shows the average effect of one week of PBD on the outcomes of
interest rather than estimating the impact month by month. Consistent with the results from Figure 3,
the simple difference specification shows a significant and negative impact of PBD on applications (Table
2, col. 1) but no significant impact on vacancies (Table 2, col. 3).

To test the robustness of the timing of events approach to unobserved variables that follow the same
timing as PBD and affect the outcomes of interest, I use a difference‐in‐differences specification. The
impact of PBD on applications remains negative and statistically significant (Table 2, column 2). Overall,
the specifications in columns 1‐2 paint a consistent picture and indicate that a one week increase in PBD
led to a 0.4% decline in job applications24.

As for the impact of PBD on vacancies, the difference‐in‐differences specification still yields an
insignificant effect (Table 2, column 4). This result addresses an important concern with the simple
difference specification. Indeed, if there is a positive trend in vacancies, as is the case during most of the
period when PBD increases (see Figure 2), this positive trend may be masking the negative impact of
PBD on vacancies. To the extent that such a trend is masking the negative effect of PBD on vacancies,
the estimated impact of PBD on vacancies should become more negative when we add a control group
of other states that share in this trend. Thus, the fact that the difference‐in‐differences specification also
yields an insignificant impact of PBD on vacancies confirms that PBD has little if any impact on vacancies.

Finally, the impact of PBD on labor market tightness is positive and significant both in the simple
difference and the difference‐in‐differences specification25 (Table 2, col. 5‐6).

Using the timing of events approach, I have shown that an increase in PBD has a large, significant and
negative impact on state‐level job applications, consistent with PBD generating a search externality.
However, PBD does not have a robust effect on vacancies: therefore, PBD does not generate a labor
demand externality. Overall, PBD increases labor market tightness. Given the theory outlined above,


24
   The reader may wonder why the impact on job applications is only about 0.4% given that the impact of PBD on
applications increases with time since the largest PBD increase (Figure 3, Panel A). This is because the figure is
based on an unbalanced panel. In fact, the median state is only observed for 2 months after the PBD increase, so
the regression mostly captures the short‐run effect.
25
   The impact of PBD on applications and vacancies is robust to adding month fixed effects instead of year and
quarter fixed effects in the difference‐in‐differences specification. However, because the point estimate of the
impact of PBD on applications slightly decreases when month fixed effects are included, the impact of PBD on
tightness falls short of statistical significance (see Appendix 1 Table 9).

                                                       16
this implies that the general equilibrium effects of unemployment insurance dampen its partial
equilibrium effect.

3.2 Using a parametric fuzzy regression discontinuity
The first part of the analysis used a timing of events approach to identify the causal impact of PBD on
applications and vacancies. However, in such a design, observations around the PBD increase are
associated with different unemployment rates for different states. Furthermore, the timing of events
approach focuses on the largest increase in PBD for each state. If heterogeneity is present in the effects
of various PBD increases, then the timing of events approach does not adequately quantify the average
effect of UI extensions during the Great Recession. Using a regression discontinuity design is an
alternative approach that can overcome some of these limitations.

To exploit the fact that PBD depends on states crossing TUR and IUR thresholds, I use a global
parametric fuzzy regression discontinuity. In Appendix 2, I also report results for a local fuzzy regression
discontinuity design around 6% TUR. While the local fuzzy regression discontinuity is conceptually
appealing, it leaves only 44 observations and therefore very limited statistical power. For the global
parametric fuzzy regression discontinuity, I use a broader sample of all the 1,804 observations lying in
the zone where there are any discontinuities in PBD as a function of TUR (and IUR). Compared to the
local fuzzy regression discontinuity design, this approach has higher power but also more potential bias
due to the inclusion of observations that lie further away from TUR discontinuities.

3.2.1 Methodology
To visualize the nonlinear relationship between TUR and PBD graphically, one can plot a smoothed
version of PBD and applications residuals or vacancies residuals as a function of TUR. The residuals are
from regressing log applications or log vacancies on state fixed effects. I then apply a kernel‐weighted
local polynomial smoothing to the residuals26. Additionally, TUR is restricted to between 4% and 10%, so
as to include some data prior to any TUR threshold being reached. This restriction discards data that is
far away from the TUR thresholds that are the primary source of identification.

To complement the graphical analysis, I run a global parametric fuzzy regression discontinuity design
that uses a broader sample. The regression discontinuity is fuzzy because crossing a threshold in TUR or
IUR increases the probability of an increase in PBD by less than one due to delays in making benefits
available, conditions on the rate of increase of unemployment, and states’ policy choices (see policy

26
     The plot uses the Stata command lpolyci.

                                                    17
background above). The design is global and parametric because I include a range of observations
around multiple discontinuities in PBD as a function of the assignment variables TUR and IUR, and
control for global polynomials in TUR and IUR.

This approach results in the following instrumental variable specification, restricting to state‐month
observations with TUR between 4 and 10%:




where      is log applications, log vacancies or log tightness (log vacancies‐log applications) in state and
month ,       is the average PBD over the month,          is a vector of controls which includes a quadratic in
TUR and IUR,      is a quarter fixed effect,    is a year fixed effect,   is a state fixed effect, and     is the
error term. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.       is instrumented with the PBD that should
be available given rules. The instrument assumes there are no temporary EUC lapses and that all states
have elected the TUR option for EB. Indeed, since states can elect the TUR option and thus provide
more generous EB extensions (see 2.1 Policy background above), such EB benefits are potentially
endogenous. To summarize, the instrument for PBD is PBD according to statutory rules, not taking into
account temporary EUC expirations, and assuming that all states take up the TUR option.

In a version of the regression above, I split        into an EUC and an EB component to analyze whether
these two programs have the same impact on the outcomes of interest. In this case, EB PBD is
instrumented with EB PBD according to rules and assuming that all states have elected the TUR option,
and EUC PBD is instrumented with the EUC PBD according to rules and ignoring temporary EUC lapses.

3.2.2 Results
I start with a graphical analysis of the data from December 2008 onwards to give an intuitive grasp of
the dependency of vacancies residuals, applications residuals, and PBD on TUR (Figure 4). PBD indeed
increases steeply around 6 to 6.5% TUR27, which are the thresholds for EUC and EB respectively. PBD
again increases around 8 to 8.5% TUR, which are the thresholds for EB and EUC respectively (note that
the EUC threshold at 8.5% TUR only exists after November 2009). Application residuals tend to decrease
over the same range of TUR28 values where PBD increases and to increase with the unemployment rate

27
   PBD increases already before TUR reaches 6% in some cases. The main reason is that the IUR condition for EUC
(IUR>=4%) is satisfied for some states with TUR below 6%.
28
   Applications also decrease when IUR thresholds are crossed. However, this is only clearly visible for the small
subset of observations when no TUR thresholds are crossed (compare Panel A and Panel B in Appendix 1, Figure
11).

                                                       18
(TUR) when PBD remains constant (Figure 4, Panel A). The fact that application residuals tend to
increase with the TUR in the absence of a PBD increase should be expected given that a higher TUR
means more unemployed jobseekers, who should be collectively sending more applications29. This
graphical analysis supports the view that PBD has a strong negative effect on applications.

In contrast, vacancies residuals tend to increase with TUR but not in a way that is strongly correlated
with PBD (Figure 4, Panel B). The positive co‐movement of vacancies and TUR may seem surprising
because one would expect worse economic conditions to be associated with both higher unemployment
and fewer vacancies. However, when one looks back at Figure 2, the positive association between
vacancies and TUR makes sense given the high frequency data used there. Indeed Figure 4 is based on
data from December 2008 on, and early in 2009, the number of vacancies started increasing again from
its trough while at the same time the unemployment rate was still increasing. Overall, the graphical
analysis suggests that PBD has little impact on job vacancies.

Prior to the introduction of EUC, PBD depended on TUR only for states that had the TUR option for EB.
Therefore, we should see that PBD goes up and application residuals go down around TUR thresholds in
states with a TUR option for EB, but not so in states without such a TUR option. This is indeed the case
(Appendix 1, Figure 10), which suggests that there is no mechanical relationship between application
residuals and TUR. A clear negative relationship between applications and TUR only appears when PBD
does depend on TUR.

I now use regression analysis to complement the graphical results, and check more systematically
whether there is indeed a statistically significant negative impact of PBD on applications. I regress log
applications on PBD and a number of controls, using the whole available time period (September 2007
to July 2011), and restricting to TUR between 4 and 10%.

When I repeat a specification similar to the local fuzzy RD specification (see Appendix 2), I find a
significant and negative impact of PBD on log applications (Table 3, col. 1). When adding date fixed
effects instead of year and quarter fixed effects, the impact of PBD on applications remains negative but
falls short of statistical significance (col .2). In column 3, I separate EUC and EB, and find that only EUC
extensions have a negative impact on applications. The small effect of EB is consistent with expectations
based on the policy. Indeed, additional weeks of benefits due to EB only kick in after EUC extension
29
   If we plot the residuals of applications per CPS unemployed, there is no increase in this outcome in between
increases in PBD (Appendix 1, Figure 12). This confirms that the increase in the number of applications in between
increases in PBD is largely driven by the increase in the number of unemployed job seekers.

                                                       19
weeks have been used up, and so discounting implies a smaller effect of EB. Furthermore, EB has
somewhat stronger job search requirements than EUC, which could dampen its effect on job
applications. When adding month fixed effects (col. 4), the impact of EUC stays negative and significant
while the impact of EB becomes positive if still statistically insignificant. The estimates in col. 4 can
account for why the impact of total PBD on applications became smaller and insignificant when we
added date fixed effects in col. 2: indeed, the total impact of PBD on applications is a mixture of a large
negative impact of EUC and a small positive impact of EB. Overall, I find that a one‐week increase in EUC
is associated with a 0.72% decline in job applications (col. 4), while the state‐level EB program has no
significant effect on job applications during the Great Recession.

Having examined the impact of PBD on applications, I now analyze the impact of PBD on vacancies using
the same specifications. While the impact of PBD on vacancies is negative and significant without date
fixed effects (Table 4, col. 1), adding date fixed effects renders the impact of PBD positive and
insignificant30 (col. 2). When distinguishing between EUC and EB, we see that EB never has a significant
impact on vacancies, and the point estimate is positive (col. 3 and 4). As for EUC, it appears to have a
negative and significant effect on vacancies (col. 3), but this negative effect is not robust to adding
month fixed effects (col. 4). Therefore, the apparent negative impact of PBD on vacancies is likely
explained by changes in EUC that occur when a new federal law increases EUC for all states. EUC
appears to have a negative impact on vacancies when we do not control for monthly changes in
macroeconomic conditions. After accounting for common macro factors that vary from month to
month, there is no significant impact of PBD on vacancies, consistent with the timing of events result.

Finally, we can examine the impact of PBD on log tightness, the difference between log vacancies and
log applications. Just as in the case of the timing of events approach, the estimate of the impact of PBD
on tightness for a given specification is almost exactly the difference between the estimated impact of
PBD on vacancies and the estimated impact of PBD on applications (Appendix 1, Table 11). Thus, while
EB has no effect on tightness, EUC PBD has a positive and significant impact on tightness (Table 4, col.
5): a one‐week increase in EUC increases tightness by 0.8%.

How do the estimates of the impact of PBD on applications compare with the estimates arising from
different methodologies used above? In the timing of events approach, a one‐week increase in PBD
yields a 0.4% decline in applications (Table 2, col. 2). This estimate implies that the median state saw a


30
     The lower bound of the 90% confidence interval is ‐0.001 and the upper bound is 0.004.

                                                         20
29% decline in applications due to PBD extensions during the Great Recession (+73 weeks). When using
the global parametric regression discontinuity design, I find that it is important to distinguish between
EUC and EB. If we take the point estimates for EUC and EB in Table 3, col. 4, the impact of PBD in the
median state is the sum of the impact of the increase in EUC (53 weeks) and the impact of the increase
in EB (20 weeks), that is: ‐0.0072*53 +0.0032*20= ‐32% decline in applications. Therefore, across
specifications, I find that unemployment extensions decreased applications by about 30% in the median
state during the Great Recession.

The estimated effect of PBD on applications may seem large. However, one must remember that this
estimate arises from more than tripling the duration of unemployment benefits. To get a sense of the
magnitudes, it is useful to compare the elasticity of applications with respect to PBD to prior estimates
of the elasticity of job search effort with respect to unemployment insurance. The elasticity of
applications with respect to PBD is given by Δ                / Δ     /       , where the numerator Δ               is
the percent impact (      of the PBD increase (Δ           on applications, and the denominator Δ               /
is the percent increase in PBD. Given that, in the median state, PBD went from 26 to 99 weeks, the
elasticity of labor market tightness with respect to unemployment insurance is given by                     Δ       /
 Δ      /           26 . If a one week increase in PBD yields a 0.4% decline in applications (timing of
events estimate), the elasticity of applications with respect to PBD is               0.004 ∗ 26        0.104. This
elasticity is small given that the elasticity of minutes spent in job search with respect to unemployment
benefit amounts31 was estimated to be between ‐1.6 and ‐2.2 (Krueger and Mueller 2010). Of course,
my sample includes both unemployed and employed job seekers, which reduces the estimated
elasticity. Still, the elasticity of job applications with respect to PBD is orders of magnitude smaller than
the elasticity of job search minutes with respect to unemployment benefit amounts. Thus, the large
estimated impact of PBD on job applications arises from a small elasticity of applications with respect to
PBD combined with a very large increase in PBD.

In conclusion, my empirical analysis shows that the increase in PBD during the Great Recession led to a
substantial decline in total applications, and thus generated a search externality. Because changes in
PBD had no robust effect on the number of vacancies, I conclude that extensions did not generate a
labor demand externality. Overall, unemployment insurance extensions during the Great Recession
increased labor market tightness. A positive impact of unemployment insurance on labor market
31
  Using the timing of events methodology, the impact of PBD on log total UI benefit payments is ‐0.01. So the
implied elasticity of applications with respect to UI benefits is ‐0.004/0.01=‐0.4. This is a still a small elasticity
compared to the estimates by Krueger and Mueller 2010.

                                                         21
tightness implies that the general equilibrium effect of unemployment insurance contributes to reducing
its impact on aggregate unemployment: thus, the macro impact of unemployment insurance on
aggregate unemployment is smaller than its micro (partial equilibrium) impact on benefit recipients.



4. Robustness tests and further results

4.1 Robustness tests
The specification from the global parametric regression discontinuity design in column 4 in Table 3, with
full controls including month fixed effects will serve as the baseline specification for these robustness
tests.

The first robustness test I perform is to vary the degree of the polynomials in the assignment variables
TUR and IUR that are used as controls. Using third or fourth degree polynomials rather than second
degree polynomials does not affect the estimated impact of PBD on applications, vacancies or labor
market tightness (Appendix 1, Table 12).

The impact of PBD on applications and tightness may be biased by changes in the composition of posted
jobs. To address this issue, I add controls for the share of jobs in each education category and each 2‐
digit NAICS industry (Table 5, col. 1 and 4). The impact of EUC PBD on applications is still significant and
negative, and not statistically significantly different from the baseline estimates. Similarly, the impact of
EUC PBD on tightness stays significant and positive. I conclude that the results are robust to changes in
the composition of jobs by industry and education requirement.

To control for any systematic decline in applications over time that is unrelated to PBD increases, I add
state‐specific trends to the specification (Table 5, col. 2 and 5). This lowers the impact of EUC on
applications (col. 2), but the point estimate is not statistically significantly different from the baseline.
Similarly, the positive impact of EUC PBD on tightness is robust to state‐specific trends (col. 5).

My interpretation of the main results is that the decrease in aggregate job search effort as measured by
applications comes from UI recipients decreasing their job search effort in response to an increase in
PBD. To support this interpretation, I test whether the impact of PBD on applications is greater in states




                                                     22
that have a higher share of UI recipients among their unemployed32. I find that the impact of EUC PBD
on applications is significantly larger when the share of UI recipients in the state is higher (Table 5, col.
3). A similar result is observed for tightness in col. 6: the point estimate indicates that the impact of EUC
PBD on tightness is greater when the share of UI recipients in the state is higher, though the interaction
term is not statistically significant. Reassuringly, the main impact of EUC PBD on applications, which
corresponds to a 0 share of UI recipients among the unemployed, is not statistically significant. I
conclude that the impact of PBD on applications is larger in states with a higher share of UI recipients
among the unemployed, which is consistent with a negative impact of PBD on the applications of UI
recipients.

An alternative way to test whether the negative impact of PBD on job applications is due to the behavior
of UI recipients is to separately estimate the impact of PBD on a sample of vacancies whose applicants
are less likely to respond to increases in PBD. For example, it seems plausible that applications to high
paying jobs will not be affected by increases in PBD. Indeed, highly educated workers have significantly
shorter unemployment durations (Riddell and Song 2011) and are therefore unlikely to be using the PBD
extensions. Furthermore, there is a cap in the dollar amount of benefits that can be collected, and
therefore the replacement rate is lower for top earners, making it less advantageous to stay
unemployed for long periods of time. I estimate the impact of PBD separately for vacancies with
different levels of the posted wage, and find that the negative impact of EUC PBD on applications is
driven by lower‐earning job applicants (Appendix 1, Figure 13), who are more sensitive to increases in
the generosity of unemployment insurance.

I have also performed these robustness tests using the number of vacancies as an outcome. Neither EUC
nor EB have a significant impact on vacancies in these alternative specifications (Appendix 1,Table 13). In
particular, the specification with state‐specific trends (Appendix 1, Table 13, col. 3) helps address the
above‐mentioned concern that a positive trend in vacancies is masking the negative impact of PBD on
vacancies. If this concern is valid, then adding state‐specific trends should make the impact of PBD on
vacancies more negative. However, with state trends, the impact of EUC becomes more positive
(compare Appendix 1, Table 13 col. 1 and col. 3), not more negative. Overall, the absence of an impact
of PBD on vacancies is robust.


32
  Specifically, I compute the average share of UI recipients in each state from December 2008 through the end of
my sample. I use this time frame because the identifying variation in EUC as a function of TUR only exists when
EUC levels change with TUR, which is after December 2008.

                                                      23
Finally, for vacancies, I can also repeat the analysis with Help Wanted Online data, which counts all
online vacancies and is available in my data extract since 2009. Overall, the correlation between the
CareerBuilder vacancy count used for the main analysis and the Help Wanted Online vacancy count is
extremely high at 0.95. Therefore, it is not surprising that using this alternative vacancy data, we still
find no significant impact of EUC or EB PBD on all online job vacancies (Appendix 1, Table 13, col. 5). This
result supports the external validity of my estimate of the impact of the extensions on vacancies.

4.2 The impact of PBD on job seeker selectivity and posted wages
In this subsection, I examine the impact of PBD on job seeker selectivity and posted wages using the
same baseline specification as in Table 3, col. 3.

If PBD increases reservation wages or other demands by UI recipients, this decreases the number of jobs
suitable for application. To measure the number of jobs that job seekers consider, I use data on the
number of times that a job vacancy snippet was viewed as part of a listing that comes out after a job
search query. The number of applications per view is a measure of how selective jobseekers are: if
reservation wages or other demands go up with PBD, the number of applications per view should go
down. Empirically, I find that PBD does not have a significant impact on applications per view (Table 6,
col. 1). This suggests that PBD does not affect job seeker selectivity.

My finding that PBD does not affect applications per job view is consistent with the lack of evidence for
an impact of PBD on the reservation wage found in previous literature (e.g. Card, Chetty, and Weber
2007; Lalive 2007; van Ours and Vodopivec 2008; Krueger and Mueller 2011). At the same time, this
result adds to the literature. Indeed, even if the reservation wage does not react to an increase in PBD,
jobseekers could become more selective about other job characteristics besides the wage. My results
are inconsistent with the idea that PBD increases jobseeker selectivity on non‐wage job characteristics.
Instead, an increase in PBD chiefly affects job search effort with no significant impact on jobseeker
selectivity on either wage or non wage job attributes.

While the evidence on applications per view is inconsistent with PBD increasing reservation wages, firms
may believe that PBD increases reservation wages. If that is the case, posted wages may increase as an
equilibrium response. I find no effect of the PBD on the log average real posted wage33 among vacancies
with a posted wage, and the point estimate is even negative (Table 6, col. 2). I then examine the impact

33
  To calculate the average posted wage, I take the mid‐point of each bin, and for the highest bin (over $500,000) I
assume that the posted wage is $600,000; I then use the CPI to convert nominal wages to real wages.

                                                        24
of PBD on the distribution of nominal posted wages: I find no impact of PBD on the share of jobs with a
posted wage above $50,000, the share of jobs with a posted wage below $30,000 and the share of jobs
with a posted wage above $100,000 (Table 6, cols. 3‐5). Finally, given that not all jobs post a wage, there
is a concern that PBD may affect the share of jobs that post a wage, and that the absence of an impact
of PBD on posted wages may be driven by selection. However, I also find no impact of EUC PBD on the
share of jobs with a posted wage34 (Table 6, col. 6). Overall, I conclude that PBD has no impact on the
level or the distribution of posted wages. The absence of an impact of PBD on posted wages is
consistent with the absence of an impact of PBD on reservation wages and on job seeker selectivity.

In this sub‐section, I have shown that PBD does not have an impact on job seeker selectivity nor on
posted wages. These results are consistent with the absence of an effect of PBD on the number of
vacancies and thus strengthen the conclusion that PBD did not generate a labor demand externality.

4.3 County pair difference specification
Hagedorn et al. (2013) identify the impact of extensions by comparing unemployment and vacancies in
adjacent counties belonging to different states while accounting for permanent differences between
county pairs.

I use this identification strategy on the CareerBuilder county pairs dataset described above. For the sake
of transparency, I use a simple specification for the county pair design:

                             Δ            Δ                 Δ

where        is the outcome       in county     in state    at date .            is the number of weeks of EUC
available,         is the number of weeks of EB available and               is the error term. Δ stands for the
difference across counties in a pair at a given date .          is a date fixed effect (monthly) and     is a county
pair fixed effect. Observations are weighed by the total population in the two counties of the county
pair, and standard errors are clustered by border segment (i.e. all counties along a given state border).
With this specification, one can test, for example, whether a higher PBD in a county (relative to the
paired county’s PBD) in a given month is associated with a smaller number of applications (relative to
the paired county’s applications), and after accounting for fixed differences in the number of



34
  There is some evidence for EB PBD diminishing the share of posted wages, but EB PBD does not have an impact
on the number of applications (Table 3, col. 3‐4), the number of vacancies (Table 4, col. 3‐4), or the level of posted
wages, so this result is not particularly enlightening.

                                                           25
applications between the two counties in the pair. This specification can recover the causal effect of PBD
on outcomes if, for each county, the paired county constitutes a valid counterfactual.

Using the border county pair specification above, I find no significant impact of PBD (EUC and EB) on
applications, jobs or tightness (Table 7, col. 1‐3). In Appendix 2, I also present specifications a la
Hagedorn et al. (2013) and a la Dube, Lester, and Reich (2010). Across all of these specifications, I find
no significant impact of PBD on vacancies, applications or tightness.

Why do we find insignificant effects across the board in the county pair design when other specifications
have shown a significant effect of PBD on applications and labor market tightness? Cross‐county
spillover effects may bias the results. Indeed, more than half of applications (54%) on CareerBuilder.com
are across county (Marinescu and Rathelot, 2014). If there are spillover effects, then outcomes in a
county should be affected by PBD in the paired county. Furthermore, the spillover effect, if any, should
be larger if the county is the smaller (in terms of population) of the two counties in the pair than if the
county is the larger of the two counties.

To test for spillover effects, I retain only the smaller county in the pair (the “reference county”) and run
the same specification as above, but in levels rather than differences; furthermore, I add controls for
EUC and EB in the larger paired county, and I weigh observations by the population in the reference
county. This is thus a simple panel specification for the smaller counties. Remarkably, there is no
significant impact of EUC in the reference county on applications: instead, only EUC in the larger paired
county has a negative and significant effect (Table 7, col. 4). For vacancies, there is no significant effect
of PBD across the board (col. 5). For tightness, we see a positive and highly significant effect of EUC in
the bigger paired county (col. 6). These results are evidence for strong spillover effects for the
application and tightness outcomes flowing from the bigger to the smaller county in a pair35.

Taken together, these results support the view that there are important spillover effects across
counties. Because of these spillover effects, taking differences between paired counties systematically
biases the impact of PBD towards zero. In a nutshell, the county pair design cannot capture the causal
impact of UI on applications and vacancies.




35
  The results from the large counties show that it is EUC in the county itself that negatively affects applications
and positively affects tightness, with no significant effect from EUC in the paired (smaller) county.

                                                        26
5. Discussion and calibration

5.1 External validity
One may wonder whether applications on CareerBuilder.com are a good measure of search effort.
Unemployment benefit recipients during the Great Recession spent between 24 and 38% of their job
search time sending applications and answering job ads (Krueger and Mueller, 2011). Additionally, 27%
of job search time is spent browsing job ads. Nowadays, the overwhelming majority of vacancies are
posted on the Internet (Barnichon 2010). Furthermore, Internet job search is associated with higher job
finding rates than offline job search (Kuhn and Mansour 2011). Therefore, it is plausible to think that
more than two thirds of job search time is spent on the Internet and that this is an effective method for
job finding.

While I have shown that the increase in PBD led to a substantial decrease in applications, one may
wonder whether this decline was due to a decrease in applications on the CareerBuilder website only. If
so, it is possible that jobseekers applied through other channels and so the overall applications in the
state may not have decreased as much as it seems. This scenario is very unlikely, because such changes
in jobseekers’ use of the CareerBuilder website are unlikely to coincide exactly with the timing of UI
extensions. Still, I provide some additional evidence on this issue. First, one can show that the number of
applications on CareerBuilder is significantly and positively related to hires in national monthly data
from JOLTS (not shown). If applications on CareerBuilder were substituted by applications through other
channels, this relationship would likely not be significant. Additionally, when graphing hires and
applications between 2007 and 2011, one does not see that applications fall behind hires in relative
terms as time goes by, as would be the case if applications in CareerBuilder had represented a lower and
lower share of total applications (not shown).

Second, there is independent evidence showing that jobseekers are unlikely to have moved away from
Internet job search during the Great Recession. Indeed, while there is no representative survey about
online job search in the US during the Great Recession, a study using quarterly labor force survey data
from the United Kingdom (Green et al. 2011) shows that there was an increased use of Internet for job
search purposes among jobseekers during 2008‐2009. In April to June 2009, over 4 in 5 British
jobseekers used the Internet to look for jobs, and this proportion was even higher among the recipients
of unemployment benefits (Green et al. 2011). Therefore, there is no reason to assume that jobseekers




                                                    27
moved away from online job search during the recession. I conclude that my results are unlikely to be
explained by jobseekers moving away from CareerBuilder.com to apply elsewhere.




5.2 Why does PBD have no effect on vacancies?
If the decrease in applications induced by PBD increases made it substantially harder for employers to
recruit, it may be surprising that PBD did not affect vacancies. However, in practice, it is likely that PBD
increases did not substantially increase the difficulty of recruitment. Indeed, there are on average 31
applications per job. Even if the number of applications decreases by 29%, which is what I estimate to be
the full effect of the PBD extensions, employers are still left with 22 applications per job. As is typical in
the search and matching literature, assume that applications follow a Poisson process and vacancies are
filled whenever they receive at least one applicant. Under these assumptions, with an average of 22
applications per job, the probability that a vacancy remains unfilled is equal to the probability of
receiving 0 applications, i.e. exp(‐22), which is extremely close to 0. Furthermore, my conversations with
CareerBuilder employees suggest that employers during the Great Recession were rather facing a glut of
applications and wished for fewer applications. Thus, the decrease in applications may have reduced the
cost of screening for firms. It is therefore unlikely that it became substantially harder to fill vacancies
during the Great Recession. Consistent with this interpretation, the job filling rate during the Great
Recession increased by about 30% (Davis, Faberman, and Haltiwanger 2012). Overall, it is unlikely that
extensions in the duration of unemployment insurance benefits affected the value of vacancies because,
during the Great Recession, firms were receiving enough applications to quickly fill their vacancies.

5.3 Long‐run effects vs. short run effects
My analysis captures the short‐to‐medium term effects of PBD on applications and vacancies. Indeed,
the regression‐based timing of events approach captures impacts of the largest increase in PBD in the
next couple of months out because the average state is observed for two months post‐PBD increase.
When I use a fuzzy regression discontinuity designs, the estimated impacts are also only short to
medium term. Indeed, we are comparing state‐month observations with essentially the same TUR but
different levels of PBD: because the unemployment rate is slow‐moving and I have a short panel,
observations with similar TUR will also tend to be close together in time.

My empirical analysis pertains to the short and medium run and assumes that firms and job seekers do
not change their behavior in anticipation of the policy. For job seekers, it is evident from Figure 3 that

                                                     28
they do not start lowering the number of applications prior to the policy change, and if anything their
response is delayed. Firms could lower their number of vacancies if they expect the number of
applicants to drop. Given that a vacancy takes about a month to fill, any such anticipatory effect would
have to happen in the couple of months before the policy change, but we see no evidence for this in
Figure 3. Therefore, despite the argument made by Hagedorn, Manovskii, and Mitman (2016) that I
ignore firms’ anticipations, the identification strategy used here is valid because there is no evidence for
behavioral changes prior to the implementation of the policy.

While there are no anticipation effects, it is still possible in theory that PBD decreases labor market
tightness in the longer run. The timing of events approach (Figure 3, Panel B) shows that the number of
vacancies stays constant as far as seven months after the largest increase in PBD36. Furthermore, the
impact of a PBD increase on applications tends to get significantly more negative over time (Figure 3,
Panel A). Therefore, at time horizons of the order of a year, the impact of PBD on labor market tightness
is likely to remain positive37.

5.4 Implied impact of PBD on aggregate unemployment
Landais, Michaillat, and Saez (2014) demonstrate that, in a dynamic framework, the macro elasticity of
aggregate unemployment with respect to unemployment benefits is the sum of the micro elasticity,
which captures the partial equilibrium effect, and a general equilibrium effect, which is crucially
dependent on labor market tightness:


                                                    . 1         . 1      . .


where:




36
   As an alternative approach to understanding the timing of the impact of PBD on vacancies, I used up to three
lags and leads of PBD in the specification relying on nonlinearities in PBD as a function of TUR. I find no significant
effect of lags or leads of PBD (EUC and EB) on vacancies (Appendix 1, Table 15, col. 2‐7). For applications, the
impact of lagged EUC PBD stays negative, significant and fairly constant up to lag 3, while the lead of EUC PBD
becomes insignificant at leads 2 and 3. The first‐difference specifications and the lag and lead analysis confirm that
EUC PBD has a negative effect on applications but no significant effect on vacancies.
37
   It is possible that the impact of PBD on aggregate unemployment becomes negative in the longer run. This is in
fact what happens in the theoretical model by Mitman and Rabinovich (2011), who find that optimal PBD should
first increase and then decrease during a recession. Therefore, there seems to be agreement over the fact that an
increase in PBD early on in a recession has little impact on unemployment. However, how exactly the impact of
PBD on aggregate unemployment evolves over the course of a recession remains an open area for empirical
investigation.

                                                          29
                 is the micro elasticity. It is the elasticity of unemployment probability of a worker whose
            individual benefits change.
               is employment at the representative firm.
                is the discouraged worker elasticity.
               is labor market tightness measured as aggregate vacancies divided by aggregate search effort.
           1          0 is the elasticity of the job finding rate by unit of search effort.
               are unemployment benefits.


The term           .   in the formula above is the elasticity of labor market tightness with respect to

unemployment benefits38. I use the same calibration as Landais, Michaillat, and Saez (2014) for namely
and        , namely       0.7 and         0.

If we take         (employed workers in the representative firm) to be one minus the unemployment rate,
then, given that the average unemployment rate is 7.38% in the sample, we have: 1
 1        0.7 ∗ 1      0.0738       0.2779. What is the elasticity of labor market tightness with respect to
PBD? If we use the global parametric regression discontinuity design estimates (Table 4, col. 5), the
impact PBD in the median state is the impact of 53 weeks increase in EUC and 20 weeks increase in EB39,
i.e. 0.008*53 ‐0.0019*20= 39%. In the median state, PBD went from 26 to 99 weeks, an increase of
281%. Thus, the elasticity of labor market tightness with respect to PBD is: 39/281=0.14. The macro
elasticity of aggregate unemployment with respect to PBD is then:

                                                     0.2779 ∗ 0.14            0.04

For the micro elasticity of unemployment with respect to PBD, the most relevant estimates are from
Rothstein (2011) and Farber and Valletta (2013), since they use the same extensions. Rothstein (2011)
estimates that a one‐week increase in benefits increases unemployment duration by 0.37% (Table 3,




38
   Landais, Michaillat, and Saez (2014) write the macro elasticity as a function of the elasticity of labor market
tightness with respect to the difference in consumption between employed and unemployed individuals. If we
assume that the unemployed consume their unemployment benefit, this is the opposite of . , which is why a
minus sign appears after the micro elasticity instead of the plus sign in the original formula.
39
   Using the insignificant point estimate for the impact of PBD on tightness obtained when not distinguishing
between EUC and EB (col. 2 in Appendix 1, Table 11) yields almost exactly the same estimate for the elasticity of
labor market tightness with respect to PBD.

                                                            30
column 3‐5), which translates into an elasticity40 of              0.1. This elasticity is the same as the one
found by Farber and Valletta (2013). Importantly, this estimate of                 0.1 is essentially the same as
the estimate from the US extended benefits program studied by Card and Levine (2000), and the same
as the estimates from the regression discontinuity design for Germany in Schmieder, Wachter, and
Bender (2012a), which range between 0.12 and 0.13.

Using a micro elasticity estimate              0.1, the macro elasticity of aggregate unemployment with
respect to PBD41 is         0.1    0.04    0.06. Therefore, general equilibrium effects reduce the impact of
unemployment insurance by 40%.

The wedge between the macro and the micro elasticity is close the one found in the calibration by
Lalive, Landais, and Zweimüller (2013) using Austrian data. They use a research design that cannot fully
account for the impact of extensions on job vacancies. Given the results from this paper, there is no
robust effect of extensions on vacancies, so the formula they use to calculate the elasticity wedge is
likely to be fairly accurate despite not taking into account the impact of the extensions on job vacancies.
The fact that the estimates of the wedge between the macro and the micro elasticities for Austria and
the United States are so close suggests that this wedge may not vary very much across developed
countries. However, much more research is needed to confirm this point.

Given the most plausible calibration, the medium run macro impact of PBD on aggregate unemployment
is small. The idea that a decrease in search effort could have little effect on aggregate unemployment
may seem counterintuitive. Yet a previous paper studying a job search assistance experiment came to
the same conclusion (Crépon et al. 2013). Because job search assistance increased the job finding rate of
recipients but decreased the job finding rate of non‐recipients, the impact on the aggregate job finding
rate was zero. Conversely, PBD reduces job search effort by UI recipients but probably increases the job
finding rate of non recipients, so it makes sense that PBD had a small effect on aggregate
unemployment during the Great Recession.

A caveat to the interpretation that PBD has a small impact on aggregate unemployment is that the
decrease in applications may not reduce labor market tightness as much as it seems. Indeed, the

40
   If we use Rothstein’s calculation of the impact of the extensions on the unemployment exit hazard in 2010Q4,
we find a decrease in the hazard of 11%. Population adjusted, PBD was 87 weeks in 2010Q4. This gives an elasticity
of 0.04 rather than 0.1. With this lower estimate, the macro impact of PBD would be even lower.
41
   If we take the impact of PBD on tightness from the timing of events difference‐in‐differences specification (Table
2, col. 6), the macro elasticity is 0.1‐0.2779*26*0.0024=0.08, and the wedge between the macro and the micro
elasticity is 20%.

                                                         31
theoretical framework used here implicitly assumes that every applicant has the same probability of
getting hired, so a decrease in the number of applications leads to a proportional increase in the
probability of getting hired. However, if PBD reduces applications by candidates that are less hirable
from the point of view of the firm, the impact of PBD on effective labor market tightness would be
smaller than the impact of PBD on applications.

How plausible is the idea that PBD reduces applications by less hirable candidates? On the one hand,
long‐term unemployed job seekers are less likely to get a call back from employers than short‐term
unemployed and employed job seekers (Kroft, Lange, and Notowidigdo 2013). Therefore, to the extent
that the increase in PBD mostly decreased the applications of the long‐term unemployed, it may have
somewhat increased the average quality of the applicant pool from the point of view of the firm, and
therefore the decrease in applications may overestimate the increase in labor market tightness. On the
other hand, the evidence that PBD does not affect job seeker selectivity is not consistent with PBD
increasing the quality of applications. Therefore, it is not clear that PBD reduces applications by less
hirable candidates, and therefore it is hard to conclude that my calibration underestimates the macro
elasticity of unemployment with respect to PBD.

Given my estimates and calibration results, the macro effect of unemployment insurance extensions
during the Great Recession in the US is small, and smaller than the micro effect. By contrast, and based
on their own estimates and calibration results, Hagedorn et al. (2013) conclude that the macro effects of
these unemployment insurance extensions are large, and larger than the micro effects. Hagedorn et al.
(2013)’s identification strategy relies on comparing counties along state borders. However, as shown
above, because of large spillover effects across counties, this identification strategy cannot pin down the
impact of PBD on labor market tightness.

Even if there were a negative impact of PBD on vacancies, Hagedorn et al. (2013) are still overestimating
the macro effect of unemployment insurance because they only take into account the labor demand
externality and neglect the search externality. The labor demand externality contributes to increasing
aggregate unemployment above and beyond the micro effect of the extensions on benefit recipients,
while the search externality has the opposite effect. Therefore, it is not surprising that (Hagedorn et al.
2013) find that the macro effect of the extensions is larger than the micro effect. To determine the
macro impact of the extensions on unemployment it is necessary to take into account the offsetting
impacts of the labor demand externality and the search externality.


                                                    32
Overall, I conclude, first, that the macro impact of PBD on aggregate unemployment is smaller than the
micro impact of PBD on the unemployment of UI recipients in the medium run. This first conclusion is
based on the positive impact of PBD on labor market tightness. Second, the calibration performed above
suggests that PBD had a small impact on aggregate unemployment in the medium run.



6. Conclusion
This paper has used state‐level variation in unemployment benefit duration during the Great Recession
to investigate the general equilibrium impact of unemployment insurance. Using new data from the
large job board CareerBuilder.com, I show that extensions in the duration of unemployment benefits do
not have a robust impact on the number of vacancies, and therefore do not generate a labor demand
externality. On the other hand, a one‐week increase in the potential duration of unemployment benefits
(PBD) leads to a 0.4% decline in applications, which corresponds to an elasticity of applications with
respect to PBD of ‐0.1. The fact that extensions reduce the total number of job applications implies that
extensions generate a search externality.

Unemployment insurance extensions increase labor market tightness. This positive effect of extensions
on labor market tightness implies that the impact of unemployment insurance on aggregate
unemployment is smaller than its impact on unemployment benefit recipients. Quantitatively,
calibration indicates that a 10% increase in PBD increases aggregate unemployment by 0.6%, an effect
that is 40% smaller than the micro effect of PBD on benefit recipients. In other terms, the general
equilibrium effect of unemployment insurance lowers its impact on aggregate unemployment by 40%.
Furthermore, to the extent that recessions are characterized by inefficiently low labor market tightness,
increasing tightness through unemployment insurance extensions at the beginning of recessions is
welfare improving. The evidence that unemployment insurance extensions increase labor market
tightness thus contributes to vindicating the institution of extended unemployment benefits in the US.
However, further empirical investigation is needed to quantify the longer run impacts of unemployment
insurance extensions.




                                                   33
References
Angrist, Joshua D., and Victor Lavy. 1999. “Using Maimonides’ Rule to Estimate the Effect of Class Size
         on Scholastic Achievement.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (2): 533–75.
Barnichon, Regis. 2010. “Building a Composite Help‐Wanted Index.” Economics Letters, Economics
         Letters, 109 (3): 175–78.
Card, David, Raj Chetty, and Andrea Weber. 2007. “Cash‐on‐Hand and Competing Models of
         Intertemporal Behavior: New Evidence from the Labor Market.” The Quarterly Journal of
         Economics 122 (4): 1511–60. doi:10.1162/qjec.2007.122.4.1511.
Card, David, and Phillip B. Levine. 2000. “Extended Benefits and the Duration of UI Spells: Evidence from
         the New Jersey Extended Benefit Program.” Journal of Public Economics 78 (1): 107–138.
Crépon, Bruno, Esther Duflo, Marc Gurgand, Roland Rathelot, and Philippe Zamora. 2013. “Do Labor
         Market Policies Have Displacement Effects? Evidence from a Clustered Randomized
         Experiment.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (2): 531–80. doi:10.1093/qje/qjt001.
Davis, Steven J, R. Jason Faberman, and John C Haltiwanger. 2012. “Recruiting Intensity during and after
         the Great Recession: National and Industry Evidence.” American Economic Review 102 (3): 584–
         88. doi:10.1257/aer.102.3.584.
Dube, Arindrajit, T. William Lester, and Michael Reich. 2010. “Minimum Wage Effects Across State
         Borders: Estimates Using Contiguous Counties.” Review of Economics and Statistics 92 (4): 945–
         64. doi:10.1162/REST_a_00039.
Farber, Henry S., and Robert G. Valletta. 2013. “Do Extended Unemployment Benefits Lengthen
         Unemployment Spells? Evidence from Recent Cycles in the U.S. Labor Market.” Working Paper
         19048. National Bureau of Economic Research. http://www.nber.org/papers/w19048.
Green, A.E., M. de Hoyos, Y. Li, and D. Owen. 2011. “Job Search Study: Literature Review and Analysis of
         the Labour Force Survey.” Department for Work and Pensions Research Report 726.
Hagedorn, Marcus, Fatih Karahan, Iourii Manovskii, and Kurt Mitman. 2013. “Unemployment Benefits
         and Unemployment in the Great Recession: The Role of Macro Effects.” Working Paper 19499.
         National Bureau of Economic Research. http://www.nber.org/papers/w19499.
Hagedorn, Marcus, Iourii Manovskii, and Kurt Mitman. 2016. “Interpreting Recent Quasi‐Experimental
         Evidence on the Effects of Unemployment Benefit Extensions.” Working Paper 22280. National
         Bureau of Economic Research. http://www.nber.org/papers/w22280.
Katz, Lawrence F., and Bruce D. Meyer. 1990. “The Impact of the Potential Duration of Unemployment
         Benefits on the Duration of Unemployment.” Journal of Public Economics, Journal of Public
         Economics, 41 (1): 45–72.
Kroft, Kory, Fabian Lange, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2013. “Duration Dependence and Labor Market
         Conditions: Evidence from a Field Experiment*.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (3):
         1123–67. doi:10.1093/qje/qjt015.
Krueger, Alan B., and Andreas Mueller. 2010. “Job Search and Unemployment Insurance: New Evidence
         from Time Use Data.” Journal of Public Economics, Journal of Public Economics, 94 (3–4): 298–
         307.
———. 2011. “Job Search and Job Finding in a Period of Mass Unemployment: Evidence from High‐
         Frequency Longitudinal Data.” Princeton University, Department of Economics, Industrial
         Relations Section. http://ideas.repec.org/p/pri/indrel/1283.html.
Kuhn, Peter J., and Hani Mansour. 2011. “Is Internet Job Search Still Ineffective?” IZA Discussion Paper
         5955. Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA). http://ideas.repec.org/p/iza/izadps/dp5955.html.
Lalive, Rafael. 2007. “Unemployment Benefits, Unemployment Duration, and Post‐Unemployment Jobs:
         A Regression Discontinuity Approach.” The American Economic Review 97 (2): 108–12.



                                                   34
Lalive, Rafael, Camille Landais, and Josef Zweimüller. 2013. “Market Externalities of Large
         Unemployment         Insurance     Extension      Programs.”    IZA    Discussion   Paper.
         http://www.econstor.eu/handle/10419/90053.
Landais, Camille, Pascal Michaillat, and Emmanuel Saez. 2014. “Optimal Unemployment Insurance over
         the Business Cycle.”
Marinescu, Ioana, and Roland Rathelot. 2014. “Mismatch Unemployment and the Geography of Job
         Search.”
Meyer, Bruce D. 2002. “Unemployment and Workers’ Compensation Programmes: Rationale, Design,
         Labour Supply and Income Support.” Fiscal Studies 23 (1): 1–49.
Mitman, Kurt, and Stanislav Rabinovich. 2011. “Pro‐Cyclical Unemployment Benefits? Optimal Policy in
         an Equilibrium Business Cycle Model.” Penn Institute for Economic Research, Department of
         Economics, University of Pennsylvania Working Paper, 11–23.
Nekoei, Arash, and Andrea Weber. 2013. “Does Extending Unemployment Benefits Improve Job
         Quality?”         mimeo,          Harvard           University,      Cambridge,        MA.
         http://www.econ.upf.edu/docs/seminars/nekoei.pdf.
Riddell, W. C, and X. Song. 2011. “The Impact of Education on Unemployment Incidence and Re‐
         Employment Success: Evidence from the US Labour Market.” Labour Economics.
Rothstein, Jesse. 2011. “Unemployment Insurance and Job Search in the Great Recession.” Working
         Paper 17534. National Bureau of Economic Research. http://www.nber.org/papers/w17534.
Schmieder, Johannes F., Till von Wachter, and Stefan Bender. 2012. “The Effects of Extended
         Unemployment Insurance Over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Regression Discontinuity
         Estimates Over 20 Years.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (2): 701–52.
         doi:10.1093/qje/qjs010.
Schmieder, Johannes, Till von Wachter, and Stefan Bender. 2012. “The Effect of Unemployment
         Insurance              Extensions             on            Reemployment          Wages.”
         http://www.irs.princeton.edu/sites/irs/files/event/uploads/matchqual_wp_March2012.pdf.
van Ours, Jan C., and Milan Vodopivec. 2008. “Does Reducing Unemployment Insurance Generosity
         Reduce Job Match Quality?” Journal of Public Economics 92 (3–4): 684–95.
         doi:10.1016/j.jpubeco.2007.05.006.




                                                35
Figure 1: Simplified summary of the regulations governing the total duration of unemployed benefits in states with a TUR
option for Extended Benefits (EB)

                                        120
   Maximum weeks of UI benefits (PBD)




                                        100


                                        80

                                                                                                   Sept. 2007 to June 2008
                                        60
                                                                                                   July 2008 to Nov. 2008
                                                                                                   Dec. 2008 to Oct. 2009
                                        40                                                         Oct. 2009 to July 2011


                                        20


                                         0
                                              5   5.5   6    6.5   7   7.5    8    8.5   9   9.5
                                                        Total Unemployment Rate (TUR)


Note: Both EUC and EB are taken into account to calculate the maximum duration of UI benefits. The total unemployment rate
(TUR) is, for each month and state, the average of the weekly three‐months seasonally adjusted unemployment rate. This figure
assumes that PBD only depends on the current level of TUR, while in fact PBD also depends on the past level of TUR and on the
current and past levels of the insured unemployment rate (see text for more details).




                                                                               36
Table 1: Summary statistics

                                                      N            mean              sd          min           max

 Applications                                       2,397         431,725       584,975        2,424        3.179e+06
 Vacancies                                          2,397          13,357        15,455         438          123,090
 Job views (snippet)                                2,397        7.560e+07     9.336e+07     1.547e+06      6.528e+08
 Educ. required: high school                        2,397          0.137         0.032         0.047          0.358
 Educ. required: 2-year degree                      2,397          0.051         0.025         0.007          0.241
 Educ. required: 4-year degree                      2,397          0.160         0.049         0.043          0.463
 Educ. required: graduate degree                    2,397          0.020         0.017         0.001          0.593
 Educ. required: not specified                      2,397          0.633         0.061         0.267          0.857
 Share of wages over $50000 (if posted)             2,397          0.522         0.110         0.134          0.902
 Share of wages under $30000 (if posted)            2,397          0.254         0.096         0.022          0.808
 Share of wages over $100000 (if posted)            2,397          0.161         0.079         0.017          0.784
 Share of jobs with a posted wage                   2,397          0.216         0.062         0.049          0.433
 PBD in weeks                                       2,397          61.90         26.12           26             99
 Total Unemployment Rate (TUR) (%)                  2,397          7.138         2.557         2.325          15.20
 Insured unemployment rate (IUR) (%)                2,397          3.042         1.326         0.303          7.870


Note: PBD is determined by weeks of UI available in the BLS trigger notices. The total unemployment rate is, for each month
and state, the average of the weekly three‐months seasonally adjusted unemployment rate. The insured unemployment rate is
the 13‐weeks insured unemployment rate.

Source: Department of Labor, and CareerBuilder.com for applications and vacancies.




                                                            37
Figure 2: The evolution of the unemployment rate, job vacancies and potential unemployment benefit duration at the
national level




                                                                                                                4500
            100




                                                                                        12


                                                                                                                Job vacancies JOLTS (in 1000)
                                                                                                                                        4000
                   80




                                                                                                           10
                                                                                        Unemployment rate (%)
    PBD (in weeks)




                                                                                                                                3500
          60




                                                                                                 8

                                                                                                                        3000
            40




                                                                                        6

                                                                                                                2500
                                                                                                                2000
            20




                                                                                        4
                2007m7   2008m7         2009m7          2010m7           2011m7

                         PBD                                    Unemployment rate
                         Job vacancies JOLTS



Note: Potential unemployment benefit duration (PBD) is calculated as an average over states, where each state is weighted
accorded to the size of its labor force.

Source: Department of Labor.




                                                           38
Figure 3: The impact of potential unemployment benefit duration on log applications and log vacancies, timing of events




                                 Panel A: Log(applications) relative to month -2
       relative to month -2
        -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1
         Log(applications)




                               -10     -8   -6   -4      -2      0      2     4     6         8       10
                                            Month relative to largest increase in PBD

                                                    Log(applications) rel. to month -2
                                                    90% confidence interval



                                     Panel B: Log(vacancies) relative to month -2
       -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2
       relative to month -2
          Log(vacancies)




                               -10     -8   -6   -4      -2      0      2     4     6         8       10
                                            Month relative to largest increase in PBD

                                                         90% confidence interval




Note: The estimates are from a regression of log vacancies (Panel A) or log applications (Panel B) on relative month dummies,
state, year and quarter of the year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by state. There are 318 observations. The largest
increase in PBD is defined, for each state, as the largest increase that does not correspond to a change in the schedule, and is
not due to a temporary interruption of EUC.

Source: Department of Labor, and CareerBuilder.com for applications and vacancies.




                                                                 39
Table 2: The impact of the largest increase in potential benefit duration (PBD) on log applications log vacancies, and labor
market tightness, timing of events regressions

                               Log applications               Log vacancies                   Log tightness
                                Diff       DiD                Diff      DiD                  Diff        DiD
                                (1)         (2)               (3)        (4)                 (5)         (6)

 Total PBD in weeks         -0.0035*** -0.0042***          -0.0012       -0.0018          0.0024*       0.0024*
                             (0.0013)   (0.0010)           (0.0013)      (0.0011)         (0.0013)      (0.0013)
 After                                 -0.0214***                        -0.0200*                        0.0014
                                        (0.0063)                         (0.0104)                       (0.0139)

 Observations               318         5,257          318                 5,257             318         5,257
 R-squared                 0.9970      0.9971        0.9926               0.9900           0.9832       0.9730
 Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
 All regressions include state, quarter and year fixed effects.

Note: The largest increase in potential benefit duration (PBD) is defined, for each state, as the largest increase that does not
correspond to a change in the schedule, and is not due to a temporary interruption of EUC. Tightness is defined as
vacancies/applications. In columns 2, 4 and 6, I include, for each state, all states that had constant PBD during the event
window for the largest increase in PBD. In columns 2, 4 and 6, “After” is an interaction of the event window indicator and a
dummy for the date being after the largest increase in PBD. In columns 2, 4 and 6, state by event window fixed effects are
included (see text for more details).

Source: Department of Labor, and CareerBuilder.com for applications and vacancies.




                                                              40
Figure 4: Potential benefit duration (PBD), log applications and log vacancies as a function of the total unemployment rate
(Dec. 2008 onwards)




                                           Panel A: Log(applications) residuals
                                  .2




                                                                                                    90
         Log(applications) residual




                                                                                                    PBD (in weeks)
                            .1




                                                                                                          70   80
                     0




                                                                                                    60
             -.1




                                                                                                    50
       -.2




                                       4     5          6       7          8         9        10
                                                 Total unemployment rate (TUR) (%)

                                             PBD (in weeks)            Log(applications) residual
                                             95% CI                    Log(apps) resid.: binned



                                           Panel B: Log(vacancies) residuals
                            .1 .2




                                                                                                    90
          Log(vacancies) residual




                                                                                                    PBD (in weeks)
                                                                                                               80
       -.3 -.2 -.1 0




                                                                                                    60
                                                                                                    50    70




                                       4     5          6       7          8         9        10
                                                 Total unemployment rate (TUR) (%)

                                             PBD (in weeks)             Log(vacancies) residual
                                             95% CI                     Binned residual




Note: Data is smoothed using kernel‐weighted local polynomial smoothing with a 0.2 bandwidth. The applications residual is
obtained after regressing log applications on state fixed effects. The total unemployment rate is, for each month and state, the
average of the weekly three‐months seasonally adjusted unemployment rate. The two solid vertical lines correspond to 6% TUR
(threshold for EUC2 when it was conditional, and for EUC3), and 8.5% TUR (threshold for EUC4). The two dashed vertical lines
correspond to 6.5% TUR (threshold for 13 weeks extended benefits when the TUR option is active) and 8% TUR (threshold for
20 weeks extended benefits when the TUR option is active).

Source: Department of Labor, and CareerBuilder.com for applications and vacancies.

                                                                       41
Table 3: The impact of potential unemployment benefit duration on log applications: using the global parametric fuzzy RD
design

                                                           4%<=TUR<=10%
                                          (1)              (2)        (3)                      (4)

 Total PBD in weeks                  -0.0076***         -0.0028
                                      (0.0016)          (0.0027)
 EUC PBD in weeks                                                        -0.0090***        -0.0072**
                                                                          (0.0012)          (0.0029)
 EB PBD in weeks                                                           -0.0004            0.0032
                                                                          (0.0066)          (0.0073)
 Total Unemployment Rate               0.0106        0.0314                 0.0385            0.0597
  (TUR) (%)                           (0.0675)     (0.0613)               (0.0534)          (0.0558)
 TUR^2                                 0.0014       -0.0006                -0.0021           -0.0032
                                      (0.0039)     (0.0032)               (0.0031)          (0.0033)
 Insured Unemployment Rate            -0.0564       -0.0113                -0.0368           0.0102
  (IUR) (%)                           (0.0415)     (0.0426)               (0.0416)          (0.0490)
 IUR^2                                 0.0037       -0.0031                 0.0004          -0.0060
                                      (0.0058)     (0.0054)               (0.0061)          (0.0064)
 Month fixed effects                                    X                                        X
 Observations                       1,804            1,804                 1,804              1,804
 R-squared                         0.9925           0.9956                 0.9929            0.9957
 Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
 All regressions include state, year and quarter fixed effects.

Note: Instrumental variables regressions, where PBD is the endogenous variable. The instrument for Total PBD in weeks is PBD
according to statutory rules, not taking into account temporary EUC expirations, and assuming that all states take up the TUR
option. In col. 3‐4, EB PBD is instrumented with EB PBD according to rules and assuming that all states have elected the TUR
option, and EUC PBD is instrumented with the EUC PBD according to rules and ignoring temporary EUC lapses. The sample
includes any observation for which TUR is between 4% and 10%.

Source: Department of Labor, and CareerBuilder.com for vacancies.




                                                             42
Table 4: The impact of potential unemployment benefit duration on log vacancies and log tightness: using the global
parametric fuzzy RD design

                                                                      4%<=TUR<=10%
                                                               Log vacancies                            Log tightness
                                               (1)            (2)         (3)      (4)                        (5)

 Total PBD in weeks                       -0.0082***        0.0010
                                           (0.0011)        (0.0015)
 EUC PBD in weeks                                                       -0.0104***        0.0008           0.0080***
                                                                         (0.0009)        (0.0021)           (0.0028)
 EB PBD in weeks                                                           0.0037         0.0013             -0.0019
                                                                         (0.0029)        (0.0028)           (0.0061)
 Total Unemployment Rate (TUR)        -0.0943*       -0.0447              -0.0488        -0.0433            -0.1030*
  (%)                                  (0.0522)      (0.0446)            (0.0472)        (0.0449)           (0.0584)
 TUR^2                                0.0087***       0.0022               0.0031         0.0020             0.0052
                                       (0.0032)      (0.0026)            (0.0031)        (0.0028)           (0.0040)
 Insured Unemployment Rate (IUR) -0.0939***         -0.0879**            -0.0620*       -0.0869**          -0.0971**
   (%)                                 (0.0333)      (0.0343)            (0.0367)        (0.0352)           (0.0482)
 IUR^2                                  0.0059        0.0015               0.0006         0.0014             0.0074
                                       (0.0040)      (0.0042)            (0.0045)        (0.0043)           (0.0064)
 Month fixed effects                                     X                                   X                  X
 Observations                           1,804          1,804              1,804           1,804               1,804
 R-squared                              0.9816        0.9906              0.9831          0.9906             0.9630
 Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
 All regressions include state and year fixed effects.

Note: Instrumental variables regressions, where PBD is the endogenous variable. The instrument for Total PBD in weeks is PBD
according to statutory rules, not taking into account temporary EUC expirations, and assuming that all states take up the TUR
option. In col. 3‐5, EB PBD is instrumented with EB PBD according to rules and assuming that all states have elected the TUR
option, and EUC PBD is instrumented with the EUC PBD according to rules and ignoring temporary EUC lapses. Tightness is
defined as vacancies/applications. The sample includes any observation for which TUR is between 4% and 10%.

Source: Department of Labor, and CareerBuilder.com for applications and vacancies.




                                                            43
Table 5: The impact of potential unemployment benefit duration on log applications and log tightness using the global
parametric fuzzy RD design: robustness

                                                    Log applications                               Log tightness
                                       Controlling for Controlling Interaction       Controlling for Controlling Interaction
                                       industry and for state-       with share      industry and for state-     with share
                                          required       specific        UI             required      specific        UI
                                         education        trends     recipients        education       trends     recipients
                                             (1)            (2)          (3)               (4)            (5)         (6)

EUC PBD in weeks                         -0.0056**       -0.0025*       -0.0023         0.0061**       0.0050**        0.0053
                                          (0.0024)       (0.0014)      (0.0038)         (0.0026)       (0.0021)       (0.0039)
EB PBD in weeks                            0.0042         -0.0053       -0.0073          -0.0035        0.0038         0.0066
                                          (0.0059)       (0.0033)      (0.0085)         (0.0057)       (0.0038)       (0.0105)
EUC PBD in weeks*share UI                                              -0.0150*                                        0.0086
  recipients among unempoyed                                           (0.0084)                                       (0.0085)
EB PBD in weeks*share UI                                                 0.0247                                       -0.0200
  recipients among unempoyed                                           (0.0203)                                       (0.0227)
Total Unemployment Rate (TUR)              0.0433         -0.0028        0.0563         -0.0812*       -0.1178**      -0.0978
 (%)                                      (0.0329)       (0.0460)      (0.0587)         (0.0464)        (0.0530)      (0.0592)
TUR^2                                      -0.0032         0.0002       -0.0030          0.0052         0.0059*        0.0048
                                          (0.0028)       (0.0030)      (0.0036)         (0.0033)        (0.0034)      (0.0040)
Insured Unemployment Rate (IUR)            -0.0129       -0.0516*       -0.0073          -0.0569        -0.0145      -0.0937**
  (%)                                     (0.0400)       (0.0290)      (0.0457)         (0.0414)        (0.0356)      (0.0440)
IUR^2                                      -0.0017        0.0060*       -0.0034          0.0032         -0.0035        0.0068
                                          (0.0054)       (0.0034)      (0.0062)
Controls for composition of
vacancies by required education           X                                                 X
Controls for composition of
vacancies by 2-digit NAICS
industry                                  X                                                 X
State-specific trends                                    X                                                 X
Observations                           1,804           1,804            1,804            1,804          1,804         1,804
R-squared                             0.9964          0.9978            0.9957           0.9698         0.9759        0.9629
Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
All regressions include state and month fixed effects.


Note: Instrumental variables regressions, where PBD is the endogenous variable. EB PBD is instrumented with EB PBD according
to rules and assuming that all states have elected the TUR option, and EUC PBD is instrumented with the EUC PBD according to
rules and ignoring temporary EUC lapses. Tightness is defined as vacancies/applications. The sample includes any observation
for which TUR is between 4% and 10%. The specification is the same as in Table 3, column 4. In columns 1 and 4, controls are
included for the share of vacancies in each education category (see summary statistics Table 1), and for the share of vacancies
in each 2‐digit NAICS code. In columns 3 and 6, the share of UI recipients is, for each state, the average share of UI recipients
among all unemployed between December 2008 and the end of the sample; the share of UI recipients (not interacted with
PBD) is controlled for in the regression.

Source: Department of Labor, and CareerBuilder.com for applications and vacancies.




                                                              44
Table 6: The impact of potential unemployment benefit duration on applications per view and on posted wages, using the
global parametric fuzzy RD design

                                Applications     Log real     Posted      Posted      Posted     Share with
                                  per view     posted wage wage>=50000 wage<=30000 wage>=100000 posted wage
                                     (1)            (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)

EUC PBD in weeks                   -0.0013       -0.0005           -0.0010        0.0010          0.0007         0.0008
                                  (0.0013)       (0.0030)         (0.0018)       (0.0013)        (0.0009)       (0.0005)
EB PBD in weeks                     0.0011        0.0018            0.0004       -0.0011          0.0004        -0.0012*
                                  (0.0026)       (0.0025)         (0.0017)       (0.0014)        (0.0010)       (0.0007)
Total Unemployment Rate             0.0042       -0.0078           0.0128         0.0070         -0.0078        -0.0002
  (TUR) (%)                       (0.0292)       (0.0400)         (0.0258)       (0.0165)        (0.0143)       (0.0098)
TUR^2                               0.0008        0.0004            0.0000       -0.0004          0.0003         0.0002
                                  (0.0022)       (0.0026)         (0.0015)       (0.0010)        (0.0010)       (0.0007)
Insured Unemployment Rate        0.0528***      0.0840***        0.0504***     -0.0491***         0.0136        -0.0152
 (IUR) (%)                        (0.0182)       (0.0269)         (0.0172)       (0.0145)        (0.0099)       (0.0110)
IUR^2                            -0.0058***    -0.0092***        -0.0064***     0.0053***       -0.0022**        0.0010
                                  (0.0022)       (0.0031)         (0.0022)       (0.0017)        (0.0011)       (0.0013)
Observations                        1,804          1,804            1,804         1,804            1,804          1,804
R-squared                           0.9068        0.7859           0.7244         0.7634          0.7316         0.7954
Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
All regressions include state and month fixed effects.


Note: Instrumental variables regressions, where PBD is the endogenous variable. EB PBD is instrumented with EB PBD according
to rules and assuming that all states have elected the TUR option, and EUC PBD is instrumented with the EUC PBD according to
rules and ignoring temporary EUC lapses. The sample includes any observation for which TUR is between 4% and 10%. In
columns 3‐5, the dependent variable is the share of vacancies that have a posted wage respectively above $50000, below
$30000 and above $100000; the denominator for the share is all vacancies with a posted wage.

Source: Department of Labor, and CareerBuilder.com for applications and vacancies.




                                                            45
Table 7: The impact of PBD on log applications, log vacancies and log tightness: within county pair specification, and panel
specification with spillover effects

                                    Within county pair differences                        Smaller county panel
                                d.Log apps d.Log jobs d.Log tight                  Log apps     Log jobs     Log tight
                                    (1)           (2)           (3)                   (4)           (5)         (6)

 d.EUC PBD in weeks                0.0001         -0.0012          -0.0016
                                  (0.0031)        (0.0028)         (0.0028)
 d.EB PBD in weeks                 0.0016          0.0007          -0.0008
                                  (0.0015)        (0.0012)         (0.0018)
 EUC PBD in weeks                                                                     0.0004          -0.0006       -0.0010
                                                                                     (0.0019)        (0.0020)       (0.0024)
 EB PBD in weeks                                                                      -0.0007         -0.0015       -0.0007
                                                                                     (0.0011)        (0.0020)       (0.0018)
 EUC PBD in weeks                                                                   -0.0047**         0.0003       0.0053***
  in larger paired county                                                            (0.0021)        (0.0020)       (0.0017)
 EB PBD in weeks                                                                      -0.0006         -0.0010       -0.0003
  in larger paired county                                                            (0.0015)        (0.0016)       (0.0014)

 Observations                  36,771      40,716         36,771                     39,225          43,024          39,225
 R-squared                     0.9516      0.9624         0.6342                     0.9682          0.9776          0.7426
 Robust standard errors clustered by border segment in parentheses
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
 All regressions include county pair and month fixed effects.

Note: The sample is composed of county pairs straddling state borders. A border segment is the set of all counties along a given
state border. Tight in columns 3 and 6 refers to tightness, which is defined as vacancies/applications. In columns 1‐3, outcomes
are defined as the difference within a given county pair for each month, and the explanatory variables are defined in the same
way. In columns 4‐6, only the smaller (in terms of population) county in each county pair in the sample is retained.
Observations are weighed by the total population in the two counties of the county pair (col. 1‐3), or in the county (col. 4‐6).

Source: Department of Labor, and CareerBuilder.com for applications and vacancies.




                                                              46
APPENDIX 1



ONLINE APPENDIX: not for publication


APPENDIX 1: further results and robustness tests
Table 8: Date of largest increase in PBD and amount of the increase for each state


 state        date          PBD increase          state        date         PBD increase
 AK           2009m2                      13      MT           2009m3                  22.75
 AL           2009m9                      20      NC           2011m7                      20
 AR           2009m5                      13      ND           2011m7                       0
 AZ           2009m5                      13      NE           2011m7                       0
 CA           2009m5                      20      NH           2009m8                      13
 CO           2009m6                    15.6      NJ           2009m4                    14.4
 CT           2009m3                      13      NM           2009m10                     13
 DC           2009m5                      20      NV           2009m3                      13
 DE           2009m8                  16.75       NY           2009m6                      13
 FL           2009m7                      20      OH           2009m5                      20
 GA           2009m6                      20      OK           2009m8                      13
 HI           2009m5                      13      OR           2009m3                       7
 IA           2009m10                     13      PA           2009m2                  22.75
 ID           2009m2                      26      RI           2008m11                      7
 IL           2009m5                      13      SC           2009m4                      13
 IN           2009m4                      13      SD           2011m7                       0
 KS           2009m7                      26      TN           2011m7                      20
 KY           2009m5                      20      TX           2009m8                      13
 LA           2009m8                      13      UT           2011m7                       0
 MA           2009m3                    19.5      VA           2009m5                      26
 MD           2009m5                      13      VT           2009m3                    19.5
 ME           2009m5                      13      WA           2009m3                      13
 MI           2009m2                      13      WI           2009m3                    20.8
 MN           2009m4                      13      WV           2009m9                      20
 MO           2010m3                      20      WY           2010m2                      13
 MS           2011m7                       0


Note: The largest increase in PBD is defined, for each state, as the largest increase that does not correspond to a change in the
schedule, and is not due to a temporary interruption of EUC.

Source: Department of Labor




                                                              47
APPENDIX 1


Figure 5: The evolution of applications and vacancies around lapses in EUC




       -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3         Panel A: Log(applications) relative to 2010m3
        relative to 2010m3
         Log(applications)




                          2010m1        2010m4     2010m7          2010m10            2011m1
                                                        Date

                                                 Log(applications) rel. to 2010m3
                                                 90% confidence interval



                                  Panel B: Log(vacancies) relative to 2010m3
                             .4
          relative to 2010m3
            Log(vacancies)

       -.4 -.2 0        .2




                          2010m1        2010m4     2010m7          2010m10            2011m1
                                                        Date

                                                     90% confidence interval




Note: The estimates for applications and vacancies are from a regression of the outcome on month dummies, and state fixed
effects. Standard errors are clustered by state. A month is counted as having a EUC lapse if the lapse is ongoing for any week of
the month. The plain vertical lines mark the beginning of a lapse in EUC, while the dashed vertical lines mark the end of the
lapse in EUC.

Source: Department of Labor, and CareerBuilder.com for applications and vacancies.




                                                              48
APPENDIX 1


Figure 6: Timing of events: number of states used for estimation and PBD around the largest increase in PBD for each state



                          Number of states in sample and PBD




                                                                                                              30
                                                     51        51
        50




                                                                                                              PBD relative to month -2
        40




                                                                                                                                 20
                                                39
          30




                                                                    30
     States




                                                                                                                         10
                                           25
                                                                         23
    20




                                      20
                                                          17                  16
                                                                                   13




                                                                                                                0
        10




                                 11                                                     11

                            4                                                                3
                       2                                                                         2




                                                                                                              -10
        0




               -10   -8         -6    -4      -2      0      2      4     6                          8   10
                                 Month relative to largest increase in PBD

                                           Number of states in sample
                                           PBD (in weeks)
                                           90% confidence interval for PBD



Note: The estimates for PBD are from a regression of PBD on relative month dummies, state, year and quarter of the year fixed
effects. Standard errors are clustered by state. The largest increase in PBD is defined, for each state, as the largest increase that
does not correspond to a change in the schedule, and is not due to a temporary interruption of EUC.

Source: Department of Labor, and CareerBuilder.com for applications and vacancies.




                                                                     49
APPENDIX 1


Figure 7: The impact of potential unemployment benefit duration on log applications and log vacancies, timing of events,
balanced panel




                                   Panel A: Log(applications) relative to month -2
                                        balanced panel with 3 period before and after
       relative to month -2
       -.25-.15-.05.05 .15
        Log(applications)




                              -3                        -1                         1
                                           Month relative to largest increase in PBD

                                                   Log(applications) rel. to month -2
                                                   90% confidence interval



                                   Panel B: Log(vacancies) relative to month -2
                                        balanced panel with 3 period before and after
       relative to month -2
       -.25-.15-.05.05 .15
         Log(vacancies)




                              -3                        -1                         1
                                           Month relative to largest increase in PBD

                                                    Log(vacancies) rel. to month -2
                                                    90% confidence interval




Note: The estimates are from a regression of log vacancies (Panel A) or log applications (Panel B) on relative month dummies,
state, year and quarter of the year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by state. The sample consists of 18 states that
have a constant PBD 3 months before and after the largest increase in PBD. The largest increase in PBD is defined, for each
state, as the largest increase that does not correspond to a change in the schedule, and is not due to a temporary interruption
of EUC.

Source: Department of Labor, and CareerBuilder.com for applications and vacancies.




                                                                50
APPENDIX 1


Figure 8: The impact of potential unemployment benefit duration on log applications and log vacancies, timing of events,
treated vs. control group




                         Log(applications) relative to month -2: treat vs. control
       -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1
        relative to month -2
         Log(applications)




                               -10   -8   -6    -4      -2      0      2     4      6         8       10
                                           Month relative to largest increase in PBD

                                                Ctrl: Log(applications) rel. to month -2
                                                Treat: Log(applications) rel. to month -2



                               Log(vacancies) relative to month -2: treat vs. control
       -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1
        relative to month -2
          Log(vacancies)




                               -10   -8   -6    -4      -2      0      2     4      6         8       10
                                           Month relative to largest increase in PBD

                                                 Ctrl: Log(vacancies) rel. to month -2
                                                 Treat: Log(vacancies) rel. to month -2




Note: The estimates are from a regression of log vacancies (Panel A) or log applications (Panel B) on relative month dummies,
state, year and quarter of the year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by state. There are 318 observations. The largest
increase in PBD is defined, for each state, as the largest increase that does not correspond to a change in the schedule, and is
not due to a temporary interruption of EUC.

Source: Department of Labor, and CareerBuilder.com for applications and vacancies.




                                                                 51
APPENDIX 1


Figure 9: The impact of potential unemployment benefit duration on log tightness, timing of events


                   .6   .4              Log tightness relative to month -2
    relative to month -2
       Log(tightness)

       0        .2 -.2




                             -10   -8   -6       -4      -2       0       2      4     6        8       10
                                             Month relative to largest increase in PBD

                                                      Log(tightness) rel. to month -2
                                                      90% confidence interval



Note: The estimates are from a regression of log tightness (i.e. log vacancies‐log applications) on relative month dummies,
state, year and quarter of the year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by state. There are 318 observations. The largest
increase in PBD is defined, for each state, as the largest increase that does not correspond to a change in the schedule, and is
not due to a temporary interruption of EUC.

Source: Department of Labor, and CareerBuilder.com for applications and vacancies.




                                                                   52
APPENDIX 1


Table 9: The impact of the largest increase in potential benefit duration (PBD) on log applications log vacancies, and labor
market tightness, timing of events regressions, robustness to month fixed effects

                               Log applications               Log vacancies                  Log tightness
                               DiD         DiD                DiD       DiD                 DiD         DiD
                                (1)         (2)               (3)        (4)                (5)         (6)

 Total PBD in weeks         -0.0042*** -0.0028**           -0.0018       -0.0018          0.0024*        0.0010
                             (0.0011)   (0.0011)           (0.0011)      (0.0014)         (0.0013)      (0.0017)
 After                      -0.0214*** 0.0030              -0.0200*       0.0024           0.0014       -0.0006
                                                                                          (0.0139)      (0.0098)
 Month Fixed Effects                           X                             X                              X

 Observations               5,257       5,257         5,257       5,257          5,257                   5,257
 R-squared                 0.9971      0.9985        0.9900      0.9945         0.9730                  0.9813
 Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
 All regressions include state, quarter, year, and state by event study fixed effects.

Note: The largest increase in potential benefit duration (PBD) is defined, for each state, as the largest increase that does not
correspond to a change in the schedule, and is not due to a temporary interruption of EUC. I include, for each state, all states
that had constant PBD during the event window for the largest increase in PBD. “After” is an interaction of the event window
indicator and a dummy for the date being after the largest increase in PBD. See text for more details. Tightness is defined as
vacancies/applications.

Source: Department of Labor, and CareerBuilder.com for applications and vacancies.




                                                              53
APPENDIX 1


Table 10: : The impact increases in potential benefit duration (PBD) on log applications, log vacancies, and labor market
tightness, timing of events regressions, robustness to alternative definitions of the event

                             More than 10 weeks PBD increase                         Less than 10 weeks PBD increase
                        Log applications Log vacancies Log tightness            Log applications Log vacancies Log tightness
                              (1)              (2)           (3)                      (4)              (5)           (6)

 Total PBD in weeks         -0.0030**          -0.0016           0.0014              -0.0051           -0.0012           0.0040
                             (0.0012)          (0.0014)         (0.0014)             (0.0035)          (0.0045)         (0.0033)
 After                        -0.0007          0.0228**         0.0235**            -0.0389***        -0.0434***        -0.0045
                             (0.0053)          (0.0094)         (0.0109)             (0.0070)          (0.0097)         (0.0070)

 Observations               4,116            4,116           4,116                    4,704              4,704           4,704
 R-squared                 0.9976           0.9901          0.9786                   0.9974             0.9908           0.9765
 Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
 All regressions include state, quarter and year fixed effects.


Note: Difference‐in‐differences specifications. In col. 1‐3, the event is, for each state, the last increase in potential benefit
duration (PBD) of 10 weeks or more that does not correspond to a change in the schedule, and is not due to a temporary
interruption of EUC. In col. 4‐6, the event is, for each state, the last increase in potential benefit duration (PBD) of less than 10
weeks that does not correspond to a change in the schedule, and is not due to a temporary interruption of EUC. I include, for
each state, all states that had constant PBD during the event window. “After” is an interaction of the event window indicator
and a dummy for the date being after the largest increase in PBD. Tightness is defined as vacancies/applications. See text for
more details.

Source: Department of Labor, and CareerBuilder.com for applications and vacancies.




                                                                54
APPENDIX 1


Figure 10: Potential unemployment benefit duration and applications residuals as a function of the total unemployment rate
(before Dec. 2008)

            70




                                                                                                .6                         .4
            60




                                                                                                Log(applications) residual
     PBD (in weeks)




                                                                                                                .2
             50




                                                                                                      0
            40




                                                                                                -.2
            30




                                                                                                -.4
                      4      5             6            7                     8
                                 Total unemployment rate (TUR) (%)

                                  PBD: TUR option
                                  Log(applications) residual: TUR option
                                  Log(applications) residual: no TUR option
                                  95% CI



Note: Data is smoothed using kernel‐weighted local polynomial smoothing with a 0.2 bandwidth. States that had a TUR option
before Dec. 2008 are the following: Alaska, Connecticut, Kansas, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, North Carolina,
Oregon, Rhode Island, Vermont, Washington. The applications residual is obtained after regressing log applications on state
fixed effects. The total unemployment rate is, for each month and state, the average of the weekly three‐months seasonally
adjusted unemployment rate. The two dashed vertical lines correspond to 6.5% TUR (threshold for 13 weeks extended benefits
when the TUR option is active) and 8% TUR (threshold for 20 weeks extended benefits when the TUR option is active).

Source: Department of Labor, and CareerBuilder.com for applications.




                                                            55
APPENDIX 1


Figure 11: Potential unemployment benefit duration and applications residuals as a function of the insured unemployment
rate (Dec. 2008 onwards)




                            Panel A: Log(applications) residuals
             90




                                                                                                                                .1
                                                                                                       Log(applications) residual
       PBD (in weeks)
                 80




                                                                                                             -.1       0
        70




                                                                                                     -.2
             60




                        2      3          4        5          6        7                        8
                                   Insured unemployment rate (IUR) (%)

                               PBD (in weeks)                    Log(applications) residual
                               95% CI



                        Panel B: Log(applications) residuals, TUR<6%
             80




                                                                                                                                .3
                                                                                                       Log(applications) residual
                   70
       PBD (in weeks)




                                                                                                                          .2
             60




                                                                                                                   .1
       50




                                                                                                     -.1    0
             40




                        2      3          4        5          6        7                        8
                                   Insured unemployment rate (IUR) (%)

                               PBD (in weeks)                    Log(applications) residual
                               95% CI




Note: Data is smoothed using kernel‐weighted local polynomial smoothing with a 0.2 bandwidth. The applications residual is
obtained after regressing log applications on state fixed effects. The two solid vertical lines correspond to 4% IUR (threshold for
EUC), and 6% IUR (threshold for EUC). The dashed vertical line corresponds to 5% IUR (threshold for EB). In Panel B, the data is
restricted to monthly TUR<6% so that TUR conditions are unlikely to trigger higher PBD.

Source: Department of Labor, and CareerBuilder.com for applications and vacancies.



                                                               56
APPENDIX 1


Figure 12: Potential benefit duration (PBD) and applications per CPS unemployed as a function of the total unemployment
rate (Dec. 2008 onwards)



                          Applications per CPS unemployed residuals




                                                                                                  Applications per CPS unemployed resid.
                                                                                                                                     .2
           90




                                                                                                                            0
                 80
    PBD (in weeks)




                                                                                                                    -.2
         7060




                                                                                                            -.4
           50




                                                                                                  -.6
                      4       5          6        7           8                9            10
                                   Total unemployment rate (TUR) (%)

                             PBD (in weeks)            Apps. per CPS unemployed resid.
                             95% CI



Note: Data is smoothed using kernel‐weighted local polynomial smoothing with a 0.2 bandwidth. The applications per CPS
unemployed residual is obtained after regressing applications per CPS unemployed on state fixed effects. The total
unemployment rate is, for each month and state, the average of the weekly three‐months seasonally adjusted unemployment
rate. The two solid vertical lines correspond to 6% TUR (threshold for EUC2 when it was conditional, and for EUC3), and 8.5%
TUR (threshold for EUC4). The two dashed vertical lines correspond to 6.5% TUR (threshold for 13 weeks extended benefits
when the TUR option is active) and 8% TUR (threshold for 20 weeks extended benefits when the TUR option is active).

Source: Department of Labor, and CareerBuilder.com for applications.




                                                            57
APPENDIX 1


Table 11: The impact of potential unemployment benefit duration on log tightness, complete results using the global
parametric fuzzy RD design

                                                              4%<=TUR<=10%
                                                (1)            (2)      (3)                  (4)

 Total PBD in weeks                         -0.0005          0.0039
                                            (0.0017)        (0.0026)
 EUC PBD in weeks                                                          -0.0014       0.0080***
                                                                           (0.0013)       (0.0028)
 EB PBD in weeks                                                            0.0040         -0.0019
                                                                           (0.0062)       (0.0061)
 Total Unemployment Rate (TUR)              -0.1049  -0.0761               -0.0873        -0.1030*
  (%)                                       (0.0706) (0.0645)              (0.0682)       (0.0584)
 TUR^2                                      0.0073*   0.0027                0.0052         0.0052
                                            (0.0044) (0.0040)              (0.0044)       (0.0040)
 Insured Unemployment Rate (IUR)            -0.0375  -0.0766               -0.0251       -0.0971**
   (%)                                      (0.0439) (0.0476)              (0.0494)       (0.0482)
 IUR^2                                       0.0022   0.0046                0.0002         0.0074
                                            (0.0060) (0.0062)              (0.0070)       (0.0064)
 Month fixed effects                                     X                                     X
 Observations                           1,804          1,804                1,804           1,804
 R-squared                             0.9412         0.9617                0.9415          0.9630
 Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
 All regressions include state and year fixed effects.

Note: Tightness is defined as vacancies/applications. Instrumental variables regressions, where PBD is the endogenous variable.
The instrument for Total PBD in weeks is PBD according to statutory rules, not taking into account temporary EUC expirations,
and assuming that all states take up the TUR option. In col. 3‐4, EB PBD is instrumented with EB PBD according to rules and
assuming that all states have elected the TUR option, and EUC PBD is instrumented with the EUC PBD according to rules and
ignoring temporary EUC lapses. The sample includes any observation for which TUR is between 4% and 10%.

Source: Department of Labor, and CareerBuilder.com for applications and vacancies.




                                                             58
APPENDIX 1


Table 12: The impact of PBD on applications, vacancies and tightness using the global parametric fuzzy RD design, sensitivity
to higher‐order polynomials in the assignment variables

                               Log applications              Log vacancies                  Log tightness
                                (1)         (2)              (3)        (4)                (5)         (6)

 EUC PBD in weeks           -0.0070**    -0.0078**         0.0009        0.0013        0.0079***     0.0091***
                             (0.0029)     (0.0036)        (0.0021)      (0.0022)       (0.0029)      (0.0033)
 EB PBD in weeks               0.0044      0.0040           0.0019        0.0017        -0.0024       -0.0023
                             (0.0068)     (0.0069)        (0.0037)      (0.0038)       (0.0068)      (0.0068)
 Total Unemployment           0.1780       -1.5724         0.0163         0.3979        -0.1617       1.9703
  Rate (TUR) (%)             (0.2287)     (1.5643)        (0.3171)      (1.1469)       (0.3715)      (1.4626)
 TUR^2                        -0.0210      0.3756          -0.0070       -0.0957         0.0140       -0.4713
                             (0.0318)     (0.3644)        (0.0454)      (0.2589)       (0.0541)      (0.3324)
 TUR^3                        0.0008      -0.0379          0.0004        0.0093         -0.0004       0.0472
                             (0.0015)     (0.0363)        (0.0021)      (0.0254)       (0.0025)      (0.0328)
 TUR^4                                     0.0014                        -0.0003                      -0.0017
                                          (0.0013)                      (0.0009)                     (0.0012)
 Insured Unemploymen 0.0770                0.2073         -0.0375         0.1253        -0.1145       -0.0820
   Rate (IUR) (%)    (0.0973)             (0.2338)        (0.0906)      (0.2179)        (0.1074)     (0.2467)
 IUR^2               -0.0260               -0.0880        -0.0135        -0.0919         0.0125       -0.0039
                     (0.0229)             (0.1150)        (0.0229)      (0.0971)        (0.0270)     (0.1199)
 IUR^3                0.0018               0.0136          0.0013         0.0165        -0.0005        0.0029
                     (0.0017)             (0.0226)        (0.0019)      (0.0179)        (0.0021)     (0.0232)
 IUR^4                                     -0.0008                       -0.0010                      -0.0002
                                          (0.0015)                                                   (0.0015)

 Observations               1,804     1,804          1,804               1,804           1,804         1,804
 R-squared                 0.9957    0.9957         0.9906              0.9907          0.9630        0.9631
 Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
 All regressions include month and state fixed effects.

Note: Instrumental variables regressions, where PBD is the endogenous variable. EB PBD is instrumented with EB PBD according
to rules and assuming that all states have elected the TUR option, and EUC PBD is instrumented with the EUC PBD according to
rules and ignoring temporary EUC lapses. The sample includes any observation for which TUR is between 4% and 10%.
Tightness is defined as vacancies/applications.

Source: Department of Labor, and CareerBuilder.com for applications and vacancies.




                                                             59
APPENDIX 1


Figure 13: The impact of EUC PBD on applications, using the global parametric fuzzy RD design, and running separate
regressions for different posted wage ranges




Note: The figure plots coefficients on EUC PBD in weeks from running the specification from   Table 3, col. 4, and using samples
with different ranges of posted wages. 90% confidence intervals are represented in the figure.

Source: Department of Labor, and CareerBuilder.com for applications and vacancies.




                                                              60
APPENDIX 1


Table 13: The impact of potential unemployment benefit duration on log vacancies using the global parametric fuzzy RD
design: robustness

                                                       Controlling for                                              Baseline
                                                       industry and Controlling for    Interaction                specification
                                           Baseline       required     state-specific with share UI               with HWOL
                                         specification   education         trends       recipients                    data
                                             (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)                        (5)

 EUC PBD in weeks                            0.0008            0.0003             0.0025             0.0030           0.0026
                                            (0.0021)          (0.0015)           (0.0019)          (0.0031)          (0.0029)
 EB PBD in weeks                             0.0013            0.0011            -0.0015            -0.0007          -0.0013
                                            (0.0028)          (0.0020)           (0.0023)          (0.0083)          (0.0019)
 EUC PBD in weeks*share UI                                                                          -0.0064
   recipients among unempoyed                                                                      (0.0080)
 EB PBD in weeks*share UI                                                                            0.0048
   recipients among unempoyed                                                                      (0.0169)
 Total Unemployment Rate (TUR)                -0.0433          -0.0404          -0.1206**           -0.0414         -0.1679***
  (%)                                        (0.0449)          (0.0394)          (0.0580)          (0.0446)           (0.0593)
 TUR^2                                         0.0020           0.0021           0.0061*             0.0017          0.0102***
                                             (0.0028)          (0.0023)          (0.0034)          (0.0028)           (0.0035)
 Insured Unemployment Rate                  -0.0869**         -0.0645**         -0.0662**         -0.1010***          -0.0177
   (IUR) (%)                                 (0.0352)          (0.0287)          (0.0306)          (0.0369)           (0.0418)
 IUR^2                                         0.0014           0.0008            0.0025             0.0034           -0.0021
                                             (0.0043)          (0.0037)          (0.0039)          (0.0048)           (0.0042)
 Controls for composition of
 vacancies by required education                           X
 Controls for composition of
 vacancies by 2-digit NAICS
 industry                                                  X
 State-specific trends                                                              X
 Observations                          1,804            1,804                    1,804              1,804             1,210
 R-squared                            0.9906            0.9931                   0.9937             0.9907            0.9934
 Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
 All regressions include state and month fixed effects.

Note: Instrumental variables regressions, where PBD is the endogenous variable. EB PBD is instrumented with EB PBD according
to rules and assuming that all states have elected the TUR option, and EUC PBD is instrumented with the EUC PBD according to
rules and ignoring temporary EUC lapses. The sample includes any observation for which TUR is between 4% and 10%. Column
1 is taken from Table 4, column 4. In column 2, controls are included for the share of vacancies in each education category (see
summary statistics Table 1), and for the share of vacancies in each 2‐digit NAICS code. In column 4, the share of UI recipients is,
for each state, the average share of UI recipients among all unemployed between December 2008 and the end of the sample;
the share of UI recipients (not interacted with PBD) is controlled for in the regression. In column 5, the sample is restricted to
vacancies with posted wages of $100 000 or less per year. In column 6, the sample is restricted to vacancies that pay more than
$100 000 per year.

Source: Department of Labor, and CareerBuilder.com for applications and vacancies.




                                                               61
APPENDIX 1


Table 14: The impact of PBD on log applications using the global parametric fuzzy RD design: first difference, and lags and
leads of PBD

                            Outcome in                                   Lags and leads of PBD
                          first difference        L3            L2          L1           F1              F2            F3
                                 (1)              (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)             (6)           (7)

EUC PBD in weeks             -0.0011        -0.0065*      -0.0068*        -0.0069**     -0.0059*      -0.0046       -0.0029
                             (0.0007)       (0.0034)      (0.0035)         (0.0033)     (0.0030)      (0.0034)      (0.0035)
EB PBD in weeks              -0.0000         0.0028         0.0015          0.0003       0.0043        0.0055        0.0065
                             (0.0010)       (0.0069)      (0.0068)         (0.0073)     (0.0074)      (0.0071)      (0.0064)
Total Unemployment         -0.0199***        0.0308         0.0351          0.0410       0.0655        0.0605        0.0491
  Rate (TUR) (%)             (0.0064)       (0.0560)      (0.0554)         (0.0563)     (0.0570)      (0.0609)      (0.0649)
TUR^2                       0.0013**         -0.0014       -0.0013         -0.0014       -0.0041      -0.0044       -0.0041
                             (0.0005)       (0.0035)      (0.0034)         (0.0034)     (0.0032)      (0.0031)      (0.0031)
Insured Unemployment        -0.0186**        -0.0010       -0.0073         -0.0084       0.0155        0.0165        0.0074
 Rate (IUR) (%)              (0.0075)       (0.0427)      (0.0453)         (0.0481)     (0.0478)      (0.0473)      (0.0477)
IUR^2                       0.0020**         -0.0038       -0.0032         -0.0032       -0.0072      -0.0075       -0.0062
                             (0.0008)       (0.0047)      (0.0052)         (0.0059)     (0.0063)      (0.0060)      (0.0059)
Observations                   1,772          1,707         1,740           1,772         1,760        1,717         1,677
R-squared                     0.7667         0.9958         0.9958          0.9957       0.9958        0.9958        0.9958
Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
All regressions include state and monthly date fixed effects.


Note: Instrumental variables regressions, where PBD is the endogenous variable. EB PBD is instrumented with EB PBD according
to rules and assuming that all states have elected the TUR option, and EUC PBD is instrumented with the EUC PBD according to
rules and ignoring temporary EUC lapses. The sample includes any observation for which TUR is between 4% and 10%. In
column 1, the outcome variable is the first difference in log applications. In columns 2‐7, EUC PBD and EB PBD are used in lags
or leads as described by the column heading.

Source: Department of Labor, and CareerBuilder.com for applications and vacancies.




                                                              62
APPENDIX 1


Table 15: The impact of PBD on log jobs using the global parametric fuzzy RD design: first difference, and lags and leads of
PBD

                             Outcome in                                   Lags and leads of PBD
                           first difference       L3            L2           L1           F1              F2            F3
                                  (1)             (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)             (6)           (7)

EUC PBD in weeks            -0.0002          0.0002        0.0015           0.0016        0.0004        0.0008        0.0006
                            (0.0006)        (0.0025)      (0.0027)         (0.0024)      (0.0022)      (0.0025)      (0.0027)
EB PBD in weeks             -0.0006          0.0013        0.0014           0.0002        0.0017        0.0010        0.0004
                            (0.0010)        (0.0033)      (0.0029)         (0.0028)      (0.0030)      (0.0030)      (0.0030)
Total Unemployment          -0.0175          -0.0245      -0.0337          -0.0459       -0.0445       -0.0515       -0.0537
  Rate (TUR) (%)            (0.0107)        (0.0469)      (0.0456)         (0.0452)      (0.0456)      (0.0480)      (0.0496)
TUR^2                       0.0016**         0.0014        0.0016           0.0024        0.0020        0.0026        0.0029
                            (0.0008)        (0.0031)      (0.0030)         (0.0029)      (0.0026)      (0.0025)      (0.0025)
Insured Unemployment         0.0105        -0.0844**     -0.0813**        -0.0858**     -0.0859**     -0.0887**     -0.0870**
  Rate (IUR) (%)            (0.0119)        (0.0354)      (0.0346)         (0.0341)      (0.0360)      (0.0366)      (0.0367)
IUR^2                        0.0006          0.0018        0.0012           0.0016        0.0012        0.0016        0.0016
                            (0.0013)        (0.0041)      (0.0042)         (0.0042)      (0.0044)      (0.0044)      (0.0044)
Observations                  1,772           1,707        1,740            1,772         1,760         1,717         1,677
R-squared                    0.6200          0.9911        0.9910           0.9908        0.9906        0.9906        0.9905
Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
All regressions include state and monthly date fixed effects.


Note: Instrumental variables regressions, where PBD is the endogenous variable. EB PBD is instrumented with EB PBD according
to rules and assuming that all states have elected the TUR option, and EUC PBD is instrumented with the EUC PBD according to
rules and ignoring temporary EUC lapses. The sample includes any observation for which TUR is between 4% and 10%. In
column 1, the outcome variable is the first difference in log jobs. In columns 2‐7, EUC PBD and EB PBD are used in lags or leads
as described by the column heading.

Source: Department of Labor, and CareerBuilder.com for applications and vacancies.




                                                              63
APPENDIX 2




APPENDIX 2: local parametric fuzzy regression discontinuity design
Crossing a threshold in the total unemployment rate (TUR) is much more likely to lead to an actual
increase in PBD than crossing a threshold in the insured unemployment rate (IUR) (see p. 8). I therefore
focus on TUR thresholds. Among all the TUR thresholds, the one at 6% TUR for EUC is the best candidate
for a regression discontinuity design because it applies to all states. Moreover, around 6% TUR, states
would typically not have extended benefits (EB). Indeed, TUR must be above 6.5% in the states with a
TUR option for EB to be turned on. By contrast, the next EUC TUR threshold is met at 8.5%, which would
trigger EB in states that have an 8% TUR threshold for EB. The potential triggering of EB would introduce
additional interpretation issues, thus the EUC discontinuity around 6% is a better option.

Increases in PBD occur at specific TUR thresholds (Figure 14). The data in the figure is at the week by
state level for December 2008 to October 2009, a period during which the PBD schedule as a function of
TUR was constant. Two main reasons justify the limitation of observations to December 2008 to October
2009. First, prior to December 2008, EUC did not depend on TUR, and after October 2009, PBD increased
at more TUR thresholds. Second, after October 2009, there were few states with TUR just below 6%,
making that latter period unsuitable for a regression discontinuity design around 6% TUR.

If we focus on 1 percentage point around 6% TUR (i.e. 5.5% TUR to 6.4% TUR) then no clear discontinuity
in PBD is observed (Appendix 2, Figure 14, blue hollow circles). This is because some states are eligible
for EB or EUC under IUR conditions, which means that PBD can be at a higher level even when TUR is
below 6%. Additionally, even when TUR is above 6%, some states have the lower PBD level because
there is usually a delay between when a state crosses the threshold and when benefits become
available. To focus on a situation where PBD only depends on TUR (and not IUR), and to apply a
standard fuzzy regression discontinuity design, I exclude some of the observations. First, state‐week
observations are dropped where any EB is available due to IUR conditions. Second, I also drop state‐
week observations where TUR is below 6% and the IUR condition for EUC is satisfied. Substantively,
what these exclusions do is drop the 15% of state‐week observations42 in the 5.5% to 6.4% TUR range
where IUR is unusually high compared to TUR. This procedure leaves only observations where TUR is
between 5.5% to 6.4% and PBD is either 46 or 59 weeks (red diamonds in Appendix 2, Figure 14).

42
  If we don’t exclude these observations, the point estimates for the impact of PBD in Appendix 2, Table 16 are
essentially unchanged.

                                                      64
APPENDIX 2


Some states may value higher PBD and might want to manipulate their unemployment rate towards
that objective43, which would result in bunching of observations at the threshold, potentially
compromising the assumptions behind the fuzzy regression discontinuity design. However, no evidence
for bunching at the 6% TUR threshold was found (Appendix 2, Figure 15).

The data from CareerBuilder is only available at the monthly level, even though PBD varies at the weekly
level. I therefore use the monthly average of PBD, and only include months where TUR lies between
5.5% and 6.4% in each and every week. With monthly data on the outcomes of interest, the fuzzy
regression discontinuity framework is embodied in the following instrumental variables regression:




where      is log applications, log vacancies or log tightness (i.e. log vacancies‐log applications) in state
and month ,        is the PBD in weeks,       is a vector of controls which can include a quadratic in TUR
and IUR,     is a year fixed effect,   is a state fixed effect, and   is the error term. Standard errors are
clustered at the state level. Given that this is a fuzzy regression discontinuity design,     is instrumented
with the PBD that should be in place given program rules. The instrument is therefore PBD such that
extra weeks of benefit are made available by states without delay.

This application of a fuzzy regression discontinuity design is similar to the work by Angrist and Lavy
(1999). While it is typical to include the forcing variable (here TUR) as a control in a regression
discontinuity design, I report results both with and without this control. Indeed, the TUR is endogenous
in a regression with applications on the left‐hand side: if jobseekers send in fewer applications, then, all
other things equal, unemployment will increase.

As previously stated, using the EUC 6% TUR threshold is the best one can do with a single threshold in
this sample, but it leaves only 44 state‐month observations44. A larger sample would be desirable,
though it will not be possible to use the regression discontinuity framework strictly speaking. Figure 14
illustrates why this is the case: while the crossing of TUR thresholds plays an important role in the
determination of PBD, the relationship between PBD and TUR does not present very sharp
discontinuities.



43
   Such manipulation would however be exceedingly difficult in practice since states do not control the data
collection and calculation of the TUR by the Bureau of Labor statistics.
44
   There are 21 states in the sample.

                                                      65
APPENDIX 2


The impact of PBD on applications is negative and significant (Appendix 1, Table 16, col. 1). A 1‐week
increase in PBD decreases applications by 1.36%. If we compare this estimate to the results from the
timing of events approach, a 1.36% decrease in applications corresponds to the impact of PBD on
applications 4 months after the largest PBD increase45. Therefore, while the impact estimated by the
fuzzy regression discontinuity design is large, it is within the range of what was found for the timing of
events approach.

Given that unemployment is also a potential determinant of applications, it is important to see how
results change when we control for this variables. When controlling for a quadratic in TUR, which is the
forcing variable, the quadratic in TUR itself does not have a significant impact on applications. The
impact of PBD on log applications stays negative but becomes statistically insignificant (Appendix 1,
Table 16, col. 2). While this specification lacks power (see also the graphical analysis in Appendix 1,
Figure 16, which is supportive of the results but noisy), it suggests that PBD increases led to decreases in
applications.

By contrast, the impact of PBD on vacancies is positive and insignificant both without and with controls
(Appendix 1, Table 16, cols. 3 and 4). Therefore, the decline in applications around the 6% TUR
discontinuity was not accompanied by a decline in the number of vacancies.

Finally the impact of PBD on tightness is positive and significant in a regression without controls for the
unemployment rate (Appendix 1, Table 16, col. 5), and becomes insignificant when controls for the
unemployment rate are added (Appendix 1, Table 16, col. 6).

Overall, the results from the fuzzy regression discontinuity approach are consistent with the results from
the timing of events approach. Indeed, there is no significant impact of PBD on vacancies and a negative
impact of PBD on applications. The results from the fuzzy regression discontinuity design therefore
agree with the timing of events approach to show that longer PBD increases labor market tightness.




45
  Indeed, in the timing of events approach, the estimated impact in month 3 (see Figure 3) is ‐0.21, which is for a
15 weeks increase in PBD: this implies that a one week increase in PBD decreases applications by 1.4%.

                                                        66
APPENDIX 2


Figure 14: Potential unemployment benefit duration as a function of TUR, weekly level data, December 2008 to October 2009

           79
           72
    PBD (in weeks)
     59    46




                     3   4           5         6         7         8                     9           10
                                    Total unemployment rate (TUR) (%)

                             PBD (in weeks)           PBD (in weeks) for fuzzyy RD



Note: Each circle corresponds to a state and week. The total unemployment rate is the weekly three‐months seasonally
adjusted unemployment rate. The diamonds correspond to the states and weeks that are retained for the fuzzy regression
discontinuity graphs and regressions. The solid vertical line corresponds to the 6% TUR threshold for EUC. The dashed vertical
lines correspond to the 6.5% and 8% thresholds for EB.

Source: Department of Labor.




                                                             67
APPENDIX 2


Figure 15: The distribution of the total unemployment rate (TUR) in the fuzzy RD sample, weekly level data

       2
       1.5
    Density
      1.5
       0




              5.4           5.6            5.8           6            6.2                      6.4
                                    Total unemployment rate (TUR) (%)


Note: The total unemployment rate is the weekly three‐months seasonally adjusted unemployment rate.

Source: Department of Labor.




                                                            68
APPENDIX 2


Figure 16: RD graph for the impact of EUC on log vacancies and log applications around 6% unemployment rate (TUR),
December 2008 to October 2009, monthly data




                           Panel A: Log(vacancies) relative to month -2




                                                                                                                           .15
                60




                                                                                                     Log(vacancies) residuals
       PBD (in weeks)




                                                                                                                      .1
                55




                                                                                                              .05
         50




                                                                                                   -.05 0
                45




                           5          5.5              6                 6.5                  7

                                 PBD (in weeks)        Log(vacancies) residuals



                           Panel B: Log(applications) relative to month -2




                                                                                                    Log(applications) residuals
                      60




                                                                                                     -.15 -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1
       PBD (in weeks)
         50     55
               45




                           5         5.5            6             6.5                         7
                                     Total unemployment rate (TUR) (%)

                                PBD (in weeks)        Log(applications) residuals




Note: The vacancies (Panel A) and applications (Panel B) residuals are obtained after regressing respectively log vacancies and
log applications on state and year fixed effects. The sample is restricted to points that are valid to estimate the impact of the
discontinuous change in PBD at 6% TUR due to EUC regulations between December 2008 and October 2009 (see text for more
details). The total unemployment rate is, for each month and state, the average of the weekly three‐months seasonally
adjusted unemployment rate. The applications residuals and the PBD are averaged over 0.1 percentage point TUR bins.

Source: Department of Labor, and CareerBuilder.com for applications.




                                                              69
APPENDIX 2


Table 16: The impact of potential benefit duration on applications, vacancies and tightness: fuzzy regression discontinuity

                                       Log applications               Log vacancies                  Log tightness
                                        (1)         (2)               (3)        (4)                (5)         (6)

 Total PBD in weeks                 -0.0136*      -0.0032          0.0064        0.0102         0.0200***      0.0134
                                    (0.0076)      (0.0156)        (0.0094)      (0.0123)        (0.0051)      (0.0100)
 Total Unemployment Rate                          6.3144*                        4.2366                       -2.0778
  (TUR) (%)                                       (3.6059)                      (4.0899)                      (3.1294)
 TUR^2                                            -0.5486*                      -0.3625                        0.1861
                                                  (0.2938)                      (0.3506)                      (0.2563)
 Insured Unemployment Rate
  (IUR) (%)
 IUR^2


 Observations                      44          44          44                      44              44            44
 R-squared                       0.9972      0.9976      0.9962                  0.9964          0.9903        0.9916
 Robust standard errors clustered by state in parentheses
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
 All regressions include state and year fixed effects.


Note: Instrumental variables regressions. Total PBD in weeks is instrumented by PBD according to statutory rules, not taking
into account temporary EUC expirations, and assuming that all states take up the TUR option. The sample is restricted to points
that are valid to estimate the impact of the discontinuous change in PBD at 6% TUR due to EUC regulations between December
2008 and October 2009. Tightness is defined as vacancies/applications. See text for more details.

Source: Department of Labor, and CareerBuilder.com for applications and vacancies.




                                                             70
APPENDIX 3




APPENDIX 3: additional specifications for the county pair difference
identification strategy
This appendix presents additional specifications for the county pair difference identification strategy.
Specifically, I present regressions a la Hagedorn et al. (2013) and a la Dube, Lester, and Reich (2010).

For the regressions a la Hagedorn et al. (2013), I adopt the following specification:

                             Δ    ,           Δ                Δ

where        is the outcome in county in state at date .               is the number of weeks of EUC
available,        is the number of weeks of EB available. Δ , stands for a double difference: for county
  in state and its paired county ′ in state ′, we have Δ ,                     ,                            ,
   ′ ′ . Δc stands for the difference across counties in a pair at a given date .           is a date fixed effect
(monthly).      is the error term.

The specification above was chosen to be as transparent as possible while still being very close to the
one used by Hagedorn et al. (2013). There are two minor differences between this specification and the
one used in Hagedorn et al. (2013).

        I take the undiscounted lead of the first difference46 of the outcomes over time.
        I do not estimate factor loadings for common time effects but simply use a set of time
         (monthly) dummies. Not using any time effects makes no difference to the qualitative results.

For the regressions a la Dube, Lester, and Reich (2010), I use the following specification:




where       is the residual of outcome in county in state at date , after a regression of                on
county fixed effects. Similarly,          is the residual of the number of weeks of EUC available after
county fixed effects, and        is the residual of the number of weeks of EB available after county fixed
effects.    is a county pair by monthly date fixed effect.       is the error term, and standard errors are
clustered by border segment, i.e. the set of all counties along a given state border.




46
  For comparison, I have also run as specification from this paper that relies on the global parametric fuzzy
regression discontinuity (i.e. in Table 3 and Table 4), but using the first difference of the outcome. PBD (EUC and
EB) has no significant impact on the first‐difference of applications (Appendix 1 Table 14, col. 1) or vacancies
(Appendix 1, Table 15, col. 1), though EUC PBD still has a negative (insignificant) impact on applications.

                                                        71
APPENDIX 3


The only difference between this specification and the one used in Dube, Lester, and Reich (2010) is the
clustering of standard errors: for simplicity, I use border segment clustering, rather than separately
clustering on state and border segment.

Both the regressions a la Hagedorn et al. (2013) (Appendix 3, Table 17, col. 1‐3) and a la Dube, Lester,
and Reich (2010) (Appendix 3, Table 17, col. 4‐6) yield an insignificant effect of EUC PBD and EB PBD on
applications, vacancies and labor market tightness.




                                                  72
APPENDIX 3


Table 17: Regressions a la Hagedorn et al. (2013) and Dube et al. (2010)

                                      A la Hagedorn et al. (2013)                          A la Dube et al. (2010)
                                                                                   Log apps       Log jobs      Log tight
                               dd.Log apps dd.Log jobs dd.Log tight                  resid.         resid.        resid.
                                    (1)        (2)         (3)                         (4)            (5)           (6)

 d.EUC PBD in weeks                0.0008          0.0012          0.0003
                                  (0.0020)        (0.0009)        (0.0018)
 d.EB PBD in weeks                -0.0008         -0.0002          0.0005
                                  (0.0010)        (0.0004)        (0.0009)
 EUC PBD in weeks resid.                                                              0.0043        0.0036         -0.0018
                                                                                     (0.0062)      (0.0038)        (0.0052)
 EB PBD in weeks resid.                                                               -0.0009      -0.0004          0.0002
                                                                                     (0.0025)      (0.0028)        (0.0029)
 Time fixed effects               X                   X              X
 County pair by time                                                                    X               X              X
   fixed effects
 Observations                  32,889             37,409          32,889             87,990         93,689         87,990
 R-squared                     0.0027             0.0036          0.0023             0.6212         0.6339         0.6431
 Standard errors in parentheses
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Note: The sample is composed of county pairs straddling state borders. In columns 1‐3, outcomes are defined in double
differences: for outcome in county c in state s and paired county c' in state s', we have Δ ,           ,

      ,              . In columns 4‐6, residuals are from a regression of the variable on county fixed effects. In columns 4‐6,
standard errors are clustered by border segment, where a border segment is the set of all counties along a given state border.
Tight in col. 3 and 6 stands for tightness, which is defined as vacancies/applications. See text above for more details.

Source: Department of Labor, and CareerBuilder.com for applications and vacancies.




                                                             73
