NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MEASURING TIME PREFERENCES
Jonathan D. Cohen
Keith Marzilli Ericson
David Laibson
John Myles White
Working Paper 22455
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22455

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2016

We thank Steven Durlauf and five anonymous referees at the Journal of Economic Literature for thoughtful
comments. We thank Layne Kirshon, Omeed Maghzian, Lea Nagel, and Kartik Vira for outstanding
research assistance. We acknowledge financial support from the National Institutes of Health (NIA
R01AG021650 and P01AG005842) and the Pershing Square Fund for Research in the Foundations
of Human Behavior. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2016 by Jonathan D. Cohen, Keith Marzilli Ericson, David Laibson, and John Myles White. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Measuring Time Preferences
Jonathan D. Cohen, Keith Marzilli Ericson, David Laibson, and John Myles White
NBER Working Paper No. 22455
July 2016, Revised February 2019
JEL No. D03,D9
ABSTRACT
We review research that measures time preferences—i.e., preferences over intertemporal tradeoffs.
We distinguish between studies using financial flows, which we call “money earlier or later” (MEL)
decisions and studies that use time-dated consumption/effort. Under different structural models, we
show how to translate what MEL experiments directly measure (required rates of return for financial
flows) into a discount function over utils. We summarize empirical regularities found in MEL studies
and the predictive power of those studies. We explain why MEL choices are driven in part by some
factors that are distinct from underlying time preferences.

Jonathan D. Cohen
Green Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
jdc@princeton.edu

David Laibson
Department of Economics
Littauer M-12
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dlaibson@gmail.com

Keith Marzilli Ericson
Boston University Questrom School of Business
595 Commonwealth Avenue
John Myles White
Boston, MA 02215
Green Hall
and NBER
Princeton University
kericson@bu.edu
Princeton, NJ 08540
jmw@johnmyleswhite.com

Measuring Time Preferences

1. Introduction
In the early 1980s, almost all economists embraced a single model of intertemporal choice: the
classical discounted utility model (Samuelson 1937), which features time-separable utility flows
and exponential discounting. In this parsimonious framework, utils delayed τ periods from the
present are given weight δτ, where δ is the discount factor.
During the 1980’s, researchers began conducting experiments that were designed to test
the classical discounted utility model. Since it is hard to give subjects “utils”, experimenters
gave them what was considered to be the next best thing: money. For example, subjects would
choose between X dollars at an early date or Y dollars at a later date. We call these experiments,
which offer participants time-dated monetary payments, Money Earlier or Later (MEL)
experiments. Under the assumption that promised time-dated payments and time-dated utils are
interchangeable—an assumption that we will critically examine—MEL experiments generate
numerous empirical regularities that contradict the standard discounted utility model. These
anomalies, which are discussed below (section 5), include the magnitude effect, diminishing
impatience, sub-additive discounting, and many others.
As this apparently anomalous experimental evidence accumulated, researchers began to
propose theoretical fixes. Several theories were proposed that could account for some of the
anomalous data emerging from MEL studies. These included hyperbolic discounting (Strotz
1955; Ainslie 1975, 1992, 2001, 2012; Loewenstein and Prelec 1992), present-biased preferences
(Laibson 1997; O’Donoghue and Rabin 1999a, 1999b), temptation-based preferences (Gul and
Pesendorfer 2001), dual-self preferences (Metcalfe and Mischel 1999; Thaler and Shefrin 1981;
Fudenberg and Levine 2006; Loewenstein and O’Donoghue 2004), and psychometric distortions
such as log time perceptions (Read 2001 originates this idea which is expanded upon by
Zauberman et al. 2009).
The literature has continued to evolve, growing more complicated as the number of
theories has mushroomed. Some observers have argued that no existing framework can explain
the rich set of anomalies that have emerged from the MEL experimental paradigm (Frederick,
Loewenstein and O’Donoghue, 2002).
In recent years, a new set of challenges has arisen. Researchers have begun to question
the MEL methodology itself. This experimental paradigm can be motivated by assuming that a
monetary payment at date t generates a dollar-equivalent incremental consumption event at time
t (and the corresponding utility flow at time t). This assumption is inconsistent both with the
empirical evidence and with standard economic theory. Only perfectly liquidity-constrained
consumers or perfectly myopic consumers would instantly consume every payment they receive,
with zero intertemporal smoothing.

Page 2

Measuring Time Preferences

Alternatively, the MEL paradigm can be motivated by assuming that income (or financial
flows) is the appropriate fundamental argument of the utility function. This assumption is made
occasionally in the economics literature, and is a coherent alternative to the reigning
consumption-based model of utility. Nevertheless, an income-based utility function is not
usually used in the economics literature. Indeed, the consumption literature starts by assuming
that consumption is the argument of the utility function and that consumption is therefore being
smoothed over the lifecycle (i.e., consumption is not equal to income) because the utility
function is concave (e.g., see Friedman 1957; Modigliani and Brumberg 1954; and Hall 1978).
Because the myopic consumption model (consumption = income) is empirically
contradicted and because most economists believe that consumption is the proper argument of
the utility function, the MEL methodology itself has become a target of criticism. In light of
these criticisms, it has become less clear what the MEL methodology is measuring.
The literature is now divided on many dimensions, including both the theoretical
foundations of intertemporal preferences and the empirical methods that we should use to
measure intertemporal preferences. On the theory side, there is a division between models that
assume dynamic inconsistency (often adopted by behavioral economists) and models that assume
dynamically consistent preferences.1 On the empirical side, there is a division between recent
work critical of the MEL framework (Chabris et al. 2008; Epper, Fehr-Duda, and Bruhin 2011;
Augenblick, Niederle, and Sprenger 2015; Ericson et al. 2015), and research that uses the
assumption that choices in MEL experiments are equivalent to choices over time-dated utility
flows (for instance, much of the literature reviewed in Frederick, Loewenstein and O’Donoghue
2002; Andersen et al. 2008; Benhabib, Bisin and Schotter 2010; Halevy 2014, 2015). Because of
its methodological simplicity, the MEL framework remains the most widely used paradigm for
estimating time preferences.
In this review, we take the reader through this developing literature, pointing out the
explicit and implicit assumptions that researchers have made along the way and the problems
with those assumptions. We offer tips on how researchers should navigate the shoals of the time
preferences literature: what are the pros and cons of the different theories and the different
empirical methods that are now available?
The bad news is that the literature is in discord, without a shared theoretical framework or
a broadly accepted empirical methodology. The good news is that conceptual discord is
invigorating the intertemporal choice literature and opening the way for new ideas that we hope
will resolve the multiple conceptual and methodological contradictions that have emerged.
1

Preferences are dynamically consistent iff all the state-contingent preferences held at time t agree with the statecontingent preferences held at time t+τ for all values of t and τ.

Page 3

Measuring Time Preferences

Despite this discord, most of the empirical literature relies on a common method: MEL.
In Figure 1, we demonstrate this by providing an empirical snapshot of the empirical side of the
discounting literature. Figure 1 summarizes the characteristics of empirical studies identified
using Google Scholar to search for papers reporting measurements of time preferences (see our
appendix for details, including keywords used and a complete list of the papers identified). While
the results of such a search are crude—we undoubtedly missed some relevant papers—they
provide a rough-and-ready guide to the overall state of the literature. MEL is a common
methodology, with column 2 showing that more than 60% of papers use it. Most papers examine
behavior in the lab, but a substantial minority examines behavior in the field (column 3).
Columns 4 and 5 describe the type of individuals being studied. While students still form an
important study population, a majority of papers examine the behavior of the general population
(column 4); about two-thirds of the papers study respondents in the U.S. or Europe. Although
the literature currently relies on MEL, there is substantial disagreement about the interpretation
of MEL data as well as other data from intertemporal choice studies. Much of our review
struggles to interpret and reconcile these competing interpretations.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the theoretical frameworks that
economists have used to study time preferences. We focus on the discounted utility model, which
is the paradigm most commonly employed when modeling time preferences. We also discuss
other modeling frameworks, including multiple-self models, temptation models, and models of
heuristic-based decision-making.
Section 3 introduces the conceptually simplest and most direct way to measure time
preferences. It focuses on empirical studies in which individuals choose among mutually
exclusive consumption events that are available at various points in time (e.g., eating a spoonful
of ice cream now or two spoonfuls of ice cream at a specific later date), holding fixed all other
consumption. We then generalize these ideas and describe a wider class of empirical strategies
that measure time preferences using real consumption events. This contrasts with studies that
analyze preferences over financial flows by manipulating the dates on which cash payments are
received by an experimental subject.
Section 4 then considers experiments in which financial events, rather than consumption
events, are the objects of choice. The vast majority of such studies, and of intertemporal choice
more generally, have used the Money Earlier or Later (MEL) framework (see the eighth column
in Figure 1: “Rewards”). We describe the strong assumptions that are needed to use MEL studies
to measure time preferences.
Section 5 summarizes the regularities—often inconsistent with classical theory—
observed in MEL studies. We explain why many of these regularities are not predicted by the

Page 4

Measuring Time Preferences

discounted utility model and examine potential explanations for the anomalies.
Section 6 compares findings from MEL studies inside and outside of the laboratory. We
review the predictive power of time preference measurements from such studies for other
economic behavior that involves intertemporal tradeoffs. This predictive power is usually weak
in terms of effect sizes (though the results are often statistically significant): in almost all cases,
measures of time preference (and self-regulation) explain less than 5% of the cross sectional
variation in economic behaviors that require intertemporal tradeoffs. This predictive power is
likely to improve as we obtain better methods for inferring time preferences. However, we argue
that it is not likely to improve a great deal, because complex intertemporal choices are affected
by many factors, not just domain general time preferences.
Section 7 discusses the broad lessons that can be drawn from the existing literature. We argue
that the structure of time preferences is still poorly understood and that the most commonly used
methodologies for measuring time preferences are not well-suited to the study of time
preferences (if consumption is the argument of the utility function). We provide a summary of
the alternative methods that are likely to be the most fruitful.

Page 5

Measuring Time Preferences

60%
50%

Lab
Yes

USA

Yes

40%
30%
20%

No

Field

10%
0%

No

N/A

Europe

Asia
N/A

No

Linear

N/A

None

Yes

Hyp. Money

Yes

Africa

Other

Real money

70%

Students

Percentage of Sample

80%

Other

No model

90%

Other

Non-linear

Both

General population

100%

Not relevant

Uncertain Uncertain
Uncertain
Uncertain Uncertain
Uncertain
Partially Both

Yes
Yes

No
No
No

N/A

N/A

N/A

Characteristics

Figure 1. Distribution of Characteristics for Recent Empirical Discounting Papers. Note:
Result of the following Google Scholar Search conducted August 2014: (discount OR
discounting) AND utility AND “intertemporal choice" AND “time preferences” AND "standard
errors". After eliminating duplicates and reprints, 222 publications remain. Year of publication
min =1980, max=2014, mean=2009.8. Papers may appear more than once in the “Lab or
Field,” “Linear Utility,” and “Rewards” columns if they fit more than one category (e.g. a
paper with a lab and a field component”). The “Intertemporal Substitution” column classifies
whether a paper allowed for the possibility that individuals might substitute consumption across
time when estimating its discounting model (“Yes”) or assumed individuals consumed money or
other rewards when they were received (“No”). The “Linear Utility” column classifies whether
the paper’s model allows for non-linear utility functions in its model. The “Exponential”,
“Hyperbolic”, and “Quasi-Hyperbolic” indicate whether any of those discount functions were
estimated in the paper.

Page 6

Measuring Time Preferences

2. What are Time Preferences?
2.a) The General Form of the Discounted Utility Model
In this section, we review the theoretical framework commonly used by economists to model
time preferences. This model is used for both positive applications (describing and predicting
behavior) and normative applications (prescribing optimal individual behavior and/or optimal
public policy).
We begin with discrete-time notation. Let t index the time of the current period and τ
index relative time (i.e., an event τ periods after date t). Let xt+τ represent total consumption (a
consumption vector) at time t+τ. Assume that a stationary discount function D(τ) devalues
future utility flows based on their distance, τ, from the present. This discount function D(τ) is
stationary in the sense that it does not depend on the current period t and only varies with the
discounting horizon, 𝜏. Without loss of generality, D(0) is normalized to 1. The value of D(τ) is
referred to as the discount function at horizon τ.
It is also common to assume a stationary flow utility function (a.k.a. felicity function)
u(xt) that depends on current consumption xt.. The flow utility function is stationary in the sense
that it does not depend directly on time, t, and only depends on consumption. This is sometimes
generalized to allow the utility function u(.) to also depend on other state variables Ωt (e.g. habits
as in Abel (1990) or health status), implying u(xt, Ωt). In some implementations, especially
papers that estimate discount functions, the argument of the utility function is monetary payment
(or income) received by the individual on that date, rather than consumption. We return to this
alternative approach below.
The utility flow in period t+τ, viewed from the perspective of period t, has discounted
value D(τ)u(xt+τ, Ωt+τ). To simplify notation, we drop the state vector, Ωt+τ, going forward. Total
forward looking utility (from the perspective of time t) is then the sum of the per-period
discounted utility flows:2
∑

𝐷 𝜏 𝑢 𝑥

.

(1)

We call the following set of three assumptions (A1-A3) the discounted utility model:
A1. Stationary3 discount function D(τ)
A2. Stationary flow utility function u(xt+τ)
2
Some researchers have contemplated utility functions that look both forward and backward (e.g., Caplin and Leahy
2004).
3
Stationary functions depend only on relative time (and other state and flow variables), not on absolute time. Agedependent discounting (e.g., as in Robson and Samuelson (2009)) would be an example of a discount function that
violates Assumption A1.

Page 7

Measuring Time Preferences

A3. Total utility from the perspective of date t is a sum of discounted flow utilities:
∑ 𝐷 𝜏 𝑢 𝑥
.
Time preferences are also often expressed in terms of a discount rate, which is the rate at
which the value of the discount function declines (at a particular horizon τ). In discrete time, the
discount rate at horizon τ is usually defined as
Discount rate at horizon 𝜏 = ρ 𝜏 ≡

ln[D(τ+1) / D(τ)] ≈

[D(τ+1) - D(τ)] / D(τ).

This final approximation is a first-order Taylor expansion of - ln[D(τ+1) / D(τ)] around
D(τ+1)/D(τ) = 1.
The (one-period) discount factor with respect to horizons τ+1 and τ is defined as
Discount factor at horizon 𝜏 ≡ D(τ+1) / D(τ).
The n-period discount factor with respect to horizons τ+n and τ is D(τ+n) / D(τ). Thus, the (oneperiod) discount factor is the level of devaluation of 1 util when its consumption is moved from
horizon τ to horizon τ+1. The discount rate and the discount factor are related by the equation:
Discount rate = ρ 𝜏 =

ln(Discount factor) ≈ 1 – (Discount factor) = 1 -

.

(2)

These concepts also have continuous-time generalizations. When the discount function is
differentiable, the instantaneous discount rate is defined:
Instantaneous discount rate at horizon 𝜏 ≡ ρ 𝜏
Likewise, we can define an instantaneous discount factor:
Instantaneous discount factor at horizon τ ≡ exp

.

(3)

ρ 𝜏 .

(4)

Depending on the application, time discounting may be motivated by many different
mechanisms, including mortality (i.e., the chance that the agent won’t be alive to experience utils
in the future), myopia (i.e., an inability to accurately forecast the future4), and pure time
preferences (i.e., even excluding mortality effects, economic agents might not value utils in the
future as much as they value utils today).5
4

See Böhm-Bawerk (1890), Pigou (1920), Loewenstein (1992), and Gabaix and Laibson (2017).
Ethicists disagree whether pure time preferences (which exclude mortality risk) can be normatively justified. There
is a related debate over the normatively correct discount rate to use for intergenerational discounting (see Sen 1957;
Schelling 1995; Gollier 2012; and discussions in the literature on climate change in Stern 2007 and Goulder and
Williams 2012). The evolution of time discounting has also been studied: for instance, Robson and Samuelson
(2009) argue that evolution selects for time discounting rates that are linked to the mortality rate and population
growth rate, and can produce present-bias in the presence of aggregate mortality shocks.
5

Page 8

Measuring Time Preferences

Note that a discount rate is different, in theory, from an interest rate, though they may be
linked in general equilibrium. Time preferences are (usually) defined by utility tradeoffs. Interest
rates are defined as the return on savings or the cost of borrowing. We will discuss the wedge
between time preferences and interest rates below. In principle, time preferences are also distinct
from risk preferences, however, some authors have argued that delay in reward receipt is
inherently (or at least, usually) linked to risk (e.g., Sozou 1998; Dasgupta and Maskin 2005;
Halevy 2008; Epper, Fehr-Duda; and Bruhin 2011; Saito 2011; and Andreoni and Sprenger
2012b), creating a confound for the standard model, which assumes a conceptual distinction
between the two phenomena.
Finally, it is important to emphasize that our benchmark model makes no restriction
regarding heterogeneity across economic agents; see Coller, Harrison, and Rutström (2011) for a
conceptual framework and evidence of such heterogeneity.
2.b) Samuelson’s Classical Discounted Utility Model
The classical discounted utility model (Samuelson 1937; axiomatized by Koopmans 1960) uses
the three assumptions discussed above (A1-A3) and employs the additional restriction that the
discount function is exponential:
5
Discount function
𝐷 𝜏
δ
This gives the following:
𝐷 𝜏 1
δ
6
Discount factor
𝐷 𝜏
Discount rate
ln δ
1 δ
7
The classical discounted utility model implies that choices are time-consistent, that is,
individuals will make the same utility tradeoff between two periods (s vs. s+τ) regardless of
when (on or before date s) they make the allocation (Strotz 1955). To see why, consider an agent
making a decision at time t ≤ s over a tradeoff of utils at times s vs. s+τ. From the perspective of
time t, the relative value of a util at s+τ versus time s is given by the ratio
D(s+τ-t)/D(s-t) = δs+τ-t /δ s-t = δτ.

(8)

Note that the final expression does not depend on either t (the decision time, which is also the
current period) or s (the date of the earliest utils). Accordingly, the discount factor from s to s+τ
is δτ, which depends only on the time gap between the two rewards (τ) and not absolute time
(either t or s). The exponential discount function implies that a person’s discount factor between
two dates depends only on the length of the delay interval.
The converse is also true: if (i) choices are always time consistent, and (ii) behavior is

Page 9

Measuring Time Preferences

generated by a (stationary) discounted utility model that satisfies A1-A3 above, then the discount
function must be exponential. Time consistency is defined as the property that the relative value
of utility in periods s+τ and s must always be the same regardless of when, on or before date s,
the preferences are evaluated. Combining this consistency property with stationarity of time
preferences implies that the discount function from the perspective of time t for utils experienced
at time t+τ must be δτ.
Accordingly, the exponential discounted utility model is the only (stationary) timeconsistent discounted utility model; recall that we are working in a class of stationary models.6
Time consistency has many desirable properties. It simplifies welfare analysis and dynamic
programming (i.e., solving dynamic optimization problems, like a lifecycle consumption
problem). However, it has been criticized for being empirically unrealistic, an issue to which we
will return.
2.c) Economic Models of Self-Control7
Samuelson’s discounted utility model has many useful properties first and foremost, it is
tractable and parsimonious but it is not designed to explain empirical patterns that fall under the
general category of self-control problems. Specifically, the agents in Samuelson’s model do
exactly what they plan/intend to do. More formally, their state-contingent plans are always
perfectly aligned with their subsequent state-contingent actions. For example, they stick to
exercise schedules and savings plans. Naturally, they sometimes spend more than they had
expected to spend, but these episodes are tied to normatively legitimate shocks (e.g., an
unanticipated medical bill) and not a violation of their state-contingent spending plans. Indeed,
their state-contingent plans include allowances for adverse shocks. Accordingly, agents in
Samuelson’s model do not experience (state-contingent) preference reversals. They will not
keep planning to start writing their term paper and keep failing to follow through. Relatedly, they
will not be willing to restrict their choice sets to limit their own scope for future action.
However, there is a growing literature that finds that people do make choices that are
characterized by systematic preference reversals (e.g., Read and Van Leeuwen 1998; Read,
Loewenstein and Kalyanaraman 1999; and Augenblick, Niederle, and Sprenger 2015) and that
people are sometimes willing to use commitment devices that have the sole purpose of limiting
their choices (e.g., Ashraf, Karlan and Yin 2006 and Kaur, Kremer, and Mullainathan 2010; for a
review, see Bryan, Karlan and Nelson 2010). This contemporary literature was anticipated by
Hume (1738, p. 536), who wrote:
“In reflecting on any action, which I am to perform a twelve-month hence, I always
resolve to prefer the greater good, whether at that time it will be more contiguous or
6
With non-stationary models (dropping Assumption A1), an individual can have time-consistent preferences
without having an exponential discount function.
7
This subsection is based in part on the section on intertemporal choice in Camerer et al. (2014).

Page 10

Measuring Time Preferences

remote; nor does any difference in that particular make a difference in my present
intentions and resolutions. My distance from the final determination makes all those
minute differences vanish, nor am I affected by any thing, but the general and more
discernible qualities of good and evil. But on my nearer approach, those circumstances,
which I at first over-looked, begin to appear, and have an influence on my conduct and
affections. A new inclination to the present good springs up, and makes it difficult for me
to adhere inflexibly to my first purpose and resolution. This natural infirmity I may very
much regret, and I may endeavour, by all possible means, to free my self from it. I may
have recourse to study and reflection within myself; to the advice of friends; to frequent
meditation, and repeated resolution: And having experienced how ineffectual all these
are, I may embrace with pleasure any other expedient, by which I may impose a restraint
upon myself, and guard against this weakness.”
In an effort to develop models that can explain such phenomena, three types of deviations
from the classical discounted utility model have been proposed: (i) multiple-self models in which
the multiple selves have overlapping periods of control or influence, (ii) multiple-self models
with non-overlapping periods of control (i.e., a sequence of selves, each of which has its own
period of control over the actions of the agent); and (iii) models that have a single (“unitary”)
self, which has dynamically consistent preferences over choice sets. All of these classes of
models have been developed to explain the same types of empirical phenomena (e.g., preference
reversals and choice-set-constraining commitments) so the models make similar qualitative
predictions. Indeed, in some limit cases they make identical quantitative predictions (e.g.,
Krusell, Kuruşçu and Smith 2010). Hence, these models are difficult to distinguish empirically
(if one is constrained to use data on behaviors, as opposed to data on attitudes, beliefs, forecasts,
and hedonics).8
2.c.i) Models in which multiple selves have overlapping periods of control
One class of models assumes that multiple selves with conflicting preferences coexist
simultaneously within the agent – in other words these selves exist in parallel with one another.
Such conflicts could be generated by neural systems with goals/valuations that are imperfectly
aligned.
Models of a divided self can be traced back at least as early as Plato, who described a
person as a charioteer pulled by two horses with conflicting personalities:
“one of the horses is noble and of noble breed, but the other quite the opposite in breed
and character. Therefore in our case the driving is necessarily difficult and troublesome.”
(Plato, Phaedrus 246b)
8

For example, agents could be asked if their current preferences for future actions (in the absence of commitment)
match the preferences that they will hold in the future.

Page 11

Measuring Time Preferences

Adam Smith (1761, 1776) explained human behavior with a similar description of two
conflicting motivational systems: “interests” and “passions.” With examples like this in mind,
Ashraf, Camerer and Loewenstein (2005) describe Smith as the first behavioral economist.
In the 20th century, multiple-self models were first embraced by psychologists. Starting in
the 1980s, the economic literature has also proposed theories of two conflicting/interacting
systems, where one system is relatively patient and forward-looking (e.g., a “planner”) and one
system is relatively myopic (Thaler and Shefrin, 1981; Shefrin and Thaler 1988; Loewenstein
1996; Bernheim and Rangel 2004; Fudenberg and Levine 2006, 2011; Brocas and Carrillo
2008a, 2008b, 2012; Loewenstein and O’Donoghue, 2004). In a related variation on these
themes, Jackson and Yariv (2014, 2015) examine collective decision making, which can be
interpreted as multiple simultaneous selves. They show that if there is heterogeneity in time
preference, any Pareto-efficient, non-dictatorial way of aggregating utility functions will be
characterized by present-bias.
2.c.ii) Models in which multiple selves have non-overlapping periods of control
Researchers have also argued that self-control problems are a reflection of dynamically
inconsistent preferences generated by a series of (non-overlapping) selves that arise sequentially
and don’t agree about optimal behavior. Strotz (1955) was the first to propose such a model,
though his ideas were partially anticipated by Ramsey (1928) and Samuelson (1937).
Strotz’s model falls within the general class of discounted utility models (Assumptions
A1-A3 above), but his model does not adopt exponential discounting, and thereby deviates from
Samuelson’s approach. In Strotz’s framework, a non-exponential discount function induces
preferences to be dynamically inconsistent: i.e., self t and self t+n don’t agree about the
preference ranking of consumption paths that are identical before date t+n and at least partially
different thereafter (see a formal example below). Figure 2 plots the exponential discount
function, along with two common alternatives: continuous-time hyperbolic discounting (i.e.,
D(τ)= 1 𝛼𝜏 / , which is taken from Loewenstein and Prelec 1992) and discrete-time quasihyperbolic discounting (see Phelps and Pollak 1968; Akerlof 1991; and Laibson 1997).
With a hyperbolic discount function, the discount rate (i.e., the rate of decline of the
discount function at a particular horizon) falls as the horizon increases. The quasi-hyperbolic
model reflects this property, and, because of its simplicity, enables equilibrium analysis to take a
tractable recursive structure.9 The quasi-hyperbolic discount function is given by D(τ)=1 at τ=0
and D(τ)=βδτ for all τ>0, where 0<β<1 and 0<δ≤1. Current rewards are normalized to have unit
weight, and future rewards have weight βδτ. From the perspective of self 0, dates 1 and 2 have
9

For example, see Harris and Laibson (2001, 2013) for analyses that exploit this recursiveness.

Page 12

Measuring Time Preferences

respective weights βδ and βδ2 so one util at date 2 is worth δ times as much as one util at date 1.
But from the perspective of self 1, one util at date 2 is worth only βδ times the value of one util
at date 1. Hence, self 0 and self 1 don’t agree on the relative value of rewards at dates 1 and 2
(i.e., βδ<δ). Self 0 wishes to act more patiently than self 1, with regard to tradeoffs between
periods 1 and 2. This implies that the economic agent has dynamically inconsistent preferences:
self 0 and self 1 hold inconsistent preferences (and this generalizes in the sense that all future
selves have preferences that are inconsistent with the preferences of the current self).
Commitment may be valued by this agent if three conditions hold: (i) she partially understands
her dynamic inconsistency (i.e., she is not fully naïve about her time preferences see Strotz 1955
and O’Donoghue and Rabin 1999a), (ii) commitment technologies are sufficiently low-cost (i.e.,
inexpensive to construct or obtain), and (iii) there is sufficiently little non-contractible
uncertainty in the environment (see Laibson 2015 for a joint analysis of these three conditions).

𝛿
𝛽

Figure 2. The Shape of Different Discount Functions. Plots of the exponential 𝛿 with
0.944, hyperbolic 1 𝛼𝜏 / with 𝛼 4, 𝛾 1, and quasi-hyperbolic 𝛽𝟏
𝛿 with
0.7, 𝛿 0.957.

2.c.iii) Unitary-self models
In the last fifteen years, a third approach has emerged. This new class of models explains
(apparent) preference reversals and commitment (i.e., voluntary choice set restrictions) without
assuming the existence of multiple selves. This new class of models features dynamically
consistent preferences expressed by a single self. Accordingly, we refer to this class as unitary-

Page 13

Measuring Time Preferences

self models (emphasizing a distinction with the multiple-self models summarized in sections 2.c.i
and 2.c.ii).
These unitary-self models assume that agents have preferences over choice sets. In traditional
economic models, the bigger the choice set the (weakly) better off the individual. However, in
these new models, agents suffer from temptation effects which imply a potential cost to having a
larger choice set (e.g., Gul and Pesendorfer 2001; Dekel, Lipman and Rustichini 2009). With
temptation effects, agents may be made worse off if their choice set is enlarged, even if they
don’t pick any of the new options that have been added to the choice set. Intuitively, resisting a
tempting option (e.g., a second helping of cake at a birthday party) may be aversive, making an
agent worse off from exposure to an option even if the option isn’t chosen. Accordingly, an
agent may prefer to ex-ante eliminate items from her choice set, regardless of whether or not she
would have chosen to consume that particular item if it were available. These temptation effects
are related to cue effects in which environmental cues (e.g., Pavlov’s bells or the sight of drug
paraphernalia) stimulate appetites that may create aversive cravings (e.g., Laibson 2001; and
Bernheim and Rangel 2004).
2.d) Other Classes of Models that Deviate from the Classical Discounted Utility Model
There are many models that fall outside the boundaries of the discounted utility model.
While the discounted utility model, which features a domain-general discount function, has the
benefit of being applicable to any intertemporal choice environment in principle, this generality
may be empirically invalid. Alternative, domain-specific, models of intertemporal choice have
also been proposed. For example, some authors have developed models with domain-specific
discount functions (i.e., discounting health differently than discounting the consumption of
material goods; e.g., Chapman 1996).10
Relaxing the assumption that utility is the sum of discounted flow utilities—assumption A3
above— allows risk aversion to be separated from the intertemporal elasticity of substitution (see
Epstein and Zin 1989, Bommier 2006, 2007, 2013, Bommier and Rochet 2006, Cheung 2015,
Abdellaoui et al. 2017, and Andersen et al. 2018). For instance, Andersen et al. (2018) consider
10

Another literature examines systematic features of intertemporal choice that can operate on top of discounted
utility or other models of time preference. For instance, Koszegi and Szeidel (2013) develop a model of focusing
and apply it to intertemporal choice. In their model, individuals maximize focus-weighted utility and focus more on
attributes in which their options differ more. Their model predicts no present-bias when choices are equally
concentrated (e.g., 10 utils or 20 utils tomorrow), but does predict present-bias for “lifestyle choices”, in which
costs are incurred at a single point in time but benefits come as a stream of payoffs (e.g., going to the gym is costly,
but produces a flow of health benefits on many future dates). Focusing could operate alongside traditional
discounting.

Page 14

Measuring Time Preferences

utility that can be written 𝑈 𝐸 𝜑 ∑ 𝐷 𝜏 𝑢 𝑥
for some function 𝜑. When 𝜑 is the
identify function, this is simply the discounted utility model, but this functional form allows for
the concavity of intertemporal utility. DeJarnette et al. (2018) show that this model is what
results from the combination of the axioms of expected utility with those of discounted utility,
and call this model generalized expected discounted utility.11
Benhabib, Bisin and Schotter (2010) propose a “fixed-cost of delay model,” in which the
later option in a pairwise comparison incurs a “fixed cost” that does not depend on the length of
the delay between the earlier and later options. In a similar class of models, Kable and Glimcher
(2010) examine choices between two rewards, and argue for a modification of hyperbolic
discounting that starts the hyperbola at the arrival time of the earlier reward (which might be at a
horizon τ>0). They find that this fits their choice data better than an exponential discount
function or a standard hyperbolic discount function (which starts at horizon 0).
Other models deviate more drastically from the classical discounted utility model. For
example, heuristic-based models are designed to reflect the specific cognitive algorithms that
individuals use and the biases that result from those cognitive processes. Such models have been
widely applied in the psychology literature (Tversky and Kahneman 1974, Gigerenzer and Todd
1999). To date, heuristic-based models in the domain of intertemporal choice have primarily
been descriptive and difficult to generalize. They would not typically be used for welfare or
policy evaluation. In other words, these heuristic models are primarily positive and not
normative in scope.
Early examples of heuristic-based models applied to intertemporal choice include Read et
al (2011, 2013). They propose a model (“DRIFT”) that explains choice between pairs of
monetary rewards based on four factors:
(1) The absolute difference between the larger and smaller amounts of reward.
(2) The absolute delay between the arrival times of the later and earlier rewards.
(3) The implicit discount rate between the later/larger and earlier/smaller rewards.
(4) The descriptive frame of the experiment: consumption or investment.
In a closely related line of work, Ericson et al. (2015) propose an intertemporal choice
heuristics model (“ITCH”), which is also based on four simple factors. The ITCH model
employs the first two factors listed above, but changes the final two factors so that they are the
percentage difference between the reward amounts and the percentage difference in reward
delays. Using a cross validation framework (which implicitly penalizes overfitting because the
tests are all out-of-sample), Ericson et al. (2015) find that both of these heuristic-based models fit
a broad dataset of MEL choices better than any of the commonly studied discounted utility
11

Cheung (2015) and Andersen et al. (2018) present experimental evidence for concavity of intertemporal utility
based on intertemporal correlation aversion.

Page 15

Measuring Time Preferences

models. However, these findings have been challenged by Wulff and van den Bos (2017), who
show that population-level models of the type used by Ericson et al. (2015) distort inference and
give a misleading advantage to heuristic models. Wulff and van den Bos (2017) recommend
fitting parameters at the level of the individual experimental participant, but this is problematic
when sample sizes are small (at the level of the individual).

3. Measuring Time Preferences Using Real Consumption Events
In the discounted utility model, an individual’s time preferences are summarized by the discount
function, D(τ). In principle, to empirically identify the shape of the discount function, a
researcher would like to ask experimental participants to choose between (separable) increments
of utility available at different dates in time. For example, holding all else fixed, would you
prefer 1 util now or 2 utils in a week? However, experimenters cannot directly deliver utils—
rather, they deliver rewards that experimental participants value: direct consumption
experiences—e.g., food, goods, effort—or money (which can be used to purchase consumption
experiences). The differences between time-dated utils and the rewards provided in experiments
raise two measurement challenges.
First, the economic analysis must translate the rewards into marginal time-dated utils.
Utility is usually not linear in units of reward, like ounces of ice cream or dollars spent on a meal
(the mapping is usually assumed to be concave). In addition, a specific reward, like potato chips,
may be a complement or a substitute for other real rewards (respectively, soft drinks and
Doritos).
Second, the economic analysis must determine how receipt of the experimental rewards
changes the overall time path of utils. For instance, subjects need not consume money when they
receive it. Moreover, as discussed by Augenblick, Niederle, and Sprenger (2015), even if the
experimenter directly controls consumption of a reward (food or effort), the subject might
engage in offsetting behavior outside the lab (e.g., skipping an afternoon snack after receiving
ice cream during an afternoon experiment, or taking a break after the conclusion of a grueling
experimental task).
To illustrate the second issue, consider the following example. Let time be divided into
periods of one full day. Let the individual have a concave instantaneous utility function 𝑢 𝑐
applied to total (real) consumption 𝑐 in each period. Within each period, let consumption be
perfectly substitutable, so the utility of consuming q units of a good during a period is the same
no matter when those q units are consumed over the course of the day. Although the
experimenter controls an individual’s consumption during part of the day (e.g., eating food or
experiencing entertainment during an experiment), the subject chooses consumption for the rest

Page 16

Measuring Time Preferences

of the period. In an optimizing model in which the subject is not constrained, the subject chooses
total consumption to satisfy the Euler equation: 𝑢′ 𝑐
𝛿 1 𝑟 𝑢′ 𝑐
, where δ is the oneperiod discount factor and r is the real interest rate. In such a model, the delivery of a small
reward during an experiment is almost12 perfectly offset by a reduction in consumption outside
the experiment during the same modeling period (i.e., during the same calendar day).
These methodological problems do not arise if the period length (within which
substitution can occur) is shorter than the duration of the experimental session, or if substitution
does not occur for some other reason. For example, mental accounting, like narrow bracketing,
could cause the subject to treat the experimental rewards as separable from all of the other
consumption in their life. Likewise, a myopic consumption heuristic—consume experimental
windfalls when they are received, not when they are initially promised, and do not adjust
background consumption—would also eliminate the problem of intertemporal substitution.
Research has attempted to address these issues in measuring intertemporal preferences
with several different methodological approaches. In this section, we review the leading
examples of the efforts to resolve the difficulties surrounding the use of real rewards.
3.a) Experimental Studies Using Time-Yoked Consumption (Instead of Financial Flows)
The seminal study using time-dated consumption of real rewards is Walter Mischel’s
“marshmallow” experiment (Mischel and Ebbesen 1970; Mischel, Shoda, and Rodriguez 1989).
Children from the Stanford University Bing Nursery School ranging from 3 to 5 years of age
were seated alone in a room and told that if they waited until the experimenter returned they
would obtain a preferred food reward. The children were able to receive a less preferred food
reward at any point during the experiment (e.g., by ringing a bell), which would cause them to
lose the opportunity to wait for the more preferred reward. Accordingly, the children were
making intertemporal choices at every moment during the experiment between an immediate
reward and a delayed reward: e.g., one marshmallow now vs. two marshmallows if they could
wait until the experimenter returned. The children were not told how long they would need to
wait until the experimenter returned. In fact, the experimenters returned 15 minutes after the
start of the task. In the marshmallow task it is probably safe to assume that the food rewards are
consumed in real time. They are not saved for later that day and they plausibly do not crowd out
other consumption–at least, it is reasonable to assume that the 3-to-5-year-old subjects do not
anticipate such crowd out, which may result from parental decisions later during the day of the
experiment.

12

An income effect (deriving from unexpectedly high or low income received during the experiment) might cause a
small change in the annuity value of total lifetime resources, thus increasing overall consumption during the
modeling period by a tiny amount.

Page 17

Measuring Time Preferences

Despite these advantages, it is difficult to use the marshmallow study to estimate the
parameters in the discounted utility model (even if one knew the curvature of the utility function
for marshmallows). First, it is not clear what each child initially believed about the time it would
take the experimenter to return. A child’s unmeasured belief about the distribution of return
times is essential to an application of the discounted utility model, but such beliefs were not
measured in the experiment. Second, it is likely that the children’s beliefs about return time
changed as the experiment unfolded. As McGuire and Kable (2013) note, the decision to wait a
few minutes and then opt out of the experiment may imply that the children are updating their
posteriors toward expectations of a longer remaining waiting time. In short, Mischel’s study
measures behavior that is related to (1) time preference, (2) the capacity to stick to a previously
made decision, (3) beliefs about the future actions of the experimenter, and numerous other
factors. Despite these methodological confounds, Mischel’s task predicts (correlation 0.19)
scores on personality scales that are designed to measure self-regulatory capacity (Benjamin et
al. 2017).
In addition to Mischel’s study, there have been several other studies of decision-making
that focus on the consumption of goods for which the time of consumption is at least partially
controlled by the experimenter. Because of difficulties involved in estimating the exact form of a
person’s flow utility function, the majority of these studies have not estimated the discount
function, but have instead focused on qualitative properties of intertemporal choice behavior. In
particular, these studies have used real consumption flows to demonstrate that intertemporal
choices often exhibit dynamic inconsistency.
For example, Read and van Leeuwen (1998) implemented a design in which participants
chose a single snack from a set of eight snacks, some of which were healthy (e.g., fruit) and
some of which were unhealthy (e.g., candy bar). Participants chose while they were either
hungry (i.e., before lunch) or sated (i.e., after lunch). Subjects ate the chosen snack while they
were either hungry (i.e., before lunch) or sated (i.e., after lunch).13 Subjects chose twice: one
week before the eating event and, again, at the time of the eating event–in other words, they
were given a chance to change their mind, though they didn’t know they would have this chance
when they made their first choice. Varying satiation allowed Read and van Leeuwen to
determine the extent to which current emotional states affect preferences (e.g., projection bias14),
whereas varying the time horizon of the choice allowed Read and van Leeuwen to assess
whether preferences are dynamically inconsistent. Demonstrating dynamic inconsistency in the
absence of a cardinal measure of utility is a common strategy in the literature: it is possible to
establish qualitative properties of the discount function without estimating its exact parametric
form. Collapsing across individuals and conditions, Read and van Leeuwen found that unhealthy
13

Actually, the experimenters did not directly observe when the snack was eaten. Here we assume that the snack
was eaten when it was received, which is probably not true in all cases.
14
See Loewenstein, O’Donoghue and Rabin (2003).

Page 18

Measuring Time Preferences

snacks were chosen 51% of the time when offered for consumption one week in the future (this
number averages across their conditions). The same unhealthy snacks were chosen 83% of the
time when offered for immediate consumption. This was one of the first studies to use real
consumption events to investigate dynamic inconsistency.
Read, Loewenstein, and Kalyanaraman (1999) implemented a related design in which the
real consumption good was viewing movies. Subjects chose what to watch from a set of movies
that was evenly split between low-brow and high-brow films. Participants selected a movie to
watch the day of the experiment. In addition, participants selected (that day) a movie to watch in
a future week. On average, participants picked low-brow movies to watch that day and highbrow movies to watch in the future. (In this study there was no opportunity for participants to
later change their mind.15)
McClure et al. (2007) employed time-dated juice rewards16 in a neuroimaging experiment
in which participants were asked to choose one of two time-yoked juice squirts (subjects were
thirsty, because they were denied fluid for three hours before the experiment and then fed salty
snacks at the start of the experiment). All of the squirts of juice were delivered during a single
one-hour experiment. Like Read and van Leeuwen, McClure et al. found strong evidence for
dynamic inconsistency. Roughly 40% of participants chose the early option when it was
available immediately (e.g., now vs. 5 minutes), whereas 30% chose the early option when it was
delayed 10 minutes (e.g., 10 minutes vs. 15 minutes) and 20% chose the early option when it was
delayed 20 minutes (e.g., 20 minutes vs. 25 minutes).
Many papers study both monetary rewards and primary rewards (e.g., food). For
example, Reuben, Sapienza, and Zingales (2010) compared discounting for a primary reward
(chocolate) with discounting for a monetary reward. They found that individuals’ elicited
discount rates correlated across these two choice domains (R2=0.12). However, the actual
discount rates were much higher for the primary reward than the monetary reward.
Using a time-yoked work/effort task, Augenblick, Niederle, and Sprenger (2015) found
evidence of dynamic inconsistency. Experimental participants made work plans for future
weeks. When the time to work arrived, some participants were given the opportunity to change
their self-selected work plans. Participants tended to use this flexibility to shift work further into
15

Accordingly, this study is only evidence for dynamic inconsistency under the maintained assumption of
preference stationarity.
16
Food rewards have also been used to compare time preferences across species in the psychology literature.
Tobin and Logue (1994) studied food choices at short delays with human and non-human populations. They
showed that the required rate of return increased as the subject population switched from pigeons, to rats, to human
children, to human adults. However, this position is challenged by research that argues that high rates of
impatience in non-human species are observed in food-deprived animals, invalidating comparisons to relatively
sated human subjects (e.g., Rosati et al. 2007).

Page 19

Measuring Time Preferences

the future, rather than shifting work from the future towards the present. In contrast, they found
much weaker (but still statistically significant) evidence of dynamic inconsistency with respect to
participant decisions that involved time-dated financial flows.17 Relatedly, Carvalho, Meier, and
Wang (2016) found that present bias in MEL choices differed significantly before and after
payday for a low income population, while present bias in real effort choices was not
significantly different. Bisin and Hyndman (2014) also studied real-effort procrastination tasks
and found evidence of present bias.18 These results provide some support for the prediction that
choices over time-yoked consumption/effort identify the discount function, whereas choices over
(intertemporally-substitutable) financial rewards do not reveal the discount function (e.g., if
consumers smooth consumption).
Many other studies have measured higher discount rates for consumption rewards relative
to monetary rewards. Odum, Baumann, and Rimington (2006) found that food is discounted
more steeply than money using hypothetical choices. Odum and Rainaud (2003) examined
hypothetical discounting for money, alcohol, and food. They found that individuals are more
patient for money than for alcohol or food, but that alcohol and food are discounted similarly.
Similarly, Estle et al. (2007) compared the discounting of money to primary, directly consumable
rewards (candy, soda, and beer). They reported that monetary rewards are discounted less than
directly consumable rewards; their subjects discounted the consumable rewards—candy, soda
and beer—at similar rates. Likewise, Tsukayama and Duckworth (2010) found that primary
rewards are discounted more than money. Ubfal (2016) examined discount rates for six different
goods for rural Ugandan households, and also found that estimated discount rates vary by type of
good; generally, monetary rewards are discounted less than sugar, beef, or plantains.
The assumed degree of curvature in the utility function influences the imputed discount
rate. For instance, consider Lawyer et al. (2010) who studied delay discounting tasks with
respect to hypothetical money and (minutes of) hypothetical sexual activity. They found that
sexual activity is discounted more than money. They assumed that utility is linear in money and
linear in minutes of sexual activity. If the actual utility function is concave, their estimated
discount rates will be biased upward. Moreover, it seems likely that the utility function for
sexual activity is more concave than the utility function for money (since money is highly
fungible). Like Lawyer et al., most of the studies that we have reviewed assume linear utility for
primary and monetary rewards. By contrast, Augenblick, Niederle, and Sprenger (2015)
estimated separate curvature parameters for money and real-effort tasks. Ubfal (2016) measured
the curvature of the utility function using risky choices and imposed a common risk aversion
(utility curvature) parameter across goods.
17

Gill and Prowse (2012) employ a similar effort-based task that could be adapted for use in studying intertemporal
choice. Casari and Dragone (2015) also use a consumption based task (listening to unpleasant noise) to examine
patterns of preference reversals.
18
However, note that Ericson (2017) shows that assuming individuals have perfect memory leads to biased
estimates of present bias parameters from task-completion rates.

Page 20

Measuring Time Preferences

Although the literature reviewed in this section is highly multifaceted and conceptually
diverse, a common thread emerges. When discount rates are measured with MEL tasks, the
implied discount rate is lower than it is when the discount rate is measured with primary rewards
like food. Researchers also commonly find that when discounting is measured with MEL tasks,
the implied discount function is less hyperbolic than it is when discounting is measured with
primary rewards.
Another literature has studied the appeal of commitment devices. For example, Ashraf,
Karlan, and Yin (2006) found that one-quarter of their (rural Philippine) subjects were willing to
put some of their savings in an illiquid account with the same interest rate as an alternative liquid
account. Beshears et al. (2015) document a willingness to store money in an illiquid account,
even when the illiquid account has a slightly lower interest rate than the liquid account (21% vs.
22%). In their experiment, Beshears et al. found that illiquid savings accounts attracted more
deposits the higher the penalty for early withdrawal, holding all else equal. However, these
results may not generalize, because the participants were using an experimental
endowment/windfall of $100 when they made these illiquid deposits as opposed to their own
outside assets. Hence, this may be a house money effect (treating windfalls differently that
money obtained through “normal” channels). Nonetheless, commitment has been documented in
a wide range of settings: e.g., preference for costly single-unit packaging of tempting snacks
(Wertenbroch 1998); self-imposed work deadlines with financial penalties (Ariely and
Wertenbroch 2002; Bisin and Hyndman 2014); self-imposed financial penalties for smoking or
drinking (Giné, Karlan, and Zinman 2010; Schilbach Forthcoming); self-imposed financial
penalties for underperformance in the workplace (Kaur, Kremer, and Mullainathan 2010); selfimposed restrictions on internet access (Houser et al. 2018); self-imposed restrictions on work
scheduling (Augenblick, Niederle, and Sprenger 2015); and self-imposed financial penalties for
failure to exercise (Royer, Stehr, and Sydnor 2015). Despite all of these examples of
experimentally measured commitment demand, researchers have noted that very little pure
commitment is demanded/provided in real markets (Laibson 2015). Website blockers—
deployed to temporarily stop oneself from straying during work tasks—are one exception to this
observation. Another example is the decision to delete a video game from one’s game
tablet/cellphone. One of the authors of the current paper has saved tens of thousands of hours
with this last trick.
3.b) Consumption Models Estimated with Observational Field Data
Another literature studies consumption patterns over the lifecycle and uses consumption, income,
wealth, and borrowing data to estimate preference parameters and test theories of consumption

Page 21

Measuring Time Preferences

smoothing (see Attanasio and Weber 2010 for a review).19 Here, we selectively discuss some of
those papers focused specifically on measuring time preference. The literature has used the Euler
equation to estimate discount rates, but additional data (asset allocation or high frequency
consumption data) is useful to distinguish between exponential and quasi-hyperbolic
discounting.
The Euler equation20 provides one way to estimate time preferences, although linearizing
the Euler equation undermines its usefulness (Carroll 2001; see also Attanasio and Low 2004 for
a review of the literature estimating Euler equations). In early work, Lawrance (1991) uses the
Euler Equation to estimate the discount rate of an exponential discount function and then
compares discount rates across demographic groups (e.g., high- vs. low-income households).
Though the estimates are sensitive to the specification, this analysis implies that the (annual)
discount rate is about 12% for white, college-educated families in the top quintile of the income
distribution and 19% for non-white families, without a college education in the bottom quintile
of the income distribution. However, her analysis does not control for differences in income
growth rates across demographic groups; when consumption tracks income (due to rule-ofthumb behavior or liquidity constraints), consumption growth may have little to do with time
preferences.
Gourinchas and Parker (2002) incorporate liquidity constraints and solve for a structural
lifecycle savings model with age-dependent family dynamics and age-dependent (stochastic)
income. This is a demographically enriched version of the buffer stock model pioneered by
Deaton (1991, 1992) and Carroll (1992). Gourinchas and Parker use an empirical aggregate
lifecycle consumption profile to pin down their estimates of the discount function (using the
method of simulated moments). They assume that the discount function is exponential and
estimate an annual discount rate of 5%.
Like Gourinchas and Parker, Angeletos et al. (2001) solve a buffer stock model (with a
liquidity constraint). Angeletos et al. incorporate three kinds of assets: liquid assets, illiquid
assets, and credit card debt. They use their model to study wealth accumulation, consumptionincome comovement, and credit card borrowing. Angeletos et al. assume a quasi-hyperbolic β-δ
discount function. Their model needs a low value of β to explain the empirical rate of credit card
borrowing and the empirically estimated marginal propensity to consume out of predictable
movements in income. However, their model needs a high value of δ to explain the empirical
level of voluntary long-run wealth accumulation, such as defined contribution retirement wealth
19
Because of the role of arbitrage, assets prices generally do not identify whether preferences are time-consistent or
not (Kocherlakota 2001).
20
The Euler Equation is the first order optimization condition that equates marginal utility of consumption at date t
to the discounted and return-scaled value of expected marginal utility of consumption at date t+1: 𝑢 𝑐
, where 𝑅
1 𝑟
.
𝐸 𝛿𝑅 𝑢 𝑐

Page 22

Measuring Time Preferences

and home equity. In equilibrium, the surviving assets on households’ balance sheets tend to be
overwhelmingly illiquid; the liquid assets tend to be consumed quickly due to present bias.
Laibson et al. (2017) use the method of simulated moments to estimate a structural
lifecycle model with multiple types of assets—some liquid and some illiquid—following the
modeling approach taken by Angeletos et al. Laibson, Maxted, Repetto, and Tobacman estimate
that the long-run discount factor, δ, is 0.96 and the short-term discount factor, β, is 0.50. This
line of research highlights the parameter identification that is achieved by modeling and
measuring wealth formation and borrowing across assets/debts with different degrees of liquidity
(rather than studying the household balance sheet by collapsing wealth to a single net value).
Likewise, Laibson (1997), Angeletos et al. (2001), Barro (1999) and Gustman and Steinmeier
(2012) show that it is difficult to econometrically identify different functional forms of the
discount function using only data on consumption paths.
High frequency consumption data (e.g., caloric consumption taken from daily food
diaries) provides another way to distinguish between exponential and quasi-hyperbolic
discounting. Some authors have argued that consumption covaries too much with high frequency
income flows to be consistent with exponential discounting (and classical consumption
smoothing motives). Shapiro (2005) shows that calories consumed decline by 10–15% over the
monthly food-stamp cycle. He shows that quasi-hyperbolic discounting is needed to explain this
pattern (or an implausibly high level of exponential discounting). Mastrobuoni and Weinberg
(2009) follow a related strategy, but they study the intra-month caloric consumption of social
security recipients. They find that only liquidity-constrained households have a β (in the quasihyperbolic formulation) that is well below 1, while individuals who are not liquidity constrained
have a β that is indistinguishable from 1.
A large literature examines consumers’ marginal propensity to consume out of
foreseeable income flows, including social security payments (Stephens 2003; Mastrobuoni and
Weinberg 2009) and tax rebates (e.g., Shapiro and Slemrod 2003; Parker et al. 2013; Broda and
Parker 2014). Papers in this literature typically do not estimate a discount rate from consumers’
choices, but the literature has found anomalously high marginal propensities to consume. For
example, Broda and Parker (2014) estimate the marginal propensity to consume using exogenous
variation in the timing of Treasury Department tax rebates (approximately $1000 per household)
that were part of the 2008 fiscal stimulus package. They estimate a one-quarter MPC of 65%.
Such high marginal propensities to consume are difficult to reconcile with the standard lifecycle
permanent income hypothesis, but are predicted by models in which individuals have self-control
problems and face liquidity constraints.

Page 23

Measuring Time Preferences

3.c) Other Models Estimated with Observational Field Data (Including Financial Flows)
A diverse literature estimates the discount rate (or required rate of return for financial flows)
implied by various decisions. For instance, Viscusi and Moore (1989) infer time preference from
choice of job and occupational fatality risk. They find average annual discount rates of 11%,
with educational levels negatively correlated with the estimated discount rates.
This approach can also be used to distinguish between models of discounting. DellaVigna
and Paserman (2005) examine the job search behavior of the unemployed, and find evidence that
impatience has a sizeable effect on search effort and matching in the particular way predicted by
the quasi-hyperbolic discounting model. They find that variation in short-run patience (β) drives
search intensity, and variation in long-run patience (δ) is associated with the worker’s required
wage threshold, so that households with low values of β and high values of δ have the slowest
exit rates from unemployment. Because patience is empirically associated with high rates of job
finding, they conclude that variation in β is the key source of interpersonal variation. They
perform a calibration exercise, and find that β=0.9 for workers classified as “impatient” based on
behaviors signaling impatience (e.g. smoking, not having a bank account). Ben Halima and Ben
Halima (2009) estimate DellaVigna and Paserman’s model with French data and find similar
results. Paserman (2008) estimates a related structural model of job search and unemployment
with a quasi-hyperbolic discount function; he estimates that β is approximately 0.5 for low
income workers and 0.9 for high income workers.
Another literature examines preferences over financial flows using durable goods. The
seminal paper in this durables literature is Hausman (1979), which examines how individuals
trade off a higher purchase price for lower ongoing operating costs (air conditioners in this case).
In his sample of 46 households, he finds required rates of return of about 20 percent per year for
this financial flow. This high required rate of return has been used to support energy efficiency
standards on the grounds that individuals are myopic when purchasing durable goods.
A more recent literature has examined fuel efficiency choice in automobile purchasing.
Dreyfus and Viscusi (1995), following a line of previous work, estimate a hedonic price model
that allows for exponential discounting of future benefits arising from fuel efficiency and safety.
They estimate a required rate of return of 11–17%.21 Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer (2013) use
a novel identification strategy to examine preferences over financial flows: they estimate the
willingness-to-pay for more fuel efficient cars, and examine how this responds to shocks to
gasoline prices. They find large changes in market shares of new cars in response to gas prices;
in a structural model, their results imply that individuals’ required rates of return roughly match

21

They refer to their estimate as a “rate of time preference,” but they estimate a rate for financial flows, not
consumption.

Page 24

Measuring Time Preferences

the interest rates consumers pay (a range of nominal interest rates from 2–11% for new cars and
6–20% for used cars). Allcott and Wozny (2014) use a similar identification strategy and find a
required rate of return of 15% to rationalize purchase behavior. However, as Allcott and Wozny
argue, these product attribute tradeoff studies do not capture time preference alone. The implied
required rate of return can also measure such factors as beliefs, knowledge, and attention.
Other research has studied how individuals structure long-run income flows, and find
surprisingly high required rates of return. Warner and Pleeter (2001) estimate required rates of
return from military personnel choosing between a term annuity payment (i.e., ten years) and a
lump-sum payment when leaving the military. The amounts were sizeable—lump sums worth
about $25,000 to $50,000. Based on the offers that the armed services made, break-even
discount rates (before taxes) were between 17–20%, meaning that the annuity was more valuable
unless you exponentially discounted cash-flows at a rate that exceeded this 17 to 20 percent
break-even rate. In a large sample (over 65,000 individuals), 90% of enlisted personnel and 50%
of the officers took the lump-sum payment. However, there is a potential confound in the Warner
and Pleeter study: the choice of the term annuity obligated the recipient to remain connected to
the military in a type of reserve role. If separated soldiers perceived this reserve connection to be
meaningful and negatively valued, this would bias Warner and Pleeter’s calculations toward
finding higher implied required rates of return. In a related study on the military retirement
system, which is not confounded by this reserve issue, Simon, Warner, and Pleeter (2015)
measure much lower discount rates.
Similarly, Coile et al. (2002) examine the decision to delay claiming Social Security
benefits in exchange for higher payments in the future; they argue that standard models and
levels of time preference predict much more delay than is observed.22
The literature estimating time preference from consumption decisions is promising,
though it requires correctly modeling individual’s beliefs and dealing with the implications of
limited knowledge or attention. A key question for the literature using financial flows (as
opposed to consumption) is to what extent required rates of return on financial flows are
informative about time preference. Similar questions of interpretation arise in MEL experiments,
as discussed in the next section.

4. Measuring Time Preferences Using MEL Experiments
In this section, we describe the most common experimental design used to measure time
preferences in the laboratory: the Money Earlier or Later (MEL) Task. MEL tasks have the
22

A large literature examines Social Security claiming and annuitization; these decisions are affected by survival
rates and framing, and time preference has not been a focus of this literature.

Page 25

Measuring Time Preferences

methodological virtue of being easy to administer, especially because the procedure is easy to
explain to subjects. The analysis of MEL data is also theoretically tractable if one makes the
necessary identifying assumptions. In addition, MEL experiments study preferences over
financial flows, which would seem to be a topic of natural interest to economists. However,
using MEL tasks to infer an individual’s discount function requires highly restrictive identifying
assumptions, as we will explain below.
In a typical MEL task, individuals choose their preferred option from a set of two or more
time-dated monetary payments. In the most common case, each choice set is a pair of options
containing a smaller, earlier payment and a larger, later one. For example, an experimental
participant might be asked to choose between receiving $20 today or $30 in seven days, followed
by a series of other such pairs in which the pair of dollar amounts and the pair of times of
delivery would vary. Note that the earlier of the two payments need not be “now,” and may vary
across binary choices. The decisions recorded across all choice sets are then used to identify
points of indifference which, under some additional assumptions, pin down a particular discount
function.
To describe such indifference points23, we want to be precise. We use the construct of a
required rate of return (RRR). If and only if the decision maker is indifferent between {$x1, t1}
and {$x2, t2}, (where t2 > t1), we define the associated required rate of return between t1 and t2 to
be
𝑥
𝑥
𝑥
𝑅𝑅𝑅 ≡ ln
.
𝑥
𝑥
The approximation is obtained from a first-order Taylor expansion around

= 1. The definition

of RRR can be approximated by the percent change in the time-dated rewards. In the example
given above, indifference between {$20, today} and {$30, 1 week} implies a RRR of 40.5% for
this indifference pair.
Note that the RRR is not necessarily a preference parameter. Rather, it is simply an
observed (or estimated) indifference point in the experimental data. The relationship between
RRRs and preference parameters is complex and will be discussed at the end of this section, as it
depends on when monetary payments are consumed (if consumption is the argument of the
utility function), as well as on the curvature of the utility function. Finally, it is important to note
that we are not annualizing the RRR in this definition.

23

For now, we will assume that the two options are presented simultaneously as alternatives and neither is presented
as the default outcome.

Page 26

Measuring Time Preferences

4.a) Experimental MEL Mechanisms for Estimating RRRs
A substantial amount of research has gone into the methodology of eliciting MEL choices.24 We
focus on the economics-related literature here, but also note key papers in other disciplines
which have examined MEL behavior. The majority of published MEL studies employ one of
three designs: Multiple Price List (MPL), Randomized Binary Choice, and Matching. The first
two designs are closely related to the illustrative description of a MEL task presented above: an
experimental subject repeatedly selects one option from a choice set of time-dated monetary
payments. These three designs vary only in the way in which choice sets are presented.
The first design presents many related choice sets at a single time, organized in a list. We
refer to this as the Multiple Price List design (Andersen et al. 2008). In a typical multiple price
list design, a subject chooses between $x at time t and an ordered series of amounts at a given
delay t’> t . For example, a participant might first choose between ($10, 0 days) and ($11, 1
day), and then choose between ($10, 0 days) and ($12, 1 day), and then choose between ($10, 0
days) and ($13, 1 day), etc. In principle, subjects should have a single crossover point as the
value of the delayed reward monotonically rises. At this crossing point, the subject switches
from preferring the smaller sooner reward to the larger, later reward. Such crossover points are
used to estimate the RRR between t and t’. By ordering questions so that either money or time
values change monotonically, the Multiple Price List design estimates indifference points
efficiently and reduces the frequency of inconsistent choices.
In an alternative design, each choice between {$x1, t1} and {$x2, t2} is presented in isolation
and in a random order. We refer to this design as the Randomized Binary Choice paradigm.
Although this design makes it much more likely that subjects will make choices that violate
transitivity, it has other benefits. First, it can make it easier to determine the focus of attention,
since there is only one binary choice on the screen at a point in time (e.g., Johnson et al. 1989).
In addition, the tradition of presenting choice sets in isolation is more amenable to psychological
and neuroscientific experiments (e.g., using fMRI) in which the experimenter would like to
assert that the psychological and/or neural processes of interest are triggered by the content of
specific options being shown at a specific moment in the experiment.
The multiple price list and randomized binary choice variants of the MEL paradigm are
usually incentivized by paying participants in accord with their expressed preferences, while
24

We are not certain of the origins of the MEL methodology. We believe that the first implementation in humans
was an unpublished working paper by Maital and Maital (1977). However, the first published MEL paper—and the
one that is the most influential in the intertemporal choice literature—is Thaler (1981). A related stream of work
studied discounting in animal behavior (e.g., Chung and Herrnstein 1967; Ainslie 1975). The MEL design was used
by several other economists after Thaler (e.g., Loewenstein and Thaler, 1989; Prelec and Loewenstein, 1991); it was
popularized in the psychology literature by Kirby and Herrnstein (1995).

Page 27

Measuring Time Preferences

constraining overall payouts in the experiment to affordable amounts. For example, it is common
to randomly select and implement one choice from all of the binary choices that a participant
makes in the course of the experiment (often termed the “random incentive system”).
A third variant of the MEL task is the Matching paradigm (also called fill-in-the-blank).
In this paradigm, participants are asked to give an open-ended response by reporting the amount
(or time delay) that would make them indifferent between two options. For example, a
participant might be asked to state the value of x for which she would be indifferent between
($10, 0 days) and ($x, 1 day). The virtue of the matching paradigm is that, in principle, every
question identifies an indifference point. However, it is not simple to incentivize choice. The
matching paradigm is often used in psychology experiments with hypothetical choices;
psychologists have argued that, despite the lack of incentives, participants often give truthful
answers (see, e.g., Chapman 1996). The matching method can be made incentive compatible by
pairing it with the Becker, DeGroot, and Marschak (1964) method as done by, for instance,
Benhabib, Bisin, and Schotter (2010).
The multiple price list and randomized binary choice paradigms ask the subject to choose
among pre-specified alternatives, while the matching paradigm asks the subject to generate their
own indifference points. It is known that tasks with pre-specified alternatives and tasks with selfgenerated indifference points yield inconsistent results (e.g., Lichtenstein and Slovic 1973’s
results on risky gambles). Read and Roelofsma (2003) find lower RRRs in the matching
paradigm than in randomized binary choice. Hardisty et al. (2013) compare the matching
paradigm with two methods that use pre-specified alternatives, and argue that pre-specified
alternatives have greater potential for anchoring or experimenter demand effects, but that tasks
with pre-specified alternatives better predict behavior outside the lab. Hardisty et al. (2013)
employ Randomized Binary Choice and a dynamic “multiple-staircase method.” The latter is not
incentive compatible, and incentives were not used for most of the study.
In general, the elicitation format seems to matter for imputed RRR levels (as well as the
shape of the inferred discount function). Freeman et al. (2016) elicit RRRs and compare results
from the multiple price list paradigm to two implementations of the matching method: the
Becker, DeGroot and Marschak method and a second-price auction method. They find higher
RRR’s with multiple price lists as compared to the two matching methods but find similar results
in the two matching methods.
Recently, Andreoni and Sprenger (2012a, 2012b) have introduced the Convex Time Budget
elicitation paradigm.25 For fixed delivery dates, t1 and t2, the participant chooses between ($x at
t1, $0 at t2) and ($0 at t1, $y at t2) or any convex combination of the two. By varying the implied
interest rate, this paradigm can simultaneously elicit utility curvature and discounting (under the
25

See also the mixing matching tasks proposed by Cubitt and Read (2007).

Page 28

Measuring Time Preferences

assumption that payments are completely consumed when received or the assumption that
income—and not consumption— is the argument of the utility function). Using this data, they
use nonlinear regression to estimate the discount rate.
Varying time rather than money, Olea and Strzalecki (2014) estimate a β-δ discount function
using a MEL format that avoids the need to estimate the curvature of the utility function. They
fix the earlier and later consumption levels, and vary the length of time between them. They use
this tool for MEL (and find wide bounds for the fraction of agents with present-bias). Their
method can also be applied to primary rewards. In a similar spirit, Ericson and Noor (2015) show
that the “multiple delay list” can test for the shape of the discount function without assumptions
on the utility function. 26 Ericson and Noor’s method can estimate the shape of discount function
but not the level of discounting, while Olea and Strzalecki can measure the level of discounting
under the identifying assumption of the β-δ model.
Andreoni, Kuhn, and Sprenger (2015) use a double MPL, which is a MPL for MEL and
another MPL for risky choices (see Andersen et al. 2008, who pioneered this method). They
integrate this paradigm with the convex budget paradigm of Andreoni and Sprenger (2012a,
2012b). Both methods infer curvature in the utility function even for small amounts of money,
indicating that RRR’s cannot be directly translated into discount rates (a point we will discuss at
greater length below). The degree of curvature of the estimated discount rates differs
substantially between the two methods. They find that the convex time budget method
outperforms the double MPL out of sample (predicting RRR in a Becker, DeGroot, Marschak
task and a fill-in-the-blank task). This might be related to the fact that the out-of-sample tasks are
all matching tasks, as is the particular convex budget task implemented in their paper.
4.b) The Relationship between the Required Rate of Return (RRR) and Time Preference
MEL paradigms produce data that can be used to generate RRRs. However, the researcher is
often interested in the discount rate for consumption. Understanding the relationship between
RRR’s and discount rates requires a model of individual behavior. We discuss three theoretical
frameworks that have been used in the literature (see, e.g., Cubitt and Read 2007).
Model 1: The Optimization Model
First, we consider the case of optimization. In this context, MEL choices are predicted to be only
weakly related to the discount function.
In the optimization model, consumers smooth consumption across the lifecycle, subject
26

See also Takeuchi’s (2011) “equivalent delay” method for testing for present bias without making any
assumptions on the utility function.

Page 29

Measuring Time Preferences

to financing constraints, such as liquidity constraints (e.g., Modigliani and Brumberg 1953; Hall
1978; Deaton 1991; Deaton 1992; Carroll 1992; Gourinchas and Parker 2002). The optimization
model implies that the subject’s financial flows at date t are only weakly linked to the subject’s
consumption at date t. If a household has ample liquid resources (or a line of credit), then an
experimental windfall affects permanent income but has little impact on today’s consumption.
For example, in the standard lifecycle model, a $100 windfall at age 20 should increase annual
consumption by about $5.27 Hence, it should affect daily consumption by about one penny.
Even if the agent is liquidity constrained, the marginal propensity to consume may be
low. For instance, consider a rising college junior who receives a modest stipend now but will
experience a big bump in income when she graduates. For her, the $100 windfall is smoothed
over the next two years, and should only raise daily consumption during that period by 15 cents
per day. Hence, under the optimization model, even if the consumer is liquidity constrained, the
time-date of the financial payment has only a weak relationship to the time-path of consumption.
Of course, there will be rare cases in which it will be optimal to consume the entire windfall as
soon as it is received, but those cases are exceptional and would apply to only a small fraction of
experimental participants. Under the optimization model, even college students would be
expected to consume far less than 1% of their windfall per day.
The optimization model predicts that market interest rates place a constraint on what
individuals would choose in an experiment: if they could borrow and lend at the same market
interest rate, their RRR in an experiment should equal that market interest rate and reveal little or
nothing about their discount rates (i.e., their rate of time preference). Even imperfect capital
markets (e.g., the borrowing interest rate exceeds that of the lending interest rate) don’t allow the
researcher to directly translate the RRR into a discount rate.
Coller and Williams (1999) treat this problem as one of censored data: in their model, a
participant’s choices only reveals her discount rate if her RRR is between her borrowing and
lending interest rates. Thus, if an individual demands a RRR of 15% to take a later payment, we
do not know whether that reveals her discount rate or her outside borrowing opportunities.
Cubitt and Read (2007) show that the problem is even more difficult than suggested by
the censored data view. They show that, with the optimization model, an individual’s RRR does
not reveal her discount rate even if the RRR is between the interest rates faced for borrowing and
lending. For instance, consider an individual in a MEL task who would prefer consuming an
additional $20 at date t+1 over consuming an additional $15 at date t. Nonetheless, she might
still choose the “$15 at date t” option in a MEL task because it allows her to spread some
27

For example, under ln utility, the consumption function is equal to the exponential discount rate times total
wealth, generating an annualized MPC equal to the annualized exponential discount rate (which is often assumed to
be 5%).

Page 30

Measuring Time Preferences

consumption across date t and t +1. As a result, under the optimizing model, even if an
individual’s RRR is between her borrowing and lending interest rates, it still does not reveal her
discount rate.
Model 2: The Consume-on-Receipt Model (with Background Consumption)
In contrast to the optimization model (which features a high degree of consumption smoothing),
it is common in the MEL literature to assume that monetary payments from an experiment
produce immediate one-for-one marginal consumption (when the payments are received, and not
when they are initially promised). In the language of the consumption literature, this amounts to
assuming that the daily marginal propensity to consume out of cash-flow is 1. This assumption is
related to the flypaper effect in the public finance literature (see Hines and Thaler 1995 for a
review), which refers to the idea that targeted government expenditure (e.g., federal education
funding of local education) does not fully crowd out local expenditure in the targeted category,
because the local expenditure is sticky.
One can take the flypaper analogy to an extreme, and analyze MEL data by assuming that
financial flows “stick exactly where they land,” with zero crowd out. We call this the consumeon-receipt model.28 Figure 1 shows that much of the literature uses this assumption either
explicitly or implicitly: the “Intertemporal Substitution” column shows that nearly 90% of papers
matching our search did not model substitution of consumption across time, but instead assumed
individuals consume money when it is received (with no crowd out).
By pinning down the timing of marginal consumption resulting from monetary payments,
the consume-on-receipt model makes analysis of MEL data more tractable. But the consume-onreceipt model leaves the mental accounting unresolved: Is the payment viewed/framed in
isolation, or is it viewed as supplemental to the other consumption that was going to occur on
that day anyway?
This issue is sometimes addressed by assuming a fixed level of background consumption
(e.g., Andersen et al. 2008). In this case, the participant trades off utility as
D(τ1)u(b+x1)+D(τ2)u(b)

vs.

D(τ1)u(b)+D(τ2)u(b+x2),

where b is the background consumption and the binary tradeoff is between {$x1, τ1} and {$x2, τ
2}.
However, background consumption can vary over time (e.g., due to liquidity constraints
28

Andersen et al. (2008) argue that with a Fudenberg and Levine (2006) dual-self temptation model, income from
experiments will not be integrated with background wealth. They assume that payments from risky choices are spent
in one day. From individuals’ choices, Andersen et al. estimate a parameter via maximum likelihood to capture the
number of days over which income from discounting tasks is spent. In their model, the likelihood function is
maximized when individuals consume the reward on the date they receive it.

Page 31

Measuring Time Preferences

and/or time-varying income flows). For example, Noor (2009) notes that MEL choices can be
difficult to interpret if there is varying marginal utility of money over time due to varying levels
of base consumption. For instance, individuals may display (what appears to be) preference
reversals in choices over money even if they are classical exponential discounters.
In most of the literature, though, background consumption is not incorporated in the
identifying assumptions. This leads to a restricted form of the consume-on-receipt model that is
implicitly used in most analyses of MEL data. We describe this model next.
Model 3: The Consume-On-Receipt Model without Background Consumption
By setting background consumption, b, equal to zero we obtain a model in which subject
payments x1 received at delay τ1 have value D(τ1)u(x1). Indifference between two time-dated
payments, {$x1, τ1} and {$x2, τ2}, implies:
D(τ1)u(x1)+D(τ2)u(0) = D(τ1)u(0)+D(τ2)u(x2)
If u(0) is well-defined, then this model can be estimated. 29
It is common to make additional restrictions that further simplify the model. For
example, if u(0) = 0, then the indifference points imply
D(τ1)u(x1) = D(τ2)u(x2).
For example, consider the (constant relative risk aversion) utility function with 0 < γ < 1:
𝑐
𝑢 𝑐
.
1 𝛾
This utility function is an additive shift of the standard form of constant relative risk aversion.30
If we assume exponential discounting with annual discount factor δ (and time horizon variables
𝜏 and 𝜏 are measured in years), then this specification implies that at an indifference point
𝛿

𝑥
1

𝛾

𝛿

𝑥
1

𝛾

.

Taking the natural log yields
1 𝛾 𝑙𝑛 𝑥
1 𝛾 𝑙𝑛 𝑥 ,
𝜏 𝜌
𝜏 𝜌
where 𝜌 is the annual discount rate: 𝑙𝑛 𝛿 . Collapsing terms yields,

29

For some commonly used utility functions, u(0) is not well-defined. For example, with constant relative risk
aversion, u(0) is only defined when the coefficient of relative risk aversion is strictly less than one.
30
The more common form incorporates an additive shift: -1/(1-γ). This additive shift makes the function converge
to ln(c) as γ goes to 1.

Page 32

Measuring Time Preferences

𝜌

1
𝜏

𝛾
𝑥
𝑙𝑛
𝜏
𝑥

1

𝛾

𝑅𝑅𝑅
𝜏
𝜏

.

9

This provides a simple expression relating the annual (exponential) discount rate (ρ), to the
required rate of return (RRR), the coefficient of relative risk aversion (γ), and the span of the
𝜏 .
horizon, 𝜏
Equation (9) implies that the discount rate is proportional to the RRR. Second, it implies
that if one holds the RRR fixed, the discount rate is inversely proportional to the gap between the
two reward dates (where time units are measured in years). Finally, the formula implies that risk
aversion dampens the imputed level of discounting. (Note that γ = 0 is the case of risk
neutrality.) The more risk averse the agent—i.e., the higher the value of γ—the lower the
implied value of ρ (holding all else equal). This property emerges because larger, later rewards
have lower marginal utility both because they are discounted and because they are moving
further out along a concave utility function. Hence, in this model discounting and risk aversion
are substitutes.
This substitution effect is weakened when background consumption, b, is added back into
the model (as in the previous section). Moreover, as b gets large (holding fixed the indifference
pair, {$x1, τ1} and {$x2, τ2}), the role of risk aversion vanishes altogether.
𝑥
𝑅𝑅𝑅
.
10
→
𝜏
𝜏
𝑥
𝜏
𝜏
The relative risk aversion parameter ceases to affect the estimate of ρ in the case of large b,
because the utility function (with constant relative risk aversion) becomes locally linear when
background consumption becomes large relative to the experimental rewards.
lim 𝜌

1

𝑙𝑛

To summarize, in the consume-on-receipt model (holding fixed an indifference pair):
1. The higher the degree of risk aversion, γ, the lower the level of the imputed discount rate.
2. The lower the level of background consumption, b, the lower the imputed discount rate.
Finally, the special property, 𝜌

, (i.e., the discount rate equals the time-horizon-

normalized RRR), holds when the following conditions are simultaneously satisfied:
1. Time-dated monetary payments are consumed at the time of receipt. This is the
distinction between the consume-on-receipt model and the optimization model.
2. The utility function is locally linear. This may arise either because (i) the utility function
is globally linear (e.g., γ = 0 in the constant relative risk aversion utility function), or (ii)
because background consumption, b, is large and the utility function has diminishing

Page 33

Measuring Time Preferences

absolute risk aversion (e.g., constant relative risk aversion).
Condition (1) is problematic, a topic to which we return in the section on anomalies in the
measurement of RRRs. Regarding Condition (2.i), Figure 1 shows that many papers do not make
this restriction—instead, they allow for non-linear utility when estimating their models.
Accordingly, the inference 𝜌

is not considered state of the art, though it was in the

1980s.
Evidence for Models
Distinguishing among these different assumptions about consumption (described above) is
important for interpreting MEL choices, but it is difficult to directly observe consumption and
thereby evaluate these assumptions. Moreover, there is probably some heterogeneity in
sophistication, leading some households to behave according to the consume-on-receipt model,
others to behave according to the optimization model, and others to behave in yet other ways.
Curvature in the utility function is another key feature that affects interpretation of MEL
data. There is strong evidence against linear utility. Despite expected utility theory implying that
individuals should be risk neutral over lotteries with small prizes, a well-replicated literature
estimates risk aversion for small gambles (see discussion in Rabin 2000). For example, Andersen
et al. (2008) jointly estimate discount rates and risk aversion parameters from MEL choices and
from choices between (static) risky gambles, and find that (local) utility curvature is an important
mechanism. Andreoni and Sprenger (2012a) find that the level of background consumption
assumed plays an important role in estimating the curvature of the utility function.
Turning to the issue of when payments are consumed, Krupka and Stephens (2013) show
evidence that a household’s MEL-elicited RRR is affected by factors (inflation, income shocks)
that affect the marginal interest rate that the household faces. Krupka and Stephens examined
panel data from 1972-1974 with MEL choices from 1194 individuals. They found that RRR’s are
sensitive to households’ financial circumstances, with the RRR falling when households
experience positive financial shocks. This is consistent with the predictions of optimization
theory—if households face liquidity constraints, their measured RRR should fall as they move
further away from the liquidity constraint (and the slope of their forward-looking consumption
path endogenously falls). Krupka and Stephens thus provide evidence that MEL choices are
affected by the real consumption path and real interest rate that households face. Moreover,
during their study period, measured RRRs increased by 35 percentage points. They argue that this
evidence is more consistent with MEL reflecting changing financial constraints and inflation
rates than with MEL measuring changing rates of time preference.
Reuben, Sapienza, and Zingales (2015) do not observe consumption, but they do observe

Page 34

Measuring Time Preferences

when experimental participants cashed their payment check. They find that more than half of the
participants who receive their check immediately (rather than waiting 2 weeks for a larger
amount) subsequently take more than 2 weeks to cash it. Relatedly, the macroeconomics
literature on consumption estimates the marginal propensity to consume from anticipated
financial payments and generally finds that these payments are consumed over a timespan of
weeks, months, quarters, or even years and not consumed on (or before) the day of receipt (e.g.,
Broda and Parker 2014). The available evidence is hard to reconcile with the consume-onreceipt model.
In contrast to these results, Andersen et al. (2008) provide evidence in favor of the
consume-on-receipt model: they find that the likelihood of their model is highest when timedated payments are consumed when received (essentially, the consume-on-receipt model),
However, they also estimate risk aversion from risky gambles under the maintained assumption
that gamble proceeds are all consumed when received.
4.c) The Role of Incentives in MEL Tasks
There is a debate over the role of incentives in economics experiments generally. Using
incentives is standard practice in the economics literature, under the rationale that it leads
subjects to truthfully reveal their preferences.31 A classic review by Camerer and Hogarth (1999)
examines the effect of incentives in many types of experimental economics studies and finds that
incentives do not reliably change average performance, but tends to decrease the variance of
responses. Exceptions exist for judgment and clerical tasks, where payments do increase average
performance. For individual preference tasks, Camerer and Hogarth find that incentives tend to
lead to more risk aversion and less generosity.32 They do not examine time preference
experiments in particular.
Even when real incentives are used, most studies pay participants for just one of the many
choices that they make, thereby reducing the strength of the incentives (see, e.g., Baltussen et al.
2012). Paying for all of a participant’s experimental choices generates the confound that early
choices can affect the later choices through an income effect (e.g., see Thaler and Johnson 1990).
However, paying for a single choice while making multiple choices is not necessarily incentive
31

For extended discussions of the role of incentives in experiments, see Read (2005) and Harrison (2014). A related
debate is over the role of hypothetical choice in contingent valuation studies. For a range of viewpoints, see the
symposium in the Journal of Economic Perspectives: Hausman (2012), Carson (2012), Kling, Phaneuf, and Zhao
(2012).
32
On risk aversion, see also Holt and Laury (2002, 2005) showing more risk averse behavior with incentives than in
hypothetical choices. To the extent risk aversion tasks are used to measure utility curvature that is used to transform
RRRs into discount rates, hypothetical choices will likely underestimate curvature and thus affect estimated discount
rates. We do not know of evidence that RRRs are affected by incentives.

Page 35

Measuring Time Preferences

compatible if participants do not satisfy the independence axiom of expected utility (Holt 1986,
Karni and Safra 1987). Nonetheless, experimental tests suggest that the random incentive system
is unlikely to substantially contaminate behavior (Starmer and Sugden 1991, Cubitt, Starmer, and
Sugden, 1998, Hey and Lee 2005, though see Freeman, Halevy, and Kneeland forthcoming).33
Implementing incentives in MEL tasks can be challenging as it is necessary to hold
transaction costs constant and to assure a constant degree of payment reliability, both regardless
of the payment date. For example, payments made “now” must be just as reliable as payments
made in a month. Because of such logistical challenges, the desirability of using real payments in
a MEL task, as opposed to hypothetical rewards, is open to debate.
Our reading of the MEL literature is that there is little evidence of systematic differences
between RRR in incentivized and unincentivized experiments.34 However, there is a need for
more research here with larger, more representative samples. Madden et al. (2004) compared
hypothetical choices with incentivized choices both within and between subjects and found no
significant effect of incentives. Madden et al. (2003) estimate a hyperbolic discount rate for each
subject based on their incentivized and hypothetical choices, and find that the two are highly
correlated (r=0.92). In each paper, though point estimates were similar, power was limited (N=20
to 40 per experiment) and confidence intervals wide. Johnson and Bickel (2002) provide similar
results, but with an extremely small sample size: N=6. Harrison, Lau, and Williams (2002)
examine variation in the probability a subject would be paid for their choices based on variation
in the group size (they paid one subject per group). Their results show a statistically insignificant
effect of group size.
Coller and Williams (1999) compare MEL choices with incentivized and hypothetical monetary
payments, randomizing between session. In their raw results, RRRs are higher when
incentivized, but in regression results, RRRs are lower when incentivized. They conclude that
this difference “is likely due to the fact that subjects were not adequately randomized into
treatment cells, so that subject demographics are correlated with the treatment.” By way of
comparison, their regression-estimated effect of monetary incentives is similar in size to the
estimated effects of providing information about the annual interest rates implied by choosing a
given option.
In a much larger sample (N=449), Ubfal (2016) examines discount rates for six different
33

For critiques on the ability of the Becker, DeGroot, and Marschak incentivization method to reveal preference,
see Mazar, Koszegi, and Ariely (2014), who argue for context-dependent preferences, and Cason and Plott (2014),
who show mistakes in participants’ understanding of the method.
34
In a cross-study comparison, Kirby (1997) found suggestive evidence that incentivized choice showed steeper
discounting than hypothetical choice. However, incentives were confounded with the magnitude of the reward, with
hypothetical choice studies using larger rewards. We now know that people are more patient for larger rewards (the
magnitude effect, which we discuss below).

Page 36

Measuring Time Preferences

goods for rural Ugandan households, eliciting them with hypothetical choice or incentivized
choice; he finds no significant effect of incentives. Bickel et al. (2009) compare delay
discounting of money with real and hypothetical choice using neuroimaging. They replicate the
behavioral results of no significant difference in discounting in the real vs. hypothetical
conditions. They also find that the brain regions related to considering real and hypothetical
choices appear to be equivalent.
Finally, we note that the use of real incentive payments is not the same as the use of an
incentive compatible mechanism. For example, titration methods that are commonly used in the
psychology literature are not incentive compatible in the sense that sophisticated subjects could
game the system by behaving impatiently early in the experiment to obtain outsize delayed
rewards later in the experiment.
4.d) Neuroimaging of Intertemporal Choice Tasks
Neuroimaging has been used in an effort to identify the neural mechanisms underlying
intertemporal choice. There is an ongoing debate about what the neuroimaging findings imply
about the psychological processes involved in intertemporal choice (see Carter, Meyer, and
Huettel 2010; Kable 2014; and Camerer et al. 2014 for reviews). One finding is that brain
regions associated with reward display a hyperbolic or quasi-hyperbolic decline in activation as
the reward horizon is extended (McClure et al. 2004; Kable and Glimcher 2007; Albrecht et al.
2010).35 A second finding is that the brain regions that are active when making intertemporal
decisions about consumption (e.g., juice for thirsty subjects) are similar to those brain regions
involved when making intertemporal decisions about monetary payments (McClure et al. 2007).
A third finding is that self-regulation is associated with activity in the dorsal-lateral prefrontal
cortex (McClure et al. 2004, 2007; Hare, Camerer, and Rangel 2009; Albrecht et al. 2010; Figner
et al. 2010).

5. Empirical Regularities in MEL Laboratory Studies
In this section, we describe the empirical regularities that have emerged in MEL studies. Most of
the research on intertemporal choice has treated the RRRs measured during MEL tasks as if they
35

McClure et al. (2004) conducted the first neuroimaging study of intertemporal choice. They used a MEL task in
which subjects made a series of choices between time-dated Amazon gift certificates (which are a close proxy for
money). The dopamine reward system displayed a rapid decline in activation as rewards were delayed. In contrast,
delaying a reward led to only a weak decline in neural activation in areas associated with deliberation and other
higher cortical functions (e.g., dorsal-lateral prefrontal cortex). McClure et al. (2007) report a similar pattern of
neural activity in a paradigm using food rewards (i.e., water and fruit juice for thirsty subjects). These studies report
different degrees of present bias in the behavioral data. The measured present bias is much stronger for the food
rewards (McClure et al. 2007) than for the financial rewards (McClure et al. 2004; Albrecht et al. 2010).

Page 37

Measuring Time Preferences

were measurements of discount rates. As discussed above, this is justified under the joint
assumption of the Consume-on-Receipt Model and (locally) linear utility. However, many of the
results from the MEL literature are conceptually anomalous if measured RRRs actually are
equivalent to discount rates. To avoid pre-judging the meaning of these experimental findings
and to enable us to compare results across studies that make different modeling assumptions, we
defer discussing preference parameters until later and instead summarize the literature in terms
of the direct object that is observed in MEL experiments, the RRRs.
We begin by enumerating the key empirical regularities of RRRs found in most MEL
tasks. We then discuss the empirical basis and interpretation of these anomalies later in the
section:
● Decreasing impatience as the horizon increases: The RRR per unit of time (i.e.,

decreases as the length of time between the earlier and later option increases.
● Weak effects of a front-end delay with MEL (in contrast to strong effects of front-end

delay with primary rewards): Measured RRRs decrease weakly (or not at all) when a
fixed delay is added to both the earlier and later options in a MEL task. The front-end
delay effect is much stronger with primary goods that are yoked to a specific consumption
date (like food rewards or effort).
● Sub-additivity: The total required rate of return for one long interval is less than the sum

of the decomposed rates of return. Consider three rewards delivered at delays τ1, τ2, and
τ3. Assume that we have identified three indifference relationships: {$x1, τ1} ̴ {$x2, τ2},
{$x2, τ2} ̴ {$x3, τ3}, and {$x1, τ1} ̴ {$z3, τ3}. Transitivity implies that {$x1, τ1} ̴ {$x3, τ3},
so x3 = z3. Hence, under transitivity, the RRR between τ1 and τ3 should equal the sum of
the RRR between τ1 and τ2 plus the RRR between τ2 and τ3:
RRR1,3 = 𝑙𝑛

𝑙𝑛

𝑙𝑛

𝑙𝑛

𝑙𝑛

RRR1,2 + RRR2,3.

Sub-additivity contradicts transitivity, and instead implies that x3 > z3. This in turn
implies that
RRR1,3 = 𝑙𝑛

𝑙𝑛

𝑙𝑛

𝑙𝑛

𝑙𝑛

RRR1,2 + RRR2,3.

In other words, subadditivity implies that RRR1,3 < RRR1,2 + RRR2,3.
● Magnitude effect: RRRs decrease as the magnitudes of the rewards are proportionately

scaled up.

Page 38

Measuring Time Preferences

● Delay/Speedup asymmetry: RRRs are higher when the later good is described as delayed

relative to the earlier good; RRRs are lower when the earlier good is described as sped up
relative to the later good.
● Gain/Loss asymmetry: RRRs are higher when rewards are gains than when the rewards

are losses.
This bulleted list contains the regularities that have been most actively discussed in the
literature, although it is not exhaustive. For example, Read et al. (2005) document a “date/delay”
effect: i.e., MEL choices are more patient when choices are described using calendar dates for
reward delivery than when choices are characterized in terms of time delay from the current
moment. Magen, Dweck, and Gross (2008) find that when a MEL choice is framed as a sequence
(e.g., an option might be “$10 today and $0 next week” rather than simply “$10 today”), choices
are more patient. Ebert and Prelec (2007) find that increasing participants’ attention to time
lowers RRR for the near future and raises RRR for the far future. Ifcher and Zarghamee (2011)
find that inducing positive affect significantly reduces required rate of return. Anderson and
Stafford (2009) find that adding uncertainty raises RRR. Weber et al. (2007) study query theory,
and show that thinking about reasons for choices in different orders affects choice. Other
empirical regularities that are inconsistent with predictions of the models discussed above have
been reported in the intertemporal choice literature, but are beyond the scope of this review.
Below, we describe each of the bulleted regularities in greater detail and consider how they
conflict with properties predicted by the consume-on-receipt model.
5.1 Decreasing impatience as the horizon increases
The consume-on-receipt model with background consumption, b, combined with exponential
discounting, predicts that the RRR per unit of time will be given by:36
𝑅𝑅𝑅
𝜏

1
𝑥
𝑙𝑛
𝑥
𝜏

1
𝑙𝑛
𝜏

𝑥

𝑏

𝛿
𝛿

1 𝑏

𝑏

𝑙𝑛 𝑥

.

11

This equation is increasing in τ, which is the delay between the earlier reward and the later
reward. (Intuitively, as the delay increases, the ratio needs to increase for two reasons: to
offset the increased delay and to offset diminishing returns in the utility function. The latter
effect causes the horizon-normalized 𝑅𝑅𝑅 to rise.) Hence, the consume-on-receipt model with
36

This equation is derived under the maintained assumption of reward indifference with constant relative risk
𝑏
𝛿 𝑏
𝑏
𝛿 𝑥
𝑏
. Use this indifference equation to solve for 𝑥 .
aversion: 𝑥

Page 39

Measuring Time Preferences

exponential discounting predicts that the (horizon-normalized) RRR should increase as the time
horizon increases, which is counterfactual.
In fact, empirically measured (horizon-normalized) RRR’s strongly decrease as the time
horizon increases. For example, Thaler (1981) studied intertemporal choices over many
intervals, including 0–3 months, 0–1 year, and 0–3 years. Thaler reports that measured
annualized RRRs decrease substantially as the length of the delay interval increases.
The finding that decision-making becomes increasingly patient (per unit time) as the
interval of delay grows longer (holding the interval’s starting point fixed) has become a
canonical result in the MEL literature. Many other experiments have reproduced this result (e.g.,
Benzion, Rapoport, and Yagil 1989, who also demonstrate the magnitude effect and the gain/loss
asymmetry; Green, Myerson, and McFadden 1997; Kirby 1997). Moreover, Chapman and
Elstein (1995) examine the effect that increasing the length of the time interval has on RRR for
money, health, and holidays. They find decreasing impatience as the horizon increases in all
three domains.
Decreasing impatience in measured discount rates is predicted by the hyperbolic discount
function and its variants (e.g., the quasi-hyperbolic and generalized hyperbolic discount function)
under the consume-on-receipt model. Decreasing impatience in MEL tasks has therefore often
been interpreted (perhaps inappropriately, as we explain below) as evidence for hyperbolic
discounting. Other non-discounted utility models also predict decreasing impatience when
increasing the length of the time interval, such as the fixed-cost-of-delay model in Benhabib,
Bisin, and Schotter (2010), and the heuristic models proposed by Read, Frederick, and Scholten
(2013) and Ericson et al. (2015).
5.2 Weak Effects of a Front-End Delay for MEL Tasks
The consume-on-receipt model with exponential discounting and constant background
consumption predicts that the discount rate measured over any given time duration should be
constant regardless of when that period begins (holding the period length fixed). In contrast,
jointly assuming the consume-on-receipt model and some form of hyperbolic discounting
implies a higher RRR if the earlier option includes the present than if all options (including the
early option) are delayed.
Constant RRR’s can be tested by measuring RRRs over a fixed length of delay time that is
translated into the future by increasing the front-end delay before the earliest option is available.
For example, RRR could be measured for the following two time intervals, both of which are one
week long: reward now vs. reward in 1 week and reward in 10 weeks vs. reward in 11 weeks.
Although the RRRs measured in MEL tasks do tend to decrease when a front-end delay is added,

Page 40

Measuring Time Preferences

most studies find this decrease is somewhat weaker than predicted by popular non-exponential
discount functions (maintaining the consume-on-receipt assumption). For example, for the quasihyperbolic model, the β identified from variation in the front-end delay is usually only slightly
less than one, although the gap is often statistically significant (e.g., Coller and Williams 1999
and Augenblick, Niederle, and Sprenger 2015). McAlvanah (2010) finds an average annualized
discount factor of 0.87 between the present and 6 years in the future, but an average discount
factor of 0.94 between 12 years and 18 years in the future. Similarly, Slonim, Carlson, and
Bettinger (2007) find that subjects are significantly less patient when there is no front-end delay
in MEL choices, as do Green, Myerson, and Macaux (2005).
In contrast, Dohmen et al. (2012) examine the MEL choices of a representative sample of
the German population. They find that the annualized RRR are similar for tradeoffs between 0 vs.
6 months and for tradeoffs between 6 vs. 12 months, but that the (annualized) RRR is lower for 0
vs. 12 month intervals.37 Similarly, Kable and Glimcher (2010) find that the (time-length
normalized) RRR declines as the delay period increases, but that the specific pattern of declining
RRRs starts at the time of the earliest possible reward in the experimental choice set (regardless
of whether that earliest option is “now”).38
Andreoni and Sprenger (2012a) allow subjects to allocate rewards using convex budget
sets and, using a concave utility version of the consume-on-receipt model, do not find evidence
of present bias. They estimate little present bias for immediate payments delivered in the form of
a check and relatively little concavity in the utility function. A number of papers interpret
Andreoni and Sprenger (2012a, 2012b) as measuring time preference over consumption in a
discounted utility model,39,40 though in a later comment Andreoni and Sprenger (2015) note the
37

Dohmen et al. (2012) also find that a substantial fraction of subjects choose in a pattern that is inconsistent with
any type of discount function.
38
Statistical results are not presented in Glimcher et al. (2007), but Kable and Glimcher (2010) estimate two
hyperbolic discount rates for each subject: one from choices with an immediate option, and a modified one from a
set of choices shifted forward 60 days, in which the soonest possible reward (60 days) is treated as “now.” A scatter
plot shows that they are similar, consistent with discounting in relative time.
39
Cheung (2015) offers a substantially different interpretation of the results of Andreoni and Sprenger (2012a,b),
arguing that behavior in the convex time budget task is driven by a diversification motive. By allocating money to
two dates, a participant hedges her payment risk. In support of this argument, Cheung shows that making payments
certain v. risky in an MPL elicitation (where diversification cannot play a role, since only one choice is paid) has no
measureable effect on intertemporal choice. This is in contrast to Andreoni and Sprenger (2012b), which finds
significant differences between convex time budget choices with and without risk. Moreover, when Andreoni and
Sprenger (2012b) introduce risk into the convex time budget, the risks for the two dates are resolved independently.
Cheung shows that when the lotteries determining payment in the convex time budget are perfectly correlated (i.e.
one roll of the die determines both whether the earlier and the later date is paid), behavior is halfway between the
case with certain payment and with risky, independent lotteries. Miao and Zhong (2015) provide similar evidence,
also examining behavior in a negatively correlated lottery (either the sooner date will be paid or the later date, but
not both).
40
For instance, Epper and Fehr-Duda (2015) argue that rank dependent probability weighting in which participants
care about their whole portfolio's risk can explain the results (however, see Dean and Ortoleva 2015). Miao and

Page 41

Measuring Time Preferences

role of arbitrage in producing results that look like linear utility and non-present-biased RRRs.
Front-end delays have large effect sizes for primary rewards (e.g., juice, food, work) and
relatively small effect sizes for MEL tasks (though usually these MEL effects are also
statistically significant). For instance, McClure et al. (2007) examined choices over small
amounts of juice (offered to thirsty subjects). They found substantial present bias in choices
when the earliest juice reward is available immediately, but not when all options are shifted 10
minutes in the future. Read, Loewenstein, and Kalyanaraman (1999) also found evidence of
present bias in movie choices using a front-end-delay design (see also related results41 in
Milkman, Rogers, and Bazerman 2009), and Read and van Leeuwen (1998) found evidence of
present bias in food choices using a front-end-delay design.
The differential effect of front-end delays for primary vs. monetary rewards is
highlighted in Augenblick, Niederle, and Sprenger (2015), who examine the effect of a front-end
delay on MEL choices and primary reward choices (a real effort task). They found small effects
of front-end delay on MEL choices (they estimate β= 0.97, rejecting β=1), but larger effects of
front-end delay with real effort tasks (β=0.90).
In short, the literature is inconclusive about the effects of front-end delays using MEL,
but generally finds that they are weak in the financial domain. However, studies using primary
rewards do display a strong effect of adding a front-end delay. (See also Section 3 where we
discuss intertemporal choice measured from primary rewards.)
5.3 Sub-additivity
The weak effects of front-end delays on RRRs in MEL studies generates a tension with the robust
tendency of longer time intervals to lower time-length-normalized RRRs. Under the assumption
of the consume-on-receipt model, finding that front-end-delays do not change the RRR (or only
weakly lower the RRR) implies that the discount function is exponential (or nearly exponential).
At the same time, again under the assumption of the consume-on-receipt model, finding that
increasing the length of a delay decreases the time-length-normalized RRR, implies that the
discount function must have a falling instantaneous discount rate (e.g., a hyperbolic form).
Researchers consistently observe these contradictory empirical patterns.
Moreover, these empirical regularities contradict transitivity. Consider RRRs for three
dates: 1, 2, and 3, which need not be evenly spaced. Under transitivity the associated RRRs must
Zhong (2015) argue that Epstein and Zin (1989) preferences can explain the results, though Andreoni and Sprenger
(2015) reply and argue that because all risk was resolved at the end of the experiment, it may not be appropriate to
apply these models here.
41
They show that customers who use a DVD rental service are slower to return high-brow movies than low-brow
movies.

Page 42

Measuring Time Preferences

have the following relationship (see the full argument above, where we first defined subadditivity): RRR1,3 = RRR1,2 + RRR2,3. However, experiments consistently find that RRR1,3 <
RRR1,2 + RRR2,3. In other words, longer time intervals have lower RRRs than would be expected
from the observations of RRRs associated with shorter sub-intervals. This phenomenon is called
sub-additivity (Read 2001).
Roughly, subadditivity means that subdividing an interval leads to more overall
discounting than if subjects are asked to evaluate options at the beginning and end of the interval
as a whole. Averaging across the three experiments in Read (2001), the RRR was 40% higher if
the interval was subdivided instead of being treated as a single interval. Similar results have been
found in in Read and Roelofsma (2003) as well as Scholten and Read (2006).
While no discounted utility model predicts subadditivity, some non-discounted utility models
discussed in Section 2 produce sub-additive choices:
• Hyperbolic discounting, in which discounting is a function of the difference in delays (not
the time horizon from the present period): e.g., D(t1,t2)=1/(1+k×(t2-t1)), where k is a
constant. See Kable and Glimcher (2010).
• The fixed-cost-of-delay model of Benhabib, Bisin, and Schotter (2010).
• Heuristic models of Read, Frederick, and Scholten (2013) and Ericson et al. (2015).
While most of the evidence points to subadditivity, others have found evidence of superadditivity in MEL tasks (Scholten and Read 2006).
5.4 Magnitude Effect
One of the most robust findings in the MEL literature is that RRRs over relatively small
quantities of money are substantially higher than the RRR’s over relatively large quantities of
money. This is called the magnitude effect or absolute magnitude effect (Thaler 1981; Prelec and
Loewenstein 1991, Loewenstein and Prelec 1992), and is widely replicated (e.g., Benzion,
Rapoport, and Yagil 1989; Kirby 1997; Holcomb and Nelson 1992; Andersen et al. 2013; Halevy
2015; Ericson and Noor 2015). The magnitude effect is particularly puzzling because the
consume-on-receipt model predicts the opposite effect. Equation 11 predicts that a rising level
of x0 should be associated with a rising RRR. Intuitively, larger monetary rewards cause the
curvature of the utility function to become more relevant, thereby generating a higher RRR (for
any given level of positive curvature in the utility function).
The magnitude effect is also observed when researchers take into account the curvature
of the utility function and estimate discount rates (e.g., Chapman 1996; Meyer 2015). Ericson
and Noor (2015) provide a method to directly test for magnitude-independent discounting
without need to estimate the curvature of the utility function and show a magnitude effect.
Andersen et al. (2013) also incorporate utility curvature and replicate a magnitude effect in

Page 43

Measuring Time Preferences

estimated discount rates. They find a small magnitude effect relative to other researchers that
emerges only after controlling for individual heterogeneity. Andersen et al. also provide a useful
table reviewing the magnitude effect literature.
5.5 Speed-Up/Delay Asymmetry
Some MEL experiments present an early option as the default and a relatively delayed option as
an alternative. This framing elicits much higher RRRs than the opposite frame: a future option as
the default and a relatively earlier option as a sped-up alternative. Loewenstein and Prelec (1992)
described this as the speed-up/delay asymmetry and it has been robustly replicated (e.g.,
Loewenstein 1988; Malkoc and Zauberman 2006; Appelt, Hardisty, and Weber 2011). These
effects are hypothesized to arise from an intertemporal application of an endowment effect
generated by a frame-induced reference point (Kahneman and Tversky 1979; Thaler 1980; see
also Weber et al. 2007).
5.6 Gain/Loss Asymmetry
Thaler’s (1981) intertemporal choice experiment found evidence that RRRs measured in
intertemporal choices involving gains are substantially higher than RRRs measured in
intertemporal choices involving losses. This finding has been replicated many times (e.g.,
Benzion, Rapoport, and Yagil 1989; Abdellaoui, Attema, and Bleichrodt 2010; Appelt, Hardisty,
and Weber 2011; Tanaka, Camerer, and Nguyen 2010) and has come to be called the gain/loss
asymmetry.42 This effect has been attributed to anticipation effects: people obtain little
psychological benefit from postponing losses because of negative anticipation (Loewenstein
1987).

6. MEL Inside and Outside the Lab
6.a) MEL Outside the Lab and MEL with Non-Student Subjects
Though MEL studies have often been run with students inside a laboratory, they have
increasingly been run with non-student populations and/or outside the laboratory. We discuss
such results here.43 A key takeaway is that results from studies with students are similar to those
42

However, Ahlbrecht and Weber (1997) do not find a statistically significant gain-loss asymmetry in a median test,
but do not report confidence intervals. Shelley (1994) and Tanaka, Camerer, and Nguyen (2010) find that a subset of
individuals do not display gain/loss asymmetry (or even reverse the asymmetry, acting more inpatient for losses).
43
Although we continue, where possible, to describe findings in terms of the RRR (because this does not involve any
identifying assumptions), we are forced in several instances to describe discount rates as some papers present only
estimates of a discount rate filtered through a model, not the raw RRR.

Page 44

Measuring Time Preferences

with representative samples. Notably, Andersen et al. (2010) directly compare students to
representative samples and find that average discounting is similar, though preference
heterogeneity is more limited among university students.
One of the earliest papers to estimate discount functions for a representative sample is
Harrison, Lau, and Williams (2002).44 They examined a representative sample of 268 Danish
residents who traveled to participate in a MEL experiment session with one participant per
session paid for their choices. They adjust for potential censoring in choices (cf. Coller and
Williams 1999). They assume a consume-on-receipt model and linear utility, and they conclude
that the average annual discount rate is 28%, and examine variation by demographic
characteristics.
Andersen et al. (2008) examine a similar Danish population and jointly estimate discount
rates and risk aversion parameters from MEL choices and choices between risky gambles. They
thus allow for curvature in the utility function. They assume risky gambles are all consumed
when received, and find that the likelihood of their model is highest when time-dated payments
are consumed when received (essentially, the consume-on-receipt model). They conclude that
the average annual discount rate is approximately 10%. Andersen et al. (2014) examine another
Danish sample using the consume-on-receipt model. They find that the average exponential
discount rate is approximately 9%; they also find no evidence of quasi-hyperbolic discounting
(i.e., present-biased preferences), and weak evidence for modest hyperbolic discounting.
In a very different sample, Meier and Sprenger (2010) examined a population of low- and
middle-income individuals and found that that the RRR is 16% (per month); they classify 36% of
the sample as present biased and 9% as future biased.
MEL experiments have also been run in developing countries. Tanaka, Camerer, and Nguyen
(2010) examined time preference in Vietnam using MEL experiments, and estimated a variety of
discounting models (exponential, hyperbolic, etc.) under the assumption of linear utility and the
consume-on-receipt model; they found strong evidence of present bias. Bauer, Chytilova, and
Morduch (2012) examined required rates of return for a sample drawn from rural India. Like
Andersen et al. (2008), they used risky gambles to estimate the curvature of the utility function
and assumed a consume-on-receipt consumption model; they found average 3-month discount
rates of 22% and then 16% when an additional front-end delay is added. These results imply that
about 35% of their sample are present biased. Wang, Rieger, and Hens (2016) provide evidence
on hypothetical MEL choices for a sample of 53 countries.
44

Barsky et al. (1997) conduct a related study on a representative sample of 116 adults over the age of 50. They ask
these adults to pick a long-run consumption path (holding net present value constant). They find that subjects tend
to prefer a flat or rising slope of the real consumption path when the real interest rate is zero (implying a zero
discount rate or a negative discount rate). The preference for rising consumption sequences has been reviewed by
Loewenstein and Prelec (1993). See also Loewenstein and Sicherman (1991) and Bhatia et al. (2016).

Page 45

Measuring Time Preferences

6.b) How Predictive Are MEL Studies?
Whether or not MEL studies measure the precise quantitative form of the discount function,
they still may provide a proxy for an individual’s level of impatience. While one function of
MEL studies is to measure the discount function, another is simply to predict behavior by
classifying individuals as relatively patient or impatient. Hence, MEL studies could be assessed
by how well they predict behaviors in other domains. Here, we examine whether MEL behavior
predicts field behavior, the magnitude of such correlations, and alternative explanations for why
MEL behavior predicts field behavior. In sum, the literature finds that the correlation between
MEL behavior and any given field behavior is small in magnitude (and statistically significant in
well-powered studies). Aggregated indices of behavior show stronger effect sizes.
Correlations between choices in MEL tasks and other behaviors (e.g., savings rates,
educational attainment, medical adherence) have many mutually compatible interpretations.
Behavior in MEL tasks can be a function not only of time preferences, but also of knowledge,
framing, cognitive function, and beliefs. Similarly, other behaviors (e.g., outside the lab) are also
a function of time preference in addition to tastes, knowledge, context, cognitive function, and
beliefs. Accordingly, many mechanisms could give rise to the weak correlation between choices
in MEL tasks and choices outside the lab. For instance, lower RRR’s in MEL tasks can result
from higher levels of trust in the experimenter or greater levels of financial sophistication (i.e.
realizing that a 50% three-week return in a MEL task compares very favorably to rates of return
in financial markets). Trust and financial sophistication likely affect behavior in many domains.
Dohmen et al. (2010) and Benjamin, Brown, and Shapiro (2013) found that behavior in MEL
tasks is associated with performance on standardized cognitive tests. Burks et al. (2009)
examined a sample of truckers and showed that cognitive ability (as measured by IQ tests) is
positively correlated with both increased short-term and long-term patience in MEL tasks
(correlation with normalized IQ is 0.14 for β and is 0.13 for δ, implying respective R2 values of
0.142 = 0.020 and 0.132 = 0.017).
Chabris et al. (2008) examine how behavior in MEL tasks is correlated with a number of
different field behaviors, including health behaviors (e.g., BMI, exercise, smoking45) and
financial behaviors (saving, gambling, and paying late fees). In almost all cases the correlation is
statistically indistinguishable from zero. Of the 20 different relationships that they studied, the
median (unadjusted) R2 is 0.005. However, almost all of the relationships go in the predicted
direction and the RRR has at least as much predictive power as any other variable in their dataset,
45

Harrison, Lau and Ruström (2010) find that male smokers have significantly higher discount rates than male nonsmokers, but find no significant difference between female smokers and non-smokers.

Page 46

Measuring Time Preferences

including gender, age, and education. The correlation between the discount rate and field
behavior rises when field behaviors are aggregated (after aggregation the R2 is approximately
10%). Their work also highlights the difficulty in comparing R2 across studies and populations.
They find slightly higher R2 for an in-lab study than for a web-interface study.
Daly, Delaney, and Harmon (2009) examined predictors of RRR in MEL tasks using rich data
(time diaries, psychometric testing, and medical tests) on a sample of 204 students. They used
factor analysis to reduce the dimensionality of their data, and identified a significant correlation
between RRR’s and a factor based on personality measures (consideration of the future, selfcontrol, and elaboration of consequences). They also found an imprecisely measured correlation
(p<0.10) with a factor representing health (blood pressure and BMI). In a global sample with
80,000 individuals from 76 countries, Falk et al. (2015) show that RRR is predictive of savings
behavior. Falk et al. (2016) then provide a brief survey instrument that is experimentally
validated (based on the best predictors in choice experiments) for measuring RRR and various
dimensions of preferences.
Burks et al. (2012) compared different measures of patience—β and δ—as elicited by MEL
tasks, a personality survey, and a new task designed to capture the logic behind Mischel, Shoda,
and Rodriguez (1989)’s marshmallow delay-of-gratification tasks. In a sample of US truck
drivers, all four tasks are significantly correlated with field behaviors as well as measures of
numeracy. Bradford et al. (2017) use a representative sample of US residents and also show β
and δ, elicited via survey questions, are related to a variety of consumer behaviors.
A variety of studies consider the correlation between MEL tasks and particular behaviors.
Meier and Sprenger (2013) found that more impatient individuals are less likely to take up
financial education programs. Meier and Sprenger (2011) found that MEL task behavior is
correlated with individuals’ credit scores. In both cases, it is unclear which way causality runs.
Tanaka et al. (2010) examined risk and time preference in Vietnam and found that higher
patience correlates with higher individual and village incomes. Reuben, Sapienza, and Zingales
(2015) found that MEL-inferred discount rates predict procrastination on various tasks, including
when participants cash their payment check.
Ashraf, Karlan, and Yin (2006) ran a field experiment examining preferences for a
commitment savings product in the Philippines. They found marginally significant evidence
(using hypothetical MEL questions) that individuals whose short-term and long-term discount
rates differed more were more likely to use the commitment technology (12.5 percentage points
higher); discount rates measured with rice and ice cream had a smaller effect.
Another literature has examined present-bias in MEL studies, showing that RRRs derived
from choices with an immediate option in the choice set have different correlations with field

Page 47

Measuring Time Preferences

behavior than RRRs derived from choices among options that are all in the future. Meier and
Sprenger (2010) examined credit card spending and present bias (measured by MEL) and found
that present-biased individuals are more likely to hold credit card debt; the discount factor apart
from present bias had no association with debt, a pattern also found by Harrison, Lau, and
Williams (2002).
Relatedly, Cadena and Keys (2015) found that youth identified as “impatient or restless” by
interviewers for the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) are more likely to drop out
of high school and less likely to attend college. Moreover, impatient/restless youth are more
likely to display behavior that seems dynamically inconsistent, such as dropping out despite a
stated desire to finish, or completing only 3 out of 4 years for a degree. It is not clear how
restlessness is related to time preference, as restlessness could also measure willingness to
participate in the interview (social preferences) or an ability to pay attention (cognitive skill).
Finally, research has shown that the MEL choices of children are associated with
contemporaneous or later life outcomes. Bettinger and Slonim (2007) measured about 200
children’s MEL choices; they found that children have higher discount rates than adults (⅓ of
children aged 5-7 turn down a 150% return in 2 months), and found evidence of hyperbolic
discounting (strong evidence of a front-end delay). Sutter et al. (2013) found that required rates
of return in MEL tasks predict adolescents’ health-related field behavior, saving decisions, and
conduct at school. Similarly, Castillo et al. (2011) found that the MEL choices predict
disciplinary problems at school. They also examined gender and ethnic differences in their
sample of schools in Georgia, with boys and black children having higher RRRs than girls and
white children.
In a very large Swedish study (12,000 observations), Golsteyn, Grönqvist, and Lindahl
(2013) examined MEL choices at age 13 ($130 now or $1300 in five years). They found that
13% prefer the earlier reward, and that this impatience predicts earnings, education, GPA, time
spent on welfare, unemployment, and early death.
6.c) Correlation with Personality Measures
Another literature examines how MEL choices correlate with psychological personality
measures. Daly, Delaney, and Harmon (2009) examined students’ MEL choices and found that
more patient MEL choices are positively associated with conscientiousness (correlation of 0.15)
and a self-control scale (correlation of 0.18). Becker et al. (2012) found similar levels of
correlation between personality measures and incentivized (as well as unincentivized) measures
of economic preferences. In a representative sample of approximately 14,000 Germans (SOEP),
they found a positive correlation (0.11) between conscientiousness and patience in a MEL task.
The strongest correlation is that individuals who make more patient MEL choices (lower RRRs)

Page 48

Measuring Time Preferences

tend to score higher on the “agreeableness” personality trait (correlation of 0.31). The
agreeableness correlation is replicated in two much smaller samples; however, the estimated
correlation of conscientiousness with MEL drops substantially and becomes insignificant.
Wölbert and Riedl (2013) examined the correlation between RRR and various items of
the Barratt Impulsiveness Scale. They found correlations with elements of the scale related to
financial decision making (about 0.2) but not in other areas. They conclude: “intertemporal
decisions over monetary rewards are not, or only very weakly, related to general impulsiveness
and lack of self-control.”
Dean and Ortoleva (2015) estimate 11 behavioral phenomena in a single sample of
respondents (using monetary rewards that are mailed to respondents): short-term discount rates,
small stakes risk aversion, present bias, loss aversion, the endowment effect, aversion to
ambiguity and compound lotteries, the common ratio and common consequence effects and
sender/receiver behavior in trust games. They do not find evidence that probability weighting is
related to present bias (as implied by cumulative prospect theory).
Finally, a line of research examines the fundamental question: how stable are MEL
choices over time? At horizons of 5 weeks and 1 year, Kirby (2009) found that RRRs inferred
from MEL choices displayed test-retest stability similar to other personality measures:
correlations of 0.6 to 0.8 between RRRs measured at different points in time. However,
consistent with other research, Kirby found that measured RRRs increased between sessions (see
also Vuchinich and Simpson 2000). Wölbert and Riedl (2013) found RRRs are highly correlated
within the same session (about 0.8) and across sessions (about 0.6). Meier and Sprenger (2015)
examined a population of low- and middle-income individuals who made MEL choices a year
apart. They found similar distributions at both points in time. The correlation between choice
behavior (switching points in a multiple price list) was about 0.44, while the correlation of
estimated discount parameters within individuals of 0.36 for β and 0.25 for δ. They characterize
their stability of measured intertemporal choice as high by comparison to other traits studied in
the personality literature.

7. Conclusion
The concept of time preferences modeled with a stationary discount function is simple and
domain general, but it isn’t clear whether this framework is the best approach to understanding
and predicting intertemporal decisions in either the lab or the field. It is possible that other
factors, such as mistrust, temptation, inattention, confusion, context, and beliefs explain why
humans behave as if they devalue promised future payments in a wide range of settings (e.g., see
Andreoni and Sprenger 2012b; Gabaix and Laibson 2017).

Page 49

Measuring Time Preferences

Even among the community of researchers who believe that the discount function
framework is fruitful, there is no consensus about how we should measure the discount function.
The role of Money Earlier or Later (MEL) experiments is being actively debated. On one hand,
MEL experiments are relatively easy to run and they generate a simple analytic output, the
required rate of return (RRR). With this measurement in hand, it is easy to estimate time
preferences if one makes key identifying assumptions (like the consume-on-receipt assumption
with a fixed level of background consumption).
On the other hand, such identifying assumptions are controversial (Cubitt and Read
2007). Many consumers do not consume a financial flow on the day they receive it. Instead,
consumers often anticipate the receipt of financial flows and consume partly in advance (e.g.,
credit card borrowing or payday loans). In addition, consumers often save some of their income
and consume the claims some other day (e.g., saving to buy a durable, rainy day savings, and
retirement savings). Such complex intertemporal substitutions—both borrowing and saving—are
predicted by all standard economic models of household behavior and occur in practice at almost
every frequency. For example, a paycheck may be saved for a few days to fund a weekend
splurge, or for a few weeks to fund a rent payment, or for a few decades to fund retirement.
These intertemporal substitutions may need to be modeled when mapping preferences over timedated financial flows into time preferences over utility flows.
There is a rapidly growing body of work that attempts to study consumption choices
themselves (e.g., work tasks in real time or eating decisions in real time), rather than choices
over the timing of monetary payments. These consumption-based analyses generate their own
methodological tradeoffs. On one hand, consumption-based analyses are close to the economic
theory on which economic models are based. Time preferences—i.e., the discount function—are
theorized to discount utility flows, u(c), and not financial flows. On the other hand,
consumption-based analyses still require assumptions/inferences/controls regarding the curvature
of the instantaneous utility function and the nature of intertemporal substitution (e.g., when a
subject works an hour in an unpleasant experimental task, does that effort crowd out other
unpleasant work that she would have done that day).
The future of the intertemporal choice literature is likely to be multifaceted.46 Three
complementary research programs are likely to coexist in the next decade. First, some
researchers will try to use MEL measures to estimate discount functions. Second, some
researchers will try to use consumption measures (e.g., high-frequency choices over consumption
or effort) to estimate discount functions. These research programs are the continuation of the rich
literature that this paper has reviewed.
However, there is also a third direction that deviates from most of the empirical work to
46

See Ericson and Laibson (2019), who identify 16 open questions in the intertemporal choice literature.

Page 50

Measuring Time Preferences

date. Some research will study alternative mechanisms—like trust, temptation, imperfect
forecasting, and confusion about future reward contingencies—that influence choices with
intertemporal consequences. This third research program is a wildcard, because it is not clear
whether this will be a minor addendum to the large literature on time preferences or whether
these alternative mechanisms will turn out to play a major role in explaining why people tend to
devalue promised, delayed rewards relative to instant gratification. A key goal of this literature
should be to measure the practical empirical importance of these different theoretical
mechanisms. Measuring these alternative mechanisms will require some new empirical
methods—e.g., how do you measure confusion about the future (see Imas, Kuhn, and Mironova
2017 for a partial answer to this question).
Our research community will develop new empirical methods that help us analyze the
myriad conceptual questions that jointly comprise the behavioral science of intertemporal choice.
Unfortunately, there is no consensus on how we should proceed. We will need to be patient.

Page 51

Measuring Time Preferences

8. References
Abdellaoui, Mohammed, Arthur E. Attema, and Han Bleichrodt. 2010. “Intertemporal Tradeoffs
for Gains and Losses: An Experimental Measurement of Discounted Utility.” The Economic
Journal 120 (545): 845–66. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0297.2009.02308.x.
Abdellaoui, Mohammed, Emmanuel Kemel, Amma Panin, and Ferdinand M. Vieider (2017).
“Take your Time or Take your Chance: Time Discounting as a Distorted Probability.”
Working Paper.
Abel, Andrew B. 1990. “Asset Prices under Habit Formation and Catching up with the Joneses.”
The American Economic Review 80 (2): 38–42.
Ahlbrecht, Martin, and Martin Weber. 1997. “An Empirical Study on Intertemporal Decision
Making Under Risk.” Management Science 43 (6): 813–26. doi:10.1287/mnsc.43.6.813.
Ainslie, George. 1975. “Specious Reward: A Behavioral Theory of Impulsiveness and Impulse
Control.” Psychological Bulletin 82 (4): 463–96.
———. 1992. Picoeconomics: The strategic interaction of successive motivational states within
the person. Cambridge University Press.
———. 2001. Breakdown of will. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2012. "Pure hyperbolic discount curves predict “eyes open” self-control." Theory and
Decision 73 (1): 3-34.
Akerlof, George A. 1991. “Procrastination and Obedience.” The American Economic Review 81
(2): 1–19.
Albrecht, Konstanze, Kirsten G. Volz, Matthias Sutter, David I. Laibson, and D. Yves von
Cramon. 2010. “What Is for Me Is Not for You: Brain Correlates of Intertemporal Choice
for Self and Other.” Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, June, nsq046.
doi:10.1093/scan/nsq046.
Allcott, Hunt, and Nathan Wozny. 2014. “Gasoline Prices, Fuel Economy, and the Energy
Paradox.”The Review of Economics and Statistics 96 (5): 779-95. doi:
10.1162/REST_a_00419.
Andersen, Steffen, Glenn W. Harrison, Morten I. Lau, and E. Elisabet Rutström. 2008. “Eliciting
Risk and Time Preferences.” Econometrica 76 (3): 583–618.
———. 2010. “Preference Heterogeneity in Experiments: Comparing the Field and Laboratory.”
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 73: 209–224.
———. 2013. “Discounting Behaviour and the Magnitude Effect: Evidence from a Field
Experiment in Denmark.” Economica 80 (320): 670–97. doi:10.1111/ecca.12028.
———. 2014. Discounting behavior: A reconsideration. European Economic Review, 71, pp.1533.
———. 2018. "Multiattribute Utility Theory, Intertemporal Utility, and Correlation
Aversion." International Economic Review 59(2): 537-555.
Anderson, Lisa R., and Sarah L. Stafford. 2009. “Individual Decision-Making Experiments with
Risk and Intertemporal Choice.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 38 (1): 51–72.
doi:10.1007/s11166-008-9059-4.
Andreoni, James, Michael A. Kuhn, and Charles Sprenger. 2015. “Measuring Time Preferences:
A Comparison of Experimental Methods.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization
116:451-464.
Andreoni, James, and Charles Sprenger. 2012a. “Estimating Time Preferences from Convex
Budgets.” American Economic Review 102 (7): 3333–56. doi:10.1257/aer.102.7.3333.

Page 52

Measuring Time Preferences

———. 2012b. “Risk Preferences Are Not Time Preferences.” The American Economic Review
102 (7): 3357–76. doi:10.1257/aer.102.7.3357.
———. 2015. “Risk Preferences Are Not Time Preferences: Reply.” The American Economic
Review 105 (7): 2287–93. doi: /10.1257/aer.20150311.
Angeletos, George-Marios, David Laibson, Andrea Repetto, Jeremy Tobacman, and Stephen
Weinberg. 2001. “The Hyperbolic Consumption Model: Calibration, Simulation, and
Empirical Evaluation.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives 15 (3): 47–68.
Appelt, Kirstin C., David J. Hardisty, and Elke U. Weber. 2011. “Asymmetric Discounting of
Gains and Losses: A Query Theory Account.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 43 (2): 107–
26. doi:10.1007/s11166-011-9125-1.
Ariely, Dan, and Klaus Wertenbroch. 2002. “Procrastination, Deadlines, and Performance: SelfControl by Precommitment.” Psychological Science 13 (3): 219–24. doi:10.1111/14679280.00441.
Ashraf, Nava, Colin F. Camerer, and George Loewenstein. 2005. “Adam Smith, Behavioral
Economist.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives 19 (3): 131–45.
Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin. 2006. “Tying Odysseus to the Mast: Evidence from
a Commitment Savings Product in the Philippines.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics
121 (2): 635–72. doi:10.1162/qjec.2006.121.2.635.
Attanasio, Orazio P., and Hamish Low. 2004. “Estimating Euler Equations.” Review of
Economic Dynamics 7 (2): 406-35. doi:10.1016/j.red.2003.09.003
Attanasio, Orazio P., and Guglielmo Weber. 2010. “Consumption and Saving: Models of
Intertemporal Allocation and Their Implications for Public Policy.” Journal of Economic
Literature 48 (3): 693:751. doi: 10.1257/jel.48.3.693.
Augenblick, Ned, Muriel Niederle, and Charles Sprenger. 2015. “Working Over Time: Dynamic
Inconsistency in Real Effort Tasks.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 30 (3): 1067-1115.
doi: 10.1093/qje/qjv020.
Baltussen, Guido, G. Thierry Post, Martijn J. van den Assem, and Peter P. Wakker. 2012.
"Random incentive systems in a dynamic choice experiment." Experimental Economics,
15(3): 418–443.
Barro, Robert J. 1999. “Ramsey Meets Laibson in the Neoclassical Growth Model.” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (4): 1125-1152. doi:10.1162/003355399556232.
Barsky, Robert B., F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball and Matthew D. Shapiro. 1997.
“Preference Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the
Health and Retirement Study,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112 (2): 537-579.
Bauer, Michal, Julie Chytilova, and Jonathan Morduch. 2012. “Behavioral Foundations of
Microcredit: Experimental and Survey Evidence from Rural India.” American Economic
Review 102 (2): 1118–39.
Becker, Anke, Thomas Deckers, Thomas J. Dohmen, Armin Falk, and Fabian Kosse. 2012. The
Relationship between Economic Preferences and Psychological Personality Measures.
SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2039656. Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network.
http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2039656.
Becker, Gordon M., Morris H. DeGroot, and Jacob Marschak. 1964. “Measuring Utility by a
Single-Response Sequential Method.” Behavioral Science 9 (3): 226–32.
doi:10.1002/bs.3830090304.
Bem, Daryl J. 1967. “Self-Perception: An Alternative Interpretation of Cognitive Dissonance
Phenomena.” Psychological Review 74: 83–87. doi:10.1.1.323.833.

Page 53

Measuring Time Preferences

Ben Halima, Bassem, and Mohamed Ali Ben Halima. 2009. “Time Preferences and Job Search:
Evidence from France.” LABOUR 23 (3): 535–58. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9914.2009.00452.x.
Benhabib, Jess, Alberto Bisin, and Andrew Schotter. 2010. “Present-Bias, Quasi-Hyperbolic
Discounting, and Fixed Costs.” Games and Economic Behavior 69 (2): 205–23.
doi:10.1016/j.geb.2009.11.003.
Benjamin, Daniel J., Sebastian A. Brown, and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2013. “Who Is ‘Behavioral’?
Cognitive Ability and Anomalous Preferences.” Journal of the European Economic
Association 11 (6): 1231–55. doi:10.1111/jeea.12055.
Benjamin, Daniel, David Laibson, Walter Mischel, and Yuichi Shoda. 2017. “Childrens’ Self
Control and Their Adult Economic Outcomes.” Working Paper.
Benzion, Uri, Amnon Rapoport, and Joseph Yagil. 1989. “Discount Rates Inferred from
Decisions: An Experimental Study.” Management Science 35 (3): 270–84.
doi:10.1287/mnsc.35.3.270.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Antonio Rangel. 2004. “Addiction and Cue-Triggered Decision
Processes.” The American Economic Review 94 (5): 1558–90.
Beshears, John, James J. Choi, Christopher Harris, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Jung
Sakong. 2015. “Self Control and Commitment: Can Decreasing the Liquidity of a Savings
Account Increase Deposits?” NBER Working Paper 21474.
Bettinger, Eric, and Robert Slonim. 2007. “Patience among Children.” Journal of Public
Economics 91 (1–2): 343–63. doi:10.1016/j.jpubeco.2006.05.010.
Bhatia, Sudeep, Megan M Grime, Rebecca Louise McDonald, Miguel Moreno, and Daniel Read.
2016. “Inconsistent Planning and the Allocation of Tasks Over Time.” Mimeo.
Bickel, Warren K., Jeffery A. Pitcock, Richard Yi, and Edgardo J. C. Angtuaco. 2009.
“Congruence of BOLD Response across Intertemporal Choice Conditions: Fictive and Real
Money Gains and Losses.” The Journal of Neuroscience 29 (27): 8839–46.
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5319-08.2009.
Bisin, Alberto, and Kyle Hyndman. 2014. Present-Bias, Procrastination and Deadlines in a
Field Experiment. Working Paper 19874. National Bureau of Economic Research.
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19874.
Böhm-Bawerk, Eugen von. 1890. “The Ultimate Standard of Value.” American Academy of
Political and Social Science 128: 149-208.
Bommier, A., 2006. Uncertain lifetime and intertemporal choice: risk aversion as a rationale for
time discounting. International Economic Review, 47(4), pp.1223-1246.
Bommier, A., 2007. Risk Aversion, Intertemporal Elasticity of Substitution and Correlation
Aversion. Economics Bulletin, 4(29), pp.1-8.
Bommier, A., 2013. Life-cycle preferences revisited. Journal of the European Economic
Association, 11(6), pp.1290-1319.
Bommier, A. and Rochet, J.C., 2006. Risk aversion and planning horizons. Journal of the
European Economic Association, 4(4), pp.708-734.
Bradford, David, Charles Courtemanche, Garth Heutel, Patrick McAlvanah, and Christopher
Ruhm. 2017. “Time Preferences and Consumer Behavior.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty
55 (2-3): 119-45. doi:10.1007/s11166-018-9272-8.
Brocas, Isabelle, and Juan D. Carrillo. 2008a. “Theories of the Mind.” The American Economic
Review 98 (2): 175–80.
———. 2008b. “The Brain as a Hierarchical Organization.” The American Economic Review 98
(4): 1312–46. doi:10.1257/aer.98.4.1312.

Page 54

Measuring Time Preferences

———. 2012. “From Perception to Action: An Economic Model of Brain Processes.” Games
and Economic Behavior 75 (1): 81–103. doi:10.1016/j.geb.2011.10.001.
Broda, Christian, and Jonathan A. Parker. 2014. The Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008 and
the Aggregate Demand for Consumption. Working Paper 20122. National Bureau of
Economic Research. http://www.nber.org/papers/w20122.
Bryan, Gharad, Dean Karlan, and Scott Nelson. 2010. “Commitment Devices.” Annual Review of
Economics 2 (1): 671–98. doi:10.1146/annurev.economics.102308.124324.
Burks, Stephen, Jeffrey Carpenter, Lorenz Götte, and Aldo Rustichini. 2012. “Which Measures
of Time Preference Best Predict Outcomes: Evidence from a Large-Scale Field
Experiment.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 84 (1): 308–20.
doi:10.1016/j.jebo.2012.03.012.
Burks, Stephen V., Jeffrey P. Carpenter, Lorenz Goette, and Aldo Rustichini. 2009. “Cognitive
Skills Affect Economic Preferences, Strategic Behavior, and Job Attachment.” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 106 (19): 7745–50. doi:10.1073/pnas.0812360106.
Busse, Meghan R., Christopher R. Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer. 2013. “Are Consumers
Myopic? Evidence from New and Used Car Purchases.” The American Economic Review
103 (1): 220–56. doi:10.1257/aer.103.1.220.
Cadena, Brian C., and Benjamin J. Keys. 2015. “Human Capital and the Lifetime Costs of
Impatience.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7 (3): 126-53. doi:
10.1257/pol.20130081.
Camerer, Colin, Jonathan Cohen, Ernst Fehr, Paul Glimcher, and David Laibson. 2014.
“Neuroeconomics.” In Handbook of Experimental Economics, edited by John Kagel and
Alvin Roth.
http://scholar.harvard.edu/files/laibson/files/camerer_cohen_fehr_glimcher_laibson_2014.p
df.
Camerer, Colin F., and Robin M. Hogarth. 1999. “The Effects of Financial Incentives in
Experiments: A Review and Capital-Labor-Production Framework.” Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty 19 (1-3): 7–42. doi:10.1023/A:1007850605129.
Caplin, Andrew, and John Leahy. 2004. “The Social Discount Rate.” Journal of Political
Economy 112 (6): 1257-68. doi:10.1086/424740.
Carter, R. McKell, Justin R. Meyer, and Scott A. Huettel. 2010. “Functional Neuroimaging of
Intertemporal Choice Models: A Review.” Journal of Neuroscience, Psychology, and
Economics 3 (1): 27–45. doi:10.1037/a0018046.
Carroll, Christopher D. 1992. "The buffer-stock theory of saving: Some macroeconomic
evidence." Brookings papers on economic activity, Volume 2, pp. 61-156.
———. 2001. “Death to the Log-Linearized Consumption Euler Equation! (And Very Poor
Health to the Second-Order Approximation)”, Advances in Macroeconomics: Vol. 1: No. 1,
Article 6.
Carson, Richard T. 2012. "Contingent Valuation: A Practical Alternative When Prices Aren't
Available."Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26 (4): 27-42.
Carvalho, Leandro, Stephan Meier, and Stephanie Wang. 2016. “Poverty and Economic
Decision-Making: Evidence from Changes in Financial Resources at Payday” American
Economic Review 106(2):260-284.
Casari, Marco, and Davide Dragone. 2015. “Choice reversal without temptation: A dynamic
experiment on time preferences.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 50 (2): 119-140.

Page 55

Measuring Time Preferences

Castillo, Marco, Paul Ferraro, Jeffrey L. Jordan, and Ragan Petrie. 2011. “The Today and
Tomorrow of Kids: Time Preferences and Educational Outcomes of Children.” Journal of
Public Economics 95 (11): 1377–85.
Cason, Timothy, and Charles Plott. 2014. “Misconceptions and Game Form Recognition:
Challenges to Theories of Revealed Preference and Framing.” Journal of Political Economy
122: 1235-1270.
Chabris, Christopher F., David Laibson, Carrie L. Morris, Jonathon P. Schuldt, and Dmitry
Taubinsky. 2008. “Individual Laboratory-Measured Discount Rates Predict Field Behavior.”
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 37 (2-3): 237–69. doi:10.1007/s11166-008-9053-x.
Chapman, G. B., and A. S. Elstein. 1995. “Valuing the Future: Temporal Discounting of Health
and Money.” Medical Decision Making: An International Journal of the Society for Medical
Decision Making 15 (4): 373–86.
Chapman, Gretchen B. 1996. “Temporal Discounting and Utility for Health and Money.”
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 22 (3): 771–91.
doi:10.1037/0278-7393.22.3.771.
Cheung, Stephen. 2015. “Risk Preferences are Not Time Preferences: On the Elicitation of Time
Preference under Conditions of Risk: Comment.” American Economic Review 105(7):224260.
Chung, Shin-Ho, and R. J. Herrnstein. 1967. “Choice and Delay of Reinforcement.” Journal of
the Experimental Analysis of Behavior 10 (1): 67–74. doi:10.1901/jeab.1967.10-67.
Coile, Courtney, Peter Diamond, Jonathan Gruber, and Alain Jousten. 2002. “Delays in Claiming
Social Security Benefits.” Journal of Public Economics 84 (3): 357–85. doi:10.1016/S00472727(01)00129-3.
Coller, Maribeth, Glenn W. Harrison, and E. Elisabet Rutström. 2011. "Latent process
heterogeneity in discounting behavior." Oxford Economic Papers 64 (2): 375-391.
Coller, Maribeth, and Melonie B. Williams. 1999. “Eliciting Individual Discount Rates.”
Experimental Economics 2 (2): 107–27. doi:10.1023/A:1009986005690.
Cubitt, Robin P., and Daniel Read. 2007. “Can Intertemporal Choice Experiments Elicit Time
Preferences for Consumption?” Experimental Economics 10 (4): 369–89.
doi:10.1007/s10683-006-9140-2.
Cubitt, Robin P., Chris Starmer, and Robert Sugden. 1998. "On the validity of the random lottery
incentive system." Experimental Economics, 1(2):115-131.
Daly, Michael, Liam Delaney, and Colm P. Harmon. 2009. “Psychological and Biological
Foundations of Time Preference.” Journal of the European Economic Association 7 (2-3):
659–69. doi:10.1162/JEEA.2009.7.2-3.659.
Damásio, António R. 1994. Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain. New
York: G.P. Putnam.
Dasgupta, Partha and Eric Maskin. 2005. “Uncertainty and Hyperbolic Discounting.” American
Economic Review 95(5): 1290-1299.
Dean, Mark, and Pietro Ortoleva. 2015. “Is it All Connected? A Testing Ground for Unified
Theories of Behavioral Economics Phenomena” SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2643355.
Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network. http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2643355.
Deaton, Angus, 1991. “Saving and Liquidity Constraints” Econometrica 59 (5): 1221-1248.
———. 1992. Understanding Consumption. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
http://www.oxfordscholarship.com/view/10.1093/0198288247.001.0001/acprof9780198288244.

Page 56

Measuring Time Preferences

DeJarnette, Patrick, David Dillenberger, Daniel Gottlieb, and Pietro Ortoleva. 2018. "Time
Lotteries and Stochastic Impatience." Working Paper.
Dekel, Eddie, Barton L. Lipman, and Aldo Rustichini. 2009. “Temptation-Driven Preferences.”
The Review of Economic Studies 76 (3): 937–71. doi:10.1111/j.1467-937X.2009.00560.x.
DellaVigna, Stefano, and Ulrike Malmendier. 2004. “Contract Design and Self-Control: Theory
and Evidence.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (2): 353–402.
———. 2006. “Paying Not to Go to the Gym.” The American Economic Review 96 (3): 694–
719.
DellaVigna, Stefano, and M. Daniele Paserman. 2005. “Job Search and Impatience.” Journal of
Labor Economics 23 (3): 527–88.
Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde. 2010. “Are Risk Aversion and
Impatience Related to Cognitive Ability?” American Economic Review 100(3): 1238-60.
———. 2012. “Interpreting Time Horizon Effects in Intertemporal Choice.” IZA Working Paper
6385.
Dreyfus, Mark K., and W. Kip Viscusi. 1995. “Rates of Time Preference and Consumer
Valuations of Automobile Safety and Fuel Efficiency.” Journal of Law and Economics 38
(1): 79–105.
Ebert, Jane E. J., and Drazen Prelec. 2007. “The Fragility of Time: Time-Insensitivity and
Valuation of the Near and Far Future.” Management Science 53 (9): 1423–38.
doi:10.1287/mnsc.1060.0671.
Epstein, Larry G., and Stanley Zin. 1989. "Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal
Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical
Framework". Econometrica. 57 (4): 937–969.
Ericson, Keith M. Marzilli, John Myles White, David Laibson, and Jonathan D. Cohen. 2015.
“Money Earlier or Later? Simple Heuristics Explain Intertemporal Choices Better than
Delay Discounting Does.” Psychological Science 26(6):826-33. doi:
10.1177/0956797615572232.
Ericson, Keith M. Marzilli and David Laibson. Forthcoming. “Intertemporal Choice”. In:
Handbook of Behavioral Economics - Foundations and Applications Vol 2., eds. Bernheim
D, Laibson D, DellaVigna S. Elsevier.
Ericson, Keith, and Jawwad Noor. 2015. “Delay Functions as the Foundation of Time
Preference: Testing for Separable Discounted Utility.” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper 21095.
Ericson, Keith. 2017. “On the Interaction of Memory and Procrastination: Implications for
Reminders, Deadlines, and Empirical Estimation”. Journal of the European Economic
Association 15 (3): 692-719. https://doi.org/10.1093/jeea/jvw015
Epper, Thomas, Helga Fehr-Duda, and Adrian Bruhin. 2011. “Viewing the Future through a
Warped Lens: Why Uncertainty Generates Hyperbolic Discounting.” Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty 43 (3): 169–203. doi:10.1007/s11166-011-9129-x.
Epper, Thomas, and Helga Fehr-Duda 2015. “Comment on ‘Risk Preferences are Not Time
Preferences’: Balancing on a Budget Line.” American Economic Review 105(7):2261-71.
Epstein, Larry G., and Stanley E. Zin. 1989. “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal
Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework.” Econometrica 57
(4): 937–969.

Page 57

Measuring Time Preferences

Estle, Sara J., Leonard Green, Joel Myerson, and Daniel D. Holt. 2007. “Discounting of
Monetary and Directly Consumable Rewards.” Psychological Science 18 (1): 58–63.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.01849.x.
Falk, Armin, Anke Becker, Thomas Dohmen, Benjamin Enke, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde.
2015. “The Nature and Predictive Power of Preferences: Global Evidence.” IZA Discussion
Papers 9504.
Falk, Armin, Anke Becker, Thomas Dohmen, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde. 2016. “The
Preference Survey Module: A Validated Instrument for Measuring Risk, Time, and Social
Preferences” IZA Discussion Papers 9674.
Figner, Bernd, et al. 2010. “Lateral prefrontal cortex and self-control in intertemporal choice.”
Nature Neuroscience 13: 538-539.
Frederick, Shane. 2005. “Cognitive Reflection and Decision Making.” The Journal of Economic
Perspectives 19 (4): 25–42.
Frederick, Shane, George Loewenstein, and Ted O’Donoghue. 2002. “Time Discounting and
Time Preference: A Critical Review.” Journal of Economic Literature 40 (2): 351–401.
Freeman, D, Y Halevy, and T Kneeland. Forthcoming. “Eliciting Risk Preferences using Choice
Lists.” Quantitative Economics.
Freeman, David, Paola Manzini, Marco Mariotti, and Luigi Mittone. 2016. “Procedures for
Eliciting Time Preferences.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 126: 235242.
Friedman, Milton. 1957. A Theory of the Consumption Function. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Fudenberg, Drew, and David K. Levine. 2006. “A Dual-Self Model of Impulse Control.” The
American Economic Review 96 (5): 1449–76.
———. 2011. “Risk, Delay, and Convex Self-Control Costs.” American Economic Journal:
Microeconomics 3 (3): 34–68. doi:10.1257/mic.3.3.34.
Fudenberg, Drew, David K. Levine, and Zacharias Maniadis. 2012. “On the Robustness of
Anchoring Effects in WTP and WTA Experiments.” American Economic Journal:
Microeconomics 4 (2): 131–45. doi:10.1257/mic.4.2.131.
Gabaix, Xavier, and David Laibson. 2017. “Myopia and Discounting.” Working Paper 23254.
National Bureau of Economic Research. http://www.nber.org/papers/w23254.
Gigerenzer, Gerd, and Peter M. Todd. 1999. “Fast and Frugal Heuristics: The Adaptive
Toolbox.” In Simple Heuristics That Make Us Smart, 3–34. New York, NY, US: Oxford
University Press.
Gill, David, and Victoria Prowse. 2012. “A Structural Analysis of Disappointment Aversion in a
Real Effort Competition.” The American Economic Review 102 (1): 469–503.
doi:10.1257/aer.102.1.469.
Giné, Xavier, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2010. “Put Your Money Where Your Butt Is:
A Commitment Contract for Smoking Cessation.” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics 2 (4): 213–35.
Glimcher, Paul William, Joseph Kable, and Kenway Louie. 2007. “Neuroeconomic Studies of
Impulsivity: Now or Just as Soon as Possible?” The American Economic Review 97 (2):
142–47.
Gollier, Christian. 2012. “The Debate on Discounting: Reconciling Positivists and Ethicists.”
Chicago Journal of International Law 13: 549-64.

Page 58

Measuring Time Preferences

Golsteyn, Bart H. H., Hans Grönqvist, and Lena Lindahl. 2013. Time Preferences and Lifetime
Outcomes. IZA Discussion Paper 7165. Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).
https://ideas.repec.org/p/iza/izadps/dp7165.html.
Goulder, Lawrence H., and Roberton C. Williams. 2012. “The Choice of Discount Rate for
Climate Change Policy Evaluation.” Climate Change Economics 03 (04): 1250024.
doi:10.1142/S2010007812500248.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Jonathan A. Parker. 2002. “Consumption Over the Life Cycle.”
Econometrica 70 (1): 47–89. doi:10.1111/1468-0262.00269.
Green, Leonard, Astrid F. Fry, and Joel Myerson. 1994. “Discounting of Delayed Rewards: A
Life-Span Comparison.” Psychological Science 5 (1): 33–36. doi:10.1111/j.14679280.1994.tb00610.x.
Green, Leonard, Joel Myerson, and Eric W. Macaux. 2005. “Temporal Discounting When the
Choice Is Between Two Delayed Rewards.” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition 31 (5): 1121–33. doi:10.1037/0278-7393.31.5.1121.
Green, Leonard, Joel Myerson, and Edward McFadden. 1997. “Rate of Temporal Discounting
Decreases with Amount of Reward.” Memory & Cognition 25 (5): 715–23.
doi:10.3758/BF03211314.
Gross, David B., and Nicholas S. Souleles. 2002. “Do Liquidity Constraints and Interest Rates
Matter for Consumer Behavior? Evidence from Credit Card Data.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 117 (1): 149–85.
Gul, Faruk, and Wolfgang Pesendorfer. 2001. “Temptation and Self-Control.” Econometrica 69
(6): 1403–35. doi:10.1111/1468-0262.00252.
Gustman, Alan L., and Thomas L. Steinmeier. 2012. “Policy Effects in Hyperbolic vs.
Exponential Models of Consumption and Retirement.” Journal of Public Economics 96 (5–
6): 465–73. doi:10.1016/j.jpubeco.2012.02.001.
Halevy, Yoram. 2008. “Strotz Meets Allais: Diminishing Impatience and the Certainty Effect,”
The American Economic Review 98 (3): 1145-1162.
Halevy, Yoram. 2014. “Some Comments on the Use of Monetary and Primary Rewards in the
Measurement of Time Preferences,” Technical Report, University of British Columbia.
[350]
Halevy, Yoram. 2015. “Time Consistency: Stationarity and Time Invariance.” Econometrica
83(1): 335-352.
Hall, Robert E. 1978. “Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle-Permanent Income Hypothesis:
Theory and Evidence.” Journal of Political Economy 86 (6): 971–87.
Hardisty, David J., Katherine F. Thompson, David H. Krantz, and Elke U. Weber. 2013. “How
to Measure Time Preferences: An Experimental Comparison of Three Methods.” Judgment
and Decision Making 8 (3): 236–49.
Hare, T.A., Camerer, C.F., Rangel, A., 2009. “Self-control in decision-making involves
modulation of the vmPFC valuation system.” Science. 324 (5927): 646-648.
Harris, Christopher, and David Laibson. 2001. “Dynamic Choices of Hyperbolic Consumers.”
Econometrica 69 (4): 935–57. doi:10.1111/1468-0262.00225.
———. 2013. “Instantaneous Gratification.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, December,
205–48. doi:10.1093/qje/qjs051.
Harris, Christopher J., and David Laibson. 2002. “Hyperbolic Discounting and Consumption.” In
Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Volume 1, edited by
Mathias Dewatripont, Lars Peter Hansen, and Stephen Turnovsky, 258–98. Eighth World

Page 59

Measuring Time Preferences

Congress.
Harrison, Glenn W., Morten I. Lau, and Melonie B. Williams. 2002. “Estimating Individual
Discount Rates in Denmark: A Field Experiment.” American Economic Review 92 (5):
1606–17.
Harrison, Glenn, Morten Lau, and E. Elisabet Rutström. 2010. “Individual discount rates and
smoking: Evidence from a field experiment in Denmark.” Journal of Health Economics
29(5): 708-717.
Harrison, Glenn W. 2014. “Real Choices and Hypothetical Choices,” in S. Hess and A. Daly
(eds.), Handbook of Choice Modeling, Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
Hausman, Jerry A. 1979. “Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase and Utilization of EnergyUsing Durables.” The Bell Journal of Economics 10 (1): 33–54. doi:10.2307/3003318.
Hausman, Jerry. 2012. "Contingent Valuation: From Dubious to Hopeless." Journal of Economic
Perspectives,26 (4): 43-56.
Herrnstein, R. J. 1961. “Relative and Absolute Strength of Response as a Function of Frequency
of Reinforcement,” Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior 4 (3): 267–72.
doi:10.1901/jeab.1961.4-267.
Hey, John D., and Jinkwon Lee. 2005. "Do subjects separate (or are they sophisticated)?."
Experimental Economics 8(3): 233-265.
Hines, James R., Jr., and Richard H. Thaler. 1995. “Anomalies: The Flypaper Effect.” The
Journal of Economic Perspectives 9 (4): 217–26.
Holcomb, James H., and Paul S. Nelson. 1992. “Another Experimental Look at Individual Time
Preference.” Rationality and Society 4 (2): 199–220. doi:10.1177/1043463192004002006.
Houser, Daniel, Daniel Schunk, Joachim Winter, and Erte Xiao. 2018. “Temptation and
Commitment in the Laboratory.” Games and Economic Behavior, 107 (January): 329-44.
doi: 10.1016/j.geb.2017.10.025.
Holt, C. (1986). Preference Reversals and the Independence Axiom. The American Economic
Review, 76(3), 508-515.
Holt, Charles, A., and Susan K. Laury. 2002. "Risk Aversion and Incentive Effects ." American
Economic Review, 92 (5): 1644-1655.
Holt, Charles, A., and Susan K. Laury. 2005. "Risk Aversion and Incentive Effects: New Data
without Order Effects." American Economic Review, 95 (3): 902-912.
Hume, David. (1738) 1896. A Treatise of Human Nature by David Hume, reprinted from the
Original Edition in three volumes and edited, with an analytical index, by L.A. Selby-Bigge,
M.A. Reprint, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Imas, Alex, Michael Kuhn, and Vera Mironova. 2017. “Waiting to Choose.” Working paper.
Ifcher, John, and Homa Zarghamee. 2011. “Happiness and Time Preference: The Effect of
Positive Affect in a Random-Assignment Experiment.” American Economic Review 101 (7):
3109-3129.
Jackson, Matthew and Leeat Yariv. 2014. “Present Bias and Collective Dynamic Choice in the
Lab.” American Economic Review 104(12):4184-4204.
———. 2015. “Collective Dynamic Choice: The Necessity of Time Inconsistency.” American
Economic Journal: Microeconomics 7(4):150-178.
Johnson, Eric J., John W. Payne, James R. Bettman, and David A. Schkade. 1989. Monitoring
Information Processing and Decisions: The Mouselab System. ONR Tech Report 89-4.

Page 60

Measuring Time Preferences

Johnson, Matthew W., and Warren K. Bickel. 2002. “Within-Subject Comparison of Real and
Hypothetical Money Rewards in Delay Discounting.” Journal of the Experimental Analysis
of Behavior 77 (2): 129–46. doi:10.1901/jeab.2002.77-129.
Kable, J. W. 2014. “Valuation, intertemporal choice and self-control.” In Neuroeconomics, 2nd
edition (Paul Glimcher & Ernst Fehr, eds.). Elsevier.
Kable, Joseph W., and Paul W. Glimcher. 2007. “The Neural Correlates of Subjective Value
during Intertemporal Choice.” Nature Neuroscience 10 (12): 1625–33. doi:10.1038/nn2007.
———. 2010. “An ‘As Soon As Possible’ Effect in Human Intertemporal Decision Making:
Behavioral Evidence and Neural Mechanisms.” Journal of Neurophysiology 103 (5): 2513–
31. doi:10.1152/jn.00177.2009.
Kahneman, Daniel. 2011. Thinking, Fast and Slow. Macmillan.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. 1979. “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under
Risk.” Econometrica 47(2): 263-292. doi:10.2307/1914185.
Karni, E., & Safra, Z. (1987). "Preference reversal" and the observability of preferences by
experimental methods. Econometrica, 675-685.
Kaur, Supreet, Michael Kremer, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2010. “Self-Control and the
Development of Work Arrangements.” The American Economic Review 100 (2): 624–28.
Kirby, Kris N. 1997. “Bidding on the Future: Evidence against Normative Discounting of
Delayed Rewards.” Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 126 (1): 54–70.
doi:10.1037/0096-3445.126.1.54.
———. 2009. “One-Year Temporal Stability of Delay-Discount Rates.” Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review 16 (3): 457–62. doi:10.3758/PBR.16.3.457.
Kirby, Kris N., and R. J. Herrnstein. 1995. “Preference Reversals Due to Myopic Discounting of
Delayed Reward.” Psychological Science 6 (2): 83–89. doi:10.1111/j.14679280.1995.tb00311.x.
Kling, Catherine L., Daniel J. Phaneuf, and Jinhua Zhao. 2012. "From Exxon to BP: Has Some
Number Become Better Than No Number?" Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26 (4): 3-26.
Kocherlakota, Narayana. 2001. “Looking for Evidence of Time-Inconsistent Preferences in Asset
Market Data.” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 25(3): 13-24.
Koopmans, Tjalling. 1960. “Stationary ordinal utility and impatience.” Econometrica, 28 (2):
287–309.
Koszegi, Botond and Adam Szeidl. 2013. “A Model of Focusing in Economic Choice.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(1):53-104.
Krupka, Erin L., and Melvin Stephens Jr. 2013. “The Stability of Measured Time Preferences.”
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 85 (January): 11–19.
doi:10.1016/j.jebo.2012.10.010.
Krusell, Per, Burhanettin Kuruşçu, and Anthony A. Smith. 2010. “Temptation and Taxation.”
Econometrica 78 (6): 2063–84. doi:10.3982/ECTA8611.
Laibson, David. 1997. “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 112 (2): 443–78. doi:10.1162/003355397555253.
———. 2001. “A Cue-Theory of Consumption.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (1):
81–119.
Laibson, David. 2015. "Why Don't Present-Biased Agents Make Commitments?." The American
Economic Review 105 (5): 267-272.

Page 61

Measuring Time Preferences

Laibson, David, Peter Maxted, Andrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobacman. 2017. Estimating
Discount Functions with Consumption Choices over the Lifecycle. Working Paper 13314.
National Bureau of Economic Research. http://www.nber.org/papers/w13314.
Lawrance, Emily C. 1991. “Poverty and the Rate of Time Preference: Evidence from Panel
Data.” Journal of Political Economy 99 (1): 54–77.
Lawyer, Steven R., Sonja A. Williams, Tereza Prihodova, Jason D. Rollins, and Anita C. Lester.
2010. “Probability and Delay Discounting of Hypothetical Sexual Outcomes.” Behavioural
Processes 84 (3): 687–92. doi:10.1016/j.beproc.2010.04.002.
Loewenstein, George. 1992. “The fall and rise of psychological explanations in the economics of
intertemporal choice,” in eds. Jon Elster and George Loewenstein, Choice over Time.
Russell Sage Foundation, New York.
Lichtenstein, Sarah, and Paul Slovic. 1973. “Response-Induced Reversals of Preference in
Gambling: An Extended Replication in Las Vegas.” Journal of Experimental Psychology
101 (1): 16–20. doi:10.1037/h0035472.
Loewenstein, George. 1987. “Anticipation and the Valuation of Delayed Consumption.” The
Economic Journal 97 (387): 666. doi:10.2307/2232929.
Loewenstein, George. 1988. “Frames of Mind in Intertemporal Choice.” Management Science 34
(2): 200–214. doi:10.1287/mnsc.34.2.200.
Loewenstein, George. 1996. “Out of Control: Visceral Influences on Behavior.” Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes 65 (3): 272–92. doi:10.1006/obhd.1996.0028.
Loewenstein, George, and Ted O’Donoghue. 2004. Animal Spirits: Affective and Deliberative
Processes in Economic Behavior. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 539843. Rochester, NY: Social
Science Research Network. http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=539843.
Loewenstein, George, Ted O’Donoghue, and Matthew Rabin. 2003. “Projection Bias in
Predicting Future Utility.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (4): 1209-1248.
doi:10.1162/003355303322552784.
Loewenstein, George, and Richard H. Thaler. 1989. “Anomalies: Intertemporal Choice.” Journal
of Economic Perspectives 3 (4): 181-193.
Loewenstein, George, and Nachum Sicherman. 1991. "Do workers prefer increasing wage
profiles?." Journal of Labor Economics: 67-84.
Loewenstein, George, and Drazen Prelec. 1992. “Anomalies in Intertemporal Choice: Evidence
and Interpretation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (2): 573–97.
———. 1993. “Preferences for sequences of outcomes.” Psychological Review, 100(1), p.91108.
Madden, Gregory J., Andrea M. Begotka, Bethany R. Raiff, and Lana L. Kastern. 2003. “Delay
Discounting of Real and Hypothetical Rewards.” Experimental and Clinical
Psychopharmacology 11 (2): 139–45. doi:10.1037/1064-1297.11.2.139.
Madden, Gregory J., Bethany R. Raiff, Carla H. Lagorio, Andrea M. Begotka, Angela M.
Mueller, Daniel J. Hehli, and Ashley A. Wegener. 2004. “Delay Discounting of Potentially
Real and Hypothetical Rewards: II. Between- and Within-Subject Comparisons.”
Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology 12 (4): 251–61. doi:10.1037/10641297.12.4.251.
Magen, Eran, Carol S. Dweck, and James J. Gross. 2008. “The Hidden-Zero Effect Representing
a Single Choice as an Extended Sequence Reduces Impulsive Choice.” Psychological
Science 19 (7): 648–49. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02137.x.

Page 62

Measuring Time Preferences

Maital, S., and S. Maital. 1977. “Time Preference, Delay of Gratification and the
Intergenerational Transmission of Economic Inequality: A Behavioral Theory of Income
Distribution".” Essays in Labor Market Analysis : In Memory of Yochanan Peter Comay /
Edited by Orley C. Ashenfelter and Wallace E. Oates., 179–200.
Malkoc, Selin A, and Gal Zauberman. 2006. “Deferring Versus Expediting Consumption: The
Effect of Outcome Concreteness on Sensitivity to Time Horizon.” Journal of Marketing
Research 43 (4): 618–27. doi:10.1509/jmkr.43.4.618.
Mastrobuoni, Giovanni, and Matthew Weinberg. 2009. “Heterogeneity in Intra-Monthly
Consumption Patterns, Self-Control, and Savings at Retirement.” American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy 1 (2): 163–89. doi:10.1257/pol.1.2.163.
Mazar, Nina, Botond Koszegi, and Dan Ariely. 2014. “True Context-Dependent Preferences?
The Causes of Market-Dependent Valuations.” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 27
(3): 200–208. doi:10.1002/bdm.1794.
McAlvanah, Patrick. 2010. “Subadditivity, Patience, and Utility: The Effects of Dividing Time
Intervals.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 76 (2): 325–37.
McClure, Samuel M., Keith M. Ericson, David I. Laibson, George Loewenstein, and Jonathan D.
Cohen. 2007. “Time Discounting for Primary Rewards.” The Journal of Neuroscience 27
(21): 5796–5804. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4246-06.2007.
McClure, Samuel M., David I. Laibson, George Loewenstein, and Jonathan D. Cohen. 2004.
“Separate Neural Systems Value Immediate and Delayed Monetary Rewards.” Science 306
(5695): 503–7. doi:10.1126/science.1100907.
McGuire, Joseph T., and Joseph W. Kable. 2013. “Rational Temporal Predictions Can Underlie
Apparent Failures to Delay Gratification.” Psychological Review 120 (2): 395–410.
doi:10.1037/a0031910.
Meier, Stephan, and Charles Sprenger. 2010. “Present-Biased Preferences and Credit Card
Borrowing.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2 (1): 193–210.
doi:10.1257/app.2.1.193.
Meier, Stephan, and Charles D. Sprenger. 2011. “Time Discounting Predicts Creditworthiness.”
Psychological Science, December, 0956797611425931. doi:10.1177/0956797611425931.
Meier, Stephan, and Charles Sprenger. 2013. “Discounting Financial Literacy: Time Preferences
and Participation in Financial Education Programs.” Journal of Economic Behavior &
Organization 95 (November): 159–74. doi:10.1016/j.jebo.2012.02.024.
———. 2015. “Temporal Stability of Time Preferences.” Review of Economics and Statistics
97(2): 273-286.
Metcalfe, Janet, and Walter Mischel. 1999. “A Hot/Cold-System Analysis of Delay of
Gratification: Dynamics of Willpower.” Psychological Review 106 (1): 3-19.
Meyer, Andrew. 2015. “The Impacts of Elicitation Mechanism and Reward Size on Estimated
Rates of Time Preference.” Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Economics 58:132-148.
Mischel, Walter, and Ebbe B. Ebbesen. 1970. “Attention in Delay of Gratification.” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 16 (2): 329–37. doi:10.1037/h0029815.
Mischel, W., Y. Shoda, and M. I. Rodriguez. 1989. “Delay of Gratification in Children.” Science
244 (4907): 933–38. doi:10.1126/science.2658056.
Miao, Bin and Songfa Zhong. 2015. “Comment on ‘Risk Preferences are Not Time Preferences’:
Separating Risk and Time Preference.” American Economic Review 105(7): 2272-2286.

Page 63

Measuring Time Preferences

Milkman, Katherine L., Todd Rogers, and Max H. Bazerman. 2009. “Highbrow Films Gather
Dust: Time-Inconsistent Preferences and Online DVD Rentals.” Management Science 55
(6): 1047-59
Modigliani, Franco, and R. Brumberg. 1954. “Utility Analysis and the Consumption Function:
An Interpretation of Cross-Section Data.” In Post-Keynesian Economics, edited by K.
Kurihara. London: Allen and Unwin.
Muraven, Mark, Dianne M. Tice, and Roy F. Baumeister. 1998. “Self-Control as a Limited
Resource: Regulatory Depletion Patterns.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 74
(3): 774–89. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.74.3.774.
Noor, Jawwad. 2009. “Hyperbolic Discounting and the Standard Model: Eliciting Discount
Functions.” Journal of Economic Theory 144 (5): 2077–83. doi:10.1016/j.jet.2009.03.005.
O’Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. 1999a. “Doing It Now or Later.” The American
Economic Review 89 (1): 103–24.
———. 1999b. “Incentives for Procrastinators.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (3):
769–816.
Odum, Amy L, and Carla P Rainaud. 2003. “Discounting of Delayed Hypothetical Money,
Alcohol, and Food.” Behavioural Processes 64 (3): 305–13. doi:10.1016/S03766357(03)00145-1.
Odum, Amy L., Ana A. L. Baumann, and Delores D. Rimington. 2006. “Discounting of Delayed
Hypothetical Money and Food: Effects of Amount.” Behavioural Processes 73 (3): 278–84.
doi:10.1016/j.beproc.2006.06.008.
Olea, José Luis Montiel, and Tomasz Strzalecki. 2014. “Axiomatization and Measurement of
Quasi-Hyperbolic Discounting.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (3): 1449-1499.
doi:10.1093/qje/qju017.
Parker, Jonathan A., Nicholas S. Souleles, David S. Johnson, and Robert McClelland. 2013.
“Consumer Spending and the Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008.” American Economic
Review 103 (6): 2530-2553.
Paserman, M. Daniele. 2008. “Job Search and Hyperbolic Discounting: Structural Estimation
and Policy Evaluation*.” The Economic Journal 118 (531): 1418–52. doi:10.1111/j.14680297.2008.02175.x.
Pavlov, Ivan Petrovich. 1927. Conditioned Reflexes. Translated by G.V. Anrep., Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Phelps, E. S., and R. A. Pollak. 1968. “On Second-Best National Saving and Game-Equilibrium
Growth.” The Review of Economic Studies 35 (2): 185–99. doi:10.2307/2296547.
Pigou, Arthur C. 1920. The Economics of Welfare. London: Macmillan.
Plato. Plato in Twelve Volumes. Translated by Harold N. Fowler. Vol. 9. 12 vols. Cambridge,
MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1925. Online in Perseus
Digital Library. http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/.
Prelec, Drazen and George Loewenstein. 1991. “Decision Making Over Time and Under
Uncertainty: A Common Approach.” Management Science 37 (7): 770–86.
doi:10.1287/mnsc.37.7.770.
Rabin, Matthew. 2000. “Risk Aversion and Expected-utility Theory: A Calibration Theorem.”
Econometrica 68(5): 1281-1292.
Ramsey, Frank P. “A Mathematical Theory of Saving.” The Economic Journal 38 (152): 543559.

Page 64

Measuring Time Preferences

Rasmussen, Erin B., Steven R. Lawyer, and William Reilly. 2010. “Percent Body Fat Is Related
to Delay and Probability Discounting for Food in Humans.” Behavioural Processes 83 (1):
23–30. doi:10.1016/j.beproc.2009.09.001.
Read, Daniel. 2001. “Is Time-Discounting Hyperbolic or Subadditive?” Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty 23 (1): 5–32. doi:10.1023/A:1011198414683.
———. 2005 “Monetary incentives, what are they good for?” Journal of Economic Methodology
12 (2): 265-76. doi:10.1080/13501780500086180
Read, Daniel, Shane Frederick, Burcu Orsel, and Juwaria Rahman. 2005. “Four Score and Seven
Years from Now: The Date/Delay Effect in Temporal Discounting.” Management Science
51 (9): 1326–35. doi:10.1287/mnsc.1050.0412.
Read, Daniel, Shane Frederick, and Marc Scholten. 2011. Outcome Framing in Intertemporal
Choice: The DRIFT Model. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 1933099. Rochester, NY: Social
Science Research Network. http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=1933099.
———. 2013. “DRIFT: An Analysis of Outcome Framing in Intertemporal Choice.” Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 39 (2): 573–88.
doi:10.1037/a0029177.
Read, Daniel, George Loewenstein, and Shobana Kalyanaraman. 1999. “Mixing Virtue and
Vice: Combining the Immediacy Effect and the Diversification Heuristic.” Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making 12 (4): 257–73. doi:10.1002/(SICI)10990771(199912)12:4<257::AID-BDM327>3.0.CO;2-6.
Read, Daniel, and Peter H. M. P Roelofsma. 2003. “Subadditive versus Hyperbolic Discounting:
A Comparison of Choice and Matching.” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes 91 (2): 140–53. doi:10.1016/S0749-5978(03)00060-8.
Read, Daniel, and Barbara van Leeuwen. 1998. “Predicting Hunger: The Effects of Appetite and
Delay on Choice.” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 76 (2): 189–
205. doi:10.1006/obhd.1998.2803.
Reuben, Ernesto, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2010. “Time Discounting for Primary and
Monetary Rewards.” Economics Letters 106 (2): 125–27.
doi:10.1016/j.econlet.2009.10.020.
Reuben, Ernesto, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2015. “Procrastination and impatience.”
Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Economics 58: 63-76.
Robson, Arthur and Larry Samuelson. 2009. “The Evolution of Time Preference with Aggregate
Uncertainty.” American Economic Review 99(5): 1925-53.
Rosati, Alexandra G., Jeffrey R. Stevens, Brian Hare, and Marc D. Hauser. 2007. “The
Evolutionary Origins of Human Patience: Temporal Preferences in Chimpanzees, Bonobos,
and Human Adults.” Current Biology 17 (19): 1663–68. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2007.08.033.
Royer, Heather, Mark F. Stehr, and Justin R. Sydnor. 2015. “Incentives, Commitments and Habit
Formation in Exercise: Evidence from a Field Experiment with Workers at a Fortune-500
Company.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 7 (3): 51-84. doi:
10.1257/app.20130327.
Saito, Kota. 2011. “Strotz meets Allais: Diminishing impatience and the certainty effect:
Comment.” The American Economic Review 101 (5): 2271-2275.
Samuelson, Paul. 1937. “A Note on Measurement of Utility.” Review of Economic Studies 4 (2):
155–61. doi:10.2307/2967612.
Schelling, Thomas C. 1995. “Intergenerational Discounting.” Energy Policy 23 (4–5): 395–401.
doi:10.1016/0301-4215(95)90164-3.

Page 65

Measuring Time Preferences

Schilbach, Frank. Forthcoming. “Alcohol and Self-Control: A Field Experiment in India.”
American Economic Review. https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.20170458.
Scholten, Marc, and Daniel Read. 2006. “Discounting by Intervals: A Generalized Model of
Intertemporal Choice.” Management Science 52 (9): 1424–36.
doi:10.1287/mnsc.1060.0534.
Sen, Amartya. 1957. “A Note on Tinbergen on the Optimum Rate of Saving.” Economic Journal
67 (December): 745-8.
Shapiro, Jesse M. 2005. “Is There a Daily Discount Rate? Evidence from the Food Stamp
Nutrition Cycle.” Journal of Public Economics 89 (2–3): 303–25.
doi:10.1016/j.jpubeco.2004.05.003.
Shapiro, Matthew D., and Joel Slemrod. 2003. “Did the 2001 Tax Rebate Stimulate Spending?
Evidence from Taxpayer Surveys.” Tax Policy and the Economy 17: 83-109.
Shefrin, Hersh M., and Richard H. Thaler. 1988. "The behavioral life‐cycle
hypothesis." Economic inquiry 26 (4): 609-643.
Shelley, Marjorie K. 1994. “Gain/Loss Asymmetry in Risky Intertemporal Choice.”
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 59 (1): 124–59.
doi:10.1006/obhd.1994.1053.
Siegel, Shepard. 1984. “Pavlovian Conditioning and Heroin Overdose: Reports by Overdose
Victims.” Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society 22 (5): 428–30. doi:10.3758/BF03333867.
Simon, Curtis J., John T. Warner, and Saul Pleeter. 2015. "Discounting, cognition, and financial
awareness: new evidence from a change in the military retirement system." Economic
Inquiry 53 (1): 318-334.
Slonim, Robert, James Carlson, and Eric Bettinger. 2007. “Possession and Discounting
Behavior.” Economics Letters 97 (3): 215–21. doi:10.1016/j.econlet.2007.03.018.
Smith, Adam. 1761. The Theory of Moral Sentiments. 2 ed. Strand and Edinburgh: A. Miller, A.
Kincaid, and J. Bell.
———. 1776. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. 1 ed. Strand: W.
Strahan and T.Cadell.
Sozou, P. 1998. “On Hyperbolic Discounting and Uncertain Hazard Rates.” Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London (Series B- Biological Sciences) 265(1409): 2015-20.
Starmer, C., and Sugden, R. (1991). Does the Random-Lottery Incentive System Elicit True
Preferences? An Experimental Investigation. The American Economic Review, 81(4), 971978.
Stephens, Melvin. 2003. “‘3rd of Tha Month’: Do Social Security Recipients Smooth
Consumption between Checks?” The American Economic Review 93 (1): 406–22.
Stern, Nicholas. 2007. The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review. Cambridge
University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511817434
Strotz, R. H. 1955. “Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization.” The Review
of Economic Studies 23 (3): 165–80. doi:10.2307/2295722.
Sutter, Matthias, Martin G. Kocher, Daniela Glätzle-Rüetzler, and Stefan T. Trautmann. 2013.
“Impatience and Uncertainty: Experimental Decisions Predict Adolescents’ Field
Behavior.” American Economic Review 103 (1): 510–31.
Takeuchi, Kan. 2011. “Non-parametric test of time consistency: Present bias and future bias.”
Games and Economic Behavior 71: 456-478.

Page 66

Measuring Time Preferences

Tanaka, Saori C., Katsunori Yamada, Hiroyasu Yoneda, and Fumio Ohtake. 2014. “Neural
Mechanisms of Gain–Loss Asymmetry in Temporal Discounting.” The Journal of
Neuroscience 34 (16): 5595–5602. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5169-12.2014.
Tanaka, Tomomi, Colin F. Camerer, and Quang Nguyen. 2010. “Risk and Time Preferences:
Linking Experimental and Household Survey Data from Vietnam.” The American Economic
Review 100 (1): 557–71. doi:10.1257/aer.100.1.557.
Thaler, Richard. 1980. “Toward a Positive Theory of Consumer Choice.” Journal of Economic
Behavior & Organization 1 (1): 39–60.
———. 1981. “Some Empirical Evidence on Dynamic Inconsistency.” Economics Letters 8 (3):
201–7. doi:10.1016/0165-1765(81)90067-7.
Thaler, Richard H., and H. M. Shefrin. 1981. “An Economic Theory of Self-Control.” Journal of
Political Economy 89 (2): 392–406.
Thaler, Richard H. and Eric Johnson. 1990. “Gambling with the house money and trying to break
even: The effects of prior outcomes on risky choice.” Management Science 36(6): 643-660.
Tobin, Henry, and A.W. Logue. 1994. “Self-Control across Species (Columba Livia, Homo
Sapiens, and Rattus Norvegicus).” Journal of Comparative Psychology 108 (2): 126–33.
doi:10.1037/0735-7036.108.2.126.
Treasury, Great Britain. 2007. The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review. Cambridge
University Press.
Tsukayama, Eli, and Angela Lee Duckworth. 2010. “Domain-Specific Temporal Discounting
and Temptation.” Judgment and Decision Making 5 (2): 72–82.
Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman. 1974. “Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and
Biases.” Science 185 (4157): 1124–31. doi:10.1126/science.185.4157.1124.
Ubfal, Diego. 2016. “How General Are Time Preferences? Eliciting Good-Specific Discount
Rates.” Journal of Development Economics 118 (January): 150-170. doi:
10.1016/j.jdeveco.2015.07.007.
Viscusi, W. Kip, and Michael J. Moore. 1989. “Rates of Time Preference and Valuations of the
Duration of Life.” Journal of Public Economics 38 (3): 297–317. doi:10.1016/00472727(89)90061-3.
Vuchinich, Rudy E., and C.A. Simpson. 2000. “Temporal Changes in the Value of Objects of
Choice.” In Reframing Health Behavior Change With Behavioral Economics, edited by
Warren K. Bickel, 195–217. Psychology Press.
Wang, Mei, Marc Oliver Rieger, and Thorsten Hens. 2016. “How time preferences differ:
Evidence from 53 countries.” Journal of Economic Psychology, 52: 115-135.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.joep.2015.12.001.
Warner, John T., and Saul Pleeter. 2001. “The Personal Discount Rate: Evidence from Military
Downsizing Programs.” The American Economic Review 91 (1): 33–53.
Weber, E. U., E. J. Johnson K. Milch, H. Chang, J. Brodscholl, and D. Goldstein. 2007.
“Asymmetric discounting in intertemporal choice: A query theory account.” Psychological
Science 18: 516-523. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.01932.
Wertenbroch, Klaus. 1998. “Consumption Self-Control by Rationing Purchase Quantities of
Virtue and Vice.” Marketing Science 17 (4): 317–37. doi:10.1287/mksc.17.4.317.
Wölbert, Eva, and Arno Riedl. 2013. Measuring Time and Risk Preferences: Reliability,
Stability, Domain Specificity. 4339. CESifo Working Paper.
http://www.econstor.eu/handle/10419/79662.

Page 67

Measuring Time Preferences

Wulff, Dirk U., and Wouter van den Bos. 2017. “Modeling Choices in Delay Discounting.”
Psychological Science 1 (5). doi:10.1177/0956797616664342.
Zauberman, Gal, B. Kyu Kim, Selin A Malkoc, and James R Bettman. 2009. “Discounting Time
and Time Discounting: Subjective Time Perception and Intertemporal Preferences.” Journal
of Marketing Research 46 (4): 543–56. doi:10.1509/jmkr.46.4.543.

Page 68

