                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE WELFARE LOSSES OF LARGE RECESSIONS

                                        Dirk Krueger
                                        Kurt Mitman
                                        Fabrizio Perri

                                      Working Paper 22458
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22458


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2016




Thanks to Tony Smith for an excellent discussion and to Simone Civale for outstanding research
assistance. Krueger gratefully acknowledges financial support from the NSF under grants SES
1123547 and SES 1326781. Mitman gratefully acknowledges financial support from the
Mannerfelt Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Dirk Krueger, Kurt Mitman, and Fabrizio Perri. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
On the Distribution of the Welfare Losses of Large Recessions
Dirk Krueger, Kurt Mitman, and Fabrizio Perri
NBER Working Paper No. 22458
July 2016
JEL No. E21,E32,J65

                                          ABSTRACT

How big are the welfare losses from severe economic downturns, such as the U.S. Great
Recession?How are those losses distributed across the population? In this paper we answer these
questions using a canonical business cycle model featuring household income and wealth
heterogeneity that matches micro data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). We
document how these losses are distributed across households and how they are affected by social
insurance policies. We find that the welfare cost of losing one's job in a severe recession ranges
from 2% of lifetime consumption for the wealthiest households to 5% for low-wealth households.
The cost increases to approximately 8%for low-wealth households if unemployment insurance
benefits are cut from 50% to 10%. The fact that welfare losses fall with wealth, and that in our
model (as in the data) a large fraction of households has very low wealth, implies that the impact
of a severe recession, once aggregated across all households, is very significant (2.2% of lifetime
consumption). We finally show that a more generous unemployment insurance system
unequivocally helps low-wealth job losers, but hurts households that keep their job, even in a
version of the model in which output is partly demand determined, and therefore unemployment
insurance stabilizes aggregate demand and output.


Dirk Krueger                                          Fabrizio Perri
Economics Department                                  Research Department
University of Pennsylvania                            Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
160 McNeil Building                                   90 Hennepin Avenue
3718 Locust Walk                                      Minneapolis MN 55401
Philadelphia, PA 19104                                fperri@umn.edu
and NBER
dkrueger@econ.upenn.edu

Kurt Mitman
Institute for International Economic Studies
Stockholm University
106 91 Stockholm
SWEDEN
kurt.mitman@iies.su.se
1     Introduction

The objective of this paper is to quantify the distribution of welfare losses across house-
holds induced by a severe economic downturn of the magnitude of the U.S. Great Re-
cession. As a laboratory for our analysis, we use an augmented version of the canoni-
cal Krusell-Smith (1998) real business cycle model with household income and wealth
heterogeneity, as presented in Krueger, Mitman and Perri (2016). The model features
business cycles driven by productivity shocks in an economy populated by agents that
face different types of idiosyncratic income shocks and accumulate wealth in order to
finance consumption during retirement and to self-insure against idiosyncratic income
risk. In this framework, a recession affects households in several ways. First, in an
economic downturn more households find themselves without a job, and a job loss
reduces their lifetime income, consumption and welfare. Households that do not lose
their job at the onset of the recession also suffer welfare losses, as their wages will fall
and they have a higher probability of losing their job in the future, during the course
of the long-lasting recession. The main focus of this paper is to document the size and
heterogeneity of these losses across the income and wealth distribution, as well as to in-
vestigate the extent to which social insurance policies, such as stylized unemployment
insurance, affect these losses.
In order to render this analysis empirically meaningful, we first measure, using micro
data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), the extent of income, wealth,
and consumption inequality in 2006, prior to the Great Recession. After calibrating
the model to macroeconomic and microeconomic data, we first evaluate how well it
captures the stylized cross-sectional facts, and then use the model as a laboratory for
characterizing and quantifying the distribution of welfare losses from experiencing a
severe aggregate economic downturn in which unemployment risk rises and house-
hold incomes (even conditional on not losing a job) fall.
Our first set of results shows that the welfare losses vary strongly with characteristics
of households such as wealth, income, employment status, and household preferences
(their patience, more specifically). In our benchmark economy, the welfare losses range
from over 5%, for a low-wealth household that loses its job at the onset of the recession,
to less than 2% for a high-wealth household, that the onset of the recession keeps its
job.
Our second set of results uses the equilibrium distribution of households over the rel-
evant individual household states to integrate welfare losses across households, and
obtains a measure of the aggregate welfare losses.1 We find that in our benchmark
economy the aggregate (under the veil of ignorance) welfare cost of the recession is
2.2% and that almost 2% of the working-age households experience a loss exceeding

1   As we will argue below, this measure can alternatively be interpreted as the expected welfare loss,
    under the veil of ignorance of where in the distribution a household is placed just prior to the onset
    of a severe recession.


                                                    2
3% of lifetime consumption.
Our final set of results studies how the welfare costs discussed above change as we
vary features of the benchmark economy. One important lesson is that the shape of
wealth distribution, especially at the bottom, has a large impact on the aggregate wel-
fare impact of a recession as well as its distribution. In order to demonstrate this, we
repeat our welfare calculations with an economy studied by Krusell and Smith (1998),
which displays significantly less wealth inequality than our benchmark, and, in partic-
ular, displays a much smaller fraction of households at the bottom of the wealth dis-
tribution. In that economy, we find that the aggregate welfare cost the recession falls
to 1.6% (versus 2.2% in the benchmark) and that virtually no households experience a
loss that exceeds 3% of lifetime consumption.
We then study the impact of a stylized public unemployment insurance system and
find that reducing the generosity of unemployment insurance matters significantly for
welfare, even when the wealth distribution is allowed to change in response to the
policy change. In particular, we first reduce the unemployment insurance replacement
rate from 50% (our benchmark value) to 10% and let the wealth distribution change in
response to the lower replacement rate. In this case, the aggregate welfare costs from a
recession are similar to the benchmark, but the fraction of households that experience
losses bigger than 3% increases significantly from 2% to 3.1%. When we reduce unem-
ployment insurance without allowing the wealth distribution to respond immediately
(an experiment we label "unemployment insurance shock", which can be interpreted
as an unexpected expiration of unemployment insurance benefits), we find that the
aggregate welfare costs increase only moderately, but the fraction of households that
loses more than 3% of lifetime consumption jumps dramatically, to 7.5% of the popu-
lation.
We finally study how unemployment insurance affects the welfare costs from a reces-
sion in an economy in which output is partially determined by aggregate demand.2 In
such an economy, one might think that unemployment insurance, by stabilizing aggre-
gate demand, would stabilize output and thus reduce overall welfare losses. However,
it turns out that even though more generous unemployment insurance indeed miti-
gates the collapse in aggregate consumption, output, and wages in the short run and
reduces the welfare losses of the job losers (just as it did in the benchmark economy),
larger unemployment insurance benefits increase the welfare losses of those who do
not lose their job in a recession. The key intuition behind this finding is that more
generous unemployment insurance reduces the incentives for precautionary saving in
the recession. In the economy without the consumption externality, the reduction in
saving (relative to the low unemployment insurance scenario) has a relatively small
impact on factor prices and thus on overall welfare. In the economy with the con-
sumption externality, however, the reduction in saving, by reducing the capital stock

2   We achieve this by introducing in the model an externality from aggregate consumption to Total
    Factor Productivity (TFP)


                                                3
and consumption in the medium run, affects negatively the evolution of TFP in the
medium and long run. We find that, quantitatively, this effect can be quite large, and
outweigh the benefits that come from short run demand stabilization for all but the
most impatient households. This finding suggests, more broadly, that even if output is
demand determined and unemployment insurance stabilizes the economy in the short
run, it is not necessarily the case that such a policy helps both the unemployed and the
employed (even though the latter might well become unemployed during the course
of a severe and long-lasting recession).
This work is part of a broader research agenda that seeks to explore the importance
of micro heterogeneity in general, and household income and wealth heterogeneity in
particular, for classic macroeconomic questions (such as the welfare costs of macroe-
conomic fluctuations) that have traditionally been answered within the representative
agent paradigm (i.e. goes "from micro to macro"). It also builds upon, and contributes
to, the related but distinct literature that studies the distributional consequences of
macroeconomic shocks (i.e. goes "from macro to micro").3
Our work is also related to a large body of research that studies the welfare impact
of aggregate fluctuations. In a seminal contribution, Lucas (1987) calculates an upper
bound on the welfare costs of business cycle fluctuations in a representative household
economy. His hypothetical thought experiment compares an aggregate consumption
path with empirically observed volatility to one with the same mean but without fluc-
tuations and asks what percentage of lifetime consumption households would be will-
ing to give up to have the random consumption process replaced by its deterministic
mean process. This gain is, in that context, the most a costless and perfectly effective
stabilization policy can hope to achieve. Lucas finds that the so-calculated welfare loss
from business cycles is minuscule, on the order of less than 1/100 of 1%. The conclu-
sion from this calculation is that aggregate stabilization policy, whether fiscal or mone-
tary policy, has only very limited potential for improving welfare of the representative
household, even if it were perfectly effective and costless.
A substantial literature has revisited the Lucas thought experiment in a variety of mod-
els, including those with household heterogeneity, in which actors in the economy
face both idiosyncratic and aggregate risk.4 Representative contributions include Im-
rohoroglu (1989), Krusell and Smith (1999), Chatterjee and Corbae (2007), Krebs (2007),
and Krusell, Mukoyama, Sahin, and Smith (2009) and has concluded that the wel-
fare costs of business cycles are a) strongly heterogeneous across the population, with
wealth–poor households suffering the most, and b) for these households, the costs can
be large at least one order of magnitude (i.e. ten times) as large as the original Lucas
numbers.
In this paper, we ask a related, but conceptually different question. Rather than assess-

3   For a more systematic review of these literatures see Krueger, Mitman and Perri, 2016
4   See Lucas (2003) for an early summary of this literature.


                                                    4
ing the benefits of removing all cycles from an ex ante point of view, we document the
welfare losses of different households from actually experiencing a recession in the cur-
rent period.5 Conceptually we follow the papers by Glover, Heathcote, Krueger and
Rios-Rull (2014) as well as Hur (2014) in quantifying the welfare losses of experiencing
a recession in this way. In the same spirit as Lucas (1987) we do not actually study con-
crete policies that would have prevented the Great Recession, but rather assess how
valuable such a hypothetical policy would be if it existed and could be implemented
costlessly, thereby quantifying how painful it is to experience a severe recession.6
The paper is organized as follows. The next section summarizes the cross-sectional
inequality facts from the PSID that motivate and discipline our model-based analy-
sis. Section 3 sets out the model and summarizes its calibration.7 In section 4, we
assess how well the model fits the cross-sectional facts, and compare its cross-sectional
distribution with that of the original Krusell and Smith (1998) economy. Section 5 con-
tains our main welfare results; it measures how large, and how dispersed the welfare
losses from a Great Recession-like economic downturn are, and how the magnitudes
of these losses depend on the presence and size of a publicly provided unemployment
insurance system. Section 6 concludes and technical details about the welfare cost
measures and the definition of a recursive competitive equilibrium are contained in
the appendix.



2     The Wealth, Income and Consumption Distribution Prior
      to the Great Recession

In this section, our aim is two-fold. First we document the extent of income, wealth and
consumption inequality at the eve of the Great Recession. A plausible model aimed
at measuring the distribution of the welfare losses from a large aggregate economic
downturn needs to be consistent with these pre-recession cross-sectional facts. Sec-
ond, our data set of choice, the PSID contains comprehensive information on house-
hold earnings, income, consumption expenditures and wealth. These rich data allow
us to empirically characterize the joint distribution of these variables, which is in turn
informative about the plausibility of competing mechanisms that are suitable for gen-

5   We share the focus on idiosyncratic unemployment risk in rare but severe recessions with Chatterjee
    and Corbae (2007).
6   Krueger and Perri (2004) use a similar approach to the one adopted here to quantify the welfare
    losses from the observed increase in earnings inequality in the last 25 years.
7   In the interest of space, the details of the calibration are in Krueger, Mitman and Perri (2016). That
    paper shares the broad theme (the interaction between the dynamics of macroeconomic variables
    and household heterogeneity in earnings, income, consumption and wealth), but focuses on the
    impact of micro heterogeneity for the dynamics of aggregate consumption, investment and output
    in the Great Recession, rather than studying the normative question of the distribution of welfare
    losses from the Great Recession.


                                                    5
erating the empirically observed wealth dispersion.


2.1    The Cross-Sectional Distributions of Earnings, Disposable In-
       come, Consumption, and Wealth

The main focus of our welfare analysis is on households that face labor income risk
more generally, and unemployment risk specifically. Therefore in our empirical anal-
ysis we restrict attention to households with heads between ages 25 and 60. For these
households, table 1 reports, for each variable of interest in the PSID (earnings, dis-
posable income, consumption expenditures and net worth), the 2006 cross-sectional
average as well as the share of the total value held by each of the five quintiles of the
corresponding distribution. In addition, to obtain a more precise picture of earnings,
income and wealth concentration, the table also reports the Gini index as well as the
share held by the households between the 90th and 95th percentile, between the 95th
and 99th percentile, and by those in the top 1% of the respective distribution.8 Finally,
and for comparison, the table contains information about the income, wealth and con-
sumption distribution from alternative data sets.9
The marginal distributions of earnings, disposable income, consumption expenditures
and net worth have properties that are well-known from other studies and data sets.
Namely, all distributions display a fairly high degree of concentration, with the top
20% of households controlling close to 50% of earnings, income and consumption, and
more than 80% of net worth, whereas the bottom quintile accounts for no wealth, less
than 5% of earnings (income) and about 6% of consumption expenditures. Compar-
ing across variables, we see that the distributions of earnings and disposable income
for our sample look fairly similar, since capital income constitutes only about 1/6 of
disposable income for these households (ages 25 to 60).
In the class of heterogeneous-agent models we will study in the next section, net worth
is the key endogenous state variable. Thus, any model aimed at capturing the cross-
sectional distribution of welfare losses from economic downturns should feature an
empirically plausible wealth distribution. As table 1 shows, this requires generating
a wealth distribution that is substantially more concentrated than that of earnings, in-

8   The earnings variable includes all sources of labor income plus non-UI transfers minus tax liabilities.
    Disposable income encompasses earnings plus unemployment benefits, plus income from capital,
    including rental equivalent income of the main residence of the household. Consumption expen-
    ditures include all expenditure categories reported by PSID plus the rental equivalent of the main
    residence. Finally wealth is measured as net worth, the value of all financial and real assets (includ-
    ing owner-occupied houses) net of all household liabilities.
9   For disposable income from the 2006 Current Population Survey (CPS), for consumption from the
    2006 Consumer Expenditure Survey (CE) and for net worth from the 2007 Survey of Consumer
    Finances (SCF), which, because of oversampling of rich households, paints a more accurate empirical
    picture for the very top of the distribution of net worth in the data.



                                                    6
                    Table 1: Means and Marginal Distributions in 2006


                                                        Variable
                  Earn.           Disp Y                  Cons. Exp               Net Worth
 Source           PSID          PSID       CPS            PSID       CE           PSID   SCF(07)
 Mean (06$)      52,783        62,549    60,032          43,980   47,563        291,616   497,747
 % Share by:
 Q1                  3.6           4.5       4.4            5.6           6.5       -0.9      -0.2
 Q2                  9.9           9.9      10.5           10.7          11.4        0.8       1.2
 Q3                 15.3          15.3      15.9           15.6          16.4        4.4       4.6
 Q4                 22.7          22.8      23.1           22.4          23.3       13.0      11.9
 Q5                 48.5          47.5      46.0           45.6          42.4       82.7      82.5

 90 − 95            10.9          10.8      10.1           10.3          10.2       13.7      11.1
 95 − 99            13.1          12.8      12.8           11.3          11.1       22.8      25.3
 Top 1%              8.0           8.0       7.2            8.2           5.1       30.9      33.5
 Gini              0.42           0.42      0.40           0.40          0.36       0.77      0.78
 Sample           6,232          6232     54,518          6,232         4,908      6,232     2,910



come and consumption – a distribution in which the bottom 40% of household hold
virtually no wealth and more than 80% is held by the top quintile. Comparing the last
two columns of the table, it is noteworthy that the net worth distribution from the PSID
lines up fairly well with that obtained from the SCF (although it misses a significant
share of wealth at the very top of the wealth distribution, resulting in lower average
wealth per household in the PSID, relative to the SCF.


2.2   Income and Consumption by Wealth Quintiles

The previous section ranked households separately by income, consumption, and wealth
and characterized the empirical marginal distributions. Although useful for descrip-
tive purposes, economic theory imposes restrictions on the joint distribution of these
variables. In recursive formulations of heterogeneous household models wealth – in
addition to current earnings – acts as the crucial individual state variable, and thus in
table 2 we highlight the correlation of net worth with earnings, income and especially
consumption at the individual household level. We divide the 2006 PSID sample into
net worth quintiles, and then report the share of earnings, income and consumption
accruing to each net worth quintile. We also calculate, in the last two rows of the table,
the expenditure rates of the different wealth quintiles, by dividing consumption expen-

                                           7
ditures of the respective wealth quintile by earnings (income) of the wealth quintile.

        Table 2: Earnings, Disposable Income and Expenditures by Net Worth in 2006

                              % Share of:                        % Expend. Rate
       Quintile(NetW)       Earn.   Disp Y      Expend.          Earn.  Disp Y
       Q1                     9.8        8.7       11.3            95.1       90.0
       Q2                    12.9       11.2       12.4            79.3       76.4
       Q3                    18.0       16.7       16.8            77.5       69.8
       Q4                    22.3       22.1       22.4            82.3       69.6
       Q5                    37.0       41.2       37.2            83.0       62.5
                             Correlation with net worth
                             0.26       0.42       0.20

From table 2 we observe that earnings, income and consumption at the household level
are all substantially, but far from perfectly, correlated with net worth (see the last row
for the correlation coefficients). Note, however, that the correlation of consumption
expenditures with net worth is weaker than for earnings or income. As the last two
columns show, low-wealth households have systematically higher consumption rates
than high-wealth households. These differences in consumption expenditure behavior
across the wealth distribution are economically significant: the gap between the sav-
ings rate (measured as 1 minus the consumption rate) of the top and the bottom wealth
quintiles amounts to 15 to 30 percentage points.
Two key facts from tables 1 and 2 emerge: wealth is highly concentrated, with the
bottom two quintiles of the wealth distribution accounting for very little of aggregate
wealth; at the same time, these households hold about 20% of aggregate labor earn-
ings and income, and are responsible for 11.3% + 12.4% = 23.7% of total consump-
tion expenditures. In Krueger, Mitman and Perri (2016) we argue that these observa-
tions about the cross-sectional wealth distribution and the joint distribution of wealth
and consumption are key for the argument that household heterogeneity matters, in a
quantitatively significant way, for the dynamics of aggregate consumption in a severe
recession.
In this paper, we will show that it is precisely the households at the bottom of the
wealth distribution with low savings rates and high propensities to consume out of
current income that suffer the largest welfare losses from a severe recession. Further,
these losses are much more severe than those sustained by the "average" household in
society. In order to make this argument, we first develop a macroeconomic business
cycle model with household heterogeneity and ensure that the model is consistent with
the two key stylized facts from the data discussed above. In section 3 we lay out the
model and briefly discuss how we calibrate it, in section 4 we discuss the fit of the
model vis-a-vis the PSID micro data, and section 5 then contains our welfare results.


                                            8
3      Household Heterogeneity and the Macro Economy: Model
       and Calibration

In this section we lay out the canonical real business cycle model with household
income and wealth heterogeneity that we use as a measurement tool and laboratory
for counterfactual policy analysis. It builds on the seminal heterogeneous-household
general-equilibrium models of Bewley (1986), Imrohoroglu (1989), Huggett (1993, 1997),
Aiyagari (1994) and especially Krusell and Smith (1998), but modifies the latter along
several important dimensions. The objective of these modifications is two-fold. First,
in order to obtain a better fit of the cross-sectional household income and wealth dis-
tributions, we augment the model’s idiosyncratic unemployment shock process with
a stochastic process for earnings, conditional on being employed. Further, we allow
for preference heterogeneity, and we incorporate basic life cycle elements and social
insurance policies into the model.10 Second, in order for these policies to potentially
have some aggregate demand stabilizing effects, and to make contact with business cy-
cle models stressing demand-determined aggregate fluctuations more broadly, we also
consider a variant of the model with an aggregate consumption demand externality.


3.1     Aggregate Risk

As in Krusell and Smith (1998) and the real business cycle literature more generally
(see e.g. Kydland and Prescott, 1982), the ultimate source of aggregate fluctuations
are exogenous stochastic movements in total factor productivity, denoted as Z ∗ . Total
factor productivity Z ∗ is determined by

                                               Z ∗ = ZC ω                                            (1)

where the exogenous part of TFP, Z follows a first order Markov process with state
space Z ∈ Zl , Zh and transition matrix π ( Z 0 | Z ). When bringing the model to the data
we will interpret Zh as normal times and Zl as a severe recession (such as the Great
Recession). In equation (1) the term C is aggregate consumption, and the parameter
ω ≥ 0 governs the strength of the aggregate demand externality. For much of the
paper, and in our benchmark model calibration, we will study the case of ω = 0.
In that case, as in the standard Real Business Cycle literature, TFP simply follows an
exogenous process and there is no distinction between Z and Z ∗ ). If instead ω >
0, current TFP, and thus output, is partially demand-determined, and, by stabilizing
aggregate consumption, demand social insurance policies might mitigate the severity
of a recession, and thus moderate the welfare losses stemming from it.

10   On the household side, the model shares its key features with the recent study by Carroll, Slacalek,
     Tokuoka and White (2015).




                                                    9
3.2     Technology

Given the process for TFP, output in the economy is produced according to a standard
neoclassical aggregate production function:

                                     Y = Z ∗ F (K, N )                               (2)

Capital used in production in turn depreciates at a constant rate δ ∈ [0, 1].


3.3     Household Demographics, Endowments and Preferences

3.3.1   Demographics and the Life Cycle

The economy is populated by a unit mass of potentially infinitely lived households
that differ by age, preferences, unemployment status, earnings and wealth. We model
the life cycle of households in a parsimonious way, by assuming that households are
either of working age (indexed by W) and participate in the labor market or are retired
(denoted by R). A household’s age is denoted by j ∈ {W, R}. Young households
transit into retirement with constant probability 1 − θ ∈ [0, 1]. Old households die
with constant probability 1 − ν ∈ [0, 1] and are replaced by new young households. By
assumption, the realizations of the retirement and the mortality shock are orthogonal to
all other household characteristics, and thus the parameters θ, ν completely determine
the time-invariant distribution of households across the two stages of the life cycle,
given by
                                         1−θ
                              ΠW =
                                   (1 − θ ) + (1 − ν )
                                         1−ν
                              ΠR =
                                   (1 − θ ) + (1 − ν )

We explicitly model a life cycle (albeit rudimentary) of households to induce a retire-
ment savings motive, which in turn, as we will argue below, helps the model to de-
liver a more plausible consumption-savings behavior across the wealth distribution
that eludes a model where savings are accumulated for purely precautionary motives.


3.3.2   Preferences

Households have time separable preferences representable by von Neumann-Morgenstern
expected utility. The period felicity function is given by u(c) and is continuous, strictly
increasing, strictly concave and satisfies the Inada conditions. Households discount
the future with a time discount factor β that is fixed over time for a given household,
but might vary across households. Since Krusell and Smith’s (1998) original paper,
preference heterogeneity in time discount factors is known to be an effective tool for

                                            10
helping to generate a cross-sectional wealth distribution as dispersed as in the data.
The set of possible time discount factors is given by β ∈ B, the finite set of possible time
discount factors, and π ( β) denotes the share of households with time discount factor
β. By assumption (of a law of large numbers), π ( β) is both the individual probability
distribution from which a newborn household draws its β as well as the cross-sectional
distribution of time discount factors in the population.11


3.3.3    Endowments

In the macroeconomics literature that models household heterogeneity explicitly, the
key source of such heterogeneity stems from labor income. Following much of this
literature ever since Bewley (1986), we model household labor income as a stochastic
process with idiosyncratic shocks. Earnings risk has two sources: unemployment risk
and labor income risk conditional on being employed. We now describe both sources
in turn, starting with unemployment risk. The inclusion of this risk not only is em-
pirically relevant and helps us to connect our results to the original Krusell and Smith
(1998) paper, but also allows us to discuss unemployment insurance as one example
of public social insurance policies. Let s ∈ S = {u, e} denote the current employment
status of a household, where s = u stands for unemployment. We assume that this
employment status follows a Markov chain with transitions π (s0 |s, Z 0 , Z ). The depen-
dence of unemployment-employment transitions on the aggregate state transitions for
TFP captures the fact that job finding and job losing rates depend on the state of the
business cycle.
For the idiosyncratic unemployment shock, we assume a law of large numbers, so
that idiosyncratic risk averages out, and only aggregate risk determines the number of
unemployed households. Furthermore, we assume that the share of households in a
given idiosyncratic employment state s depends only on the current aggregate state12
Z, and thus denote by Π Z (s) the deterministic fraction of households with idiosyn-
cratic unemployment state s if the aggregate state of the economy is given by Z.
Unemployment risk alone is, of course, insufficient to generate an empirically plausi-
ble labor earnings distribution. Thus, following much of the literature since Aiyagari
(1994), we will estimate a stochastic labor income process, conditional on being em-
ployed, from the PSID data and embed it into the model as a second source of idiosyn-
cratic income risk.13
11   The fact that households die with positive probability ensures ergodicity of the cross-sectional wealth
     distribution even in the presence of permanent time discount factor heterogeneity across households.
12   This assumption imposes consistency restrictions on the transition matrix π (s0 |s, Z 0 , Z ) and prevents
     the unemployment rate from becoming a continuous aggregate variable. The restrictions are dis-
     cussed in detail in the original Krusell and Smith (1998) paper.
13   As described below, we discretize the continuous state space process into a finite Markov chain
     before incorporating it into the model.


                                                      11
Therefore, conditional on being employed, labor income is the product of an aggre-
gate wage w per labor efficiency unit and an idiosyncratic part y best interpreted as
individual labor productivity. The idiosyncratic component y ∈ Y follows a first or-
der Markov chain with transition matrix π (y0 |y) > 0. Let Π(y) denote the associated
unique invariant distribution; by assumption, this distribution does not depend on the
aggregate state Z.14 As with unemployment risk, we assume that idiosyncratic labor
productivity risk washes out in the aggregate because of a law of large numbers.


3.3.4    Trading Opportunities and Initial Conditions

Households can save (but are prevented from borrowing) by accumulating (risky)
physical capital and are assumed to have access to perfect annuity markets in retire-
ment. The capital of the deceased is used to pay an extra return on capital ν1 of the
survivors. We denote by a ∈ A the asset holdings of an individual household and by
A the set of all possible asset holdings. Households are born with zero initial wealth
and draw their unemployment status according to Π Z (s) and their initial labor produc-
tivity from Π(y). The cross-sectional population distribution of employment status s,
labor productivity y, asset holdings a and discount factors β is denoted as Φ and sum-
marizes, together with the aggregate shock Z, the aggregate state of the economy at
any given point in time.


3.4     Government Policy

In our economy the government organizes two social insurance programs: a pure pay
as you go (PAYGO) social security system and an unemployment insurance system.
The purpose of the presence of the former is simply to ensure that the private life
cycle savings motive has a plausible magnitude. In contrast, the role of the stylized
public unemployment insurance for the cross-sectional wealth distribution and for the
welfare losses from great recessions is an important aspect of our analysis and will be
investigated in greater detail below.


3.4.1    Unemployment Insurance

The government uses proportional taxes on labor income (and unemployment bene-
fits) to finance unemployment benefits b(y, Z, Φ) that potentially depend on the aggre-
gate state of the economy ( Z, Φ) as well as the potential earnings wy of a household.15

14   Even for the unemployed, potential labor productivity evolves according to the same process, and
     it determines the productivity upon finding a job, as well as unemployment benefits while being
     unemployed, as described in the next section.
15   Recall that even unemployed households carry with them the idiosyncratic state y.


                                                  12
The size of the system is indexed by the replacement rate ρ, the key policy param-
eter that we will vary in our counterfactual policy experiments. Thus, benefits of a
currently unemployed person are given by

                                      b(y, Z, Φ) = ρw( Z, Φ)y                            (3)

Budget balance of the unemployment insurance system requires
                                "                                                              #
Π Z (u) ∑ Π(y)b(y, Z, Φ) = τ ( Z, Φ)       ∑ Π(y) [ΠZ (u)b(y, Z, Φ) + (1 − ΠZ (u)) w(Z, Φ)y]
        y                                   y
                                                                                         (4)
and using equation (3) and the fact that the distribution over y is identical among the
employed and unemployed, we determine the required tax rate to be
                                                                 
                             Π Z (u)ρ
                                            
                                                        1
     τ ( Z, Φ; ρ) =                            =                  = τ ( Z; ρ) ∈ (0, 1) (5)
                      1 − Π Z (u) + Π Z (u)ρ      1+
                                                      1 − Π Z (u)
                                                           Π Z (u)ρ

The tax rate τ ( Z; ρ) is only a function of the exogenous policy parameter ρ measuring
the size of the unemployment system as well as the exogenous ratio of employed to
              1− Π ( u )
unemployed Π (Zu) , which in turn varies over the business cycle.
                 Z




3.4.2   Social Security

The government runs a balanced budget, pure PAYGO social security system charac-
terized by a constant payroll tax rate τSS on labor income and unemployment benefits.
Social security benefits bSS ( Z, Φ) of retired households are assumed to be independent
of past contributions, reflecting in a stylized way the highly redistributive nature of
the current U.S. system, but also avoiding the need to track past earnings or contribu-
tions as additional continuous state variables in the household maximization problem.
Given these assumptions, the budget constraint of the social security system then reads
as

                              "                                                      #
    bSS ( Z, Φ)Π R = τSS ΠW       ∑ Π(y) [ΠZ (u)ρw(Z, Φ)y + (1 − ΠZ (u)) w(Z, Φ)y]
                                  y

The social security replacement rate is an intuitive function of the payroll tax rate τSS ,
the old age dependency ratio Π W
                             Π R , and average labor productivity in the economy:

                      bSS ( Z, Φ)      Π
                                  = τSS W [Π Z (u)ρ + (1 − Π Z (u))]
                       w( Z, Φ)        ΠR
Note that both social security benefits and wages, and therefore the replacement rate,
will fluctuate with the aggregate state of the economy Z, although the quantitative
importance of these fluctuations is minor.

                                                13
3.5     Recursive Competitive Equilibrium

In this section, we formally define a recursive competitive equilibrium for this econ-
omy with cross-sectional household heterogeneity and aggregate fluctuations. The ag-
gregate state of the economy at every point in time is characterized by the aggregate
productivity shock Z and the cross-sectional distribution Φ over individual household
characteristics (s, y, a, β). This high-dimensional state space is the source of compu-
tational challenges when computing recursive competitive equilibria, and we follow
a large part of the literature in approximating the cross-sectional distribution Φ by a
small number of moments.16
Given the distinction between working-age and retired households, it is helpful to
separate age j ∈ {W, R} from the other state variables of the household and to state
the individual dynamic programming problem of both types of households separately.
The problem of retired households is given by

                                               (                                                               )
              v R ( a, β; Z, Φ) = max
                                     c,a0 ≥0
                                                   u(c) + νβ     ∑
                                                                 0
                                                                       π ( Z 0 | Z )v R ( a0 , β; Z 0 , Φ0 )
                                                                Z ∈Z
subject to

                         c + a0 = bSS ( Z, Φ) + (1 + r ( Z, Φ) − δ) a/ν
                             Φ0 = H ( Z, Φ0 , Z 0 )

For young, working households, the decision problem is given by



vW (s, y, a, β; Z, Φ) = { max u(c) + β
                           c,a0 ≥0
                                                                ∑           π ( Z 0 | Z )π (s0 |s, Z 0 , Z )π (y0 |y)
                                                       ( Z 0 ,s0 ,y0 )∈( Z,S,Y )
                                               ×     [θvW (s0 , y0 , a0 , β; Z 0 , Φ0 ) + (1 − θ )v R ( a0 , β; Z 0 , Φ0 )]}

subject to

      c + a0 = (1 − τ ( Z; ρ) − τSS )w( Z, Φ)y [1 − (1 − ρ)1s=u ] + (1 + r ( Z, Φ) − δ) a
          Φ0 = H ( Z, Φ0 , Z 0 )

where 1s=u is the indicator function that takes the value 1 if the household is unem-
ployed, and thus labor earnings equal unemployment benefits b(y, Z, Φ) = ρw( Z, Φ)y.

Definition 1 A recursive competitive equilibrium is given by value and policy functions of
working and retired households, v j , c j , a0j , pricing functions r, w and an aggregate law of motion
H such that
16   See our companion paper, Krueger, Mitman and Perri (2016), for a more detailed discussion of the
     performance of the modified Krusell and Smith (1998) algorithm we use to solve the model.


                                                           14
     1. Given the pricing functions r, w, the tax rate given in equation (5) and the aggregate law
        of motion H, the value function v solves the household Bellman equation above and c, a0
        are the associated policy functions.

     2. Factor prices are given by

                                  w( Z, Φ) = ZFN (K ( Z, Φ), N ( Z, Φ))
                                   r ( Z, Φ) = ZFK (K ( Z, Φ), N ( Z, Φ))

     3. Budget balance in the unemployment system: equation (5) is satisfied

     4. Market clearing


                                  N ( Z, Φ) = (1 − Π Z (u))        ∑ yΠ(y)
                                                                   y ∈Y
                                                   Z
                                   K ( Z, Φ) =         adΦ

     5. The aggregate law of motion H is induced by the exogenous stochastic processes for id-
        iosyncratic and aggregate risk as well as the optimal policy function a0 for assets. See
        appendix A for an explicit statement of the law of motion for this economy.


3.6     Calibration of the Benchmark Economy

We now briefly describe how we parameterize our business cycle model with house-
hold heterogeneity.17 Since the welfare losses from severe recessions induced in part
by more frequent transitions into unemployment, we want to calibrate the model at a
quarterly frequency.


3.6.1    Aggregate Risk

In the benchmark economy, we set ω = 0; in this case TFP follows a fully exogenous
process and there is no distinction between the exogenous process for Z and TFP Z ∗ .
We model aggregate risk as a two-state process with Z ∈ { Zl , Zh } where the state Zl
denotes a potentially severe recession and Zh indicates normal times (which in our
calibration strategy will include periods of shallow recessions). The Markov chain
describing aggregate state transitions is given by
                                                       !
                                          ρl    1 − ρl
                               π=                        .
                                       1 − ρh     ρh

17   Krueger, Mitman and Perri (2016) contains a more detailed discussion and justification of these cali-
     bration choices.


                                                    15
Normalizing average productivity E( Z ) = 1, the process is characterized by three pa-
rameters, the persistence of both states ρl , ρh and the dispersion of aggregate produc-
tivity, Zl /Zh . In Krueger, Mitman and Perri (2016), we define, empirically, a severe
recession as an economic downturn in which the unemployment rate rises above 9%
at least for one quarter and measure its length by the time period for which the un-
employment rate remains above 7%. Using this operational definition of a severe re-
cession, we identify two such downturns in U.S. postwar data (1948 to 2014.III): a pe-
riod encompassing the double-dip recession of the early 1980s (1980.II-1986.II) and the
Great Recession (according to our operational definition lasting from (2009.I-2013.III).
Matching the average length of a severe recession (22 quarters) and the frequency with
which these recessions occur in our model (16.5% of all quarters) requires ρl = 0.9545
and ρh = 0.9910 and thus the transition matrix is given by:

                                                       !
                                       0.9545 0.0455
                               π=                          .
                                       0.0090 0.9910

Finally, we choose the ratio ZZl such that on average (across severe recessions), GDP
                               h
per capita falls by 7% relative to normal trend growth. Given that during severe re-
cessions in the model unemployment rises and thus labor input falls as well (as does
capital, in the medium run), this requires ZZl = 0.9614, which in turn, together with the
                                             h
normalization E( Z ) = 1, pins down Zl = 0.9676, Zh = 1.0064.


3.6.2   Technology

With the exogenous process for TFP Z determined as discussed above, output is pro-
duced according to a standard Cobb-Douglas production function:

                                    Y = ZK α N 1−α .                                  (6)

The capital share is chosen to be α = 36% and the quarterly depreciation rate to δ =
2.5%.


3.6.3   Household Demographics, Preferences, and Endowments

On the household side, we need to specify the basic demographic structure of the econ-
omy, preferences of households (with discount factor heterogeneity being its crucial
element), and their stochastic labor income endowments, including the process for un-
employment spells.


Demographics and the Life Cycle Households in the working stage of their life cycle
face a constant probability 1 − θ of retiring, and retired households face a constant


                                           16
probability 1 − ν of dying. For our quarterly model, we choose 1 − θ = 1/160, implying
an expected work life of 40 years, and 1 − ν = 1/60, with a resulting retirement phase
of 15 years in expectation.


Preferences All households are assumed to have instantaneous logarithmic utility, but
display permanent heterogeneity with respect to their impatience. Following Carroll
et al. (2015) we assume that households draw their discount factors β from a uniform
distribution with support [ β̄ − e, β̄ + e]. In our numerical implementation we discretize
this uniform distribution and assume that each household draws one of five possible
β’s with equal probability; thus B = { β 1 , ...β 5 } and Π( β) = 1/5. We choose the pa-
rameters ( β̄, e) such that the benchmark economy has a wealth Gini as in the data and
a quarterly wealth-to-output ratio of 10.26 (as targeted by Carroll et al., 2015) The re-
sulting parameters are ( β̄ = 0.9864, e = 0.0053); recall that the model is calibrated
at a quarterly frequency, and thus, as a reference the annualized discount factors of
households range from to β = 0.9265 to β = 0.9672.


Endowments: Idiosyncratic Earnings Risk Households face two sources of idiosyncratic
labor earnings risk: countercyclical unemployment risk described by the transition
matrices π (s0 |s, Z 0 , Z ) and labor productivity and thus earnings risk, conditional on
being employed, driven by the Markov transition matrix π (y0 |y).


Unemployment Risk Households can either be employed (in which case their la-
bor earnings are determined by the labor productivity process y described below), or
unemployed (in which case they receive unemployment benefits). Since employment-
unemployment transition probabilities are allowed to depend on aggregate state tran-
sitions from Z to Z 0 , unemployment risk is governed by four 2 by 2 transition matrices
π (s0 |s, Z 0 , Z ). Each of these matrices has two free parameters, but the assumption that
the aggregate unemployment rate depends only on the aggregate state imposes, for
each Z, Z 0 pair, the restriction that


            Π Z0 (u) = π (u|u, Z 0 , Z ) × Π Z (u) + π (u|e, Z 0 , Z ) × (1 − Π Z (u))   (7)

With these restrictions, each matrix is uniquely pinned down by quarterly job finding
rates π (e|u, Z 0 , Z ). In Krueger, Mitman and Perri (2016), we describe how we compute
quarterly job finding rates (as a function of aggregate state transitions) from Current
Population Survey (CPS) data. The resulting rates are




                                               17
                                                               
                                   π (e|u, Zl , Zl )       0.6622
                                                               
                                  π (e|u, Zh , Zl ) 
                                                      = 0.7780
                                                                 
                                 
                                  π (e|u, Z , Z )      0.6618                                      (8)
                                           l    h              
                                   π (e|u, Zh , Zh )       0.8110
.
In general and as expected, job finding rates are high (and job losing rates low) when
tomorrow’s aggregate state of the world is Z 0 = Zh and low if the economy falls into a
large recession, Z 0 = Zl .


Earnings Risk Conditional on Employment A plausible earnings distribution re-
quires a second source of earnings risk (or at least earnings heterogeneity). Following
a large empirical literature, we specify a statistical model of log-earnings composed of
a transitory and a persistent (potentially permanent component):


                                          log(y0 ) = p + e                                             (9)
                                                    0
                                                p       = φp + η                                      (10)
with persistence φ and persistent and transitory shocks (η, e) with variances (ση2 , σe2 ).
In Krueger, Mitman, and Perri (2016) we estimate this process for household labor
earnings after taxes (after first removing age, education and time effects) from annual
PSID data and find estimates of (φ̂, σ̂η2 , σ̂e2 ) = (0.9695, 0.0384, 0.0522). Next we translate
these estimates into a quarterly persistence and variance18 and discretize the process
into a finite state Markov chain.19


3.6.4    Government Policy

Unemployment Insurance Our model has two policy parameters: the replacement rate
ρ of the unemployment insurance system, and the payroll tax rate τSS of the social
                                                                                              1
18   We map the estimated annual persistence into quarterly persistence by setting φ = φ̂ 4 . Our main
     objective when choosing quarterly variances is that the resulting process delivers a plausible cross-
     sectional distribution of labor income. Therefore, we aim to maintain the same cross-sectional distri-
     bution of earnings at the quarterly frequency as we estimate at the annual frequency. This is achieved
     by setting the quarterly transitory variance equal to its annual counterpart and
                                                 ση2           σ̂η2
                                                         =
                                               1 − φ2        1 − φ̂2

19   We discretize the persistent component into a 7 point Markov chain using Rouwenhorst’s method.
     When taking expectations with respect to the transitory shock, we perform the integration of the
     shock through a Gauss-Hermite quadrature with 3 nodes. Thus, essentially, we discretize the con-
     tinuous AR(1) plus iid process into a discrete process with 7 × 3 = 21 states.


                                                        18
security system. We choose ρ = 50% in the benchmark economy, but also experiment
with lower numbers to assess the importance of the generosity of the social insurance
system for the size of the welfare losses and their distribution across households with
different levels of wealth.


Social Security We choose the payroll tax rate for social security as τSS = 15.3%, which,
given our demographics and other parameters of the model, implies a replacement rate
of approximately 40% on average (over the cycle).



4      The Cross-Sectional Earnings, Income, Wealth and Con-
       sumption Distribution in the Benchmark Economy

Prior to turning to the welfare results, we first want to ensure that the model is indeed
broadly consistent with the cross-sectional facts discussed in section 2.


4.1     Wealth Inequality in the Benchmark Economy

A large literature within macroeconomics with household heterogeneity proposes a
variety of mechanisms to generate an empirically plausible cross-sectional distribu-
tion of net worth.20 For example, Castaneda, Diaz-Gimenez and Rios-Rull (2003) and
Kindermann and Krueger (2015) propose the presence of very large but transient in-
come realizations not captured in PSID data. De Nardi, French and Jones (2010) and
Ameriks, Briggs, Caplin, Shapiro and Tonetti (2015) stress the role of large uninsured,
or only partially insured medical expenditure shocks in old age, De Nardi (2004) stud-
ies wealth concentration induced by the intergenerational transmission of wealth through
accidental and intended bequests. Quadrini (2000), Cagetti and De Nardi (2006), and
Buera (2009) propose models of entrepreneurs and study their importance for the right
tail of the wealth distribution, and relatedly, Benhabib, Bisin and Zhu (2011) propose
idiosyncratic shocks to investment opportunities as a main driver of wealth concentra-
tion.
In our benchmark model instead, dispersion in wealth is driven by uninsurable (be-
cause of incomplete markets) idiosyncratic unemployment and income shocks and
preference heterogeneity, as already proposed by Krusell and Smith (1998), and fur-
ther analysed by Hendricks (2007) and Carroll et al. (2015). These features interact
with a rudimentary life cycle structure and a publicly provided unemployment insur-
ance system. In Krueger, Mitman and Perri (2016) we argue that, broadly, persistent

20   This literature is extensively surveyed in De Nardi (2015), De Nardi, Fella and Yang (2015) and
     Benhabib and Bisin (2016)



                                                 19
idiosyncratic income shocks, the public provision of unemployment insurance and a
life cycle where individuals are born with little wealth are key for generating a substan-
tial share of working-age households with little or no net worth, whereas preference
heterogeneity is crucial for obtaining a model net worth distribution with a fat right
tail.
Table 3 displays the resulting wealth distribution for our benchmark model with id-
iosyncratic income risk, incomplete markets, a rudimentary life cycle structure, un-
employment insurance and heterogeneous discount factors, as well as the distribution
of net worth implied by the original Krusell-Smith (1998) model (with our calibra-
tion of aggregate and idiosyncratic employment risk), as well as the empirical cross-
sectional wealth distribution from section 2.21 Through appropriate choice of the time
discount factor(s) both model economies have the same average (over the business
cycle) capital-output ratio, and the benchmark economy displays a wealth Gini coef-
ficient in line with the micro data. All other moments of the wealth distribution were
not targeted in the calibration.
We observe that our model fits the empirical wealth distribution in the data fairly well,
both at the bottom and at the top of the distribution. It captures the fact that house-
holds constituting the bottom two quintiles of the wealth distribution hardly have any
wealth, and that the top wealth quintile holds more than 80% of all net worth in the
U.S. economy. We also acknowledge that the model makes the wealth upper middle
class (quintile 4) somewhat too wealthy and somewhat misses the wealth concentra-
tion at the very top of the distribution. Specifically, in the data the top 1% wealth holders
account for over 30% of overall net worth in the economy, whereas the corresponding
figure in the model is 14%. On the other hand, households between the 90th and the
99th percentile of the net worth distribution account for about 37% of wealth in the
data, but 44% in the model.
Finally, table 3 reproduces the well-known result from Krusell and Smith’s (1998) orig-
inal paper that unemployment risk and incomplete markets alone are incapable of
generating sufficient wealth dispersion. The problem relative to the data is two-fold:
households at the top of the wealth distribution are not nearly wealthy enough, and
households at the bottom of the distribution hold significantly too much wealth in the
model, relative to SCF or PSID micro data.22 As a summary measure, whereas the
wealth Gini in the data is close to 0.8 in the working age-population, it is only 0.35 in

21   Recall that in the data, we restrict attention to households with at least one member of working age.
     Consequently, when we report cross-sectional statistics from the benchmark model (which includes
     a retirement phase), we restrict attention to households in the working stages of their life.
22   In Krueger, Mitman and Perri (2016), we argue that it is the latter feature (the wealth holdings of the
     wealth-poor) that is responsible for the finding that in our benchmark model the decline in aggregate
     consumption in the Great Recession is significantly more pronounced than in the original Krusell
     and Smith (1998) model, which in turn approximates the aggregate consumption dynamics in a
     representative agent model quite closely.



                                                     20
                          Table 3: Net Worth Distributions: Data v/s Models

                                                Data                         Models
                % Share held by:         PSID, 06    SCF, 07              Bench     KS
                Q1                            -0.9          -0.2             0.3       6.9
                Q2                             0.8           1.2             1.2      11.7
                Q3                             4.4           4.6             4.7      16.0
                Q4                            13.0          11.9            16.0      22.3
                Q5                            82.7          82.5            77.8      43.0

                90 − 95                       13.7          11.1            17.9      10.5
                95 − 99                       22.8          25.3            26.0      11.8
                T1%                           30.9          33.5            14.2       5.0

                Gini                          0.77          0.78            0.77      0.35


the original Krusell-Smith model.23


4.2     Income and Consumption at Different Points along the Wealth
        Distribution

The benchmark model delivers a plausible cross-sectional wealth distribution. In this
section, we assess whether it is also consistent with the basic empirical facts concern-
ing the joint income-wealth-consumption distribution. Table 4 sorts household by net
worth and reports the share of earnings, disposable income, consumption expenditures
and the expenditure rates for the five quintiles of the wealth distribution, for both the
data (as already contained in table 2) and the benchmark model.
Overall, the model fares quite well in replicating the joint distributions of these vari-
ables. As in the data, households in the lowest two wealth quintiles hold a significant
share of aggregate earnings, income and (crucially for welfare) consumption (close to
18%), although the share is still somewhat too low relative to the data, where the con-
sumption share of the bottom 40% of the wealth distribution amounts to 24%.24

23   For the entire population, the wealth Gini is approximately 3-5 percentage points higher, in the data
     (and in both data sets) as well as in the benchmark model.
24   In the Krusell-Smith economy with only earnings risk, which also delivers a plausible share of in-
     come and earnings held by the lowest wealth quintiles, the consumption share of the bottom 40% is
     only approximately 16%. Heterogeneity in time discount factor generates impatient households that
     end up holding little wealth (and thus are located in the lowest wealth quintile) but consume at a
     high rate, because of their impatience.



                                                     21
The benchmark model also displays consumption rates (out of disposable income) that
are strongly decreasing with net worth up until the fourth wealth quintile, although the
wealth gradient is not quite as steep as the model. For this success of the model, cap-
turing the life cycle at least in a rudimentary form as we have done is crucial, since the
retirement saving motive slows down the consumption spending of households at the
top of the wealth distribution.25 However, in a model where asset accumulation is fun-
damentally driven by precautionary motives, eventually, as households become very
wealth-rich, this motive subsides and they consume a large(r) share of their disposable
income, in contrast to the data.

                       Table 4: Selected Variables by Net Worth: Data v/s Models

                                       % Share of:                                       % Expend. Rate
               Earnings            Disp Y              Expend.                  Earnings            Disp Y
     NW Q      Data       Mod      Data      Mod       Data      Mod            Data       Mod      Data      Mod
     Q1          9.8        6.5      8.7       6.0        11.3     6.6           95.1      96.5      90.0     90.4
     Q2         12.9       11.8     11.2      10.5        12.4    11.3           79.3      90.3      76.4     86.9
     Q3         18.0       18.2     16.7      16.6        16.8    16.6           77.5      86.0      69.8     81.1
     Q4         22.3       25.5     22.1      24.3        22.4    23.6           82.3      87.3      69.6     78.5
     Q5         37.0       38.0     41.2      42.7        37.2    42.0           83.0     104.5      62.5     79.6
               Correlation with net worth
                0.26       0.46     0.42      0.67        0.20    0.76


After having verified that the model is indeed consistent with the main cross-sectional
facts from the PSID data, we now use it as a measurement tool to quantify the welfare
losses from a great recession.



5         The Welfare Cost of Great Recessions

Given the heterogeneity in the consumption response to the aggregate downturn doc-
umented above, it is plausible to conjecture that the welfare losses from this adverse
macroeconomic event are very unevenly distributed as well. In this section, we docu-
ment that this is indeed the case.
25   In an infinite horizon version of the model without a retirement phase, the fifth wealth quintile con-
     sistently has the highest consumption rate out of earnings and disposable income. In this version,
     households accumulate wealth exclusively to smooth bad income realizations, and once they have
     accumulated significant wealth for this purpose they consume at a high rate, especially when earn-
     ings and thus incomes are low.




                                                     22
5.1     Measurement of the Welfare Cost: A Useful Decomposition

5.1.1    Household-Specific Welfare Losses

In general we calculate the welfare losses from a particular transition (aggregate or
idiosyncratic) as the permanent percentage increase in consumption that a working-
age household would require so that its welfare in the transition is the same as the
welfare when the transition does not happen. In particular let gss0 ,ZZ0 (y, a, β) be the
required percentage consumption compensation for a household of type (y, a, β) for
an aggregate transition from Z to Z 0 and at the same time an idiosyncratic transition
from s to s0 . For a given current aggregate capital stock K prior to the recession26 this
quantity is given by:


                                         (1 − θβ)(1 − νβ)
                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                     0            0
                                                                                                                         
gss0 ,ZZ0 (y, a, β) = 100 ∗ exp                                       vW (s, y, a, β; Z, K ) − vW (s , y, a, β, Z , K )           −1
                                         1 − νβ + β(1 − θ )
                                                                                                           (11)
The welfare cost is clearly individual state specific, and our primary interest is in the
extent to which its size differs across households, as well as in the dimensions of house-
hold heterogeneity that determine this size of the loss.27 Of specific interest is the loss
for individuals of type (u, y, a ≈ 0), that is, the welfare loss from a recession for an un-
employed household with close to zero wealth. We are interested in transitions from
normal times, Z = Zh to a severe recession, Z 0 = Zl . In the aggregate, a larger share
of households are unemployed in a recession, and thus it is instructive to measure the
welfare losses of those households that lose their job as the economy transits into a re-
cession. This loss of moving from s = e to s0 = u when the aggregate economy transits
from Z = Zh to Z 0 = Zl is then given by geu,Zh Zl , using the notation developed above.
Note that this welfare cost captures the fact (by using the value functions and thus
the underlying transition matrices with positive persistence) that conditional on falling
into a recession the economy is likely to remain there for an extended period of time (in
expectation, 22 quarters), and that, conditional on not experiencing a recession today,
the economy is also unlikely to experience one tomorrow (since the good aggregate
state is highly persistent as well).


5.1.2    An Aggregate Welfare Loss Measure

Since the welfare loss depends on the individual characteristics of the households, it
is also informative to aggregate these losses in some form, in order to arrive at an ag-
26   Recall that we approximate, in the computational algorithm, the cross-sectional wealth distribution
     by its first moment. We choose the capital stock prevailing in the economy after a long sequence of
     good Z realizations. Our results are not sensitive to choosing different values of K in the ergodic set.
27   See appendix B for the derivation of equation 11


                                                     23
gregate measure of the welfare losses. Suppose households are randomly placed into
the pre-recession cross-sectional distribution over individual characteristics. Under
the veil of ignorance of not knowing where in the distribution one would be placed,
we ask by what percentage would lifetime consumption of everyone need to be in-
creased to be compensated from the loss of falling into a recession. Such a measure
holds the cross-sectional distribution constant and only changes the aggregate state.
However, since the fraction of unemployed households increases in the aggregate re-
cession state, expected lifetime utility in the recession event has to be calculated under
a new cross-sectional distribution that scales up the share of households in the unem-
ployment state.
Denote by ΦW,h the pre-recession working-age cross-sectional distribution over indi-
vidual characteristics, and by ΦW,h,l the same distribution, but with the mass of em-
ployed households scaled down, and the mass of unemployed households scaled up,
so as to be consistent with the increase in the aggregate unemployment rate in the
great recession.28 Using the same calculations as above we can then derive an aggre-
gate measure of the welfare losses from the Great Recession as:


                        (1 − θβ)(1 − νβ)
                                              Z                                 Z                                  
ḡ = 100 ∗ exp                                           vW (s, Zh )dΦW,h −              vW (s, Zl )dΦW,h,l        −1
                        1 − νβ + β(1 − θ )
                                                                                                                   (12)


5.1.3    Decomposition of Household-Specific Welfare Losses

To aid with the interpretation of the results and the sources by which they emerge,
the following decomposition of individual welfare losses into an aggregate and an
idiosyncratic component is useful:


              1 + geu,Zh Zl (y, a, β) = (1 + gee,Zh Zl (y, a, β)) × (1 + geu,Zl Zl (y, a, β))                      (13)

or (taking logs and approximating log(1 + g) ≈ g)


                        geu,Zh Zl (y, a, β) ≈ gee,Zh Zl (y, a, β) + geu,Zl Zl (y, a, β)                            (14)

That is, the welfare loss from losing a job as the economy turns bad is (approximately)
the sum of the welfare loss of an aggregate downturn for a person that remains em-
ployed and the welfare loss of becoming unemployed in bad times.29 For households

28   Recall that the incidence of unemployment in the model, by assumption, is orthogonal to all other
     household characteristics.
29   An alternative decomposition leading to the same qualitative results as described below is given by

                             geu,Zh Zl (y, a, β) ≈ geu,Zh Zh (y, a, β) + guu,Zh Zl (y, a, β).                      (15)


                                                         24
not changing their idiosyncratic employment status the welfare loss from the recession
is simply the aggregate component, as defined above. Also note that on net, changes in
unemployment status are small: only approximately 3% more households are unem-
ployed in the recession than in normal times, and thus the aggregate welfare measure
behind the veil of ignorance defined in equation (12) are expected to closely mirror
the aggregate component of the individual welfare losses in the decomposition above
(which will turn out to not vary too much across households with different character-
istics).


5.2     Benchmark Results

In figure 1 we plot the welfare losses from the recession geu,Zh Zl (y, a, β) against assets
for four different (y, β) combinations: the most impatient households with discount
factor β 1 , households with the median discount factor β 3 , households with lowest in-
come y1 and households with median income y4 .30
We make the following observations: first, experiencing a Great Recession and a con-
current job loss is very painful for many households, with welfare losses ranging
from 2% to 5% of lifetime consumption. Second, these losses are very unequally dis-
tributed between wealthy and poor households. Holding other household charac-
teristics (such as impatience and permanent income) constant, the additional losses
wealth-poor households sustain relative to wealth-rich households is on the order of 2
percentage points, and the wealth gradient is quite steep at the low end of the wealth
distribution.
Third, losing a job as the economy slips into a recession is significantly more painful if
the job one held was a good one: households with higher current y suffer larger losses.
The welfare losses are also distributed unequally across households that differ in their
discount factors. For the same level of income, the welfare loss is significantly higher
for more impatient households (β = 1 in figure 1, corresponding to the most impatient
households in the economy) relative to households with the average discount factor
(β = 3 in the figure). This can be explained by the high persistence of severe reces-
sions. Since these recessions are very persistent, both the contemporaneous drop in
income from being unemployed, and the fact that the households expect to face lower
income and increased unemployment risk while the recession persists, disproportion-
ately affect more impatient households, who value less the higher expected income
when the economy emerges from the recession. Broadly, for impatient households the
short run business cycle is the main determinant of lifetime utility, whereas more pa-
tient households place more weight on the remaining lifetime that, in expectation, is


30   Recall that we discretize the persistent income state process into a 7 state Markov chain. The plots
     shown pertain to households that do not experience a (positive or negative) transitory shock in the
     current period. Results for the most patient households are very similar to the ones with β 3 .


                                                   25
      Figure 1: Welfare Losses geu,Zh Zl (y, a, β) from Great Recession by Asset Holdings



                                        8
                                                                                   g                    (y=4,-=3)
                                                                                       eu,Z ,Z
                                                                                           h        l
                                                                                   geu,Z       ,Z
                                                                                                        (y=1,-=3)
                                        7                                                  h        l
                                                                                   geu,Z       ,Z
                                                                                                        (y=4,-=1)
                                                                                           h        l
                                                                                   geu,Z       ,Z
                                                                                                        (y=1,-=1)
                                        6                                                  h        l
           Consumption Equivalent (%)




                                        5


                                        4


                                        3


                                        2


                                        1


                                        0
                                            0   2   4   6   8     10     12   14   16                   18          20
                                                                Assets




spent in normal times.
In figure 2 we now decompose, using equation (14) the welfare losses into an aggregate
and an idiosyncratic component, both for households with the median earnings shock
y4 and median β = β 3 and for the most impatient households with the lowest earnings
shock, (y = y1 , β = β 1 ). Abstracting from approximation error (which is nontrivial
only for households with close to zero assets), the overall welfare loss is the sum of
both components. We observe that both components are large and decline with asset
holdings, but much more so for the idiosyncratic component.
The figure also shows that in the benchmark economy, the aggregate component of the
welfare losses (i.e. the welfare losses of households that do not lose their job at the start
of the recession) is dominant and amounts to approximately 2% of consumption, with
fairly modest variation across asset holdings and other household characteristics.
Why is the aggregate component so large? Recall that gee,Zh Zl is the welfare loss from
falling into a severe recession conditional on the household not losing its job. This loss
partially comes from lower aggregate wages (and lower returns on capital for those
with positive assets), but is to a large degree the result of higher future unemployment
risk. Recall that we study very persistent recessions (lasting on average 22 quarters)


                                                                26
        Figure 2: Decomposition of Welfare Losses into geu,Zh Zh (y, a, β) and gee,Zh Zl (y, a, β)


                                                       High -                                                                                 Low -
                                           8                                                                                      8
                                                          geu,Z       ,Z
                                                                               (y=4,-=3)                                                         geu,Z       ,Z
                                                                                                                                                                      (y=1,-=1)
                                                                  h        l                                                                             h        l
                                                          gee,Z       ,Z
                                                                         (y=4,-=3)                                                               gee,Z       ,Z
                                                                                                                                                                      (y=1,-=1)
                                           7                      h        l                                                      7                      h        l
                                                          geu,Z ,Z (y=4,-=3)                                                                     geu,Z ,Z (y=1,-=1)
                                                                  l    l                                                                                 l    l


                                           6                                                                                      6
              Consumption Equivalent (%)




                                                                                                     Consumption Equivalent (%)
                                           5                                                                                      5


                                           4                                                                                      4


                                           3                                                                                      3


                                           2                                                                                      2


                                           1                                                                                      1


                                           0                                                                                      0
                                               0   5     10                    15          20                                         0   5     10                    15          20
                                                       Assets                                                                                 Assets




and that the risk of entering unemployment during a recession is substantially higher
than in normal times. Thus, a big part of the aggregate component of the welfare losses
stems from higher future idiosyncratic risk, which also affects households that do not
lose their job at the onset of the recession.
The idiosyncratic component captures the direct impact of losing one’s job at the on-
set of the recession, triggering immediate earnings losses (of 50% given the size of the
unemployment insurance system). For households with little or no wealth, these earn-
ings losses translate directly into current consumption losses of similar magnitude, and
thus the idiosyncratic component is more potent for households at the low end of the
asset distribution. Note, however, that unemployment spells are expected to be short
(certainly relative to the length of the recession) and thus the idiosyncratic component
contributes at most half (for impatient households with little income and assets) of the
total welfare losses.31
Now that we have characterized how the welfare losses are distributed across individ-
ual states, we can use the distribution of households across these states at the start of
31   In our set-up, households do not suffer from persistent earnings losses upon re-employment. Intro-
     ducing this empirically plausible feature (see, for example, Davis and Von Wachter, 2011) into the
     model would magnify the idiosyncratic – but also the aggregate – component of the welfare losses.


                                                                                                27
the recession, together with the implied transition during recession, to calculate aggre-
gate welfare losses, as defined in equation (12), and to calculate two summary statistics
of the impact of the recession, that is the fraction of households that experience wel-
fare losses bigger than 3% and 4% of lifetime consumption as a consequence of the
recession. These statistics are reported on line 1 of table 5. Note that aggregate losses
amount to 2.16% of lifetime consumption, under the veil of ignorance of the position
in the cross-sectional wealth distribution, and thus, as expected, are similar to the wel-
fare losses of households that do not lose their job in the recession (the lines labeled
gee,Zh Zl (y, a, β) in figure 2). This is simply because these households represent, even in
a recession, the majority of the population. Note, however, that there is a non trivial
mass of households that experience significantly larger welfare losses, and those are
the low wealth households that happen to lose their job during the recession. Line
1 of table 5 shows that almost 2% of households experience losses bigger than 3% of
lifetime consumption and 0.3% of households have losses larger than 4% of lifetime
consumption.
Overall, we conclude that in our baseline model, the welfare impact of a large down-
turn is significant for most households, but with heterogeneity in the magnitude of the
losses. In the remaining of the paper we explore how the magnitude of these losses
changes when we change features of the model economy.

             Table 5: Summary Statistics for Welfare Losses from Great Recessions

                                         Aggregated Welf. Loss        % of hh’s with loss
                                           (% of lifetime cons.)          >3%       >4%
   1.   Benchmark                                           2.16         1.9%       0.3%
   2.   KS (low wealth heterog.)                            1.60         0.0%       0.0%
   3.   Low UI                                              2.14         3.1%       1.7%
   4.   UI shock                                            2.24         7.5%       2.7%
   5.   Cons. Externality                                   2.51         6.0%       0.8%
   6.   Cons. Externality+UI Shock                          2.10         9.3%       3.2%



5.3     Welfare Costs of the Great Recession and the Wealth Distribution

In this subsection, we argue that the cross-sectional wealth distribution is a crucial
determinant of the aggregate welfare losses from the great recession. We do so by
showing that these aggregate losses are significantly larger in the benchmark economy
that features realistic wealth inequality than they are in the Krusell-Smith economy
where wealth dispersion is much more limited.
In figure 3 we display the cross-sectional wealth distribution and the welfare losses
(the aggregate component and the total loss) for the original Krusell-Smith economy

                                              28
Figure 3: Welfare Losses and Wealth Distribution, Krusell-Smith (left panel) and Benchmark
(right panel) Economies

                                                                                                                                                    - 3 , y4
                             10                                                                                            10




                              8                                                                                             8
                                                                                             0.3                                                                                             0.3
      Welfare Loss (CEV %)




                                                                                                    Welfare Loss (CEV %)
                                                                                             0.25                                                                                            0.25
                              6                                                                                             6
                                                                         Employed, Z=ZL                                                                                  Employed, Z=ZL
                                                                                             0.2                                                                                             0.2
                                                                         Unemployed, Z=ZL                                                                                Unemployed, Z=ZL

                              4                                                                                             4
                                                                                             0.15                                                                                            0.15


                                                                                             0.1                                                                                             0.1
                              2                                                                                             2

                                                                                             0.05                                                                                            0.05


                              0                                                               0                             0                                                                 0
                                  0   2   4   6   8    10      12   14     16     18        20                                  0   2   4   6   8    10        12   14     16     18        20
                                                      Wealth                                                                                        Wealth




(left panel) and our benchmark economy (right panel), for households with a median
persistent income state and a median time discount factor. Thus, the lines in the right
panel of this figure replicates the information contained in the left panel of figure 2.
The first observation we make, comparing the left and right panels, is that for a given
amount of wealth, the welfare losses from the recession for those losing a job are actu-
ally substantially larger in the original Krusell-Smith economy than in our benchmark
economy (compare the solid lines in both subpanels, with the units being given on the
left y-axis).32 This is especially true for households with little or no wealth, and is pri-
marily due to the fact that the KS economy has (virtually) no unemployment insurance
whereas our benchmark economy has substantial unemployment insurance.
However, in the left panel, the wealth distribution (scale on the right y-axis) has virtu-
ally no mass at the low end where the welfare losses are largest. The right panel fea-
tures lower welfare losses for wealth-poorer households, but a lot of probability mass
at the wealth levels where the losses are the largest.33 This in turn crucially shapes
the size of the aggregated welfare losses from recession according to the measure con-
structed in equation (12): as noted above, it is 2.16% in the benchmark economy but
"only" 1.60% in the Krusell-Smith economy (see line 2 of table 5). The additional loss

32   The aggregate component (dashed line), which measures the welfare losses from the recession for
     those not losing a job, is quite similar in both economies, but slightly larger for the most impatient
     households in the benchmark economy, for whom the recession period constitute a more important
     component of expected discounted lifetime utility.
33   Both economies have the same wealth-to-income ratio. We truncate the plots at a wealth level 20
     times average income, but the wealth distribution for the benchmark economy has fat tails (and is
     well approximated by a Pareto distribution) and extends far to the right, whereas the corresponding
     distribution for the KS economy is approximately log-normal in its right tail and thus has little mass
     beyond 20 times average income.


                                                                                             29
of more than half of 1% of lifetime consumption may serve as a quantitative summary
measure for the importance of realistic household heterogeneity for the welfare loss of
severe recession question we address in this paper.

Figure 4: Histogram of Welfare Losses, Krusell-Smith (left panel) and Benchmark (right panel)
Economies

                                0.3                                                                                 0.07



                                                                                                                    0.06
                               0.25


                                                                                                                    0.05
      Fraction of Households




                                                                                           Fraction of Households
                                0.2

                                                                                                                    0.04

                               0.15

                                                                                                                    0.03

                                0.1
                                                                                                                    0.02


                               0.05
                                                                                                                    0.01



                                 0                                                                                    0
                                 -4.5   -4   -3.5     -3       -2.5       -2   -1.5   -1                              -4.5   -4   -3.5     -3       -2.5       -2   -1.5   -1
                                             Consumption Equivalent (%) Loss                                                      Consumption Equivalent (%) Loss




Figure 4 provides a different perspective on the same phenomenon. It depicts, again
for both economies, the histogram of welfare losses.34 It shows the much larger left tail
of welfare consequences from the great recession in the benchmark economy, where
more than two thirds of households lose at least 2%, close to 2% of households lose
more than 3%, and 0.3% of working age households lose more than 4% of permanent
consumption. In the KS economy (see line 2 of table 5), in contrast, the share of house-
holds experiencing welfare losses in excess of 3% is negligible (about 3/100 of 1%),
exactly because in this economy, households save away from the low wealth levels
entailing large welfare losses from economic downturns.


5.4                               Welfare Costs of Great Recessions and Unemployment Insurance

The previous analysis was based on a model with generous unemployment insurance
so that even for households that lose their jobs in a recession the immediate income
losses constitute 50% of their potential earnings. In this section, we document how the
impact of the size of the UI system on our findings. We are especially interested in the
extent to which our previous result, that the aggregate component of the welfare losses

34   Even in bad economic times, some households transit from unemployment to employment and thus
     would have, according to our measures, a negative idiosyncratic and total welfare loss from the
     recession. We show a histogram based on net flows, reflecting the aggregate component of the losses
     for 97% of the population and the sum of the idiosyncratic and the aggregate component for 3% of
     the population, where 3% is the difference in the unemployment rate between the normal and the
     recession aggregate state of the economy.


                                                                                      30
is quantitatively more important than the idiosyncratic component, hinges on the fact
that generous UI benefits soften the latter.
To do so, we now compare our previous results with those in an economy with lit-
tle unemployment insurance, concretely, with a replacement rate of 10%. Note that,
as the previous two subsections have already indicated, the generosity of unemploy-
ment insurance will have a significant impact on the welfare losses from the recession
for households with a given level of wealth. For the aggregate component of indi-
vidual welfare as well as aggregated (across households) measures of welfare, it will
also be crucially important how the presence of UI benefits affects the cross-sectional
distribution of wealth in the economy itself. For this reason we perform two distinct
experiments. The first (labeled low UI) simply recomputes the benchmark economy
with ρ = 10%. Note that in this case, the wealth distribution before the recession will
be very different than the one in the benchmark economy, because households, antic-
ipating the higher loss of income in case of unemployment will be more reluctant to
have low wealth. Welfare losses for a given state (and for households with median time
discount factor β = β 3 ) are depicted in the middle panel of figure 5, while aggregate
statistics are reported on line 3 of table 5.

                                 Figure 5: Welfare Decomposition in Benchmark, Low UI and UI shock

                                              Benchmark                                                                  Low UI                                             UI Shock
                                      8                                                                          8                                                  8
                                              geu,Z       ,Z
                                                                   (y=4,-=3)
                                                      h        l
                                              g                    (y=4,-=3)
                                      7           ee,Z ,Z                                                        7                                                  7
                                                      h        l
                                              geu,Z ,Z (y=4,-=3)
                                                      l    l


                                      6                                                                          6                                                  6
         Consumption Equivalent (%)




                                                                                    Consumption Equivalent (%)




                                                                                                                                       Consumption Equivalent (%)




                                      5                                                                          5                                                  5


                                      4                                                                          4                                                  4


                                      3                                                                          3                                                  3


                                      2                                                                          2                                                  2


                                      1                                                                          1                                                  1


                                      0                                                                          0                                                  0
                                          0           10                       20                                    0     10     20                                    0      10      20
                                                   Assets                                                                Assets                                              Assets


The first key observation from the middle panel of figure 5 is that the welfare losses
from losing a job in a Great Recession roughly double for low wealth-households, and
now approximate 8% rather than 4% of lifetime consumption (we display results for

                                                                                                                          31
median earnings and impatient households). For households with wealth exceeding
average wealth in the economy, the losses are still substantially larger with little unem-
ployment insurance, but the difference is not nearly as sizeable.
Second, whereas the welfare losses of households that do not lose their job at the onset
of the recession remains quantitatively roughly unchanged, with small ρ unemploy-
ment spells themselves are much more costly with little social insurance against them,
especially for households with little financial wealth coming into the recession. As a
result, the idiosyncratic component of the welfare loss now dominates in the low ρ
economy, especially for households with no or very little net worth. In terms of aggre-
gate statistics, line 3 of table 5 reveals several noteworthy features. First, the aggregate
welfare losses are virtually unchanged, despite the large change in the welfare losses
state by state, and across the wealth distribution. The reason is that the two changes
offset each other in the computation of aggregated welfare losses. The decline in UI
implies that in some states (low wealth), the welfare losses will be much higher, but
the endogenous response of households implies that there will be much fewer house-
holds in those states. Notice, though, that despite this, in the low UI economy more
households experience large losses (i.e. 3.1% of households, v/s 1.9% of households
in the benchmark, experience losses larger than 3% of lifetime consumption). This is
because the accumulation of wealth can provide only partial insurance against unem-
ployment shocks and thus, under the low UI regime, there some unlucky households
will experience large income losses that will translate into larger welfare losses.
Our second experiment (labeled UI shock, see the right panel of figure 5) considers a
scenario in which unemployment benefits are cut unexpectedly from 50% to 10% ex-
actly as the economy enters the recession (and remain low from that point on). The
difference relative to the first scenario is that both the benchmark and the counterfac-
tual scenario share the same cross-sectional wealth distribution coming into the reces-
sion. The right panel of figure 5 displays the results from this thought experiment,
and aggregate statistics are reported on line 4 of table 5. Since the two low-UI thought
experiments that distinguish the middle and right panels in figure 5 differ only in the
initial wealth distributions prior to the Great Recession (and thus in the evolution of
the wealth distribution through the recession), they affect households only through
differential dynamics of factor prices. Households that lose their job are less affected
by factor prices (wages), hence their welfare losses(the lines labeled geu,Zh Zl (y, a, β) )
are very similar across panels. Households that do not lose their job are more affected
by factor prices, and thus their welfare losses (the lines labelled gee,Zh Zl (y, a, β) ) differ




                                              32
more noticeable across the two experiments.35
Overall, the largest difference between the two thought experiments is the wealth dis-
tribution with which the economy enters the recession, and this distinction is primarily
responsible for the different magnitude of the numbers in lines 3 and 4 of table 5. Note
that in the UI shock experiment, a much larger fraction of households experience large
welfare losses (7.5% of households in this case experience welfare losses larger than
3%), because these households are caught by surprise by the fall in unemployment
insurance benefits and did not accumulate sufficient wealth to effectively smooth con-
sumption in case of a job loss.
Overall the main conclusion from this section is that changes in unemployment insur-
ance significantly affect the distribution of welfare losses from a recession, much more
so when households are caught by surprise by these changes. Finally, we wish to note
that it is important to keep in mind two things when interpreting these welfare results.
First, they do not represent a comprehensive normative assessment of the desirabil-
ity of public unemployment insurance, but rather simply document how the welfare
losses from recessions vary with the size of such a system. Second, and relatedly, given
that employment-unemployment transitions are exogenous, the size of the unemploy-
ment insurance system does not impact individual incentives of seeking and keeping
jobs. In addition, this analysis abstracts from the impact unemployment insurance has
on the incentives of firms to create jobs. Recent research indicates that these distortions
could potentially be large.36


5.5     Welfare Costs of Severe Recessions when Output is Demand De-
        termined

Krueger, Mitman, and Perri (2016) shows that in an economy in which aggregate out-
put is partially determined because aggregate TFP depends on aggregate consump-
tion, social insurance in general, and unemployment insurance specifically, stabilizes

35   Note that especially in the economy with surprise UI cuts, the line gee,Zh Zl (y, a, β) is U-shaped in
     household wealth (and exceeds the idiosyncratic component for wealthy households). These house-
     holds derive most of their income from capital income, and the returns to capital fall in the reces-
     sion because of the fall in TFP. This effect is present in both thought experiments. Furthermore, in
     the economy in which UI benefits unexpectedly fall (run out) and remain low, household wealth
     is suboptimally low (relative to the level of social insurance). Households respond with increased
     precautionary saving, pushing down rates of returns further. Thus, the welfare losses arising from
     aggregate factor price movements for wealthy households are more substantial (and the U-shaped
     nature of the aggregate component more severe) in the economy in which UI benefits run out by
     surprise.
36   See, for example, Hagedorn et. al. (2013) and Hagedorn, Manovskii and Mitman (2015) who find
     large negative effects of unemployment benefit extensions on vacancy creation and employment,
     respectively, and Mitman and Rabinovich (2014) who argue that unemployment benefit extensions
     can explain the "jobless recovery" that followed the Great Recession.


                                                    33
the aggregate economy, in addition to providing social insurance against idiosyncratic
unemployment shocks.37 Thus, one would expect that in such an economy, differences
in the welfare losses between an economy with low and one with high unemployment
insurance replacement rate are especially large, and that the aggregate component of
the welfare losses is responsible for this additional difference. We now investigate this
conjecture in greater detail.
To do so, we extend the model to render aggregate output partially demand-determined.
To achieve this, we assume that TFP Z ∗ is now a function of aggregate consumption:


                                             Z ∗ = ZC ω ,                                         (16)

where ω measures the strength of the aggregate demand externality. Recent work by
Bai et al. (2012), Huo and Rios-Rull (2013), and Kaplan and Menzio (2016) provides
micro foundations for an aggregate productivity process of this form.
As described in greater detail in Krueger, Mitman and Perri (2016), our calibration
strategy is to use actual data on TFP by Fernald (2012) to calibrate the dispersion of the
exogenous TFP process and then choose the externality parameter ω = 0.30 such that
output in the demand externality economy is as volatile as in the benchmark economy
studied thus far. The resulting exogenous TFP fluctuations are significantly smaller,
 Zl                       Zl
Zh = 0.9781, instead of Zh = 0.9614 as required by the benchmark economy. All other
parameters are kept at their original values. The main purpose of the analysis there
is to measure the additional benefit unemployment insurance has in the economy by
stabilizing aggregate consumption demand and thus aggregate output.
Here, first we simply document the importance for the welfare losses of the amplifi-
cation of aggregate shocks in the economy with partially demand-determined output.
Line 5 in table 5 reports the aggregate welfare statistics for the economy with the con-
sumption externality. Note that, even if the economy with consumption externality
has, by construction, the same output volatility as the benchmark economy, the ag-
gregate welfare losses in the former economy are larger (2.51% versus 2.16% in the
benchmark). This economy has a stronger internal propagation mechanism and thus
recessions are more persistent, and have more severe welfare consequences.
But the more interesting question that we wish to study with this version of the model
is how the presence of the consumption externality (and thus the fact that output is
partially consumption-demand determined) changes the impact of the generosity of
unemployment insurance on the welfare losses from severe recessions. To analyze this
issue, we now repeat, in the demand externality economy, the thought experiment of
reducing, by surprise, the replacement rate of the unemployment insurance system
from 50% to 10%. The results are shown in figure 6 and on line 6 of table 5.

37   See McKay and Reis (2016) for a comprehensive analysis of the role of social insurance policies as
     automatic stabilizers of the macro economy.


                                                  34
Figure 6: Welfare Decomposition of Great Recession: Demand Externality Economy with UI
Shock


                                                     C!                                                                                    C ! , UI Shock
                                        8                                                                                      8
                                                       geu,Z       ,Z
                                                                            (y=4,-=3)                                                             geu,Z       ,Z
                                                                                                                                                                       (y=4,-=3)
                                                               h        l                                                                                 h        l
                                                       gee,Z       ,Z
                                                                      (y=4,-=3)                                                                   gee,Z       ,Z
                                                                                                                                                                       (y=4,-=3)
                                        7                      h        l                                                      7                          h        l
                                                       geu,Z ,Z (y=4,-=3)                                                                         geu,Z ,Z (y=4,-=3)
                                                               l    l                                                                                     l    l


                                        6                                                                                      6
           Consumption Equivalent (%)




                                                                                                  Consumption Equivalent (%)
                                        5                                                                                      5


                                        4                                                                                      4


                                        3                                                                                      3


                                        2                                                                                      2


                                        1                                                                                      1


                                        0                                                                                      0
                                            0   5     10                    15          20                                         0   5        10                     15          20
                                                    Assets                                                                                    Assets




In the benchmark economy, the welfare losses from the Great Recession increased
sharply when unemployment benefits were cut, and the idiosyncratic part of the wel-
fare losses started to dominate the overall welfare cost calculations, whereas the aggre-
gate component remained broadly constant.
In the demand externality economy, the first finding persists. First, the welfare losses
increase sharply for households with little net worth: they approximately double with
a surprise cut in the replacement rate, and the increase is driven by an increase in the
idiosyncratic component of the losses. This is reflected in the second and third columns
of line 6 in table 5: when the economy is hit with the UI shock, the fraction of big wel-
fare losers increases, just as it did when we introduce the UI shock in the benchmark
economy. These big losers are households that lose their job and have low assets.
More surprising is that the welfare losses of households that do not lose their job (the
lines gee,Zh Zl (y, a, β) ) become slightly smaller for median (y, β) households. This find-
ing appears to run counter to the common intuition that in the demand externality
economy, unemployment insurance stabilizes aggregate output, consumption, TFP
and thus individual incomes. It also suggests that short-run demand stabilization,
even if successful, need not have the intended beneficial welfare consequences. Indeed,


                                                                                             35
comparing line 5 and 6 of table 5 shows that in the consumption externality economy
the UI shock reduces the aggregate welfare losses of the recession from 2.51% to 2.1%
(whereas in the benchmark economy the UI shock makes aggregate losses larger).
Figure 7 provides the explanation for this seemingly contradictory finding. It plots,
for both the benchmark and the externality economies, the difference in the evolution of
wages and rates of return after a recession shock with high, relative to low unemploy-
ment insurance benefits. To interpret the units, consider the right panel pertaining to
the externality economy. It shows that right after the recession hits, wages and rates of
return are 0.75 basis points lower in the scenario with surprise unemployment insur-
ance cuts than in the scenario without such cuts. However, as time passes, wages in
the former scenario exceed that of the latter scenario, and quite strongly so. Why?

                                            Figure 7: Impulse Responses of Factor Prices



                               #10-3        Benchmark                                        #10-3          C!
                          5                                                             5




                          0                                                             0
         PP Difference




                                                                       PP Difference




                          -5                                                            -5




                                                             W
                                                             R
                         -10                                                           -10
                               0       10      20       30       40                          0       10     20      30   40
                                        Time (quarters)                                               Time (quarters)




When UI benefits by surprise run out when the recession hits, households (especially
those at the low end of the wealth distribution) find themselves in a situation with sub-
optimally low wealth levels, relative to the income risk they are facing, going forward.
The behavioral response is to very substantially increase savings and cut consump-
tion, especially for households that have not yet lost their job. On impact, as discussed
above, aggregate consumption falls, and so do TFP and wages in the externality econ-



                                                                      36
omy.38 However, the precautionary saving translates into a large increase in the pro-
ductive capital stock in the medium run, and thus a recovery in wages that is faster
than in the economy without UI cuts. This effect is present in both the benchmark and
the externality economy. However, in the externality economy, the medium run recov-
ery in wages and household consumption driven by a larger capital stock translates
into an increase in TFP and thus a further increase in wages, incomes and consump-
tion. Thus the medium run recovery of the economy is more pronounced with low UI
benefits, and is especially potent in the demand externality economy with low UI be-
cause of the endogenous feedback from aggregate wages and consumption to TFP. As
a result, again comparing figures 5 and 6, the aggregate component of the welfare loss
becomes smaller with a surprise cut in UI benefits in the demand externality economy,
relative to the benchmark economy. Thus, even though UI benefits act as stabilizer of
aggregate consumption and output in the short run, we conclude that the welfare con-
sequences of this role of social insurance are more complex than appears at first sight,
even in the absence of the negative incentive effects on worker search behavior and
firm job creation incentives.39
Implicit in the previous argument for a decline in the aggregate component of the wel-
fare losses when UI falls is that the medium run gains from higher TFP and wages
outweigh the lower wage and consumption losses in the short-term. The relative val-
uation of these effects depends crucially on a household’s preference for the future.
This is demonstrated by figure 8, which is identical to figure 6 but shows the welfare
losses for the most impatient households in the economy (β 1 as opposed to β 3 ). For rel-
atively patient households (Figure 6 ), the short-run effects of low wages and returns
are dominated by the medium run movements in TFP and thus wages, and therefore
the aggregate component of the welfare losses (the line gee,Zh ,Zl ) is noticeably lower
with low unemployment benefits. For the most impatient households (Figure 8 ) the
aggregate component of the welfare losses is instead roughly invariant to the size of
the unemployment system (and in fact increasing non-trivially for the wealth-poorest
when UI benefits are cut).
To summarize, we have established that more generous unemployment insurance is
beneficial for households that lose their job during a severe recession, especially for
those with low wealth. The effect of the size of the unemployment insurance system
on households that are not (yet) laid off at the onset of the recession is instead ambigu-
ous. In our benchmark economy, households that keep their job have to pay higher

38   Note that this effect on TFP and wages is absent in the benchmark economy where TFP is fully
     exogenous.
39   We wish to add two caveats to this discussion. First, this result depends on the assumption that the
     extra precautionary saving due to lower UI benefits flows into productive assets -the physical capital
     stock in this economy- that eventually raise wages and thus TFP. If the precautionary saving would
     instead be absorbed by unproductive assets or flow out of the economy, the described effect would
     be absent. Second, the additional potency of the effect in the demand externality economy clearly
     relies on the particular way we chose to model the relation between TFP and aggregate consumption.


                                                    37
                                                Figure 8: Welfare Decomposition in Two Economies


                                                      C!                                                                                 C ! , UI Shock
                                       12                                                                                   12
                                                        geu,Z       ,Z
                                                                             (y=4,-=1)                                                          geu,Z       ,Z
                                                                                                                                                                     (y=4,-=1)
                                                                h        l                                                                              h        l
                                                        gee,Z       ,Z
                                                                       (y=4,-=1)                                                                gee,Z       ,Z
                                                                                                                                                                     (y=4,-=1)
                                                                h        l                                                                              h        l

                                       10               geu,Z ,Z (y=4,-=1)                                                  10                  geu,Z ,Z (y=4,-=1)
                                                                l    l                                                                                  l    l
          Consumption Equivalent (%)




                                                                                               Consumption Equivalent (%)
                                        8                                                                                    8



                                        6                                                                                    6



                                        4                                                                                    4



                                        2                                                                                    2



                                        0                                                                                    0
                                            0   5      10                    15          20                                      0   5        10                     15          20
                                                     Assets                                                                                 Assets




taxes but also receive more benefits in case they become unemployed. Moreover, more
generous unemployment insurance reduces precautionary saving and increases inter-
est rates, benefiting especially high wealth households who keep their job. On net these
effects are relatively small, though, and we conclude that households that get to keep
their job during the recession are basically unaffected by the size of the unemployment
insurance system.
More surprisingly, in a model in which TFP (and output) is demand determined, we
find that households that retain their jobs suffer from more generous unemployment
insurance. In the short run unemployment insurance increases aggregate demand and
thus TFP, output and wages, which is beneficial for job keepers. The higher short
run consumption and lower saving reduces capital, aggregate consumption, TFP and
wages in the medium and long run, however. This negative effect quantitatively dom-
inates the short run positive effect for welfare of most job keepers, and suggests that
the majority of the population can actually be made worse off by more generous un-
employment insurance at the onset of a severe recession.
This last finding brings us back to the broader point of this paper, and indeed the re-
search agenda of which it is a part: the welfare losses from severe recessions can be
large, are shaped in an important way by public social insurance, and perhaps most


                                                                                              38
importantly, vary fundamentally across a population displaying heterogeneity by in-
come, wealth and preferences. Measuring this heterogeneity empirically and mod-
elling it explicitly in general equilibrium is therefore crucial for normative analyses of
the kind conducted here, in our view.40



6      Conclusion

In this paper, we have used PSID data on earnings, income, consumption, and wealth
as well as a canonical business cycle model with household earnings and wealth het-
erogeneity to measure the welfare losses of households across the wealth distribution,
following a severe recession. We have argued that these losses are substantial, more
than twice as high for wealth-poor relative to wealth-rich households, and that social
insurance in the form of a publicly provided unemployment insurance program can
effectively mitigate these costs, especially for households who lose their job and are at
the low end of the wealth distribution.
Looking forward, to us the future of the research agenda on macroeconomics with
household heterogeneity looks promising. In the last ten years, inequality has re-
emerged as a major issue in the academic, popular and public policy debate41 at the
same as as the macro economy experienced the most severe recession since World
War II. At the same time, administrative data sets are increasingly becoming available
to researchers, allowing them to paint a much more comprehensive picture of cross-
sectional distributions than was previously possible.42 The advancement of computa-
tional tools for studying heterogeneous household and/or firm models has progressed
at a rapid speed in recent years.43 Therefore, if we were still in graduate school, signing
on to this research agenda would appear to be a very promising proposition.




40   Krueger, Mitman and Perri (2016) argue that the same is true for positive questions surrounding the
     dynamics of aggregate consumption and output in the great recession.
41   see, for example, Piketty’s (2014) best-selling book and the Occupy (Wall Street) Movement.
42   See e.g. Guvenen, Ozkan and Song (2014) for a recent example of using such administrative data for
     an important applied topic.
43   For a collection of these advancements, see the special issues (January 2010 and February 2011) of
     the Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control.


                                                   39
References
 [1] Aiyagari, R. (1994), “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Sav-
     ing,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 659-684.

 [2] Ameriks, J., J. Briggs, A. Caplin, M. Shapiro and C. Tonetti (2015), “Long-Term
     Care Utility and Late in Life Saving, ”NBER Working paper 20973.

 [3] Bai, Y., V. Ríos Rull and K. Storesletten (2012), “Demand Shocks as Productivity
     Shocks,”Working Paper.

 [4] Benhabib, J. and A. Bisin (2016), “Skewed Wealth Distributions: Theory and Em-
     pirics,”NBER Working Paper 21924.

 [5] Benhabib, J., A. Bisin, and S. Zhu, (2011), “The Distribution of Wealth and Fiscal
     Policy in Economies with Finitely Lived Agents ”, Econometrica, 79(1), 123-157.

 [6] Bewley, T. (1986), “Stationary Monetary Equilibrium with a Continuum of In-
     dependently Fluctuating Consumers,”in Werner Hildenbrand and Andreu Mas-
     Colell (eds.) Contributions to Mathematical Economics in Honor of Gerard Debreu, Am-
     sterdam: North-Holland, 79-102.

 [7] Buera, F. (2009), “A Dynamic Model of Entrepreneurship with Borrowing Con-
     straints: Theory and Evidence,”Annals of Finance, 5, 443-464.

 [8] Cagetti, M., and De Nardi, M. (2006), “Entrepreneurship, Frictions, and
     Wealth,”Journal of Political Economy, 114, 835-870.

 [9] Carroll, C., J. Slacalek, K. Tokuoka and M. White (2015), “The Distribution of
     Wealth and the Marginal Propensity to Consume,”Working paper.

[10] Castaneda, A., J. Díaz-Giménez and V. Ríos-Rull (2003), “Accounting for the U.S.
     Earnings and Wealth Inequality,”Journal of Political Economy, 111, 818-857.

[11] Chatterjee. S. and D. Corbae (2007), “On the Aggregate Welfare Cost of Great De-
     pression Unemployment,”Journal of Monetary Economics, 54, 1529-1544.

[12] Davis S. and T. Von Wachter (2011), “Recessions and the Costs of Job Loss, ”Brook-
     ings Papers on Economic Activity, 43(2), 1-72

[13] De Nardi, M. (2004) “Wealth Inequality and Intergenerational Links,”Review of
     Economic Studies, 71, 743-768.

[14] De Nardi, M. (2015) “Quantitative Models of Wealth Inequality: A Survey,”NBER
     Working Paper 21106.

[15] De Nardi, M., G. Fella and F. Yang (2015) “Piketty’s Book and Macro Models of
     Wealth Inequality”, NBER Working Paper 21730.


                                           40
[16] De Nardi, M., E. French and J. Jones (2010) “Why Do the Elderly Save? The Role
     of Medical Expenses, ”Journal of Political Economy, 118, 39-75.

[17] Fernald, J. (2012), “Productivity and Potential Output before, during, and after
     the Great Recession“, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2012-18.

[18] Glover, A., J. Heathcote, D. Krueger and V. Rios-Rull (2014), “Inter-generational
     Redistribution in the Great Recession”, Working paper.

[19] Guvenen, F., S. Ozkan and J. Song (2014), “The Nature of Countercyclical Income
     Risk,”Journal of Political Economy, 122, 621-660.

[20] Hagedorn, M., F. Karahan, I. Manovskii and K. Mitman (2013), “Unemployment
     Benefits and Unemployment in the Great Recession: The Role of Macro Effects”,
     NBER Working Paper 19499.

[21] Hagedorn, M., I. Manovskii and K. Mitman (2015), “The Impact of Unemploy-
     ment Benefit Extensions on Employment: The 2014 Employment Miracle?”NBER
     Working Paper 20884.

[22] Hendricks, L. (2007), “How Important Is Discount Rate Heterogeneity for Wealth
     Inequality? ”Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 31, 3042-68.

[23] Huggett, M. (1993), “The Risk-Free Rate in Heterogeneous-Agent Incomplete-
     Insurance Economies,”Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 17, 953-969.

[24] Huggett, M. (1997), “The One-Sector Growth Model with Idiosyncratic Shocks:
     Steady States and Dynamics,”Journal of Monetary Economics, 39, 385-403.

[25] Huo, Z. and V. Ríos-Rull (2013), “Paradox of Thrift Recessions,”NBER Working
     Paper 19443.

[26] Hur, S. (2014), “The Lost Generation of the Great Recession,”Working Paper, Uni-
     versity of Pittsburgh.

[27] Imrohoroglu, A. (1989), “Cost of Business Cycles with Indivisibilities and Liquid-
     ity Constraints,”Journal of Political Economy, 97, 1364-1383.

[28] Kaplan, G. and G. Menzio (2016), “Shopping Externalities And Self-Fulfilling Un-
     employment Fluctuations,”Journal Of Political Economy, 124, 771-825.

[29] Kindermann, F. and D. Krueger (2015), “High Marginal Tax Rates on the Top 1%?
     Lessons from a Life Cycle Model with Idiosyncratic Income Risk,”Working Paper.

[30] Krebs, T. (2007) “Job Displacement Risk and the Cost of Business Cycles,”American
     Economic Review, 97, 664-686.

[31] Krueger, D., K. Mitman and F. Perri (2016), “Macroeconomics and Household Het-
     erogeneity, Including Inequality ”, Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 2, forth-
     coming.

                                          41
[32] Krueger, D. and F. Perri (2004), “On the Welfare Consequences of the Increase in
     Inequality in the United States, ”in Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoff (eds) NBER
     Macroeconomics Annual 2003,vol. 18 Cambridge MA: MIT Press 83-138

[33] Krusell, P., T. Mukoyama, A. Sahin and A. Smith (2009), “Revisiting the Welfare
     Effects of Eliminating Business Cycles, ”Review of Economic Dynamics, 393-404.

[34] Krusell, P. and A. Smith (1998), “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the Macroe-
     conomy,”Journal of Political Economy, 106, 867-896.

[35] Krusell, P. and A. Smith (1999), “On the Welfare Effects of Eliminating Business
     Cycles,”Review of Economic Dynamics 2, 245-272.

[36] Lucas R. (1987), “Models of Business Cycles,”New York: Basil Blackwell

[37] Lucas R. (2003), “Macroeconomic Priorities,”American Economic Review, 93, 1-14.

[38] McKay, A. and R. Reis (2016), “The Role of Automatic Stabilizers in the U.S. Busi-
     ness Cycle,”Econometrica, forthcoming.

[39] Mitman, K. and S. Rabinovich (2014), “Do Unemployment Benefit Extensions Ex-
     plain the Emergence of Jobless Recoveries?”, Working Paper.

[40] Piketty, T. (2014), “Capital in the Twenty-First Century,”Cambridge, MA: Belknap
     Press.

[41] Quadrini, V. (2000), “Entrepreneurship, Saving and Social Mobility, ”Review of Eco-
     nomic Dynamics, 3, 1-40.




                                          42
A       Explicit Statement of Aggregate Law of Motion for Dis-
        tribution

Since the extent of heterogeneity and the choice problem of young and old households
differ significantly, it is easiest to separate the cross-sectional probability measure Φ
into two components (ΦW , Φ R ), and note that the measures integrate to ΠW and Π R ,
respectively. First define the Markov transition function, conditional on staying in the
young age group j = W as

                                                              (
                                                                                                   0 ( s, y, a, β; Z, Φ ) ∈ A, β ∈ B
                                                                   π (s0 |s, Z 0 , Z )π (y0 |y) : aW
QW,(Z,Φ,Z0 ) ((s, y, a, β), (S , Y , A, B)) =      ∑0                           0                                    else
                                                s0 ∈S ,y ∈Y



and for the old, retired age group, as

                                                           (
                                                               1 : a0R ( a, β; Z, Φ) ∈ A, β ∈ B
                Q R,(Z,Φ,Z0 ) (( a, β), (A, B)) =
                                                                0                 else

For each Borel sets (S , Y , A, B) ∈ P(S) × P(Y ) × B(A) × P(B), the cross-sectional
probability measures of the young and old tomorrow are then given by44

                                                   Z
                     0
       HW ( Z, Φ, Z )(S , Y , A, B) = θ                 QW,(Z,Φ,Z0 ) ((s, y, a, β), (S , Y , A, B))dΦW
                                          + (1 − ν)1{0∈A}                 ∑
                                                                          0
                                                                                Π Z (s0 )   ∑
                                                                                            0
                                                                                                   Π(y0 )   ∑
                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                   Π( β0 )
                                                                         s ∈S               y ∈Y            β ∈B


and

                                           Z
         HR ( Z, Φ, Z 0 )(A, B) = ν              Q R,(Z,Φ,Z0 ) (( a, β), (A, B))dΦ R
                                                       Z
                                    + (1 − θ )             QW,(Z,Φ,Z0 ) ((s, y, a, β), (S, Y, A, B))dΦW



B       Calculation of the Welfare Cost of a Recession

In this section, we describe in detail how we derive the consumption equivalent vari-
ation measure used to quantify the welfare costs of a severe recession. The key step
44   These expressions captures the assumption that in each period a measure 1 − ν of newborn house-
     holds enter the economy as workers, with zero assets and with idiosyncratic productivities and
     discount factors drawn from the stationary distributions, and that a fraction 1 − θ of working house-
     holds retire, and that the retirement probability is independent of all other characteristics.


                                                              43
is to compute how lifetime utility is scaled upward if consumption in every t, at ev-
ery node of the event tree, is scaled up by a factor 1 + g. Denoting lifetime utility of
a working age individual with idiosyncratic state s and aggregate state S by vW (s, S)
and the lifetime utility from the scaled-up consumption profile by vW (s, S; g) we have:


                          ∞                                  ∞               ∞
                                                                        (                               )
      vW (s, S) = E ∑ ( βθ ) log(ct ) + β(1 − θ ) E ∑ ( βθ )t−1
                               t
                                                                            ∑ ( βν)   τ −t
                                                                                             log(ct )
                       t =0                                 t =1            τ =t
                         ∞                                    ∞
                                               β (1 − θ )
                 = E ∑ ( βθ )t log(ct ) +
                                                1 − νβ t∑
                                                          E ( βθ )t−1 log(ct )
                       t =0                                =1
                         ∞
                                                β (1 − θ ) ∞
   vW (s, S; g) = E ∑ ( βθ )t log((1 + g)ct ) +             E ∑ ( βθ )t−1 log((1 + g)ct )
                     t =0                        1 −   νβ     t =1
                                 ∞                         ∞
                             (                                       )
                                          β ( 1 −  θ )
                 = log(1 + g) ∑ ( βθ )t +              E ∑ ( βθ )t−1 +
                               t =0        1  −  νβ      t =1
                          ∞
                                        β (1 − θ ) ∞
                     E ∑ ( βθ )t log(ct ) +       E ∑ ( βθ )t−1 log(ct )
                     t =0                1 −   νβ   t =1
                                    β (1 − θ )
                                              
                   log(1 + g)
                 =              1+               + v(s, S)
                      1 − θβ         1 − νβ
                                1 − νβ + β(1 − θ )
                                                  
                 = log(1 + g)                          + vW (s, S).
                                (1 − θβ)(1 − νβ)

The scaling factor g that makes a working age household indifferent between remain-
ing in normal times Z = Zh and experiencing a recession ( Z = Zl ), with scaled-up
consumption from that point on, then solves the equation:
                                     vW (s, Zl ; g) = vW (s, Zh )                                           (17)
which, given the result above, gives the scaling factor g as:
                            1 − νβ + β(1 − θ )
                                              
              log(1 + g)                         + vW (s, Zl ) = vW (s, Zh )                                (18)
                            (1 − θβ)(1 − νβ)
and thus:
                                   (1 − θβ)(1 − νβ)
                                                                                            
    gZh Zl (s) = 100 ∗ exp                                  [vW (s, Zh ) − vW (s, Zl )] − 1                 (19)
                                   1 − νβ + β(1 − θ )

and thus the welfare loss gZh Zl (s) for a household of type s is positive as long as
vW (s, Zh ) > vW (s, Zl ). The same calculations apply if, in addition to a change in the
aggregate state of the world the household experiences a change in the idiosyncratic
state of the world (e.g. when losing a job at the onset of a severe recession), in which
case part of the idiosyncratic state s in vW (s, Zl ) has to be replaced by the new state s0 .
Note that if σ 6= 1, then the above calculations are simpler and deliver
                                                            1
                                                vW (s, Zh ) 1−σ
                           gZh Zl (s) = 100 ∗                   >0
                                                vW (s, Zl )


                                                 44
