                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      NEW EVIDENCE ON TRUST AND WELL-BEING

                                        John F. Helliwell
                                         Haifang Huang
                                          Shun Wang

                                      Working Paper 22450
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22450


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2016




Helliwell’s research is supported by the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR).
Wang gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Korea Development Institute (KDI)
School of Public Policy and Management. We thank the Gallup Organization for access to data
from the Gallup World Poll. We are grateful for comments on an earlier version presented at the
OECD/Sciences Po Workshop on Measuring Trust and Social Capital, June 10, 2016. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by John F. Helliwell, Haifang Huang, and Shun Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
New Evidence on Trust and Well-being
John F. Helliwell, Haifang Huang, and Shun Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 22450
July 2016
JEL No. I31,J15,O57

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper first uses data from three large international surveys – the Gallup World Poll, the
World Values Survey and the European Social Survey – to estimate income-equivalent values for
social trust, with a likely lower bound equivalent to a doubling of household income.

Second, the more detailed and precisely measured trust data in the European Social Survey (ESS)
show that social trust is only a part of the overall climate of trust. While social trust and trust in
police are the most important elements, there are significant additional benefits from trust in three
aspects of the institutional environment: the legal system, parliament and politicians. Thus
estimates of the total well-being value of a trustworthy environment are larger than those based
on social trust alone.

Third, the ESS data show that living in a high-trust environment makes people more resilient to
adversity. Being subject to discrimination, ill-health or unemployment, although always
damaging to subjective well-being, is much less damaging to those living in trustworthy
environments. These results suggest a fresh set of links between trust and inequality. Individuals
who are subject to discrimination, ill-health or unemployment are typically concentrated towards
the lower end of any national distribution of happiness. Thus the resilience-increasing feature of
social trust reduces well-being inequality by channeling the largest benefits to those at the low
end of the well-being distribution.

John F. Helliwell                                   Shun Wang
Vancouver School of Economics                       KDI School of Public Policy and Management
University of British Columbia                      263 Nansejong-ro
6000 Iona Drive                                     Sejong, Korea 339-007
Vancouver, BC V6T 1L4                               swang@kdis.ac.kr
CANADA
and NBER
john.helliwell@ubc.ca

Haifang Huang
Department of Economics
University of Alberta
8-14 HM Tory
Edmonton Alberta T6G 2H4 CANADA
haifang.huang@ualberta.ca



A Statistical appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22450
1. Introduction

In this paper we report existing and fresh evidence on some of the direct and indirect
linkages between trust and subjective well-being. There are four main sections. First we
survey a range of previous key results on the empirical linkages between trust and
subjective well-being. Then we proceed in the subsequent three sections to present new
research on three separate topics. First we use the European Social Survey, the World
Values Survey and the Gallup World Poll to prepare new estimates of the effects of social
trust on satisfaction with life. Second, we present new results from the European Social
Survey showing how the relative importance for well-being of trust depends on both the
type and radius of trust. Third, we shall present some new individual-level evidence on
how social trust increases the resilience of individuals affected by adverse events. Finally,
the concluding section will summarize the results and present some evidence that
improvements are possible within policy-relevant time horizons.

2. Summary of Previous Findings

Trust of many types matters for subjective well-being
Several types of trust are independently important to well-being, as evidenced by large
income-equivalent compensating differentials. Much early research, starting from
Almond and Verba (1963) made use of what has come to be seen as the classic social
trust question: “Generally speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted, or
that you can’t be too careful in dealing with people?”. This was initially, and is mainly
still, asked with only two possible answers. More recently, and desirably, the European
Social Survey has asked for responses on an eleven-point scale ranging from 0 to 10. This
permits not only a more subtle gradation of perceived trust levels by each respondent, but
then also provides a meaningful distribution of responses, and hence a measure of trust
inequality within the community or nation. Subsequent research has embraced trust
measures of many types, and covering various aspects of life, social groupings,
institutions and ranges of geography. Once distinctions are made about the locus, radius,
and type of trust, the evidence shows that several different types of trust can be
simultaneously important. We shall discuss the radius of trust more fully later in this
section. As for different types of trust, large samples US and Canadian data have shown
large effects linking interpersonal differences in several measures of subjective well-
being to workplace trust, trust in police, and trust in neighbours, in addition to the
standard measure of social trust (Helliwell & Putnam, 2004). We shall present in section
4 some new estimates, from the European Social Survey, of the relative importance of
several types of trust.

Some scholars, worried about the possible vagueness of the social trust question,
proposed what has come to be known as the wallet question: “Supposing that you lost
your wallet with $200 in it, what is the likelihood of it being returned intact if found
by…” (followed by a list of possibilities that differ across surveys, but generally
including at least neighbors, a police officer, and a stranger.) This question was inspired
by experiments run by the Reader’s Digest, and analyzed by Knack (2001), where wallets
containing cash were dropped in a number of cities in the US and 14 countries in Europe.



                                             1
The cross-city variations in the fractions of wallets returned were highly correlated
(r=0.65, Knack 2001) with differences among the respective countries in average answers
to the classic social trust question. The wallet-dropping question, aside from permitting
different directions of trust to be distinguished – for example the relative rankings of
neighbors and police officers as likely wallet returners differ significantly among
countries – also provides the potential for making direct comparisons between expected
trust and actual trustworthiness, an asset we make use of under the next heading.


People are more trustworthy than you think
Should people be encouraged to be more trusting of others? Any informed answer to this
question requires some knowledge about how trusting people are now, and about how
trustworthy is the environment within which they live. To be too trusting in a dangerous
environment is looking for trouble. But to be untrusting in a trustworthy environment
needlessly reduces peoples’ subjective well-being directly, and also diminishes their
willingness to reach out to others in ways that will increase trust and well-being in the
future. What has been generally lacking is evidence that permits a precise matching of
expected and actual trustworthiness. Fortunately, the Canadian General Social Survey has
used the wallet question in several rounds, providing large samples showing how likely
people feel their cash-bearing wallet is to be returned if found by a stranger. A Toronto
newspaper experimentally dropped cash-bearing wallets around the city. A direct
comparison can thus be made between actual and expected trustworthiness by comparing
the actual rate of wallet return to what people expected it to be. Figure 1 shows a
dramatic gap between expected and actual trustworthiness, with the actual rate of wallet
return, at 80%, being about three times what it was expected to be. Although the sample
of dropped wallets was small, with a correspondingly wide 95% confidence region, the
survey estimate was very tight, and the overall likelihood of the trust perceptions being
consistent with the actual rate of wallet return is one in several billion.




                                            2
                  Figure 1: Likelihood of lost wallet being returned
 1.00
 0.90
 0.80
 0.70
 0.60
 0.50
                                                                              Toronto
 0.40
 0.30
 0.20
 0.10
 0.00
         survey: neighbour survey: stranger         actual: stranger



These results are striking enough, and have sufficiently important implications for
behavior and policy, that they deserve replication in other countries and social contexts.
They imply that peoples’ trust assessments are needlessly pessimistic, presumably
because the information they see and read in the media is more skewed to reporting anti-
social than pro-social behavior. This is probably true whether the information source is
news, fictional dramas or reality shows. Only by running experiments like these in a
broad range of communities and countries will it be possible to see if this undue
pessimism is evident more generally, and to dig deeper into the sources of this undue
pessimism wherever it may be found. If the situation elsewhere should match that in
Toronto, there is ample scope for improving trust simply by improving information, with
immediate benefits for current well-being, and future benefits likely to flow from the
additional social connections and trust fueled by the realistic increases in expected
trustworthiness.



Trust saves lives
There is a large literature linking social trust to a range of health outcomes both within
and among countries, as surveyed by Kawachi (2016). Many of these studies are derived
from within-country direct linkages from social trust to subjective well-being, e.g. Yip,
Subramanian, Mitchell, Lee, Wang, and Kawachi (2007). And at the national level,
healthy life expectancy is in turn a well-established contributor to average life
evaluations, through its impact in explaining international differences in life evaluations
(Helliwell, Huang, & Wang, 2016, Table 2.1). Beyond these linkages, social trust has
been found to be correlated with international differences in mortality rates for two major


                                             3
sources of mortality, suicide (Helliwell, 2007) and traffic accidents. The effects of social
trust on traffic fatalities has been found both internationally (Helliwell, 2007) and across
states in the United States (Nagler, 2013), with the US effects appearing mainly in urban
traffic (Nagler & Ward, 2016). Suicide and traffic fatalities are roughly tied as the tenth
leading causes of death worldwide, and the effects of national-level social trust on both
rates are estimated to be equal (Helliwell, 2007, Table VI), so the projected lives saved
by higher social trust in the two cases are similar. The estimated effects are large. For
example, if the level of social trust in France were as high as that in Norway the projected
rate of traffic fatalities would be halved, to about the Norwegian rate (Helliwell & Wang
2011, p. 51).

Footprints of trust and well-being after migration
There is a long-standing literature, dating at least from Fischer (1991), that migrants from
Europe to the United States brought many aspects of their culture, including social trust
and other social norms, with them, and that these norms, including especially social trust
(Rice & Feldman 1997) had footprints that could extend over generations, even surviving
subsequent internal migration (Uslaner, 2008). If so, and if these social norms themselves
have causal linkages to subjective well-being, then we might also expect to find a post-
migration footprint for subjective well-being. The migration footprint of trust, mainly
studied with respect to immigration from other countries to the industrial countries, is
extensively surveyed in Dinesen & Sonderskov (2016). Evidence from more symmetric
samples of global migration also show that trust and other social norms (e.g. generosity)
adjust with some lag when people migrate from one society to another, providing
evidence of a trust footprint from their countries of origin. By contrast, confidence in
national institutions shows no such footprint. For both results see Helliwell, Wang, and
Xu (2015).

As for the happiness of migrants, there is evidence from some countries of migrants
being less happy than non-migrants. Because most of the migrant samples studied are in
countries whose immigrants came from less happy source countries, it is hard to tell how
much of their post-migration happiness deficit is a footprint effect. Recent evidence from
immigrants to Canada from 100 different source countries, with national average source-
country life satisfaction averages varying by a factor of two, shows that immigrants from
all countries tend to report life satisfaction levels almost equal to those of all Canadian
residents, whether or not allowance is made for differences in education, age and health.
See Frank, Hou, and Schellenberg (2015) for research based on 54 countries, and
Helliwell, Bonikowska, and Shiplett (2016) for the larger samples. There is a very small
footprint effect for life satisfaction, perhaps consistent with the trust footprint weighted
by a plausible estimate of the effects of social trust on life evaluations.

Inequality and trust
If inequality matters for social trust, then this presumably provides one of the channels
through which inequality affects well-being. Rothstein and Uslaner (2005) argue that
two types of inequality – economic inequality and inequality of opportunity – are both
damaging to social trust. Their empirical work, and that of Bjørnskov (2007), emphasizes
the role of income inequality, finding it to be one of the strongest variables used to



                                             4
explain international differences in social trust. Algan and Cahuc (2014) find significant
negative correlations between social trust and income inequalities both internationally
and among states of the United States. But if subjective well-being provides a broader
and more relevant indicator of welfare than does income, we might also expect that the
inequality of well-being would be a relevant measure of inequality, perhaps even more
than is the inequality of income.

One way of testing this would be to see which of the two measures of inequality has a
stronger link to social trust. For both types of inequality, there is a strong likelihood that
their correlation with social trust has causal arrows that run both ways, and also reflect
their joint dependence on other aspects of a nation’s or a community’s culture and
institutions. In some sense this does not matter, since both equality and social trust have
independently established positive effects on well-being, so that any successful attempt to
improve one will thereby have positive spillover effects on the other, with
experimentation serving to reveal the most efficient ways of improving both. In any case,
since these reverse linkages are no more likely for one type of inequality than the other,
they should not influence the outcome of a horse race run to see which measure is a better
predictor of social trust. What is the evidence? Goff, Helliwell, and Mayraz (2016) have
shown, using all three of the international surveys that we are using here, that the
negative link between inequality and social trust is even stronger and more robust when
inequality is measured in terms of overall subjective well-being rather than in terms of
income or wealth.

Radius of trust matters
What sorts of trust are more likely to support well-being? Fukuyama (2001) makes the
distinction between the strength and the radius of trust, with the radius covering social,
ethnic and linguistic as well as geographic distances. Narrow-radius trust is sometimes
referred to as in-group trust, which may build on the in-group/out-group boundary, and
hence be at the expense of the out-group. In such cases, collaborative action in response,
for example, to a natural disaster may increase trust and well-being among the high-trust
group, but perhaps also lead to further marginalization of out-groups (Aldrich, 2011).
Narrow-radius trust is similar to what Putnam has called bonding social capital, as
distinct from the bridging social capital typified by the canonical social trust question.
There is some evidence of difference across cultures in the extent to which answers to the
social trust question are based on broader or narrower social contexts (Delhey, Newton,
& Welzel, 2011).

Although narrow-radius trust is sometimes thought to represent, and hence to breed,
insularity and suspicion of others, previous evidence comparing the well-being effects of
trust measures with different distance and scope has tended to show positive well-being
effects from each (Helliwell & Putnam, 2004). Are these effects independent, or do the
well-being advantages of narrow or in-group trust come at the expense of the strength or
well-being benefits of broader trust? Unraveling that puzzle is difficult, as social
identities and trust are likely to be co-determined, with trust more easily established
among those who see themselves as sharing social identities. One way of interpreting this
interdependence is to see shared social identities as representing a channel through which



                                              5
high social trust supports happiness. For example, data from the Canadian General Social
Survey shows that the estimated well-being effects of social trust are reduced where
shared social identities are separately accounted for (Helliwell & Wang, 2011, Table 3).
That evidence shows that trust and a sense of belonging contribute to subjective well-
being, with local identities and trust mattering most. As for the crucial question of
whether there is a conflict between the local and longer-distance belonging, that same
Canadian evidence shows that while the well-being effects of local community belonging
have a stronger well-being impact than does belonging to the province or country, all
three contribute, and tests show a life satisfaction premium for those who have multiple
overlapping senses of belonging (Helliwell & Wang, 2011, Table 3).

Resiliency
One important but less studied channel from social trust to well-being resides in the
resilience that enables high-trust communities to respond more successfully to natural
disasters or economic shocks. Where communities with initially high levels of social trust
were faced with disaster- as in the examples of the 2011 earthquake and tsunami
(Yamamura, Tsutsui, Yamane, Yamane, & Powdthavee, 2015) – the resulting efforts to
cooperate in dealing with the suffering and damage led to post-disaster levels of trust and
sometimes even happiness higher than before the disaster. Analyzing the same event
using only a post-disaster survey, Homerich (2012) found social trust to differ across
communities according to their degree of damage, significantly so for younger
respondents, being higher in those prefectures that suffered more damage.

Looting in Chilean cities following the 2010 earthquakes was serious in low-trust regions
and absent in high-trust regions. Social trust in Chile was estimated to have increased in
regions with more damage, to an extent that was greater for regions with initially higher
levels of social trust (Dussaillant & Guzman, 2014, 2015). Although changes from pre-
disaster to post-disaster levels of trust are only recently being measured, there is evidence
that pre-disaster levels of social trust, or related measures of social capital or institutional
quality help to explain international differences in the death tolls from natural disasters
(Kahn, 2005), differences among Tokyo wards in their ability to cope with the 1923
earthquake (Aldrich, 2012) and among communities in South India in the wake of the
2004 tsunami (Aldrich, 2011). Comparisons across communities with differing degrees of
disaster damage show trust in strangers higher among those in the more disaster-damaged
communities, based on trust experiments in various countries, including Thailand (Cassar,
Healy, & Von Kessler, 2011), Honduras (Castillo & Carter, 2011) and Chile ( Fleming,
Chong, & Bejarano, 2014).

A corresponding case has been made that countries with higher levels of social capital
had better well-being outcomes following the 2007-2008 financial crisis. The lower trust
countries suffered worse economic consequences, and reductions in happiness much
larger than would have been predicted on the basis of their reductions in income and
employment (Helliwell, Huang, & Wang, 2014).


3. Updated Evidence on the Links between Trust and Well-being



                                               6
In this section we use the largest available international samples of data to update some
key basic results, emphasizing the links between social trust and life evaluations. To
make our results as comprehensive as possible, we use all three large international
surveys that have in some or all of their survey rounds asked the social trust question.
These include six waves of the biennial European Social Survey (ESS, 2002 through
2012), six waves of the World Values Survey (WVS, covering1981-2014), and the
Gallup World Poll (GWP), in which the social trust question was only asked in most
countries for only a single year, usually 2009. We have attempted to set up our estimation
so as to make the results as comparable as possible across the three surveys. Even so,
there remain some differences in what is available for all three of the key variables: life
evaluations, social trust, and income.

We first consider the differences in life evaluations. The European Social Survey asks
two life evaluation questions with answers on a scale running from 0 to 10, one relating
to satisfaction with life, and the second asking: “Taking all things together, how happy
would you say you are?”. We find here, as with our earlier research, that these two
questions reveal the same underlying patterns of relative importance for the factors
supporting subjective well-being, so much so that better-fitting equations are obtained by
using an average of answers to the two questions. Hence we use this average life
evaluation for the results reported in this paper. For the World Values Survey we use the
answers to a question asking respondents to report their life satisfaction on a scale
running from 1 to 10. Although there is also a happiness question in the WVS, it has a
different scale and is less clearly a life evaluation, and so we do not make use of it here.
The Gallup World Poll uses the Cantril ladder question as its central life evaluation. This
question asks respondents to evaluate their current lives on a 0 to 10 scale using the
image of a ladder, with top rung (10) representing the best possible life for them, and the
lowest (0) the worst possible life for them. There has been some uncertainty about how
answers to this question could be compared to those from the life satisfaction question.
Fortunately the GWP also included the life satisfaction question, on the same 0 to 10
scale used for the Cantril ladder, although only for a single year. This significant set of
data showed that answers to the Cantril ladder had a slightly lower average value, and
were more tightly grouped about the global median answer of 5.0, just as Cantril
presumed when he described it as a ‘self-anchoring’ scale. 1 Looking across national
averages for the 129 countries where both questions were asked, life satisfaction starts
below the Cantril ladder and rises faster. 2 The two measures are of course positively
correlated with each other at both the individual (r=0.63) and the national levels (r=0.91).
For the purposes of our comparisons here, the most important finding is that the
estimated structural determinants of the two measures are almost identical, so much so
that tighter explanations for the individual-level data are provided by averaging the two
answers. This suggests, by triangulation, that we would expect the effects of social trust
to be the same on both measures. This cannot be directly tested, since the satisfaction

1
  For the 129 countries with both measures, the SWL national averages have a mean value of 5.91
(SD=1.41) compared to 5.45 (SD=1.11) for the Cantril ladder. At the individual level, the SWL
average is 5.99 (SD=2.40) compared to 5.57 (SD=2.19) for the Cantril ladder.
2
  Using the 129 national averages, SWL= -0.41 + 1.16*ladder (SE=0.05), r2=0.83.


                                              7
with life question was asked in 2007, and the trust question in 2009. Thus our equations
reported here make use of the Cantril ladder answers on their own.

We turn now to consider measures of social trust. All three surveys ask the social trust
question described above. In both the World Values Survey and the Gallup World Poll,
the answers are binary, either 1 or 0. But the European Social Survey used a scale ranging
from 0 to 10. The fuller range of available responses greatly increases the information
provided, including the possibility of measuring international differences in the inequality
of social trust, to match the measures of the inequality of well-being. But it does pose a
difficulty of comparability of results across surveys. The answers to the binary question
are all clustered at 0 or 1, while the answers to the eleven-point assessment are distributed
among the eleven possible answers. When the 0 to 10 scale responses are used in a
regression explaining life evaluations in the ESS, it attracts a coefficient of 0.11,
implying an increase of that size for each one-point increase on the 10-point scale, or
more than a full point in moving from the bottom to the top of the scale. To make the
ESS data and results more comparable with the binary answers from other surveys, we
divide the whole sample of social trust answers into two groups. A binary high-trust
variable is created, with the value of 1.0 for each of those who have answered 7 or above
on the ESS social trust question. Its average value of 0.3 is fairly close to the fraction of
the population in these same countries who answer yes rather than no to the binary trust
question often asked in other surveys. And it naturally produces a coefficient, 0.45, which
is larger than 011, because of the ten-fold diminution of the range of the variable, but
much less than ten times larger. This reflects the fact that the distribution of answers over
the 0 to 10 scale is much more even than for the binary variables. We will use both the
binary and full forms of the ESS social trust variable. We shall use the binary form
results in this section, to help us to deliver comparability with the results from the other
two surveys, in which only binary trust answers are available. We shall use the fuller
information provided by the answers in the 0 to 10 scale for our more detailed analysis of
the ESS trust data in subsequent sections.

There is also non-comparability among the surveys in their treatment of income. Ideally,
we would like to be able to measure household income in logarithmic form, so as to be
able to define the value of social trust in terms of a compensating differential measured as
a proportionate change in income. This is possible in the case of the Gallup World Poll,
where the household income data have been transformed into international dollars
measured in terms of purchasing power parities. But in the ESS and WVS we only have
income reported by decile of household income. Thus for our equations using these two
surveys we include dummy variables for each decile, treating the fifth income decile as
the omitted category. To get an income difference to compare with the estimated value of
social trust we use the scaled-up coefficient on the ninth income decile, which shows the
extra life evaluation from being in the ninth rather than the fifth income decile. For the
ESS, the average income in the ninth decile is greater than that in the fifth decile by about
0.7 log units, not too far from the 1.0 log units implicit in the Gallup World Poll
estimates. For a better comparison, we scale up the extra life evaluation from the ninth
decile by a factor 1/0.7, and use that coefficient as the gain in life evaluation from a one-
unit move in the logarithm in the household income, the same income move as that



                                             8
implicitly in the GWP regressions. For the WVS, the average income in the ninth decile
is greater than that in the fifth decile by about 1.07 log units. We scale the extra life
evaluation from the ninth decile by a factor 1/1.07 to yield the gain in life evaluation
from a one-unit move in the logarithm of household income.

Finally, a word about the preferred estimation form. In all three cases we include country
and year fixed effects. Country fixed effects are necessary to absorb the net effects from
the range of national level variables not included. In all cases we include a number of
individual-level controls, including age and age squared, health status, and other variables
available only in specific surveys, especially the ESS. Full details are shown in the
Statistical Appendix.

                                           Table 1
                            Estimates of the value of social trust
                           Income-equivalent values of social trust
                Based on individual-level data from three international surveys
                                                                        Survey
                                                    ESS                  WVS                   GWP
Effect of binary trust                              0.45                 0.30                   0.25
Standard error                                     (0.03)               (0.03)                 (0.03)
Effect of household income                          0.50                 0.43                   0.31
Standard error                                     (0.05)               (0.06)                 (0.02)
Ratio: trust effect/income effect                   0.90                 0.70                   0.81
Standard error                                     (0.07)               (0.10)                 (0.10)
Adjusted R2                                         0.32                 0.22                   0.29
Number of observations                              278k                 356k                   144k
Number of countries                                  32                   110                    112
Notes:
Results are based on regressions using data from individual survey respondents – after controlling for
country and year fixed effects, and a number of individual-level variables. In ESS, the effect of household
income is estimated as that associated with a move from the 5th decile to the 9th decile of the income
distribution - or an increase of log household income by 0.7 unit - divided by the factor 0.7. The underlying
regression for the ESS estimates is reported in column 3 of Appendix Table 6. In WVS, the effect of
household income is estimated as that associated with a move from the 5th decile to the 9th decile of the
income distribution - or an increase of log household income by 1.07 unit - divided by the factor 1.07. The
underlying regression for the WVS estimates is reported in column 1 of Appendix Table 12. In GWP
household income is already in log form. Thus in all cases the income effect is in terms of a 1-unit increase
in log income. The underlying regression for the GWP estimate is reported in column 1 of Appendix Table
7.



Table 1 shows the key results from each of the three surveys. The well-being advantages
of social trust, as seen by the individual, and measured by a binary or binary-equivalent
variable, range from 0.25 to 0.45 across the three surveys, in each case at a high level of
statistical significance. Thus to be a generally trusting member of the global sample is
associated with a life evaluation that is a quarter to a half a point higher on the 10-point
scale. These effects can then be compared to those of income. The effects of household



                                                      9
income are estimated to be 0.31 on log income in the case of the GWP. In the two other
surveys, the effects are 0.50 for the ESS and 0.43 for the WVS.

The third set of numbers brings the social trust and income effects together to show the
income-equivalent value of social trust. These ratios range from 0.7 to 0.9, and in all
cases these ratios are very significant in statistical terms, reflecting the large sample sizes
and the generally powerful individual-level linkages between life satisfaction and both
income and social capital. The range of estimates from one survey to another provides an
appropriate note of caution about treating any one estimate as a precise measure. Indeed,
one of the motives behind our decision to use all three major surveys in a consistent way
was to produce a number of intentionally comparable estimates from all the available
sources of data, expecting to find, as we did, a range of resulting estimates.

The results in Table 1 are entirely based on individual-level responses. Other possibilities
include either national or two-level analysis. In both these latter cases, explicit allowance
is being made for the possibility of contextual effects, where individual well-being
depends not only on their own circumstances but on those of others in their countries.
The individual-level analysis recognizes the possibility of such contextual effects, but
combines them within country fixed effects. Two-level analysis, which we used in some
earlier analysis with the SWL and GWP data, 3 is bedeviled by the relatively small
number of national-level observations in relation to the possible number of relevant
national-level variables. This has tended to lead to estimates of contextual effects that are
highly unstable.

The use of national level data in principle permits the estimation of the combined impact
of direct and contextual effects. It is, however, limited by the relatively small number of
countries and the short and often uneven country coverage from year to year. The best of
the three surveys for this analysis is the ESS, with six complete survey rounds at two-year
intervals. This permits us to use panel analysis with country fixed effects and year fixed
effects, providing at least a tentative estimate of the within-country national level
linkages between social trust and life evaluations. For the Gallup World Poll, there is
generally only a single year of observations on social trust, making a pure cross-section
the preferred form of analysis. The WVS has such a changing and uneven pattern of
country surveys that stable national-level estimates for the effects of social trust cannot
be pinned down without relying mainly on cross-sectional variation, which we achieve by
using fixed effects for years but not for countries. Thus, looking across the three surveys,
we lack the same comparability of results that we were able to achieve for the individual
results with their much larger samples.

However, we nonetheless present in Table 2 our current estimates at the national level for
all three surveys. The estimation method is a pure cross-section for the GWP, a panel
estimation with year and country fixed effects in the case of the ESS, and a tattered panel
without fixed effects for the WVS. In all three cases the estimated effects of social trust
are higher than shown in Table 1, suggestive of positive contextual effects. Income
3
 See Helliwell (2003) for two level analysis using the WVS, and Helliwell, Barrington-Leigh,
Harris, and Huang (2010, Table 10.1) for the GWP data.


                                              10
effects are higher in the case of the ESS and roughly the same in the case of the GWP.
The higher effect in the ESS probably reflects the well-established short-term dynamics
between national income and subjective well-being. This dynamic aspect naturally does
not appear in the GWP cross-section. In both surveys the estimated national-level
compensating differentials for the value of social trust are higher than in Table 1.
Because of the smaller samples sizes, and the resulting lower precision, we prefer not to
rely too heavily on these larger national-level estimates, beyond taking comfort in the fact
that they are if anything higher than we found at the individual level.

                                          Table 2
                     National-level estimates of the value of social trust
                           Income-equivalent values of social trust
                                                                  Survey
                                           ESS                     WVS                     GWP
Effect of binary trust                     2.37                    0.81                     1.08
Standard error                            (0.78)                  (0.28)                   (0.45)
Effect of GDP per capita                   1.73                    0.59                     0.33
Standard error                            (0.41)                  (0.09)                   (0.08)
Ratio                                      1.37                    1.37                     3.21
Standard error                            (0.54)                  (0.56)                   (1.38)
Adjusted R2                            0.36(within)                0.37                     0.76
Number of observations                     152                     328                      126
Number of countries                         32                     106                      126
Notes:
Results are based on regressions using national average data, and using GDP per capita (in PPP) rather than
the national averages of household incomes. The ESS results are from a panel regression containing social
trust, log GDP per capita, healthy life expectancy and both country and year fixed effects (column 6 of
Appendix Table 9). The WVS results have the same variables, but without controlling for fixed effects
(column 1 of Appendix Table 13). The GWP regression is a pure cross-section (column 8 of Appendix
Table 10) that also includes the six key variables used to explain international happiness differences in
Table 2.1 of the World Happiness Report.

Taken together our individual-level and national-level results confirm a strong positive
relation between social trust and life evaluations, while the ESS panel results with
country fixed effects also suggest that these linkages are strong over time within
countries as well as between countries. This in turn suggests that social trust, sometimes
thought to culturally fixed, can in fact change within policy-relevant time horizons, and
that these changes in social trust are linked to significant changes in national levels of
subjective well-being. An example may help to illustrate this point. Social trust in Poland
averaged 3.82 (SE=0.03) in the three rounds of the ESS 2002 to 2006, and 4.27
(SE=0.04) in the two latest rounds (2010 and 2012). To evaluate this increase in social
trust on the 10-point scale, we use the corresponding social trust and income coefficients
from national panel estimation with country fixed effects (equation 5 in Table 9 of the
Statistical Appendix). Using these estimates, the social trust increase from 2002-07 to
2010-12 is calculated to have increased life evaluations by almost 0.18 points
(0.45*0.458=0.206), about one-third of the total increase in Poland’s life evaluations over



                                                    11
that same period. For comparison purposes, it would take an increase in GDP per capita
of 12% to produce an equivalent increase in life satisfaction.


4. New Evidence on Well-being Effects of Different Types of Trust

The results in the previous section were focused on social trust. Here we try to estimate,
relying mainly on the European Social Survey, the relative importance of several types of
interpersonal and institutional trust. We concentrate on five different measures, all
reported on a scale ranging from 0 to10: social trust, trust in police, trust in three aspects
of governance- the legal system, parliament, and politicians. The simple correlations in
the appendix show significant positive correlations among all pairs, with the tightest pairs
being parliament and politicians (r=0.73), police and the legal system (r=0.67) and
parliament and the legal system (r=0.65). Social trust has the lowest correlations with the
other variables, about r=0.3 in each case. Given the close logical and statistical relations
among the trust measures, we might expect it to be difficult to assess their separate and
combined influence. However, when they are all entered in the same equation to explain
life evaluations (as measured by the average answer to life satisfaction and happy with
life) on an individual basis for roughly 260,000 respondents in 32 European countries,
2002-2012, they are all individually significant, permitting us to rank their individual
importance and estimate their combined contributions to well-being.

Figure 2 shows the levels, and 95% significance bounds, for six different coefficients.
Two are for social trust, the first from an equation in which social trust is included
without any other trust measures, and the second from an equation in which the other four
trust measures are all included. Columns 1 and 2 of Appendix Table 6 report the
underlying estimates. When social trust is on its own, the coefficient is 0.11, and this falls
to 0.08 when all of the other trust measures are included. This drop reflects the positive
correlations reported above. Bearing in mind that the ESS trust variables are measured on
a scale running from 0 to 10, the social trust effects are very large in either specification.
Moving up just one standard deviation (2.5 points on the 0 to 10 scale) in social trust
would thereby increase life evaluations by 0.28 points with the larger social trust effect,
or by 0.20 points with the other trust variables included. Moving from the bottom to the
top of the social trust scale would raise life evaluations by 1.1 points or 0.80 points in the
two cases.




                                             12
Figure 2: Estimated trust effects from ESS

   .15
   .1
   .05
   0

                e)




                              st




                                               e




                                                                                       t




                                                                                                            ns
                                                                   em




                                                                                     en
                                            lic
                         tru
             on




                                                                                                          ia
                                                                 st




                                                                                   am
                                          po




                                                                                                       ic
           al




                                                               sy
                         al




                                                                                                    lit
            (




                                                                                 rli
                                          n
                       ci




                                                                                                  po
         st




                                                               l
                                        i




                                                                               pa
                                                            ga
                     So




                                     st
    tru




                                                                                                  n
                                      u




                                                          le




                                                                               n




                                                                                                i
                                   Tr




                                                                             i
    al




                                                                                             st
                                                          n




                                                                          st
  ci




                                                        i




                                                                                              u
                                                                           u
                                                     st




                                                                                           Tr
So




                                                                        Tr
                                                      u
                                                   Tr




                                                   Estimated effect on SWB
                                                   95% confidence interval




What about the ranking of the different trust variables? Social trust and trust in police
have the largest effects on well-being, about 0.08 in both cases, for a one-point change in
the ten-step trust assessment. Each of these variables reflects each person’s experience in
their own lives, coupled with what they hear from friends and hear and see in the media.
Social trust averages 4.91 across the ESS countries, compared to 5.77 for trust in police.

The other three variables reflect trust in institutions less closely connected to daily life –
the legal system, parliament, and politicians. In each case, those who have more trust in
the institutions in question report higher life evaluations. The estimated well-being effects
of moving up one point in the ten-point trust evaluation scale are significant in each case,
ranging from +0.019 for the legal system to +0.026 for parliament and +0.023 for
politicians. What is the scope for more institutional trust to make people happier with
their lives? In all three cases the current levels of trust are at or below the mid-point on
the 10-point scale, being highest at 4.99 for the legal system, 4.32 for parliament, and
lowest for politicians (3.46). If trust in the three linked institutions were to be higher by
one point on the 10-point scale, the estimated combined effect on well-being would be
0.068 points, a substantial boost, although less than for either trust in police or social
trust.

Putting all these results together, any estimate of the effects of social trust alone shows it
to provide very much a lower bound on the likely effects of the overall environment of


                                                              13
trust. For example, using social trust on its own to represent all the other forms of trust
provides a well-being impact of 0.11 for moving up one point on the 10-point trust scale.
Moving up one standard deviation, 2.5 points, on the trust scale would thus translate into
an increase of 0.28 points in life evaluations. This is a very substantial estimate, to be
sure. But if we instead use the results from the equation with all five trust measures, and
add up the increases in well-being that would be estimated to follow, we get a total well-
being increase of 0.23 points from a one-point increase on the ten-point scale. Moving up
all five types of trust by one-standard deviation, about 2.5 points in each case, would thus
be estimated to increase subjective well-being by 0.58 points.

Thus we can conclude, based on the ESS evidence, with its larger range of trust measures
and large samples of respondents, that the benefits of a high trust environment are likely
to be more than twice as high if a broader range of trust measures is taken into account.
The overall well-being increase from higher trust would be even higher if workplace
trust, which is not measured in the ESS, and has been shown to be at least as important as
any of the other trust domains, were taken into account.


5. Trust and Resilience at the Individual Level

Here we estimate the extent to which the positive linkage between social trust and well-
being at the individual level can be traced to the help it provides individuals to deal with
difficult circumstances. Our evidence is drawn from the European Social Survey, because
it provides the largest international survey with continuing measures of social trust. The
basic idea is fairly simple – that living in a high-trust environment increases both the
psychological and external resources available to individuals to weather storms of one
sort or another. We thus see a parallel between what this evidence might show and what
has already been studied at the community and national level - that on average
communities or groups with higher levels of social capital are better able to deal with
storms and other natural disasters.

Difficult circumstances reduce subjective well-being both because of unpleasant
immediate consequences and fears about the chances of future adversity. Why might
higher levels of social trust or connectedness reduce the physical or psychological costs
of adversity? Consider, for a particular example, the subjective well-being of people who
perceive themselves as belonging to a group that is discriminated against in their country.
Looking across the ESS sample, this is true for about 7% of respondents, or 20,000
among the quarter-million who provided subjective life evaluations in the six waves of
the ESS spanning the years 2002-2012. As shown in the ESS results discussed in section
3 and reported in detail in the statistical appendix, to feel oneself a member of a group
likely to be discriminated against is associated with a decline of 0.68 in a life assessment
on a 0 to 10 scale. This is a drop as large as would accompany moving more than half-
way down the income distribution. This group of respondents includes those who have
been subject to discrimination, those who fear they might be so subjected in the future,
and those have neither felt past not expect to see future discrimination against themselves
personally, but perceive actual or potential discrimination against others. Those who have



                                             14
high social trust are less likely to interpret past or present actions as discriminatory, and
less likely to anticipate future discrimination. And they are also more likely, given their
high social trust, to think that others will lend a hand to stop discriminatory actions by
others. Thus we would hypothesize that those with higher social trust would face a
significantly smaller well-being cost from being a member of a group that they think to
be subject to discrimination.

Similar theoretical arguments can be made to support the idea that either ill-health or
unemployment would cause less damage to well-being to those individuals who see
themselves as living in a high-trust environment. Presumably that is the sort of
environment where others would be more likely to lend a helping hand if needed, and to
maintain a watchful eye just in case.

Just as high social trust may lessen the subjective well-being damage from unfortunate
events or circumstances, so it might lessen the need for, and advantages from, additional
social connections of types that generally increase social trust and well-being. Thus we
might expect to find that while people with low social trust actually meet less frequently
with friends (by 0.35 on the 7-point scale, p<0.001) they may have more to gain from
doing so. Conversely, those who already see themselves as living in a high-trust
environment may have less to gain, either through higher trust or other well-being
benefits of spending more time with friends.

All of these considerations lead us to hypothesize that the well-being effects of a
discriminatory environment, ill-health, unemployment and time spent with friends may
all be significantly less for those who generally think that other people can be trusted. To
test these hypotheses, we use the binary social trust variable described earlier, dividing
the whole sample of social trust answers into two groups. Those who answer 7 and above
on the 10-point scale are taken to being belong to the high-trust group, comprising just
over 30% of the sample. A high-trust variable is created, with the value of 1.0 for each of
those who have answered 7 or above on the ESS social trust question. Its average value
of 0.3 fairly close to the fraction of the population in these same countries who answer
yes rather than no to the binary trust question often asked in other surveys. We multiply
the high-trust variable by the each of the hypothesized variables: member of a group
discriminated against, unemployed, in ill-health and frequency of meeting with friends.
These four variables are entered into the original equation (see last column of Table 6 in
the Statistical Appendix). All are expected to show attenuation in the effects of the four
variables. Thus we expect a positive coefficient in the case of the three negative events,
and a negative coefficient reducing the positive effects from the frequency of meeting
with friends.




                                              15
Figure 3. Estimated interactive effects from ESS

     .3
     .2
     .1
     0
     -.1


                    up




                                    th




                                                                          t




                                                                                                         s
                                                                       en




                                                                                                       nd
                                  al
                  o




                                                                      m




                                                                                                      e
                               he
               gr




                                                                                                   fri
                                                                   oy
               ed




                             Ill




                                                                                                   g
                                                                pl




                                                                                                tin
             at




                                                               m
          in




                                                                                              ee
                                                            ne
        im




                                                                                          m
                                                          U
     cr




                                                                                         cy
  is




                                                                                       en
 D




                                                                                   e qu
                                                                                Fr
                                         Interactive effect with social trust >= 7
                                         95% confidence interval




Figure 3 shows the results, which in all cases support the hypotheses, with coefficients
that are large in size and statistical significance. In the first example case we discussed, of
being in a group subject to discrimination, the well-being damage is 0.26 points, or 38%,
(p<0.001) less for high trusters than for the rest of the population, holding all else
constant. This is consistent with other research using community belonging as a buffer
against the individual well-being costs of discrimination (Branscombe, Daley, & Phipps,
2016). Their research finds an almost complete offset, perhaps because their evidence is
taken from those who have actually faced discrimination, or because community
belonging provides a better measure of the relevant social support.

Moving up one point on the ill-health scale (with 1 for the best of health and 5 for the
worst) is correlated with 0.64 reduction in the life evaluations for the low-trust group
compared to 0.46 for the high-trust group, a reduction of 28% (p<.001).

For unemployment, those in the low-trust group face a 0.84-point lower life evaluation.
This effect is reduced by 0.12 points, or 14% (p<0.05) for those in the high-trust group.

Finally, there is also attenuation of the gains from more time spent with family and
friends. Increasing the frequency of meeting with friends by 1.0 (on a scale ranging from
1 to 7) raises life evaluations by 0.16 points for those in the low-trust group, compared to
0.11 for those in the high trust group. Frequency of meeting with friends matters



                                                       16
significantly for both groups (p<0.001), but is nonetheless one third smaller (p<0.003) for
those in the high-trust group.

Taken together, these resilience-providing channels between social trust and well-being
offset more than one-quarter (26%) of the combined damage from the three unfavourable
events, reducing it from 2.2 points to 1.6 points on the 0 to 10 scale of life evaluation.
The gains from social meeting with friends also are reduced by roughly one-quarter.
These four channels together account for almost one-third of the total benefits of high
trust for subjective well-being, as shown by the coefficient on the binary trust variable
falling from 0.45 in the equation without the interaction terms to 0.33 where the
interaction terms are included. We of course expect to find that social trust will continue
to have most of its total positive effects on well-being arising from the large majority of
the population who are employed, in good health, and are not members of groups felt
thought likely to be subject to discrimination. Nonetheless, our tests show that social trust
has much greater proportionate advantages for those who are subject to ill-health,
unemployment and discrimination. Thus the well-being gap between the advantaged and
disadvantaged, in terms of employment, health and discrimination would be significantly
narrower if trust levels were generally higher, Thus increases in social trust would not
only raise average levels of well-being for all, but would reduce its inequality, by raising
well-being more for the disadvantaged than for the rest of the population.


6. Summary and Policy Applications

There are several conclusions that flow from our new results. First, we have used the
largest available sets of international data to demonstrate large income-equivalent values
for social trust, with a likely lower bound equivalent to moving two or three income
deciles, or alternatively a doubling of household income. A companion paper (Hamilton,
Helliwell, & Woolcock, 2016) estimates that social trust alone represents, on these
valuations, a significant part of total national and global wealth, on the order of 20% of
total wealth as measured by the World Bank. This in itself has implications for policy,
emphasizing the importance of paying earlier and deeper attention to maintaining and
improving the social fabric.

Second, the more detailed and precisely measured trust data in the European Social
Survey was used to show that social trust, while of central importance to well-being, is
only a part of the overall climate of trust. We found significant additional well-being
links from several different measures of trust. Social trust and trust in police are
estimated to be the most important, but we found also significant additional benefits from
trust in three key aspects of the institutional environment: the legal system, parliament
and politicians. Other surveys including workplace trust have found it to be of great value
to individual well-being as well, above and beyond its effects on workplace efficiency.
Thus any estimates of the total well-being value of a trustworthy environment will be
larger than those based solely on social trust.




                                             17
Third, we were found strongly suggestive evidence that living in a high-trust environment
makes people more resilient in the face of several types of adversity. In particular, being
subject to discrimination, ill-health or unemployment, while always damaging to
subjective well-being, is much less damaging to those living in more trustworthy
environments. This evidence provides a natural individual-level counterpart to the more
aggregate evidence that community-level and national-level responses to natural disasters
are much more favorable to well-being in a high-trust environment. These individual-
level effects reveal also a fresh set of links between trust and inequality. Those who are
subject to discrimination, ill-health or unemployment are typically concentrated towards
the lower end of the national distribution of happiness. Thus the resilience-increasing
feature of social trust, which channels its benefits especially to those subject to adversity,
thereby reduces the inequality of well-being as well as raising its average value. And has
been shown elsewhere (Goff et al., 2016), reductions in the inequality of well-being are
themselves likely to feed back to improve the climate of social trust, since the links
between wellbeing inequality and social trust are even closer than those running from
income inequality to social trust.

Finally, the ESS country-level results with country fixed effects show that within-country
changes in social trust can have significant effects on subjective well-being within policy-
relevant time horizons.




                                             18
                                         References

Aldrich, D. P. (2011). The externalities of strong social capital: Post-tsunami recovery in
Southeast India. Journal of Civil Society, 7(1), 81-99.

Aldrich, D. P. (2012). Social, not physical, infrastructure: the critical role of civil society
after the 1923 Tokyo earthquake. Disasters, 36(3), 398-419.

Algan, Y., & Cahuc, P. (2014). Trust, growth and well-being: New evidence and policy
implications. In P. Aghion & S. Durlauf (Eds.), Handbook of economic growth Vol. 2 (pp.
49-120). Elsevier.

Almond, G., & Verba, S. (1963). The civic culture: political attitudes and democracy in
five countries. Princeton: Princeton University.

Bjørnskov, C. (2003). The happy few: Cross-country evidence on social capital and life
satisfaction. Kyklos, 56(1), 3-16.

Bjørnskov, C. (2006). The multiple facets of social capital. European Journal of Political
Economy, 22(1), 22-40.

Bjørnskov, C. (2007). Determinants of generalized trust: A cross-country comparison.
Public choice, 130(1-2), 1-21.

Bjørnskov, C. (2008). Social capital and happiness in the United States. Applied Research
in Quality of Life, 3(1), 43-62.

Branscombe, N., Daley, A., & Phipps, S. (2016). Perceived discrimination, belonging and
the life satisfaction of Canadian adolescents with disabilities. Halifax: Dalhousie
Department of Economics Working Paper, forthcoming.

Cassar, A., Healy, A., & Von Kessler, C. (2011). Trust, risk, and time preferences after a
natural disaster: Experimental evidence from Thailand. University of San Francisco
Working Paper.

Castillo, M., & Carter, M. (2011). Behavioral responses to natural disasters. Unpublished
Manuscript.

Delhey, J., Newton, K., & Welzel, C. (2011). How general is trust in “most people”?
Solving the radius of trust problem. American Sociological Review, 76(5), 786-807.

Dinesen, P. T., & Sonderskov, K. M. (2016). Trust: Inheritance or adaptation? In R.
Uslaner (Eds.), Handbook on Social and Political Trust. Oxford University Press,
forthcoming.




                                              19
Dussaillant, F., & Guzmán, E. (2014). Trust via disasters: The case of Chile’s 2010
earthquake. Disasters, 38(4), 808-832.

Dussaillant, F., & Guzmán, E. (2015). Disasters as an opportunity to build social capital.
International Journal of Emergency Mental Health and Human Resilience, 2015.

Fischer, D. H. (1991). Albion’s seed: Four British Folkways in America. Oxford
University Press.

Fleming, D. A., Chong, A., & Bejarano, H. D. (2014). Trust and reciprocity in the
aftermath of natural disasters. The Journal of Development Studies, 50(11), 1482-1493.

Fleming, C. M., Manning, M., & Ambrey, C. L. (2016). Crime, greenspace and life
satisfaction: An evaluation of the New Zealand experience. Landscape and Urban
Planning, 149, 1-10.

Frank, K., Hou, F., & Schellenberg, G. (2015). Life satisfaction among recent immigrants
in Canada: Comparisons to source-country and host-country populations. Journal of
Happiness Studies, 1-22.

Fukuyama, F. (2001). Social capital, civil society and development. Third World
Quarterly, 22(1), 7-20.

Goff, L., Helliwell, J. F., & Mayraz, G. (2016). The welfare costs of well-being
inequality. National Bureau of Economic Research working paper no. w21900.

Hamilton, K., Helliwell, J. F., & Woolcock, M. (2016). Social capital, trust and well-
being in the evaluation of wealth. In K. Hamilton & C. Hepburn (Eds.), Wealth:
Economics and Policy. Oxford University Press, forthcoming.

Helliwell, J. F. (2003). How’s life? Combining individual and national variables to
explain subjective well-being. Economic Modelling, 20(2), 331-360.

Helliwell, J. F. (2006). Well-being, social capital and public policy: What’s new?
Economic Journal, 116(510), C34-C45.

Helliwell, J. F. (2007). Well-being and social capital: Does suicide pose a puzzle? Social
Indicators Research, 81(3), 455-496.

Helliwell, J. F., Barrington-Leigh, C. P., Harris, A., & Huang, H. (2010). International
evidence on the social context of well-being. In E. Diener, J. F., Helliwell, & D.
Kahneman (Eds.), International differences in well-being (pp. 291–327), Oxford
University Press.




                                            20
Helliwell, J. F., Bonikowska, A., & Shiplett, H. (2016). Migration as a test of the
happiness set-point hypothesis: Evidence from immigration to Canada. National Bureau
of Economic Research working paper, forthcoming.

Helliwell, J. F., Huang, H., & Wang, S. (2014). Social capital and well-being in times of
crisis. Journal of Happiness Studies, 15(1), 145-162.

Helliwell, J. F., & Putnam, R. D. (2004). The social context of well-being. Philosophical
Transactions-Royal Society of London Series B Biological Sciences, 359(1449), 1435-
1446.

Helliwell, J. F., & Wang, S. (2011). Trust and well-being, International Journal of
Wellbeing, 1(1), 42-78.

Helliwell, J. F., Wang, S., & Xu, J. (2015). How durable are social norms? Immigrant
trust and generosity in 132 countries. Social Indicators Research, 1-19.

Kawachi, I. (2016). Trust and public health. In R. Uslaner (Eds.), Handbook on social
and political trust. Oxford University Press, forthcoming.

Knack, S. (2001). Trust, associational life and economic performance. In J. F. Helliwell
& A. Bonikowska (Eds.), The contribution of human and social capital to sustained
economic growth and well-being (pp. 172-202), Ottawa: Government of Canada.

Hommerich, C. (2012). Trust and subjective well‐being after the Great East Japan
Earthquake, Tsunami and Nuclear Meltdown: Preliminary results. International Journal
of Japanese Sociology, 21(1), 46-64.

Kahn, M. E. (2005). The death toll from natural disasters: the role of income, geography,
and institutions. Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(2), 271-284.

Lau, M., & Li, W. (2011). The extent of family and school social capital promoting
positive subjective well-being among primary school children in Shenzhen, China.
Children and Youth Services Review, 33(9), 1573-1582.

Lucchini, M., Bella, S. D., & Crivelli, L. (2015). Social capital and life satisfaction in
Switzerland. International Journal of Happiness and Development, 2(3), 250-268.

Nagler, M. G. (2013). Does social capital promote safety on the roads? Economic
Inquiry, 51(2), 1218-1231.

Nagler, M. G., & Ward, N. J. (2016). Lonely highways: The role of social capital in rural
traffic safety. Eastern Economic Journal, 42(1), 135-156.

Portes, A. (2014). Downsides of social capital. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 111(52), 18407-18408.


                                              21
Rice, T. W., & Feldman, J. L. (1997). Civic culture and democracy from Europe to
America. The Journal of Politics, 59(04), 1143-1172.

Rothstein, B., & Uslaner, E. M. (2005). All for all: Equality, corruption, and social trust.
World Politics, 58(01), 41-72.

Toya, H., & Skidmore, M. (2014). Do natural disasters enhance societal trust? Kyklos,
67(2), 255-279.

Uchida, Y., Takahashi, Y., & Kawahara, K. (2014). Changes in hedonic and eudaimonic
well-being after a severe nationwide disaster: The case of the Great East Japan
Earthquake. Journal of Happiness Studies, 15(1), 207-221.

Uslaner, E. M. (2008). Where you stand depends upon where your grandparents sat: The
inheritability of generalized trust. Public Opinion Quarterly, 72(4), 725-740.

Yamamura, E., Tsutsui, Y., Yamane, C., Yamane, S., & Powdthavee, N. (2015). Trust
and happiness: Comparative study before and after the Great East Japan Earthquake.
Social Indicators Research, 123(3), 919-935.

Yip, W., Subramanian, S. V., Mitchell, A. D., Lee, D. T., Wang, J., & Kawachi, I.
(2007). Does social capital enhance health and well-being? Evidence from rural China.
Social Science & Medicine, 64(1), 35-49.




                                             22
