                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 HETEROGENEITY AND UNEMPLOYMENT DYNAMICS

                                          Hie Joo Ahn
                                       James D. Hamilton

                                      Working Paper 22451
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22451


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                             July 2016, Revised June 2018




The views in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted
as reflecting the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or of any other
person associated with the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research. We thank Stephanie Aaronson, Katarina Borovickova, Shigeru Fujita and Ryan
Michaels for helpful comments on an earlier draft of this paper.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Hie Joo Ahn and James D. Hamilton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Heterogeneity and Unemployment Dynamics
Hie Joo Ahn and James D. Hamilton
NBER Working Paper No. 22451
July 2016, Revised June 2018
JEL No. E24

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper develops new estimates of flows into and out of unemployment that allow for
unobserved heterogeneity across workers as well as direct effects of unemployment duration on
unemployment-exit probabilities. Unlike any previous paper in this literature, we develop a
complete dynamic statistical model that allows us to measure the contribution of different shocks
to the short-run, medium-run, and long-run variance of unemployment as well as to specific
historical episodes. We find that changes in the inflows of newly unemployed are the key driver
of economic recessions and identify an increase in permanent job loss as the most important
factor.


Hie Joo Ahn
Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System
20th & C Street, NW.
Washington, D.C. 20551
HieJoo.Ahn@frb.gov

James D. Hamilton
Department of Economics, 0508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
jhamilton@ucsd.edu
Introduction

    What accounts for the sharp spike in the unemployment rate during recessions? The answer
traditionally given by macroeconomists was that falling product demand leads ﬁrms to lay oﬀ
workers, with these inﬂows into unemployment a key driver of economic downturns. That view
has been challenged by Hall (2005), Shimer (2012) and Hall and Schulhofer-Wohl (2017), who argued
that cyclical ﬂuctuations in the unemployment rate are instead primarily driven by declines in the
job-ﬁnding rates for unemployed workers. By contrast, Yashiv (2007), Elsby, Michaels and Solon
(2009), Fujita and Ramey (2009), and Fujita (2011) concluded that ﬂows into the unemployment
pool are as important or more important than outﬂows as cyclical drivers of the unemployment
rate.
    These papers are part of a large literature that tries to measure the relative importance of
inﬂows and outﬂows to unemployment. Our paper is the ﬁrst to do this using maximum likelihood
estimation of a complete dynamic model. This is a critical step because the unemployment rate
is very serially correlated and possibly nonstationary. The variance of a nonstationary variable is
not deﬁned. Trying to measure how much of the variance of unemployment comes from inﬂows
versus outﬂows is not a well-posed question in the absence of a full dynamic model.                                  With a
complete dynamic model, we can forecast variables like unemployment at any horizon. As in den
Haan (2000) and Hamilton (forthcoming), the variance of the error associated with the forecast is
well deﬁned regardless of whether the series is stationary, and we can measure the fraction of this
variance that is attributable to inﬂows and outﬂows as a function of the horizon. Our framework
also allows us to decompose the forecast error associated with any given historical episode into the
respective contributions of inﬂows and outﬂows. These represent key innovations of our approach
that are entirely new to this literature.
    The main reason that we are able to do what others have not is that we directly confront another
core issue— unobserved heterogeneity.                One can see the critical importance of taking this into
account in Figure 1, which plots the stark diﬀerences in unemployment-continuation probabilities
between the newly unemployed and the long-term unemployed.1                              On average, someone who is
    1
     Let Ũtn.+ denote the seasonally unadjusted number of individuals in month t who report having been unemployed
for n months or longer at that time. The seasonally unadjusted monthly unemployment-continuation probability for
the long-term unemployed was calculated as p̃t4.+ = (Ũt+3      7.+
                                                                    /Ũt4.+ )1/3 . The probability for the newly unemployed was
calculated as the solution to p̃1t (1 + p̃1t ) = Ũt+1
                                                   2.3
                                                       /Ũt1 . The ﬁgure plots 12-month moving averages of p̃t .


                                                              1
newly unemployed has less than a 50% chance of still being unemployed next month. By contrast,
if someone has already been unemployed for 4 months or longer, there is an 80% chance they will
still be unemployed the next month.               The newly unemployed during the Great Recession had
better job-ﬁnding prospects than did the long-term unemployed during the strongest economic
boom.      Diﬀerences in unemployment-continuation probabilities between the newly unemployed
and long-term unemployed can make a huge diﬀerence for any calculations about unemployment
dynamics.
    Figure 2 illustrates how ex ante heterogeneity across workers could explain why unemployment-
continuation probabilities are observed to increase as a function of duration. Suppose for example
that 80% of the newly unemployed have unemployment-continuation probability of 35% and 20%
have probability of 85%.           Then the average continuation probability will rise as a function of
duration as the latter group comes to make up a larger portion of the remaining unemployed.
    All of the previous papers in this literature that tried to allow for heterogeneity across workers
did so based on diﬀerences in observable characteristics such as demographics, education, industry,
occupation, geographical region, and reason for unemployment.2 However, regardless of what ob-
servable characteristics we condition on, dramatic diﬀerences in unemployment-continuation prob-
abilities between the newly unemployed and long-term unemployed remain.3 No two individuals
with the same coarse observable characteristics are in fact identical. It seems undeniable that
a given pool of unemployed individuals that conditions on any set of observed characteristics is
likely to become increasingly represented by those with higher ex ante continuation probabilities
the longer the period of time for which the individuals have been unemployed.4 Showing how to
incorporate unobserved heterogeneity into a dynamic model of observed variables is the second
    2
      Baker (1992), Shimer (2012), and Kroft, et al. (2016) found that such variables contributed little to variation over
time in long-term unemployment rates, while Aaronson, Mazumder and Schechter (2010), Bachmann and Sinning
(2012), Barnichon and Figura (2015), Hall (2014), and Hall and Schulhofer-Wohl (2017) documented important
diﬀerences across observable characteristics. Elsby, Michaels and Solon (2009) found that incorporating observable
heterogeneity reduced the imputed role of cyclical variation in unemployment exit rates.
    3
      For example, for individuals who gave involuntary permanent separation as the reason for unemployment, the
average unemployment-continuation probability since 1994:M1 (the sample for which this ﬁner separation exists) was
70% for the newly unemployed and 84% for the long-term unemployed.
    4
      Several recent studies have found that observable characteristics that were not considered in the earlier literature
can further explain diﬀerences in unemployment durations. Faberman and Kudlyak (2017) discovered that how much
time newly unemployed devote to searching for a new job predicts how long they will remain unemployed. Kudlyak
and Lange (2017) demonstrated that a newly unemployed individual who the previous month had been classiﬁed
as not in the labor force is likely to remain unemployed longer than a newly unemployed individual who had been
employed the previous month. And Morchio (2016) documented that 2/3 of prime-age unemployment comes from
only 10% of the workers.


                                                            2
main contribution of our paper.
    The diﬀerence in unemployment-continuation probabilities between the newly unemployed and
long-term unemployed could reﬂect not just ex ante heterogeneity but also the possibility that
the experience of being unemployed for a longer period of time directly changes the employment
probability for a ﬁxed individual. Following van den Berg and van Ours (1996) we will refer to
this possibility as “genuine duration dependence”. Individuals lose human capital the longer they
are unemployed (Acemoglu, 1995; Ljungqvist and Sargent, 1998), and employers may statistically
discriminate against those who have been unemployed for longer (Eriksson and Rooth, 2014; Kroft,
Lange, and Notowidigdo, 2013).5
    A large literature has discussed the diﬃculty of distinguishing genuine duration dependence from
unobserved heterogeneity.6         A common resolution has been to assume that there is no variation
over time in unobserved heterogeneity, in which case identiﬁcation can be achieved by observing
repeated spells of unemployment for a given individual (Honoré,1993).                      Here we instead use a
proportional hazards speciﬁcation in which the identifying assumptions are that genuine duration
dependence does not change over time while changes in unobserved heterogeneity are characterized
by a simple parametric model. Although this approach imposes some restrictions, we will show
that it provides a natural, compelling, and robust way of interpreting the observed data.                         The
resulting new perspective on cyclical unemployment dynamics is the third main contribution of the
paper.
    In Section 1 we introduce the data that we will use in this analysis based on the number of job-
seekers each month who report they have been looking for work at various search durations. We
describe the accounting identities that will later be used in our full dynamic model and use average
values of observable variables over the sample to explain the intuition behind our identiﬁcation
strategy. We also use these calculations to illustrate why cross-sectional heterogeneity appears to
be more plausible than genuine duration dependence as an explanation for the broad features of
these data.
    In Section 2 we extend this framework into a full dynamic model in which we represent hetero-
    5
      Jarosch and Pilossoph (2015) demonstrated that the quantitative magnitude of statistical discrimination found
in these studies could in fact be consistent with the claim that cross-section heterogeneity is the primary explanation
for the observed tendency of unemployment-continuation probabilities to rise with duration of unemployment.
    6
      See for example Elbers and Ridder (1982), Heckman and Singer (1984a,b,c), Ridder (1990), Honoré (1993), and
van den Berg (2001).


                                                          3
geneity in terms of two diﬀerent types of workers at any given date. Type H workers have a higher
ex ante probability of exiting unemployment than type L workers, and all workers are also subject
to genuine duration dependence eﬀects as well. Our model postulates that the number of newly
unemployed individuals of either type, as well as the probability for each type of exiting the pool
of unemployed at each date, evolve according to unobserved random walks. We show how one can
approximate the likelihood function for the observed unemployment data and form an inference
about each of the state variables at every date in the sample using an extended Kalman ﬁlter.7
    Empirical results are reported in Section 3. Broken down in terms of inﬂows versus outﬂows,
we ﬁnd that variation over time in the inﬂows of the newly unemployed are more important than
outﬂows from unemployment in accounting for errors in predicting aggregate unemployment at all
horizons. Broken down in terms of types of workers, inﬂow and outﬂow probabilities for type L
workers are more important than those for type H workers, and account for 90% of the uncertainty
in predicting unemployment 2 years ahead. In recessions since 1990, shocks to the inﬂows of type
L workers were the most important cause of rising unemployment during the recession.
    In Section 4 we provide corroboration of these conclusions using a number of alternative data
sources and methods. We show why data that have been pointed to as demonstrating the impor-
tance of outﬂows in fact support the opposite conclusion when properly interpreted.
    In Section 5 we investigate the robustness of our approach to various alternative speciﬁcations,
including alternative methods to account for the change in the CPS questionnaire in 1994, allowing
for correlation between the innovations of the underlying structural shocks in our model, and the
possible eﬀects of time aggregation. While such factors could produce changes in some of the details
of our inference, our overall conclusions (summarized in Section 6) appear to be quite robust.



1       Observable implications of unobserved heterogeneity

    The purpose of this section is to use steady-state calculations to explain how our approach allows
for both unobserved heterogeneity and genuine duration dependence and provide the intuition
    7
     Our approach is closely related to that in Hornstein (2012), who used dynamic accounting identities to interpret
aggregate panel dynamics in a similar way to that in our paper. However, Hornstein’s model was unidentiﬁed— in
terms of the discussion of identiﬁcation in Section 1, his model has 5 unknowns and only 4 equations. As a result, his
speciﬁcation did not allow him to calculate the likelihood function for the observed data or forecasts of unemployment
or duration. By contrast, our model generates values for all these along with the optimal statistical inference about
the various shocks driving the observed dynamics of unemployment.


                                                          4
behind some of the results that will be found in Section 3 using our full dynamic model.
    The Bureau of Labor Statistics reports for each month t the number of working-age individuals
who have been unemployed for less than 5 weeks. Our baseline model is speciﬁed at the monthly
frequency, leading us to use the notation Ut1 for the above BLS-reported magnitude, indicating these
individuals have been unemployed for 1 month or less as of month t. BLS also reports the number
who have been unemployed for between 5 and 14 weeks (or 2-3 months, denoted Ut2.3 ), 15-26 weeks
(Ut4.6 ) and longer than 26 weeks (Ut7.+ ). One reason the BLS reports the data in terms of these
duration aggregates is to try to minimize the role of measurement error by averaging within broad
groups. We will do the same thing in our paper. Our theoretical model will generate a prediction of
the number of unemployed at every monthly duration, but we will only use the model’s implications
about broad duration aggregates for purposes of calculating the likelihood function of the observed
data.8   Notwithstanding, when reporting on long-term unemployment, many BLS publications9
further break down the Ut7.+ category into those unemployed with duration 7-12 months (Ut7.12 )
and those with duration longer than 1 year (Ut13.+ ). Since long-term unemployment is also a major
interest in our investigation, we have used the raw CPS micro data from which the usual publicly
reported aggregates are constructed to create these last two series for our study.10
    The average values over the full sample of these ﬁve observed variables on which our inference
will be based are reported in the ﬁrst row of Table 1. Our purpose in this paper is to explore what
variation in these duration-speciﬁc counts across time can tell us about unemployment dynamics.
Our focus will be on the following question— of those individuals who are newly unemployed at
time t, what fraction will still be unemployed at time t + k? We presume that the answer to this
question depends not just on aggregate economic conditions over the interval (t, t + k) but also on
the particular characteristics of those individuals. Let wit denote the number of people of type i
who are newly unemployed at time t, where we interpret

                                                         I
                                                Ut1 =         wit .                                        (1)
                                                        i=1


   8
       In January 2011 the BLS changed the maximum allowable unemployment duration response from 2 years to 5
years. Although this aﬀected the BLS’s own estimate of average duration of unemployment, it did not change the
total numbers unemployed by the duration categories we use. This is another reason to favor our approach, which
relies only on aggregated data.
     9
       See for example Bureau of Labor Statistics (2011) and Ilg and Theodossiou (2012).
    10
       See Appendix A for further details of data construction.


                                                        5
We deﬁne Pit (k) as the fraction of individuals of type i who were unemployed for one month or
less as of date t − k and are still unemployed and looking for work at t. Thus the total number of
individuals who have been unemployed for exactly k + 1 months at time t is given by

                                                         I
                                             Utk+1 =         wi,t−k Pit (k).                                         (2)
                                                       i=1


    We ﬁrst examine what we could infer about unobserved types based only on the historical
average values Ū 1 , Ū 2.3 , Ū 4.6 , Ū 7.12 , and Ū 13.+ , and then will consider what additional information
can be learned from variation over time in these ﬁve variables.


1.1     Inference using historical average values alone

    Suppose for purposes of this section only that the number of newly unemployed individuals of
each type remained constant over time at values wi and also that the probabilities that individuals
of each type remain unemployed in any given month are constants pi for i = 1, ..., I. Consider
ﬁrst the case when there is only one type of worker (I = 1). Under these assumptions (2) would
simplify to U k+1 = wpk . Given the average observed values for U k for two diﬀerent values of k,
we could then estimate the values of w and p, for example, ŵ = Ū 1 and p̂ = Ū 2 /Ū 1 . As noted
above, we regard aggregate measures like Ut2.3 as more reliable than a speciﬁc estimate such as Ut2
that could be constructed from CPS micro data, and therefore use instead p̂ + p̂2 = Ū 2.3 /Ū 1 . The
estimated values for ŵ and p̂ that result from this equation are reported in row 2 of Table 1 and
plotted in Panel A of Figure 3. The fact that the sum Ū 2.3 is signiﬁcantly lower than Ū 1 means
that most of the newly unemployed ﬁnd jobs quickly (p̂ = 0.48).                     But if workers who had been
unemployed for more than 3 months also had this same job-ﬁnding rate, there would be far fewer
workers in the 4-6 month, 7-12, and 13+ categories than we observe in the data, as represented by
the black circles in Figure 3.11
    Consider next the case when there are I = 2 types of workers. In this case (2) becomes


                                              U k+1 = wL pkL + wH pkH .                                              (3)
   11
     The black circles are used as a visual device to summarize the interval averages from row 1 of Table 1. Speciﬁcally,
they are the implied values at the particular durations 1, 3, 5, 9.5, and 15 months from a ﬂexible functional form
(equation (6)) that could predict numbers for every duration and whose predictions exactly match the observed
average values for the ﬁve observations in row 1 of Table 1.


                                                             6
This equation describes the average number of individuals who have been unemployed for k + 1
months as the sum of two diﬀerent functions of k, with each of the two functions being fully
characterized by two parameters (wi and pi ). The solid red curve in Panel B of Figure 3 plots
the ﬁrst function (wL pkL ), while the dotted blue curve plots the sum.                        Given observed values of
Ū 1 , Ū 2.3 , Ū 4.6 , and Ū 7.12 , we could estimate the four parameters (wL , wH , pL , pH ) to match exactly
those four observations, as in Panel B of Figure 3 and row 3 of Table 1.12 These estimates imply
that type H individuals comprise a very high fraction, 78%, of the initial pool of unemployed U 1 .
But the unemployment-continuation probability for type H individuals (pH = 0.36) is much lower
than for type L (pL = 0.85). Because the type H are likely to ﬁnd jobs relatively quickly, there are
very few type H individuals included in U n for durations n beyond 4 months, as seen in Panel B
of Figure 3. The key feature of the observed data (represented by the black dots in Figure 3) that
gives rise to this conclusion is the fact that the numbers drop oﬀ very quickly at low durations (as
most of the type H workers ﬁnd jobs), but after that much more slowly (as the remaining type L
workers continue searching).
    What about when I > 2? In this case we can still get a useful characterization of heterogeneity
across workers by separating them into two broad types. Speciﬁcally, for any true values for wi
and pi for i = 1, ..., I > 2 and any observed 4 durations k1 , k2 , k3 , k4 , we can ﬁnd values for the 4
parameters (ŵL , ŵH , p̂L , p̂H ) to approximate the cross-sectional distribution as the solutions to

                                                       I
                              ŵL p̂kL + ŵH p̂kH =         wi pki   for k = k1 , k2 , k3 , k4 .                     (4)
                                                      i=1


Note that if we only observed 4 duration categories, a mixture of two types is a fully general
characterization of heterogeneity in the sense that it can completely describe all the features ob-
servable in the data and provides the identical ﬁt to the observed data as would a speciﬁcation with
I > 2.13 Given measurement error in the CPS data, we do not believe we can reliably use more
than 5 observed duration categories, meaning estimation of more than I = 2 types is infeasible
using these data. In other data sets and in somewhat diﬀerent settings from ours, Ham and Rea
(1987), Van den Berg and van Ours (1996), and Van den Berg and van der Klaauw (2001) tested

   12
      Speciﬁcally, the four functions are obtained from equations (10)-(13) below for the special case when the left-hand
variables represent historical averages and on the right-hand side we set wit = wi , Pit (k) = pki , and rtx = 0.
   13
      This result can be viewed as an illustration of Theorem 3.1 in Heckman and Singer (1984b).


                                                                7
for the number of types and found I = 2 is suﬃcient to capture heterogeneiety in the data sets
they analyzed. In this paper we will represent heterogeneity in terms of a mixture of two types,
though we view this primarily as a convenient approximation for understanding how heterogeneity
can give rise to a slower drop-oﬀ in job-exit probabilities at higher durations than would be implied
by a homogeneous model as in Panel A of Figure 3. Our primary interest is to characterize how
and why this feature of the data changes over time, and a 2-component mixture representation can
faithfully capture this.14
    Although we did not use the ﬁfth data point, Ū 13.+ , in estimating these parameters, the frame-
work generates a prediction for what that observation would be.15 This is reported in the last entry
of row 3 of Table 1 to be 621,000 which is quite close to the observed value of 664,000. The feature
of the data that produced this result is that the observed numbers fall oﬀ at close to a constant
exponential rate once we get beyond 4 months, as the simple mixture model would predict.
    Alternatively, we could equally well describe the observed averages using a model in which there
is only genuine duration dependence (GDD). Suppose that an individual who has been unemployed
for τ months has a probability p(τ ) of still being unemployed the following month. We can always
write this in the form
                                                 p(τ ) = exp(− exp(dτ ))

for dτ an arbitrary function of τ . For example, we could ﬁt the 5 observations in the ﬁrst row of
Table 1 perfectly if we used w = Ū 1 along with a 4-parameter representation for dτ such as16


                                             dτ = δ 0 + δ 1 τ + δ 2 τ 2 + δ 3 τ 3 .                                          (5)


A large number of empirical studies have assumed Weibull durations, essentially corresponding to
δ 2 = δ 3 = 0. The values for δ j that would exactly ﬁt the historical averages are reported in row 4 of
   14
      For example, if in a true population for which I > 2 there is an increase in the level of inﬂows with no change
in outﬂows or relative composition (wi∗ = λwi and p∗i = pi for i = 1, ..., I), then a 2-mixture approximation would
correctly conclude that only the level of inﬂows has changed with no change in composition or in outﬂows; that is,
equation (4) would have the solution ŵi∗ = λŵi and p̂∗i = p̂i for i = H, L. Likewise if there is a proportional change
in all outﬂow probabilities with no change in composition or inﬂows in a population mixture of I types (wi∗ = wi
and p∗i = λpi for i = 1, ..., I), the 2-type approximation (4) would correctly conclude that ŵi∗ = ŵi and p̂∗i = λp̂i for
i = H, L since for each k the left and right sides of the equation are then multiplied by λk .
   15
      Following Hornstein (2012) we truncate all calculations at 48 months in equation (14). Most of the models
considered in this paper imply essentially zero probability of an unemployment spell exceeding 4 years in duration.
   16
      Speciﬁcally, we calculate U k+1 = wp(1)p(2) · · · p(k) and ﬁnd the values of w, δ 0 , δ 1 , δ 2 , δ 3 to match the observed
values in row 1 of Table 1.


                                                               8
Table 1 and the implied function p(τ ) is plotted in panel A of Figure 4. Note that in contrast to the
popular Weibull assumption and most theoretical models, the ﬁtted function (5) is not monotonic.
      If we were willing to restrict the functional form of GDD to the Weibull case, we could also
interpret the historical averages as resulting from a combination of unobserved heterogeneity and
GDD. Suppose we assumed proportional hazards17 and represent the probability that an individual
of type i who has been unemployed for τ months will still be unemployed the following month as


                                          pi (τ ) = exp{− exp[xi + dτ ]}                                          (6)


with implied unemployment counts


                                    U k+1 =       i=L,H   wi pi (1)pi (2) · · · pi (k).                           (7)


The value of xi for i = H, L reﬂects cross-sectional heterogeneity in unemployment-continuation
probabilities and dτ captures genuine duration dependence. As noted by Katz and Meyer (1990,
p. 992), this double-exponential functional form is a convenient way to implement a proportional
hazards speciﬁcation so as to guarantee a positive hazard18 , a feature that will be very helpful
for the generalization in the following section in which we will allow for variation of xit over
time.     Suppose we were willing to model GDD using a one-parameter function, say dτ = δ(τ −
1).     Then we could ﬁnd a value for the 5 parameters wL , wH , xL , xH , δ so as to ﬁt the 5 time-
series averages Ū 1 , Ū 2.3 , Ū 4.6 , Ū 7.12 , and Ū 13.+ exactly. These values are reported in row 5 of Table
1. The implied value for δ is close to zero, and the other parameters are close to those for the

  17
      Alvarez, Borovičková, and Shimer (2016) concluded that proportional hazards is not consistent with the observed
data. However, their identifying assumption was that the heterogeneous characteristics of individual i do not change
even if the individual is observed in diﬀerent decades. The assumption that employers’ demands for the speciﬁc
skills of individual i do not change over time seems to us extremely implausible. By contrast, our speciﬁcation in
the following section allows both an individual’s identiﬁcation with a particular group as well as the group’s average
unemployment-continuation probabilities to be continually changing, an approach that gives a proportional-hazards
speciﬁcation considerably more ﬂexibility.
   18
      Consider an individual i who has been unemployed for τ months as of the beginning of month t and let the
hazard within month t be λi,t,τ = exp(xit ) exp(dτ ) where the exponentiation is a device to guarantee that the hazard
is positive for any xit and dτ . The meaning of the hazard is that if we divide month t into n subintervals, the
probability that individual i exits unemployment in the interval (s, s + 1/n) is λi,t,τ /n + o(1/n) from which the
probability that the individual is still unemployed at the beginning of month t + 1 is

                        lim [1 − λi,t,τ /n + o(1/n)]n = exp(−λi,t,τ ) = exp[− exp(xit ) exp(dτ )].
                       n→∞




                                                            9
pure cross-sectional heterogeneity speciﬁcation of row 3.      Thus for this particular parametric
example, we would conclude that cross-sectional heterogeneity is much more important than genuine
duration dependence in accounting for why observed unemployment-continuation probabilities rise
with duration of unemployment. The feature of the data that gave rise to this conclusion is that
the 4-parameter pure heterogeneity model gives a very good prediction of all ﬁve observations.


1.2   Inference using changes over time

   Next consider what we can discover using time-series variation in the observed aggregates.
Suppose we repeat the above exercises only using data during the unemployment bulge around
the Great Recession.   Row 7 of Table 1 and Panel C of Figure 3 show the results if we tried to
explain these numbers entirely in terms of unobserved heterogeneity.      The implied value for the
unemployment-continuation probability for type L individuals, pL = 0.89, is only slightly higher
than the value 0.85 ﬁt to the full historical sample. The reason is that the function Ū n drops oﬀ
after n = 4 months at only a slightly slower rate than it did historically. However, we would infer
that the inﬂow of new type L individuals, wL = 1, 065 is much higher than the historical average
value of 690, in order to account for the fact that Ū n is now dropping oﬀ after 4 months from a
much higher base. We again ﬁnd that the 4-parameter model does a reasonable job of anticipating
the ﬁfth unused data point.
   If we instead tried to explain the recent averages purely in terms of GDD, we would use the
parameter values from row 8 of Table 1. These again could ﬁt the data perfectly, albeit relying on a
function with odd oscillations (see panel B of Figure 4). Although it is mathematically possible to
describe the data with this equation, it would be diﬃcult to motivate a theory of why GDD should
have changed shape in this way. It requires for example a steeper initial slope to the curve in panel
B of Figure 4 when economic conditions worsened, corresponding to the claim that the scarring
associated with unemployment is more severe during a recession. But this is directly contradicted
by the experimental ﬁnding of Kroft, Lange, and Notowidigdo (2013) that potential employers pay
less attention to applicants’ duration of unemployment when the labor market is weaker. We will
produce additional evidence in Section 4 below on predictability of changes in unemployment that
would also be very hard to interpret based on any theory of cyclically changing GDD.
   These concerns notwithstanding, would it be possible to allow for both an unrestricted non-

                                                 10
monotonic functional form for GDD as well as unobserved heterogeneity? The answer is deﬁnitely
yes once we take account of changes over time. Suppose for example we were to pool the observa-
tions from the ﬁrst row of Table 1 (the full-sample averages) together with those in row 6 (behavior
around the Great Recession), giving us a total of 10 observations. If we took the view that the
unobserved heterogeneity parameters may have changed over the cycle but that the GDD function
dτ in (6) is time-invariant, we would then be able to generalize dτ to be a function of τ determined
by two parameters, say δ 1 and δ2 , and use the ten observations to infer ten unknowns (values of
wH , wL , xH , xL for the two subsamples along with the parameters δ 1 and δ 2 ). Generalizing a little
further, if we use observations across 4 diﬀerent subsamples we could infer values of wH , wL , xH , xL
for each subsample along with a completely unrestricted nonmonotonic GDD function as in (5).19
In fact, if we were able to use all ﬁve observations on Ut1 , Ut2.3 , Ut4.6 , Ut7.12 , Ut13.+ for every date t,
we could even allow for some modest variation over time in the GDD function dτ t , and indeed such
a speciﬁcation will be included in the general results reported in Section 5.
    Restricting time variation in GDD has been used in some studies of micro labor data such as van
den Berg and van Ours (1996) and Alvarez, Borovičková, and Shimer (2016). Our paper diﬀers from
any previous study in either the micro or macro labor literature in focusing on aggregate cyclical
variation in the implications of unobserved heterogeneity. Unobserved attributes like speciﬁc skills
and how much those skills are demanded surely interact with changes in aggregate labor-market
conditions, so allowing for changes during recessions as in the diﬀerence between panels B and C
of Figure 3 is potentially quite fundamental.              Documenting the potential role of cross-sectional
heterogeneity in cyclical unemployment ﬂuctuations is one of the key original contributions of our
paper.
    We have used steady-state calculations in this section primarily to explain the intuition for where
the identiﬁcation is coming from. Nevertheless, it turns out that the key conclusions of the above
steady-state calculations— that the majority of newly unemployed individuals can be described as

   19
     More generally, let h(t, τ ) denote the observed average unemployment exit probability at date t for individuals
who have been unemployed for τ months as of that date. Under the assumption of proportional hazards and
time-invariant GDD this can be written as h(t, τ ) = θ(t, τ )δ(τ ) where δ(τ ) captures GDD and θ(t, τ ) time-varying
heterogeneity. Then the changes over time in cross-sectional heterogeneity are identiﬁed nonparametrically from
the data: θ(t, τ )/θ(t − 1, τ ) = h(t, τ )/h(t − 1, τ ). If we observe h(t, τ ) at 5 discrete values of τ and represent
heterogeneity with the 4-parameter function θ(t, τ ) = [wHt (1 − pHt ) + wLt (1 − pLt )]/(wHt + wLt ) as in (4), then the
the values of wHt , wLt , pHt , pLt can be recovered and the function δ(τ ) is nonparametrically identiﬁed in the sense
that 5 unrestricted values δ(τ 1 ), ..., δ(τ 5 ) can be recovered from the data.


                                                           11
type H who ﬁnd jobs quickly, that dynamic sorting based on unobserved heterogeneity appears
to be much more important than genuine duration dependence in explaining why a longer-term
unemployed individual is less likely to exit unemployment, and that the key driver of economic
recessions is an increased inﬂow of newly unemployed type L individuals— will also turn out to
characterize what we will ﬁnd as we now turn to a richer dynamic model.



2        Dynamic formulation

     Our dynamic model is a generalization of (6) in which outﬂow probabilities for each type of
individual change over time. We assume that for type i workers who have already been unemployed
for τ months as of time t − 1, the fraction who will still be unemployed at t is given by


                              pit (τ ) = exp[−exp(xit + dτ )] for τ = 1, 2, 3, ...                               (8)

where dτ is a third-order polynomial as in equation (5).20                        We also allowed inﬂows for each
type to vary over time, letting wit change each month. Note the identifying assumption is that
the contribution of genuine duration dependence dτ , while of the completely general functional
form used in Figure 4, does not vary over time.21 We now specify a state-space model where
the dynamic behavior of the observed vector yt = (Ut1 , Ut2.3 , Ut4.6 , Ut7.12 , Ut13.+ )′ is determined as a
nonlinear function of latent dynamic variables— the inﬂows and outﬂow probabilities for unemployed
individuals with unobserved heterogeneity. Due to the nonlinear nature of the resulting model, we
draw inference on the latent variables using the extended Kalman ﬁlter.


2.1      State-space representation

     Our baseline model assumes that the elements of ξt = (wHt , wLt , xHt , xLt )′ each evolve as
random walks, e.g.,


    20
      We found that the numerical search to ﬁnd the maximum likelihood estimates performed best when we expressed
this function in terms of scaled Chebyshev polynomials:

                 dτ = δ̃ 1 ((τ − 1)/48) + δ̃ 2 [2((τ − 1)/48)2 − 1] + δ̃ 3 [4((τ − 1)/48)3 − 3((τ − 1)/48)].

    21
    In fact our approach can also allow for modest time variation. In the robustness analysis in Section 5 we replace
dτ with dtτ which changes with t in a restricted way.


                                                             12
                                              wHt = wH,t−1 + εw
                                                              Ht
                                                                 .                                               (9)

A random walk is by far the most common assumption in dynamic latent-variable or time-varying-
parameter models as it has proven to be a ﬂexible and parsimonious way to adapt inference to a
variety of sources of changing conditions or possible structural breaks.22 Note also that equation
(9) is an unambiguous improvement over the steady-state calculations described in the previous
section (and invoked in the majority of previous studies in this literature), and includes the steady-
state formulation as a special case when the variance of εw
                                                          Ht is zero. We have also experimented

with a model in which we assume AR(1) dynamics for the latent variables with autoregressive
coeﬃcients estimated by maximum likelihood. We found the coeﬃcient estimates to be very close
to unity and the resulting inference very similar to those reported for our baseline random walk
speciﬁcation.
    The intuition for how the extended Kalman ﬁlter works is as follows. We will have formed an
inference about the value of ξ t based on the data we observed through date t. For example, we
could use the steady-state calculations of Section 2 on a small initial sample of observed y1 , .., yt0 to
form an initial inference about wH,t0 , wL,t0 , xH,t0 , xL,t0 , which would imply values for Utn0 for every
n from equation (3) based on the average values for that initial sample.23 A random walk means
that we enter period t + 1 initially expecting it to look like t. This would imply predicted values
                                             13.+
for the ﬁve variables observed at t + 1. If Ut+1  is higher than predicted, it would be an indication
that pL has gone up (since there are essentially no type H individuals included in Ut12.+ ). If Ut+1
                                                                                                 2.3 is


higher than predicted even with this higher value for pL,t+1 it means that pH,t+1 has likely gone up
             1
as well. If Ut+1 is higher than Ut1 , we know that either wL or wH must have gone up. Given the 5
new observations in yt+1 , we have more than enough information to update an inference about all
4 elements of ξ t+1 . Proceeding sequentially through the observed sample in this way, we can form
an inference about ξt for every date and at the same time improve our inference about the previous
history. The ﬁnal revised inference about the state at date t based on seeing the full sample of
data through date T is referred to as the smoothed inference, denoted ξ̂ t|T .
  22
     See for example Baumeister and Peersman (2013).
  23
     Our estimates below start with t0 = 1976:M1 and set ξ̂ t0 |t0 to the solution to the steady-state model over the
period 1972:M1-1976:M1. Our approach allows the true value ξ t0 to diﬀer from this estimate with a very large
variance, so that the initial estimate has a very limited contribution. See Appendix B for details.


                                                         13
    Another key detail of our approach is that we allow for the possibility that unemployment counts
are all contaminated by error.         The durations in CPS are in part self-reported and respondents
make a variety of errors.         We assume that each element of yt has an associated measurement
error rt = (rt1 , rt2.3 , rt4.6 , rt7.12 , rt13.+ )′ . Our identiﬁcation assumption is that the measurement error
is white noise, meaning that the inference is only adjusted for changes in the observed variables
that prove to be persistent. The observation equations can then be written as follows24 ,


                                Ut1 =             wit + rt1                                                 (10)
                                          i=H,L

                              Ut2.3 =             [wi,t−1 Pit (1) + wi,t−2 Pit (2)] + rt2.3                 (11)
                                          i=H,L
                                                   5
                              Ut4.6 =                   [wi,t−k Pit (k)] + rt4.6                            (12)
                                          i=H,L k=3
                                                  11
                             Ut7.12 =                   [wi,t−k Pit (k)] + rt7.12                           (13)
                                          i=H,L k=6
                                                   47
                            Ut13.+ =                     [wi,t−k Pit (k)] + rt13.+                          (14)
                                          i=H,L k=12


where
                                    Pit (j) = pi,t−j+1 (1)pi,t−j+2 (2)...pit (j).                           (15)

    We can arrive at the likelihood function for the observed data {y1 , ..., yT } by assuming that
the measurement errors are independent Normal,25 where R1 , R2.3 , R4.6 , R7.12 and R13.+ are the
standard deviations of rt1 , rt2.3 , rt4.6 , rt7.12 and rt13.+ respectively:


                                                    rt ∼ N(0, R)




   24
      As in the steady-state example in Section 1, we consider 4 years to be the maximum unemployment duration
considered.
   25
      The Normality assumption of measurement errors has often been adopted in the literature of unemployment
hazards; see for example Abbring, van den Berg and van Ours (2001) and van den Berg and van der Klaauw (2001).
Moreover, the identical Kalman ﬁlter equations that emerge from an assumption of Normality can also be motivated
using a least-squares criterion; see for example Hamilton (1994a, Chapter 13).


                                                            14
                                                                                             
                                             R12         0         0         0         0
                                                                                             
                                                       2
                                                                                              
                                       0              R2.3        0         0         0      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   R =
                                       0                0      2
                                                               R4.6          0         0      .
                                                                                              
                                  5×5                                                        
                                                                                             
                                       0                0         0      R27.12       0      
                                                                                             
                                        0                0         0         0       2
                                                                                    R13.+

Let ξ t be the vector (wLt , wHt , xLt , xHt )′ and εt = (εw     w     x     x′ ′
                                                           Lt , εHt , εLt , εHt ) . Our assumption that the

latent factors evolve as random walks would be written as


                                                       ξ t = ξ t−1 + εt                                                 (16)
                                                   4×1                    4×1


                                                   εt ∼ N( 0 , Σ )
                                                  4×1              4×1     4×4

                                                                                             
                                                (σw
                                                   L)
                                                     2         0            0         0
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                  0         (σw 2                            
                                                              H)           0         0       
                                   Σ =                                                       .
                                                  0           0         (σ xL )2     0       
                                  4×4                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                   0           0            0       (σxH )2

In Section 5 we will also report results for a speciﬁcation in which the shocks are allowed to be
contemporaneously correlated.
   Since the measurement equations (10)-(14) are a function of {ξ t , ξ t−1 , ..., ξ t−47 }, the state equa-
tion should describe the joint distribution of ξ t ’s from t − 47 to t, where I and 0 denote a (4 × 4)
identity and zero matrix, respectively:

                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                εt
                                   I        0          0 0 ... 0 0 0                      ξ t−1                  
               ξt                                                                              4×1           
                               4×4   4×4                                                                    
               ξ                                                                 
                                                                                          ξ t−2 
                                                                                                                  
               t−1              I        0          0 0 ... 0 0 0
                                                                                                  0            
                                                                                                            
                                                                                              4×1           
               ξ t−2                                                                 ξ t−3                  
                         =      0        I          0 0 ... 0 0 0                           +  0
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                   .   (17)
               ..                                                                       ..  
               .                ..       ..         .. ..     . . .              
                                                                                              . 
                                                                                                                  
                                 .        .          . . ... .. .. ..                         
                                                                                                   ..            
                                                                                              .             
               ξ                                                                 
                                                                                          ξ t−47 
                                                                                                                   
               t−46             0        0          0 0 ... I 0 0
                                                                                                               
                          
                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                   
                ξt−47                                                                     ξ t−48                  
                                   0        0          0 0 ... 0 I 0
                                                                                                      0
                  192×1                                                                   192×1
                                                   192×192
                                                                                                           192×1


                                                               15
2.2    Estimation

    Our system takes the form of a nonlinear state space model in which the state transition
equation is given by (17) and observation equation by (10)-(14) where Pit (j) is given by (15) and
pit (τ ) by (8). Our baseline model has 12 parameters to estimate, namely the diagonal terms in the
variance matrices Σ and R and the parameters governing genuine duration dependence, δ 1, δ 2 and
δ 3 . Because the observation equation is nonlinear in xit , the extended Kalman ﬁlter can be used to
approximate the likelihood function for the observed data {y1 , ..., yT } and form an inference about
the unobserved latent variables {ξ 1 , ..., ξ T }, as detailed in Appendix B. Inference about historical
values for ξ t provided below correspond to full-sample smoothed inferences, denoted ξ̂ t|T .



3     Results for the baseline speciﬁcation

    We estimated parameters for the above nonlinear state-space model using seasonally adjusted
monthly data on yt = (Ut1 , Ut2.3 , Ut4.6 , Ut7.12 , Ut13.+ )′ for t = January 1976 through June 2017. Figure
5 plots smoothed estimates for pit (1), the probability that a newly unemployed worker of type i
at t − 1 will still be unemployed at t. These average 0.35 for type H individuals and 0.82 for
type L individuals, close to the average calculations of 0.36 and 0.85, respectively, that we arrived
at in row 2 of Table 1 when we were explaining the intuition behind our identiﬁcation strategy
based on steady-state calculations. The probabilities of type H individuals remaining unemployed
rise during the early recessions but are less cyclical in the last two recessions.        By contrast, the
continuation probabilities for type L individuals rise in all recessions. The gap between the two
probabilities increased signiﬁcantly over the last 20 years.
    Figure 6 plots inﬂows of individuals of each type into the pool of newly unemployed. Type
H workers constitute 77% on average of the newly unemployed, again close to the value of 78%
expected on the basis of the simple steady-state calculations in row 5 of Table 1. Inﬂows of both
types increase during recessions. New inﬂows of type H workers declined immediately at the end
of every recession, but inﬂows of type L workers continued to rise after the recessions of 1990-91
and 2001 and were still at above-average levels 3 years after the end of the Great Recession. This
changing behavior of type L workers’ inﬂows appears to be another important characteristic of
jobless recoveries. The Great Recession is unique in that the inﬂows of type L workers as well as


                                                     16
the continuation probabilities reached higher levels than any earlier dates in our data set.
   The combined implications of these cyclical patterns are summarized in Figure 7.                 Before
the Great Recession, the share in total unemployment of type L workers ﬂuctuated between 30%
and 60%, falling during expansions and rising during and after recessions. But during the Great
Recession, the share of type L workers skyrocketed to over 80%. The usual recovery pattern of a
falling share of type L workers has been very slow in the aftermath of the Great Recession.
   While the inﬂows of type H workers show a downward trend since the 1980’s, those of type
L workers exhibit an upward trend. This diﬀerence in the low frequency movements of the two
series provides a new perspective on the secular decrease in the inﬂows to unemployment and the
secular rise in the average duration of unemployment. Abraham and Shimer (2001) and Aaronson,
Mazumder and Schechter (2010) showed that the substantial rise in average duration of unem-
ployment between mid-1980 and mid-2000 can be explained by the CPS redesign, the aging of the
population and the increased labor force attachment of women. Bleakley, Ferris and Fuhrer (1999)
concluded that the downward trend in inﬂows can be explained by reduced churning during this
period. Figure 6 shows that the downward trend in the inﬂows is mainly driven by type H workers.
The increased share of type L inﬂows contributed to the rise in the average duration of unemploy-
ment since the 1980’s. This suggests that unobserved heterogeneity is important in accounting for
low frequency dynamics in the labor market as well as those for business cycle frequencies.
   Table 2 provides parameter estimates for our baseline model. The estimated genuine duration
dependence parameters, δ̃ 1 , δ̃ 2 , and δ̃ 3 are consistent with the scarring hypothesis— the longer some-
one from either group has been unemployed, provided the duration has been 11 months or less, the
more likely it is that person will be unemployed next month. Once someone has been unemployed
for more than a year, it becomes more likely as more months accumulate that they will either ﬁnd
a job or exit the labor force in any given month. This non-monotonic behavior of genuine duration
dependence is displayed graphically in Panel A of Figure 8.
   As seen in Panel B of Figure 8, our estimates of genuine duration dependence imply relatively
modest changes in continuation probabilities for type L workers for most horizons.             And while
the implications for long-horizon continuation probabilities for type H workers may appear more
signiﬁcant, they are empirically irrelevant, since the probability that type H workers would be
unemployed for more than 12 months is so remote. To gauge the overall signiﬁcance of genuine

                                                    17
duration dependence, we calculated the unemployment level predicted by our model for each date t
in the sample if the values of δ̃ 1 , δ̃2 , and δ̃ 3 were all set to zero, and found it would only be about 4%
lower on average than the value predicted by our baseline model. Thus although the values of δ̃ 1 and
δ̃ 3 are statistically signiﬁcant, they play a relatively minor role compared to ex ante heterogeneity
in accounting for diﬀerences in continuation probabilities by duration of unemployment.


3.1      Variance decomposition

   Many previous studies have tried to summarize the importance of diﬀerent factors in determining
unemployment by looking at correlations between the observed unemployment rate and the steady-
state unemployment rate predicted by each factor of interest alone; see for example Fujita and
Ramey (2009) and Shimer (2012). One major beneﬁt of our framework is that it delivers a much
cleaner answer to this question in the form of variance decompositions, a familiar method in linear
VARs for measuring how much each shock contributes to the mean squared error (MSE) of an
s-period-ahead forecast of a magnitude of interest.26
   Our model can be used to account for the diﬀerence between the unemployment realization at
time t + s and a forecast based on values of the state vector only through date t in terms of the
sequence of shocks between t and t + s, denoted εt+1 , εt+2 , ..., εt+s . It is convenient to work with a
linear approximation to that decomposition, which we show in Appendix C takes the form


                                                    s
                               yt+s − ŷt+s|t ≃         [Ψs,j (ξ t , ξ t−1 , ..., ξ t−47+j )]εt+j                               (18)
                                                  j=1

for Ψs,j (·) a known (5 × 4)-valued function of ξ t , ξ t−1 , ..., ξ t−47+j . The mean squared error matrix
associated with an s-period-ahead forecast of yt+s is then



                                             s
E(yt+s − ŷt+s|t )(yt+s − ŷt+s|t )′ =           [Ψs,j (ξ t , ξ t−1 , ..., ξ t−47+j )]Σ[Ψs,j (ξ t , ξ t−1 , ..., ξ t−47+j )]′          (19)
                                           j=1
                                             s     4
                                       =                Σm [Ψs,j (ξ t , ξ t−1 , ..., ξ t−47+j )em ][Ψs,j (ξ t , ξ t−1 , ..., ξ t−47+j )em ]′
                                           j=1 m=1


for em column m of the (4×4) identity matrix and Σm the row m, column m element of Σ. Thus the

  26
       See for example Hamilton (1994a, Section 11.5).


                                                              18
contribution of innovations of type L worker’s inﬂows (the ﬁrst element of εt = (εw     w     x     x ′
                                                                                  Lt , εHt , εLt , εHt ) )

to the MSE of the s-period-ahead linear forecast error of total unemployment, ι′5 yt , is given by


                              s
                      ι5 ′           Σ1 [Ψs,j (ξ t , ξ t−1 , ..., ξ t−47+j )e1 ][Ψs,j (ξ t , ξ t−1 , ..., ξ t−47+j )e1 ]′ ι5                  (20)
                             j=1

where ι5 denotes a (5 × 1) vector of ones. Note that as in the constant-parameter linear case,
the sum of the contributions of the 4 diﬀerent structural shocks would be equal to the MSE of an
s-period-ahead linear forecast of unemployment in the absence of measurement error. However,
in our case the linearization is taken around time-varying values of {ξ t , ξ t−1 , ..., ξ t−47+j }. We can
evaluate equation (20) at the smoothed inferences {ξ̂ t|T , ξ̂ t−1|T , ..., ξ̂t−47+j|T } and then take the
average value across all dates t in the sample. This gives us an estimate of the contribution of the
type L worker’s inﬂows to unemployment ﬂuctuations over a horizon of s months:

               T             s
 qs,1 = T −1         ι5 ′            Σ1 [Ψs,j (ξ̂ t|T , ξ̂ t−1|T , ..., ξ̂ t−47+j|T )e1 ][Ψs,j (ξ̂ t|T , ξ̂ t−1|T , ..., ξ̂ t−47+j|T )e1 ]′ ι5 . (21)
               t=1          j=1


                                 4
Consequently qs,1 /                    qs,m would be the ratio of the ﬁrst factor’s contribution to unemployment
                             m=1
volatility at horizon s.
   Figure 9 shows the contribution of each factor to the mean squared error in predicting overall
unemployment as a function of the forecasting horizon. If one is trying to forecast unemployment
one month ahead, uncertainty about future inﬂows of type H and type L workers are equally
important.      However, the farther one is looking into the future, the more important becomes
uncertainty about what is going to happen to type L workers. If one is trying to predict one or
two years into the future, the single most important source of uncertainty is inﬂows of new type
L workers, followed by uncertainty about their outﬂows.                                       Much of the MSE associated with a
2-year-ahead forecast of unemployment comes from not knowing when the next recession will begin
or the current recession will end. For this reason, the MSE associated with 2-year-ahead forecasts
is closely related to what some researchers refer to as the “business cycle frequency” in a spectral
decomposition. If we are interested in the key factors that change as the economy moves into and
out of recessions, inﬂows and outﬂows for type L workers are most important.                                                   We will provide
additional evidence on this point in Section 3.2.


                                                                           19
   Panel B of Figure 9 breaks these contributions separately into inﬂows and outﬂows. Both inﬂows
and outﬂows are important. However, the uncertainty about future inﬂows is more important in
accounting for the error we would make in predicting total unemployment, accounting for about
60% of the MSE for any forecasting horizon.


3.2   Historical decomposition

   A separate question of interest is how much of the realized variation over some historical episode
came from particular structural shocks. As in (18) our model implies an estimate of the contribution
of shocks to a particular observed episode, namely


                                                 s
                       yt+s − ŷt+s|t ≃              [Ψs,j (ξ̂ t|T , ξ̂ t−1|T , ..., ξ̂ t−47+j|T )]ε̂t+j|T            (22)
                                                j=1


where ε̂t+j|T = ξ̂ t+j|T − ξ̂ t+j−1|T . From this equation, we can estimate for example the contribution
of εw        w             w
    L,t+1 , εL,t+2 , ..., εL,t+s (the shocks to wL between t + 1 and t + s) to the deviation of the level

of unemployment at t + s from the value predicted on the basis of initial conditions at t:


                                   s
                           ι5 ′         [Ψs,j (ξ̂ t|T , ξ̂ t−1|T , ..., ξ̂ t−47+j|T )]e1 ε̂′t+j|T e1 .                (23)
                                  j=1

   Figure 10 shows the contribution of each component to the realized unemployment rate in the
last ﬁve recessions. In each panel, the solid line (labeled Ubase ) gives the change in the unem-
ployment rate relative to the value at the start of the episode that would have been predicted
on the basis of initial conditions.           Typically an increase in the inﬂow of type L workers (whose
contribution to total unemployment is indicated by the starred red curves) is the most important
reason that unemployment rises during a recession. A continuing increase of these inﬂows even
after the recession was over was an important factor in the jobless recoveries from the 1990 and
2001 recessions.
   During the ﬁrst 8 months of the Great Recession, changes in inﬂows and outﬂows of type L
individuals were of equal importance in accounting for rising unemployment.                                  But our model
concludes that new inﬂows of type L individuals were the most important factor contributing to
rising unemployment after July of 2008.



                                                                20
4        Corroboration using other data sources and methods

     Our conclusions are diﬀerent from those of some other prominent studies. In this section we
examine some of the evidence considered by other researchers and show why properly interpreted
it adds further support to our main ﬁndings.


4.1      Direct evidence on the importance of the level of inﬂows

     Let ut denote the unemployment rate during month t and u1t the number of newly unemployed
as a fraction of the labor force. Shimer (2012) calculated an unemployment-outﬂow rate ft (which
he thought of as the job-ﬁnding rate) from


                                           ut+1 = exp(−ft )ut + u1t+1 .                                           (24)


He calculated an unemployment-inﬂow rate xt (which he thought of as the employment-exit rate)
from his equation (5), which diﬀers from the natural measure xt ≃ u1t by making adjustments
for within-period inﬂows and outﬂows and carefully handles data after the 1994 survey redesign.
We used Shimer’s method to generate updated series for ft and xt . Quarterly averages of these
monthly series are plotted in the top two panels of Figure 11, and seem to give the impression that
most of the cyclical action comes from outﬂows rather than inﬂows.
     Shimer proposed to approximate the unemployment rate as27

                                                             xt
                                                   ut ≃           .                                               (25)
                                                          xt + ft

We can then ask what the path of unemployment since 2007:Q4 would have been if ft had stayed
ﬁxed at its 2007:Q4 value while quarterly averages of xt varied as actually observed. Shimer inter-
preted the resulting series as the component of unemployment explained by inﬂows. Alternatively,
we could ﬁx xt at its 2007:Q4 value and let ft vary, giving a component corresponding to the
contribution of outﬂows. These two series are plotted in the upper-left panel of Figure 12.28 This
    27
      Equation (25) would be exact if the unemployment rate did not change during month t. We have conﬁrmed
Shimer’s ﬁnding that the correlation between the right and left sides of (25) is 0.98. However, this high correlation
masks the fact that the levels are very diﬀerent, with the left side on average 1.5 percentage points lower than the
right. We have subtracted 1.5 percentage points from values predicted by equation (25) to give them a better ﬁt to
the data. Of course this only shifts the level of the series and does not aﬀect the magnitude of its ﬂuctuations.
   28
      Shimer ﬁxed ft and xt at their average values over the full sample rather than the values at a ﬁxed point in time


                                                          21
calculation seems to imply that most of the ﬂuctuations in unemployment since 2007 should be
attributed to outﬂows, with very little role for inﬂows. Hall and Schulhofer-Wohl (2017) reached a
similar conclusion using an expression describing the unemployment rate as a function of current
outﬂows and past inﬂows.
    Shimer’s decomposition might seem to be a clean way to think about this question. However,
it shuts down the key channel that drives the cyclical behavior of unemployment, which is the
dynamic interaction between inﬂows and outﬂows. One can see this clearly when we reframe the
question using methods more familiar to macroeconomists, namely summarizing the properties of
forecasts of the series. How much of the unanticipated change in unemployment since the Great
Recession is due to changes in ft that we could not have forecast in 2007:Q4 and how much to
unanticipated changes in xt ? One can answer such a question using a quarterly bivariate VAR for
(∆ft , ∆xt ):


            ∆ft = cf + φf f,1 ∆ft−1 + · · · + φf f,8 ∆ft−8 + φf x,1 ∆xt−1 + · · · + φf x,8 ∆xt−8 + εf t                           (26)


           ∆xt = cx + φxf,1 ∆ft−1 + · · · + φxf,8 ∆ft−8 + φxx,1 ∆xt−1 + · · · + φxx,8 ∆xt−8 + εxt .                               (27)

The counterfactual paths for ft and xt used in the upper-left panel of Figure 12 would be numerically
identical to the historical decomposition from a VAR if we assumed that all coeﬃcients on the right-
hand side were zero and that the residuals εf t and εxt were uncorrelated with each other.29
    The assumption that the coeﬃcents on lags are truly zero is easily tested. A test of the null
hypothesis φf x,1 = · · · = φf x,8 = 0 based on OLS estimation of equation (26) for t = 1969:Q3 to
2016:Q4 produces an F (8, 173) statistic of 10.02, an overwhelming rejection with a p-value below
10−6 . In other words, a great deal of the observed variation in outﬂows could have been predicted
on the basis of earlier values of inﬂows.                  Furthermore, rather than assume that εf t and εxt are
uncorrelated, we can adopt the more common VAR procedure of using a Cholesky decomposition
of their covariance matrix with ∆ft ordered ﬁrst.                        This Cholesky ordering gives as much of the
beneﬁt to Shimer’s view as possible, with 100% of the correlated component between the residuals
as we have done here. The basic result is the same however one does this calculation. Our choice gives a better
ﬁt to the post-2007 data and helps clarify the relation between Shimer’s calculations and what we consider a better
approach to be described below.
   29
      That is, in this case the contribution of εf,t+1 , ..., εf,t+s to ft+1 , ..., ft+s is exactly equal to the values ft+1 , ..., ft+s
themselves while the contribution of εf,t+1 , ..., εf,t+s to xt+1 , ..., xt+s is exactly zero.


                                                                  22
attributed to the eﬀect of outﬂows alone. A variance decomposition of the estimated VAR (26)-
(27) ﬁnds that even with this ordering, 59% of the variation in outﬂows over a 3-year horizon can
be attributed to inﬂows.    The top right panel of Figure 12 plots the component of ft that the
bivariate VAR attributes to changes in inﬂows since 2007.
   Future outﬂow rates from unemployment are predictable from what we currently see happening
to inﬂows.   This is the central point of our paper, and the central reason some earlier research
underestimated the importance of inﬂows.


4.2   Direct evidence on the importance of the composition of inﬂows

   We moreover have claimed in this paper that what matters is not simply the level of inﬂows
but also the composition, in particular new inﬂows of those we have described as type L. Shimer
attempted to assess the importance of changes in the composition of unemployment by replacing
ft in (25) with
                                                 J
                                                 j=1 θtj ftj
                                         ft =      J
                                                   j=1 θtj

where j = 1, ..., J are diﬀerent observable characteristics of the unemployed and θtj the share of
each among the unemployed.      He then performed a similar exercise, ﬁrst ﬁxing ftj = f¯j at its
historical average to ﬁnd the contribution of changes in observable characteristics, and concluded
that these contributed little. Hall and Schulhofer-Wohl (2017) examined how the compositional
changes in the inﬂows inﬂuence the path of unemployment rate using a similar exercise.      Again
these miss the central point— the core issue should be the question of forecasting.
   The most useful observable variable that signals important changes in the composition of the
newly unemployed is the level of new claims for unemployment insurance. Not all of the newly
unemployed are eligible for beneﬁts, with some states making it diﬃcult to receive beneﬁts for
voluntary quits. And not everyone who is eligible applies for beneﬁts. When someone applies for
unemployment insurance they are revealing useful personal information about the circumstances
and expected duration of their unemployment.
   Let Qt denote the number of individuals who ﬁle new claims for unemployment insurance in the
last week of quarter t and Ut1 the BLS estimate of the number of individuals who became newly
unemployed in the last month of quarter t.      We added ∆qt for qt = Qt /Ut1 as a third variable


                                                23
to the VAR (26)-(27).          The hypothesis that coeﬃcients on lags of ∆qt−j in equation (26) are
all zero leads to an F (8,165) statistic of 7.42, again rejecting the null hypothesis with a p-value
below 10−6 .      Changes in the composition of inﬂows have huge additional predictive power for
future outﬂows beyond that contained in the level of inﬂows alone.                      If there is an increase in
the share of newly unemployed people who have a low job ﬁnding probability (as captured in this
regression by an increase in the share who ﬁle for unemployment beneﬁts), then they are likely to
stay unemployed longer and to bring down the average job ﬁnding probability going forward. The
level and composition of inﬂows together explain 76% of the variance of Shimer’s outﬂow measure
at a 3-year horizon (still ordering outﬂows ﬁrst in the VAR to try to give them the strongest eﬀect
possible). The historical decomposition of outﬂow rates that comes from the three-variable VAR
is plotted in the lower right panel of Figure 12. Again, much of the evidence that other researchers
have treated as signaling the importance of the outﬂow rate from unemployment is in fact driven
by changes in the level and composition of inﬂows.
    This empirical evidence demonstrates that an approximation such as equation (25) inherently
masks the dynamic channel through which the compositional change in the inﬂows aﬀects the
outﬂows probability persistently.          A more satisfying way to see the contribution of inﬂows and
outﬂows to the unemployment rate itself is not with an approximation such as (25) but instead
by adding the unemployment rate ut directly as a fourth variable to the VAR. With ft ordered
ﬁrst and ut last, changes in the level and composition of new inﬂows into unemployment (namely,
innovations in xt and qt ) explain 86% of the variation in the unemployment rate at a 3-year horizon,
while outﬂows ft account for only 13%.30


4.3     Reproducing the model’s key ﬁndings with direct data summaries

    Finally, it is possible to adapt Shimer’s methods to see directly the features of the data that
led to the conclusions of our dynamic structural model. Suppose we were to focus just on u4.+
                                                                                          t ,

the fraction of the labor force who have been unemployed for 4 months or longer. This is an
instructive exercise because according to the empirical estimates from our dynamic model, most
of the individuals in this group are type L.31 We could think of “inﬂows” into this group as the
   30
      The remaining 1% comes from the fact that ut is not an exact linear combination of ft and xt , with the diﬀerence
interpreted by the VAR as an innovation in ut .
   31
      For pH and pL around 0.36 and 0.85, respectively, p4H = 0.02 while p4L = 0.52. See also Panel B of Figure 3.


                                                          24
individuals who are in this group at t but were not in this group 3 months ago: x4.+
                                                                                 t   = u4.6
                                                                                        t . And

we can measure the outﬂow probability for this group just as we did in equation (24):


                                        u4.+         4.+ 4.+
                                         t+3 = (1 − Ft )ut   + u4.6
                                                                t+3 .                                          (28)


Quarterly averages of these inﬂow and outﬂow rates for long-term unemployment are plotted in the
second two panels of Figure 11. These completely reverse the impression from the top two panels.
    We can also relate these numbers directly to the estimates from our structural model by restating
the three-month probability of exiting long-term unemployment (Ft4.+ ) as a one-month continuation
probability p4.+
             t   = (1 − Ft4.+ )1/3 . This series is compared with quarterly averages of our estimated
type L monthly unemployment-continuation probabilities in the lower left panel of Figure 11. The
two series are quite similar. The reason is that, according to our model, most of the individuals
who have been unemployed for 4 months or longer are likely to be type L, so that we can nearly
read the unemployment-exit probability for this group directly from a simple summary statistic like
Ft4.+ .32 We can also see in Panel F of Figure 11 the clear basis in the raw data for our conclusion
in the last panel of Figure 10 about the source of the increase in long-term unemployment during
the Great Recession.       In the ﬁrst half of the recession, deterioration in both inﬂow and outﬂow
rates for type L contributed. Our algorithm draws this inference because we ﬁnd in the data both
x4.+
 t   increasing and Ft4.+ decreasing during this period. Later in the recession, x4.+
                                                                                  t   continued to
rise even as Ft4.+ stabilized, warranting our model’s inference that the key development in the later
part of the recession was new inﬂows of type L workers.33


4.4    Who are the type L individuals?

    And where did these new inﬂows come from?                 Darby, Haltiwanger and Plant (1986) argued
that counter-cyclicality in the average unemployment duration mainly comes from the increased
inﬂow of prime-age workers suﬀering permanent job loss who are likely to have low job-ﬁnding
probabilities.    Bednarzik (1983) also noted that permanently separated workers are more likely
to experience a long duration of unemployment, while Fujita and Moscarini (forthcoming) showed
  32
      Of course, our series is smoother (and we believe more accurate) than the nonparametric estimate because our
inference allows for measurement error in the raw data, makes joint use of all the observed unemployment categories,
and allows for the fact that not all of those unemployed for longer than 4 weeks are type L.
   33
      Other measures of the unemployment-outﬂow rate for the long-term unemployed are discussed in Appendix D.


                                                        25
that the unemployed who are likely to experience long-term unemployment spells tend to be those
who are not recalled to work by their previous employers.
    This interpretation certainly ﬁts the facts for the Great Recession. In March 2009 there were
1.38 million newly unemployed individuals who reported permanent separation as their reason
for unemployment, 454,000 more than in March 2008.                 In March 2009 there were 3.47 million
newly unemployed individuals altogether, 642,000 more than the previous year.                       This means
that 454/642 = 71% of the increase in Ut1 between 2008:M3 and 2009:M3 was due to permanent
separations. The increased inﬂow of type L individuals is clearly correlated with an increase in
permanent separations.
    In Panel A of Figure 13 we compare our estimate of the number of newly unemployed type L
workers each month to the number of newly unemployed individuals who gave permanent separation
from their previous job as the reason34 . The two series were arrived at using diﬀerent data and
diﬀerent methodologies but exhibit remarkably similar dynamics.                 Panel B compares the total
number of those unemployed who gave permanent separation as the reason with our estimate of
the total number of unemployed type L workers, for which the correspondence is even more striking.
    To obtain further evidence on the role of observed and unobserved worker characteristics, Ahn
(2016) ﬁt models like the one developed here to subsets of workers sorted based on observable
characteristics. She replaced our observation vector yt based on aggregate unemployment numbers
             1 , U 2.3 , U 4.6 , U 7.12 , U 13.+ )′ where U 2.3 for example denotes the number of workers with
with yjt = (Ujt   jt      jt      jt       jt              jt

observed characteristic j who have been unemployed for 2-3 months, the idea being that within the
group j there are new inﬂows (wjHt and wjLt ) and outﬂows (pjHt and pjLt ) of two unobserved types
of workers. Of particular interest for the present discussion are the results when j corresponds to
one of the 5 reasons for why the individual was looking for work. Panel A of Figure 14 displays
Ahn’s estimated values for new inﬂows of type L workers for each of the categories as well as the sum
  5
  j=1 ŵjLt|T .   Our series ŵLt|T inferred from aggregate data is also plotted again for comparison.
The sum of micro estimates is very similar to our aggregate estimates, and the individual micro
components reveal clearly that those we have described as type L workers primarily represent a
subset of people who were either permanently separated from their previous job or are looking
  34
     Permanent separations include permanent job losers and persons who completed temporary jobs. The separate
series, permanent job losers and persons who completed temporary jobs, are publicly available from 1994, but their
sum (permanent separations) is available back to 1976.


                                                       26
again for work after a period of having been out of the labor force.
    Ahn (2016) also calculated the models’ inferences about the total number of type L individuals
in any given observable category j who were unemployed in month t. These are plotted in Panel B
of Figure 14. Here the correspondence between the aggregate inference and the sum of the micro
estimates is even more compelling, as is the conclusion that type L unemployed workers represent
primarily a subset of those permanently separated from their old jobs or re-entering the labor force.
    However, none of this is meant to imply that those we identify as type L and those who lose their
jobs due to permanent separations are one and the same group; the evidence in Kroft et al. (2016)
clearly shows that they are not. Not all individuals who are permanently separated get classiﬁed by
our approach as type L, and not all of those we classify as type L lost their jobs due to permanent
separations. Ahn (2016) found that permanent job losers who are type L account for around 50%
of the aggregate type L unemployment and drive most of its counter-cyclicality. The second most
important group is type L re-entrants to the labor force. Considering that permanent job losers
are likely to leave the labor force and re-enter to the labor force, there is a high chance that the
type L re-entrants used to be permanent job losers before leaving the labor force. In addition, type
L people are found disproportionately more among permanent job losers than they are among in
other categories. The type L individuals account for one third of the newly unemployed permanent
job losers, whereas they only comprise less than one ﬁfth of the inﬂows in other categories.



5    Robustness checks

    Column 1 of Table 3 summarizes some of the key conclusions that emerge from our baseline
analysis. The table breaks down the MSE of a forecast of the overall level of unemployment at 3-
month, 1-year, and 2-year forecast horizons into the fraction of the forecast error that is attributable
to various shocks. In our baseline model, inﬂows account for more than half the variance at all
horizons. Inﬂows of type L workers are most important but the outﬂows of type L workers and the
inﬂows of type H workers are also crucial at a 3-month horizon. At a 1- or 2-year horizon, shocks
to inﬂow and outﬂow probabilities for type L workers are the most important factors. The table
also reports asymptotic standard errors for each of these magnitudes.
    Subsequent columns show how these conclusions would change under a number of alternative


                                                  27
speciﬁcations, as discussed below and with more details in Appendix E.


5.1     Accounting for the structural break in the CPS

    A redesign in the CPS in 1994 introduced a structural break with which any user of these data
has to deal. Our baseline estimates adjusted the unemployment duration data using diﬀerences
between rotation groups 1 and 5 and groups 2-4 and 6-8 in the CPS micro data as described in
Appendix A. Column 2 of Table 3 reports the analogous variance decompositions when we instead
use Hornstein’s (2012) data adjustment.35                  This produces very little change in our numbers.
In column 3 we use only data subsequent to the redesign in 1994 making no adjustment to the
reported BLS ﬁgures.           This reduces the estimated contribution of inﬂows of type L workers at
shorter horizons, but preserves our main ﬁnding that for business-cycle frequencies, changes for
type L workers account for most of the ﬂuctuations in unemployment. We obtained similar results
using the full data set from 1976-2013 with no adjustments for the 1994 redesign (column 4).


5.2     Time-varying genuine duration dependence

    Our baseline speciﬁcation assumed that the parameters δ 1 , δ 2 , and δ 3 characterizing genuine
duration dependence in equations (5) and (8) do not change over time.                           Column 5 of Table 3
reports results for a more general speciﬁcation


         dτ t = δ̃1t ((τ − 1)/48) + δ̃ 2t [2((τ − 1)/48)2 − 1] + δ̃ 3t [4((τ − 1)/48)3 − 3((τ − 1)/48)]

                 (1)                                   (2)
where δ̃ jt = δ̃ j     in normal months and δ̃ jt = δ̃ j     if the national unemployment rate is above 6.5%,
times when the labor market is in slack and it is likely that many job losers automatically became
                                                                              (2)   (2)   (2)
eligible for extended UI beneﬁts.36 Adding 3 new parameters (δ̃ 1 , δ̃ 2 , δ̃3 ) to the model results
in an increase in the log likelihood of 46.2, but does not change any of our core conclusions.




   35
      Note that although we report the log likelihood and Schwarz’s (1978) Bayesian criterion in rows 2 and 3 of Table
3, the values for columns 2-4 are not comparable with the others due to a diﬀerent deﬁnition of the observable data
vector yt .
   36
      Vishwanath (1989) and Blanchard and Diamond (1994) developed theoretical models in which genuine duration
dependence could be linked to market tightness. See Whittaker and Isaacs (2014) for a detailed discussion of the
conditions that can trigger extended unemployment beneﬁts.


                                                            28
5.3       Allowing for correlated shocks

    Our baseline speciﬁcation assumed that the shocks to wLt , wHt , pLt and pHt were mutually
uncorrelated. The estimated residuals from our baseline model, ε̂t|T , have some correlation37 , but
it is small. No correlation is above 0.4 in absolute value and the correlation between εw       x
                                                                                        Lt and εHt

is only 0.04.
    We estimated a generalization of the model to allow for nonzero correlations deriving from a
factor structure for the innovations, εt = λFt + ut , where Ft ∼ N(0, 1), λ is a (4 × 1) vector of
factor loadings, and ut is a (4 × 1) vector of mutually uncorrelated idiosyncratic components with
variance matrix E(ut u′t ) = Q:
                                                    E(εt ε′t ) = λλ′ + Q
                                                                                              
                                                  w )2
                                                (qH              0         0              0
                                                                                              
                                                                                              
                                                  0          (qLw )2      0              0    
                                                                                              
                                       Q=                                                     .
                                                                         x )2                 
                                                  0             0      (qH               0    
                                                                                              
                                                   0             0         0        (qLx )2

Although the correlations are small, this speciﬁcation provides a statistically signiﬁcant improve-
ment in the log likelihood (column 6 of Table 3).
    Note that equation (22) continues to hold in this more general setting, and we could still
calculate the magnitude in (23), which measures what would happen if {εw      s
                                                                       L,t+j }j=1 were to have

followed its inferred historical path with {εw        x        x      s
                                             H,t+j , εL,t+j , εH,t+j }j=1 all zero. This calculation would

no longer have a clean statistical interpretation as the answer to a forecasting question when the
ε’s are correlated, because in the latter case knowledge of the value of one of the ε’s would cause
one to revise the contemporaneous forecast of the others. Nevertheless, we can still calculate the
magnitude in (23) for the factor model as a check on whether the quantitative importance of type
L inﬂows is in any way an artifact of having assumed uncorrelated shocks. The lower right panel
of Figure 10 plots the quantitative contribution calculated in this way for each of the four shocks

   37
        The correlation between the i and j elements of ε̂t|T was calculated as
                                             T
                                             t=1 {[ε̂t|T (i)   − ε̄(i)][ε̂t|T (j) − ε̄(j)]}
                                          T                              T
                                          t=1 [ε̂t|T (i)   − ε̄(i)]2     t=1 [ε̂t|T (j)   − ε̄(j)]2
                    T
for ε̄(i) = T −1    t=1   ε̂t|T (i).


                                                                  29
during the Great Recession.           The graph is virtually identical to that in the lower left from our
baseline model.
   We can also calculate the separate statistical contribution of each of the 5 uncorrelated shocks
in the factor model, which consist of the aggregate factor Ft and the four elements of ut . In this
case, the variance decomposition (19) becomes




                  E(yt+s − ŷt+s|t )(yt+s − ŷt+s|t )′
                   s
             =         [Ψs,j (ξ t , ξ t−1 , ..., ξ t−47+j )](λλ′ + Q)[Ψs,j (ξ t , ξ t−1 , ..., ξ t−47+j )]′
                  j=1
                   s
             =         [Ψs,j (ξ t , ξ t−1 , ..., ξ t−47+j )]λλ′ [Ψs,j (ξ t , ξ t−1 , ..., ξ t−47+j )]′
                  j=1
                        s   4
                  +              Qm [Ψs,j (ξ t , ξ t−1 , ..., ξ t−47+j )em ][Ψs,j (ξ t , ξ t−1 , ..., ξ t−47+j )em ]′
                       j=1 m=1


for Qm the row m, column m element of Q.                        The contributions of each of the ﬁve shocks are
summarized in column 6 of Table 3. The aggregate factor by itself accounts for 64% of the MSE of
a 1—year-ahead forecast of unemployment. But the component of inﬂows of type L workers that is
uncorrelated with the aggregate factor would still by itself account for 31% of the MSE, far more
important than any other idiosyncratic shock. We conclude that the importance of inﬂows of type
L workers is robust to assumptions about correlations between the shocks.


5.4   Time aggregation

   Focusing on monthly transition probabilities understates ﬂows into and out of unemployment
since someone who loses their job in week 1 of a month but ﬁnds a new job in week 2 would never be
counted as having been unemployed. We discuss some of the literature on this in Appendix E, and
explain our reasons for favoring the speciﬁcation in our baseline model. But there we also show
how one could formulate our model assuming that time evolves weekly with potential transitions
into and out of unemployment within the month.
   As seen in column 7 of Table 4, the weekly formulation implies a modestly smaller role for
inﬂows than our baseline model. This is to be expected, as allowing for shorter employment spells
by construction imputes some people who exit unemployment by obtaining new jobs but then lose


                                                               30
them again before the month is over.      Note however that the weekly model in column 7 has a
slightly worse ﬁt to the data than the baseline monthly model in column 1.



6    Conclusion

    People who have been unemployed for longer periods than others have dramatically diﬀerent
probabilities of exiting unemployment, and these relative probabilities change signiﬁcantly over the
business cycle.   Even when one conditions on observable characteristics, unobserved diﬀerences
across people and the circumstances under which they came to be unemployed are crucial for
understanding these features of the data.
    We have shown how the time series of unemployment levels by diﬀerent duration categories can
be used to infer inﬂows and outﬂows from unemployment for workers characterized by unobserved
heterogeneity. In contrast to other methods, our approach uses the full history of unemployment
data to summarize inﬂows and outﬂows from unemployment and allows us to make formal statistical
statements about how much of the variance of unemployment is attributable to diﬀerent factors as
well as identify the particular changes that characterized individual historical episodes.
    In normal times, around three quarters of those who are newly unemployed ﬁnd jobs quickly.
But in contrast to the conclusions of Hall (2005) and Shimer (2012), we ﬁnd that more than half
the variance in unemployment comes from shocks to the number of newly unemployed.            A key
feature of economic recessions is newly unemployed individuals who have signiﬁcantly lower job-
ﬁnding probabilities.   Our inferred values for the size of this group exhibit remarkably similar
dynamics to separate measures of the number of people who permanently lose their jobs.          We
conclude that recessions are characterized by a change in the circumstances under which people
become unemployed that accounts for the greater diﬃculty in ﬁnding new jobs during a recession.




                                                 31
                                       References
   Aaronson, Daniel, Bhashkar Mazumder, and Shani Schechter (2010). "What is behind the rise
in long-term unemployment," Economic Perspectives, QII:28-51.
   Abbring, Jaap H., Gerard J. van den Berg, and Jan C. van Ours (2001). "Business Cycles
and Compositional Variation in U.S. Unemployment," Journal of Business & Economic Statistics,
19(4): pp. 436-448.
   Abowd, John M., and Arnold Zellner (1985). "Estimating Gross Labor-Force Flows," Journal
of Business and Economic Statistics, 3(3): 254-283.
   Abraham, Katharine G. and Robert Shimer (2002). "Changes in Unemployment Duration and
Labor Force Attachment," in Alan Krueger and Robert Solow, eds., The Roaring Nineties, pp.
367-420. Russell Sage Foundation.
   Acemoglu, Daron (1995), "Public Policy in a Model of Long-term Unemployment," Economica
62:161-178.
   Ahn, Hie Joo (2016), "The Role of Observed and Unobserved Heterogeneity in the Duration of
Unemployment Spells," Working paper, Federal Reserve Board.
   Alvarez, Fernando, Katarína Borovičková, and Robert Shimer (2016). "Decomposing Dura-
tion Dependence in a Stopping Time Model," NBER Working Papers 22188, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Inc.
   Bachmann, Ronald, and Mathias Sinning (2016). "Decomposing the Ins and Outs of Cyclical
Unemployment," Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 78(6): 853-876.
   Baker, Michael (1992). "Unemployment Duration: Compositional Eﬀects and Cyclical Vari-
ability," American Economic Review, 82(1):313—21.
   Barnichon, Regis and Andrew Figura (2015). "Labor Market Heterogeneity and the Aggregate
Matching Function," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7(4): 222-49.
   Baumeister, Christiane and Gert Peersman (2013). "Time-Varying Eﬀects of Oil Supply Shocks
on the U.S. Economy," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5(4): 1-29.
   Bednarzik, Robert (1983). "Layoﬀs and Permanent Job Losses: Workers’ Traits and Cyclical
Patterns," Monthly Labor Review, September 1983, pp.3-12, Bureau of Labor Statistics.
   Blanchard, Olivier J. and Peter Diamond (1994). "Ranking, Unemployment Duration, and


                                               32
Wages," The Review of Economic Studies, 61(3):417-434,
   Bleakley, Hoyt, Ann E. Ferris, and Jeﬀrey C. Fuhrer (1999). "New Data on Worker Flows
During Business Cycle," New England Economic Review, July/August:49—76, 1999.
   Bureau of Labor Statistics (2011). "How Long before the Unemployed Find Jobs or Quit
Looking?", Issues in Labor Statistics 2011(1):1-6.
   Darby, Michael R., John C. Haltiwanger, and Mark W. Plant (1986). "The Ins and Outs
of Unemployment: The Ins Win," NBER Working Paper # 1997, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Inc.
   Davis, Steven J., R. Jason Faberman, and John Haltiwanger (2006). "The Flow Approach to
Labor Markets: New Data Sources and Micro-Macro Links," Journal of Economic Perspectives,
20(3):3—26.
   Den Haan, Wouter J. (2000). "The Comovement between Output and Prices," Journal of
Monetary Economics, 46:3-30.
   Elbers, Chris, and Geert Ridder (1982), "True and Spurious Duration Dependence: The Iden-
tiﬁability of the Proportional Hazard Model," Review of Economic Studies, 49(3): 403-409.
   Elsby, Michael W. L., Ryan Michaels, and Gary Solon (2009). "The Ins and Outs of Cyclical
Unemployment," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(1): 84-110.
   Elsby, Michael W. L., Bart Hobijn, and Ayşegül Şahin (2010). "The Labor Market in the Great
Recession," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2010: 1-56.
   Elsby, Michael W. L., Bart Hobijn, and Ayşegül Şahin (2013). "Unemployment Dynamics in
the OECD," Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(2): 530-548.
   Elsby, Michael W. L., Bart Hobijn, Ayşegül Şahin, and Robert G. Valletta (2011). "The Labor
Market in the Great Recession: An Update to September 2011," Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, Fall 2011: 353-371.
   Eriksson, Stefan, and Dan-Olof Rooth (2014). "Do Employers Use Unemployment as a Sorting
Criterion When Hiring? Evidence from a Field Experiment," American Economic Review, 104(3):
1014-1039.
   Faberman, R. Jason and Marianna Kudlyak (2017). "The Intensity of Job Search and Search
Duration," Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
   Frazis, Harley J., Edwin L. Robison, Thomas D. Evans, and Martha A. Duﬀ (2005). "Estimating

                                                33
Gross Flows Consistent with Stocks in the CPS," Monthly Labor Review September 2005: 3-9.
   Fujita, Shigeru (2011). "Dynamics of Worker Flows and Vacancies: Evidence from the Sign
Restriction Approach," Journal of Applied Econometrics, 26: 89-121.
   Fujita, Shigeru and Garey Ramey (2009). "The Cyclicality of Separation and Job Finding
Rates," International Economic Review, 50(2):415-430.
   Fujita, Shigeru and Giuseppe Moscarini (forthcoming). "Recall and Unemployment," American
Economic Review.
   Hall, Robert E. (2005). "Job Loss, Job Finding and Unemployment in the U.S. Economy over
the Past Fifty Years," in Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual
2005, Volume 20, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
   Hall, Robert E. (2014). "Quantifying the Lasting Harm to the U.S. Economy from the Financial
Crisis," in Jonathan Parker and Michael Woodford, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2014.
Volume 29, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
   Hall, Robert E. and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl (2017). "The Pervasive Importance of Tightness in
Labor-Market Volatility," working paper, Stanford University.
   Ham, John C., and Samuel A. Rea, Jr. (1987). "Unemployment Insurance and Male Unem-
ployment Duration in Canada," Journal of Labor Economics, 5(3): 325-353.
   Hamilton, James D. (1994a). Time Series Analysis. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
   Hamilton, James D. (1994b). "State-Space Models," in Robert F. Engle and Daniel L. Mc-
Fadden, eds., Handbook of Econometrics, Volume IV, Chapter 50, pp. 3039-3080. Amsterdam:
Elsevier.
   Hamilton, James D. (forthcoming). "Why You Should Never Use the Hodrick-Prescott Filter,"
Review of Economics and Statistics.
   Heckman, James and B. Singer (1984a). "The Identiﬁability of the Proportional Hazard Model,"
Review of Economic Studies, 51(2):231-41.
   Heckman, James and B. Singer (1984b). "A Method for Minimizing the Impact of Distributional
Assumptions in Econometric Models for Duration Data," Econometrica, 52(2): 271-320.
   Heckman, James, and B Singer (1984c), "Econometric duration analysis", Journal of Econo-
metrics, 24: 63-132.
   Honoré, Bo E. (1993). "Identiﬁcation Results for Duration Models with Multiple Spells," Review

                                               34
of Economic Studies, 60(1): 241-246.
   Hornstein, Andreas (2012). "Accounting for Unemployment: the Long and Short of it," FRB
Richmond Working Paper, No.12-07, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.
   Ilg, Randy E., and Eleni Theodossiou (2012). "Job Search of the Unemployed by Duration of
Unemployment," Monthly Labor Review, March 2012, pp.41-49, Bureau of Labor Statistics.
   Jarosch, Gregor, and Laura Pilossoph (2015). "Statistical Discrimination and Duration Depen-
dence in the Job Finding Rate," working paper, Princeton University.
   Kaitz, Hyman B. (1970). "Analyzing the Length of Spells of Unemployment," Monthly Labor
Review, November 1970, pp.11-20, Bureau of Labor Statistics.
   Katz, Lawrence F. and Bruce D. Meyer (1990). "Unemployment Insurance, Recall Expectations,
and Unemployment Outcomes," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105(4):973-1002.
   Kudlyak, Marianna, and Fabian Lange (2014). "Measuring Heterogeneity in Job Finding Rates
Among the Nonemployed Using Labor Force Status Histories," working paper, Federal Reserve
Bank of Richmond.
   Kroft, Kory, Fabian Lange, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo (2013). "Duration Dependence and
Labor Market Conditions: Evidence from a Field Experiment", The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics, 128(3): 1123-1167.
   Kroft, Kory, Fabian Lange, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo, and Lawrence F. Katz (2016). "Long-
Term Unemployment and the Great Recession: The Role of Composition, Duration Dependence,
and Non-Participation," Journal of Labor Economics, 34:S7-S54.
   Lazear, Edward P. and James R. Spletzer (2012). "Hiring, Churn and the Business Cycle",
American Economic Review, 102(3):575-79.
   Ljungqvist, Lars, and Thomas J. Sargent (1998). "The European Unemployment Dilemma,"
Journal of Political Economy 106(3):514-550.
   Morchio, Iacopo (2016). "Work Histories and Lifetime Unemployment," working paper, Uni-
versity of Vienna.
   Perry, George L. (1972). "Unemployment Flows in the U.S. Labor Market," Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity, 3(2):245—292.
   Polivka, Anne E. and Stephen M. Miller (1998). "The CPS after the Redesign: Refocusing the
Economic Lens," in John Haltiwanger, Marilyn E. Manser, and Robert Topel, eds., Labor Statistics

                                               35
Measurement Issues, pp.249-86.
   Ravenna, Federico, and Carl E. Walsh (2012). "Screening and Labor Market Flows in a Model
with Heterogeneous Workers," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 44(S2): 31-71.
   Ridder, Geert (1990). "The Non-Parametric Identiﬁcation of Generalized Accelerated Failure-
Time Models", Review of Economic Studies, 57:167-182.
   Schwarz, Gideon (1978). "Estimating the Dimension of a Model," Annals of Statistics 6:461-
464.
   Shimer, Robert (2012). "Reassessing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment," Review of Economic
Dynamics, 15(2):127-148.
   Sider, Hal (1985). "Unemployment Duration and Incidence: 1968-1982," American Economic
Review, 75(3):461-72.
   Van den Berg, Gerald J. (2001). "Duration Models: Speciﬁcation, Identiﬁcation, and Multiple
Durations," in James J. Heckman and Edward Leamer, eds., Handbook of Econometrics, Volume
V (North-Holland, Amsterdam).
   Van den Berg, Gerald J., and Bas van der Klaauw (2001).       "Combining Micro and Macro
Unemployment Duration Data," Journal of Econometrics 102: 271-309.
   Van den Berg, Gerald J., and Jan C. van Ours (1996). "Unemployment Dynamics and Duration
Dependence," Journal of Labor Economics, 14(1):100-125.
   Vishwanath, Tara. (1989). “Job Search, Stigma Eﬀect, and Escape Rate from Unemployment,”
Journal of Labor Economics, 7(4):487-502.
   Vroman, Wayne (2009). "Unemployment insurance recipients and nonrecipients in the CPS,"
Monthly Labor Review, October 2009, pp.44-53, Bureau of Labor Statistics.
   White, Halbert (1982). "Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Misspeciﬁed Models," Economet-
rica, 50:1-25.
   Whittaker, Julie M. and Katelin P. Isaacs (2014). "Unemployment Insurance: Programs and
Beneﬁts,"Congressional Research Service Report for Congress, 7-5700.
   Yashiv, Eran (2007). "US Labor Market Dynamics Revisited," The Scandinavian Journal of
Economics, 109(4): 779—806.




                                              36
Table 1. Actual and predicted values for unemployment on average and during Great Recession
using diﬀerent steady-state representations


                          Parameter values                          Actual or predicted values
                                                            U1        U 2.3      U 4.6   U 7.12   U 13.+

                      1976:M1-2017:M06                                  Observed values
    (1)                                                    3,178     2,281      1,244    1,064     664

               w     p                                             Fitted (and predicted) values
     (2)   3,178   0.4840                                  3,178      2,281      (618)    (78)      (1)

           wH       wL         pH       pL                         Fitted (and predicted) values
     (3)   2,488    690      0.3559    0.8476              3,178      2,281      1,244   1,064    (621)

               w     δ0        δ1       δ2        δ3                          Fitted values
     (4)   3,178   0.1090    -0.3690   0.0140   3.314e-5   3,178      2,281      1,244   1,064     664

           wH       wL       pH (1)    pL (1)      δ                          Fitted values
     (5)   2,482    696      0.3550    0.8440   -0.0050    3,178      2,281      1,244   1,064     664

                     2007:M12-2013:M12                                  Observed values
    (6)                                                    3,339     2,787      2,131    2,426    1,902

           wH       wL         pH       pL                         Fitted (and predicted) values
     (7)   2,274   1,065     0.32920   0.890               3,339      2,787      2,131   2,426    (2,358)

               w     δ0        δ1       δ2        δ3                          Fitted values
     (8)   3,339   0.2360    -0.6620   0.0540   -1.27e-3   3,339      2,787      2,131   2,426    1,902

           wH       wL       pH (1)    pL (1)      δ                          Fitted values
     (9)   2,307   1,032     0.3340    0.9000   0.0170     3,339      2,787      2,131   2,426    1,902


Notes to Table 1. Table reports average values of Utx in thousands of workers over the entire
1976:M1-2017:M6 sample and the 2007:M12-2013:M12 subsample along with predicted values
from simple steady-state calculations. Parameters were chosen to ﬁt exactly the values in that
row appearing in normal face, while the model’s predictions for other numbers are indicated by
parentheses.




                                                 37
                         Table 2. Parameter estimates for the baseline model

                           σw
                            L     0.0422***    R1     0.1011***     δ̃ 1   5.0512***
                                  (0.0039)             (0.0054)            (1.9164)
                           σw
                            H     0.0437***   R2.3    0.0753***     δ̃ 2    -0.0485
                                  (0.0057)             (0.0044)            (0.0532)
                           σ xL   0.0476***   R4.6    0.0817***     δ̃ 3   2.1674***
                                  (0.0054)             (0.0073)            (0.8104)
                           σxH    0.0204***   R7.12   0.0586***
                                  (0.0027)             (0.0047)
                                              R13+    0.0393***
                                                       (0.0025)
                             No. of Obs.                      498
                           Log-Likelihood                   2,574.0

Notes to Table 2. White (1982) quasi-maximum-likelihood standard errors in parentheses. See
footnote 20 for the deﬁnition of δ̃ j .




                                                      38
              Table 3. Comparison of variance decomposition across diﬀerent models

                     Shocks       (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)
     # of Param.                   12        12        12       12         15        16        12
       Log-L.                    2574.0    2474.7    1326.6   2608.7     2620.2    2585.7    2571.0
         SIC                    -5073.4   -4874.8   -2585.5   -5142.8   -5147.2   -5072.0   -5067.5
       3 month          F          -         -         -         -         -       0.588       -
                                   -         -         -         -         -      (0.069)      -
                       wL        0.415     0.414     0.225     0.131     0.392     0.233     0.384
                                (0.045)   (0.048)   (0.053)   (0.025)   (0.046)   (0.041)   (0.044)
                       wH        0.208     0.229     0.225     0.388     0.214     0.123     0.147
                                (0.041)   (0.048)   (0.057)   (0.052)   (0.044)   (0.030)   (0.040)
                       pL        0.281     0.288     0.279     0.203     0.281     0.000     0.253
                                (0.043)   (0.046)   (0.067)   (0.039)   (0.045)   (0.055)   (0.041)
                       pH        0.096     0.068     0.271     0.277     0.114     0.057     0.216
                                (0.022)   (0.017)   (0.067)   (0.045)   (0.022)   (0.016)   (0.046)
                     Inﬂows      0.623     0.644     0.450     0.519     0.606     0.355     0.531
                     L group     0.696     0.703     0.503     0.335     0.673     0.233     0.637
         1 year         F          -         -         -         -         -       0.635       -
                                   -         -         -         -         -      (0.070)      -
                       wL        0.510     0.489     0.350     0.307     0.489     0.297     0.476
                                (0.050)   (0.052)   (0.060)   (0.042)   (0.052)   (0.051)   (0.049)
                       wH        0.074     0.083     0.102     0.210     0.079     0.045     0.051
                                (0.017)   (0.022)   (0.030)   (0.041)   (0.020)   (0.012)   (0.016)
                       pL        0.380     0.403     0.399     0.318     0.388     0.000     0.391
                                (0.051)   (0.053)   (0.071)   (0.053)   (0.054)   (0.071)   (0.053)
                       pH        0.036     0.025     0.148     0.165     0.044     0.022     0.082
                                (0.009)   (0.007)   (0.045)   (0.034)   (0.010)   (0.006)   (0.022)
                     Inﬂows      0.584     0.572     0.453     0.516     0.567     0.343     0.527
                     L group     0.890     0.892     0.750     0.625     0.877     0.298     0.867
         2 year         F          -         -         -         -         -       0.644       -
                                   -         -         -         -         -      (0.072)      -
                       wL        0.523     0.485     0.427     0.430     0.503     0.310     0.483
                                (0.052)   (0.053)   (0.064)   (0.048)   (0.054)   (0.053)   (0.051)
                       wH        0.049     0.054     0.063     0.139     0.053     0.031     0.033
                                (0.012)   (0.015)   (0.020)   (0.031)   (0.014)   (0.008)   (0.012)
                       pL        0.403     0.444     0.413     0.320     0.413     0.000     0.428
                                (0.053)   (0.055)   (0.071)   (0.050)   (0.056)   (0.075)   (0.054)
                       pH        0.025     0.017     0.096     0.112     0.031     0.015     0.055
                                (0.006)   (0.005)   (0.032)   (0.026)   (0.007)   (0.004)   (0.017)
                     Inﬂows      0.572     0.539     0.491     0.568     0.556     0.341     0.516
                     L group     0.926     0.929     0.841     0.750     0.916     0.310     0.911


Notes to Table 3. (1) Baseline model, (2) alternative data, (3) post 94 data, (4) unadjusted data, (5)

time-varying GDD, (6) correlated shocks, (7) weekly frequency. Standard errors in parentheses.


                                                    39
                            1.0


                            0.9


                            0.8


                            0.7


                            0.6


                            0.5


                            0.4
                                                                            newly unemployed
                                                                            >= 4 months
                            0.3
                                  1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000    2010




   Figure 1. Unemployment-continuation probabilities for newly unemployed and long-term un-
employed, 1949:M1-2017:M6.




   Figure 2. Illustration of how ex ante heterogeneity can cause unemployment-continuation prob-
abilities to increase with duration.
   Notes to Figure 2. Of newly unemployed at time t, 80 have unemployment-continuation prob-
ability of 35% and 20 have probability of 85%. The ﬁgure reports the number from each group
who are still unemployed in subsequent months and the average continuation probabilities for each
surviving cohort.


                                                 40
         Number unemployed (1000s)




                                                                                     Number unemployed (1000s)
                                     4000                                                                        4000

                                     3000                                                                        3000

                                     2000                                                                        2000         wLp nL + wH p nH
                                                          n
                                                   wp
                                     1000                                                                        1000
                                                                                                                            wLp nL
                                       0                                                                           0
                                            0             5     10    15   20                                           0            5       10   15   20
                                         Duration of unemployment (n)                                                 Duration of unemployment (n)
                                        (A) Homogeneous workers                                                     (B) Heterogeneous workers
         Number unemployed (1000s)




                                     4000

                                     3000

                                     2000
                                                   wLp nL + wH p nH
                                     1000
                                                 wLp nL
                                       0
                                            0             5     10    15   20
                                                Duration of unemployment (n)
                                                 (C) Great Recession

    Figure 3. Predicted (smooth curves) and actual (black circles) numbers of unemployed as a
function of duration based on constant-parameter speciﬁcations
    Notes to Figure 3. Horizontal axis shows duration of unemployment in months and vertical
axis shows number of unemployed for that duration in thousands of individuals. Circles denote
imputed values for Ū 1 , Ū 3 , Ū 5 , Ū 9.5 , and Ū 15 based on equation (6) with wL , wH , xL , xH , and
δ chosen to ﬁt the observed values of Ū 1 , Ū 2.3 , Ū 4.6 , Ū 7.12 , and Ū 13.+ exactly.                                                      Panel A: homo-
geneous speciﬁcation ﬁt to 1976:M1-2017:M6 historical averages for Ū 1 , and Ū 2.3 . Panel B: pure
cross-sectional heterogeneity speciﬁcation ﬁt to 1976:M1-2017:M6 historical averages for Ū 1 , Ū 2.3 ,
Ū 4.6 , and Ū 7.12 . Panel C: pure cross-sectional heterogeneity speciﬁcation ﬁt to average values for
2007:M12-2013:M12 for Ū 1 , Ū 2.3 , Ū 4.6 , and Ū 7.12 .




                                                                                41
                                                                           1




                                  Unemployment Continuation Probability
                                                                          0.8


                                                                          0.6


                                                                          0.4


                                                                          0.2


                                                                           0
                                                                                 5           10        15         20
                                                                                     Duration of unemployment (n)
                                                                                  (A) Full sample


                                                                           1
                                  Unemployment Continuation Probability




                                                                          0.8


                                                                          0.6


                                                                          0.4


                                                                          0.2


                                                                           0
                                                                                 5           10        15         20
                                                                                     Duration of unemployment (n)
                                                                                (B) Great Recession
   Figure 4. Unemployment-continuation probabilities as a function of duration based on constant-
parameter pure genuine duration dependence speciﬁcation
   Notes to Figure 4. Horizontal axis shows duration of unemployment in months and vertical
axis shows probability that individual is still unemployed the following month.                                        Curves denote
predicted values from the 5-parameter pure GDD model (w plus parameters in equation (5)) ﬁt to
1976:M1-2017:M6 historical average values for Ū 1 , Ū 2.3 , Ū 4.6 , Ū 7.12 and Ū 13.+ (panel A) and for
values for 2007:M12-2013:M12 (panel B). The GDD model exactly ﬁts the dots plotted in Figure
3 for each case.




                                                                                             42
                          1



                         0.9



                         0.8



                         0.7



                         0.6



                         0.5



                         0.4



                         0.3
                                      p (1)
                                       L,t
                                      p      (1)
                                       H,t
                         0.2
                               1980           1985   1990   1995    2000   2005   2010   2015




   Figure 5. Probability that a newly unemployed worker of each type will still be unemployed
the following month
   Notes to Figure 5. The series plotted are p̂it|T (1) for i = L, H with 95% conﬁdence intervals.


                         3.5

                                                                                         WL
                                                                                         W
                                                                                          H
                          3




                         2.5




                          2




                         1.5




                          1




                         0.5



                               1980           1985   1990   1995    2000   2005   2010   2015




   Figure 6. Number of newly unemployed workers of each type
   Notes to Figure 6. The series plotted are ŵit|T for i = L, H with 95% conﬁdence intervals.




                                                               43
                           1


                          0.9


                          0.8


                          0.7


                          0.6


                          0.5


                          0.4


                          0.3


                          0.2


                          0.1          Share
                                            H
                                       ShareL
                           0
                                1980       1985   1990   1995         2000         2005       2010        2015




   Figure 7. Share of total unemployment accounted for by each type of worker


         0.4                                                          1


                                                                     0.9
         0.3

                                                                     0.8

         0.2
                                                                     0.7


         0.1
                                                                     0.6



          0                                                          0.5


                                                                     0.4
        −0.1

                                                                     0.3

        −0.2
                                                                     0.2
                                                                                 type L
                                                                                 type H
        −0.3                                                         0.1
               0   5       10              15       20          25           2     4      6    8     10     12   14   16   18   20   22   24

                       (A) GDD alone                                  (B) Continuation probs for each type
   Figure 8. Eﬀects of genuine duration dependence
   Notes to Figure 8.     Panel A plots dτ as a function of τ (months spent in unemployment).
Panel B plots average unemployment-continuation probabilities of type H and type L workers as
a function of duration of unemployment.




                                                                44
             1                                                              1
                                                                  WL
                                                                  WH                 Inflows
         0.9                                                               0.9
                                                                  Pux                Outflows
                                                                   L
                                                                      ux
                                                                  PH
         0.8                                                               0.8


         0.7                                                               0.7


         0.6                                                               0.6


         0.5                                                               0.5


         0.4                                                               0.4


         0.3                                                               0.3


         0.2                                                               0.2


         0.1                                                               0.1


             0                                                              0
                  5     10     15   20   25   30   35   40       45              5      10      15   20   25   30   35   40   45

                             (A) All four factors                                    (B) Inﬂows vs. outﬂows

             1


         0.9


         0.8                                                 L
                                                             H

         0.7


         0.6


         0.5


         0.4


         0.3


         0.2


         0.1


             0
                  5     10     15   20   25   30   35   40       45

                      (C) Type H versus type L
   Figure 9. Fraction of variance of error in forecasting total unemployment at diﬀerent horizons
attributable to separate factors
   Notes to Figure 9. Horizontal axis indicates the number of months ahead s for which the forecast
is formed.       Panel A plots the contribution of each of the factors {wHt , wLt , xHt , xLt } separately,
Panel B shows combined contributions of {wHt , wLt } and {xHt , xLt }, and Panel C shows combined
contributions of {wHt , xHt } and {wLt , xLt }. Dotted lines denote 95% conﬁdence intervals.




                                                                       45
    10                                                             11
              Ubase                                                               Ubase
              Uall                                                                Uall
   9.5                                                            10.5
              WL                                                                  WL
              WH                                                                  WH
     9                                                             10
              Pux
               L
                                                                                  Pux
                                                                                   L

   8.5        Pux
               H                                                   9.5            Pux
                                                                                   H



     8                                                              9


   7.5                                                             8.5


     7                                                              8


   6.5                                                             7.5


     6                                                              7


   5.5                                                             6.5


     5                                                              6
              1980.1                            1981.1                                     1982.1                      1983.1                       1984.1


                       (A) 1980 Recession                                                 (B) 1981 Recession

   9.5                                                            8.5
              Ubase                                                                                                                               Ubase
              Uall                                                                                                                                Uall
     9                                                              8
              WL                                                                                                                                  WL
              WH                                                                                                                                  WH
   8.5                                                            7.5
              Pux
               L
                                                                                                                                                  Pux
                                                                                                                                                   L

     8        Pux
               H                                                    7                                                                             Pux
                                                                                                                                                   H



   7.5                                                            6.5


     7                                                              6


   6.5                                                            5.5


     6                                                              5


   5.5                                                            4.5


     5                                                              4


   4.5                                                            3.5
                       1991.1          1992.1            1993.1          2001.1                      2002.1                     2003.1


                       (C) 1990 Recession                                                 (D) 2001 Recession

     9                                                              9
              Ubase                                                               Ubase
              Uall                                                                Uall
   8.5                                                            8.5
              WL                                                                  WL
              WH                                                                  WH
     8                                                              8
              Pux
               L
                                                                                  Pux
                                                                                   L

   7.5        Pux
               H                                                  7.5             Pux
                                                                                   H



     7                                                              7


   6.5                                                            6.5


     6                                                              6


   5.5                                                            5.5


     5                                                              5


   4.5                                                            4.5


     4                                                              4
         2008.1           2009.1   2010.1       2011.1                   2008.1             2009.1            2010.1                     2011.1


                       (E) 2007 Recession                           (F) 2007 Recession (correlated shocks)

Figure 10. Historical decompositions of ﬁve U.S. recessions
Notes to Figure 10. Panels A-E use baseline model. Panel F uses factor model.


                                                              46
                            A. Shimer measure of unemployment outflows                                                      B. Shimer measure of unemployment inflows
            0.60                                                                                     0.050

            0.55
                                                                                                     0.045
            0.50
                                                                                                     0.040
            0.45

            0.40                                                                                     0.035

            0.35
                                                                                                     0.030
            0.30
                                                                                                     0.025
            0.25

            0.20                                                                                     0.020
                     1970    1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010        2015                       1970    1975      1980       1985    1990    1995   2000   2005   2010       2015


                   C. Shimer-like measure of long-term unemployment outflows                                    D. Shimer-like measure of long-term unemployment inflows
           0.7                                                                                       0.0200

                                                                                                     0.0175
           0.6
                                                                                                     0.0150
           0.5                                                                                       0.0125

           0.4                                                                                       0.0100

                                                                                                     0.0075
           0.3
                                                                                                     0.0050

           0.2                                                                                       0.0025
                    1970    1975    1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010       2015                        1970     1975         1980   1985     1990   1995   2000   2005   2010       2015


                     E. Long-term unemployment-continuation probabilities                                       F. Long-term continuation probabilities in Great Recession
            0.95                                                                                     0.925

            0.90
                                                                                                     0.900

            0.85
                                                                                                     0.875
            0.80
                                                                                                     0.850
            0.75

                                                                                                     0.825
            0.70
                                                                               Shimer-like measure                                                                                     Shimer-like measure
                                                                               Data from Figure 5                                                                                      Data from Figure 5
            0.65                                                                                     0.800
                     1970    1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010        2015                2007                  2008                 2009            2010           2011




   Figure 11. Alternative measures of inﬂows and outﬂows, 1967:Q1-2016:Q4.
   Notes to Figure 11. Panel A plots updated series for Shimer’s measure of ft (outﬂows from
unemployment). Panel B plots updated series for Shimer’s measure of xt (inﬂows to unemploy-
ment). Panel C plots the measure of outﬂows from long-term unemployment Ft4.+ from equation
(28). Panel D plots inﬂows into long-term unemployment measured by u4.6
                                                                    t . Panel E plots monthly

unemployment-continuation probabilities as calculated from (1 − Ft4.+ )1/3 and from quarterly av-
erages of the series p̂Lt|T (1) in Figure 5. Panel F shows Panel E data over 2007:Q3-2011:Q4.




                                                                              47
                    A. Shimer decomposition of unemployment                                            B. Contribution to outflows of level of inflows
           10                                                        Unemployment rate
                                                                                             0.425
                                                                     Explained by inflows
                                                                     Explained by outflows
                                                                                             0.400
            9
                                                                                             0.375
            8
                                                                                             0.350

            7                                                                                0.325

            6                                                                                0.300

                                                                                             0.275
            5
                                                                                             0.250
            4
                                                                                             0.225
                                                                                                                                                           Shimer f
                                                                                                                                                           Explained by inflows
            3                                                                                0.200
                  2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015      2016                       2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015       2016


                     C. VAR decomposition of unemployment                                      D. Contribution to outflows of level and composition of inflows
           10                                                        Unemployment rate
                                                                                             0.425
                                                                     Explained by inflows
                                                                     Explained by outflows
                                                                                             0.400
            9
                                                                                             0.375
            8
                                                                                             0.350

            7                                                                                0.325

            6                                                                                0.300

                                                                                             0.275
            5
                                                                                             0.250
            4
                                                                                             0.225
                                                                                                                                                           Shimer f
                                                                                                                                                           Explained by inflows
            3                                                                                0.200
                  2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015      2016                       2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015       2016




   Figure 12. Alternative measures of the contributions of inﬂows and outﬂows to unemployment
and the unemployment-exit rate since 2007:Q4.
   Notes to Figure 12. Panel A plots the unemployment rate and contributions to it from inﬂows
and outﬂows using Shimer’s method. Panel B plots unemployment outﬂow rate and the component
of outﬂows that is explained by innovations in inﬂows according to a bivariate VAR. Panel C plots
unemployment rate and contributions to it from innovations in outﬂows, innovations in level and
composition of inﬂows according to a 4-variable VAR. Panel D plots unemployment outﬂow rate
and the component of outﬂows that is explained by innovations in level and composition of inﬂows
according to a 3-variable VAR.



                                                                     48
                                           2
                                                              WL
                                          1.8
                                                              Permanent Separations

                                          1.6


                                          1.4


                                          1.2




                            (Millions)
                                           1


                                          0.8


                                          0.6


                                          0.4


                                          0.2


                                           0
                                                1980   1985        1990       1995    2000   2005   2010   2015

                                                       (A) Newly unemployed

                                          14

                                                              Type L
                                                              Permanent Separations
                                          12




                                          10




                                           8
                             (Millions)




                                           6




                                           4




                                           2




                                           0
                                                1980   1985        1990       1995    2000   2005   2010   2015

                                                        (B) All unemployed
   Figure 13. Contribution to unemployment of type L individuals and those unemployed due to
permanent separation.
   Notes to Figure 13. Panel A shows newly unemployed type L individuals and newly unemployed
individuals who gave permanent job loss or end of a temporary job as the reason. Panel B shows
total numbers of unemployed type L workers compared to total numbers of unemployed who gave
permanent job loss or end of temporary job as the reason.




                                                                              49
                                            2


                                           1.8            Permanent Separation
                                                          Layoff
                                                          Leaver
                                           1.6            Re−Entrant
                                                          New−Entrant
                                           1.4            Sum
                                                          WL

                                           1.2




                             (Millions)
                                            1


                                           0.8


                                           0.6


                                           0.4


                                           0.2


                                            0
                                                 1985      1990          1995     2000   2005   2010

                                                        (A) Newly unemployed


                                           12
                                                          Permanent Separation
                                                          Layoff
                                                          Leaver
                                                          Re−Entrant
                                           10
                                                          New−Entrant
                                                          Sum
                                                          Type L
                                            8
                              (Millions)




                                            6




                                            4




                                            2




                                            0
                                                 1985      1990          1995     2000   2005   2010

                                                         (B) All unemployed
   Figure 14. Inﬂows and total numbers of type L workers by reason of unemployment
   Notes to Figure 14. Panel A shows the number of type L individuals who are newly unemployed
by reason of unemployment along with the sum across reasons (thick fuchsia) and inference based
on uncategorized aggregate data (dashed black).                                  Panel B shows the number of type L workers
who have been unemployed for any duration by reason of unemployment along with the sum across
reasons (thick fuchsia) and inference based on uncategorized aggregate data (dashed black). Source:
Ahn (2016).




                                                                           50
                                        Online Appendix
    A. Measurement issues and seasonal adjustment
    The seasonally adjusted numbers of people unemployed for less than 5 weeks, for between 5 and
14 weeks, 15-26 weeks and for longer than 26 weeks are published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
To further break down the number unemployed for longer than 26 weeks into those with duration
between 27 and 52 weeks and with longer than 52 weeks, we used seasonally unadjusted CPS
microdata publicly available at the NBER website (http://www.nber.org/data/cps_basic.html).
Since the CPS is a probability sample, each individual is assigned a unique weight that is used to
produce the aggregate data. From the CPS microdata, we obtain the number of unemployed whose
duration of unemployment is between 27 and 52 weeks and the number longer than 52 weeks. We
seasonally adjust the two series using X-12-ARIMA,38 and calculated the ratio of those unemployed
27-52 weeks to the sum. We then multiplied this ratio by the published BLS seasonally adjusted
number for individuals who had been unemployed for longer than 26 weeks to obtain our series
Ut7.12 .39
    An important issue in using these data is the redesign of the CPS in 1994.                       Before 1994,
individuals were always asked how long they had been unemployed. After the redesign, if an
individual is reported as unemployed during two consecutive months, then her duration is recorded
automatically as the sum of her duration last month and the number of weeks between the two
months’ survey reference periods. Note that if an individual was unemployed during each of the two
weeks surveyed, but worked at a job in between, that individual would likely self-report a duration
of unemployment to be less than 5 weeks before the redesign, but the duration would be imputed
to be a number greater than 5 weeks after the redesign.
    As suggested by Elsby, Michaels and Solon (2009) and Shimer (2012) we can get an idea of the
size of this eﬀect by making use of the staggered CPS sample design. A given address is sampled
for 4 months (called the ﬁrst through fourth rotations, respectively), not sampled for the next 8
   38
      An earlier version of this paper dealt with seasonality by taking 12-month moving averages and arrived at
similar overall results to those presented in this version. As a further check on the approach used here, we compared
the published BLS seasonally adjusted number for those unemployed with duration between 15 and 26 weeks to an
X-12-ARIMA-adjusted estimate constructed from the CPS microdata, and found the series to be quite close.
   39
      This adjustment is necessary because the published number for unemployed with duration longer than 26 weeks
is diﬀerent from that directly computed from the CPS microdata, although the diﬀerence is subtle. The diﬀerence
arises because the BLS imputes the numbers unemployed with diﬀerent durations to various factors, e.g., correction
of missing observations.


                                                         51
months, and then sampled again for another 4 months (the ﬁfth through eighth rotations). After
the 1994 redesign, the durations for unemployed individuals in rotations 2-4 and 6-8 are imputed,
whereas those in rotations 1 and 5 are self-reported, just as they were before 1994. For those in
rotation groups 1 and 5, we can calculate the fraction of individuals who are newly unemployed
and compare this with the total fraction of newly unemployed individuals across all rotations. The
ratio of these two numbers is reported in Panel A of Figure A1, and averaged 1.15 over the period
1994-2007 as reported in the second row of Table A1.                 For comparison, the ratio averaged 1.01
over the period 1989-1993, as seen in the ﬁrst row. This calculation suggests that if we want to
compare the value of Ut1 as calculated under the redesign to the self-reported numbers available
before 1994, we should multiply the former by 1.15. This is similar to the adjustment factors of
1.10 used by Hornstein (2012), 1.154 by Elsby, Michaels and Solon (2009), 1.106 by Shimer (2012),
and 1.205 by Polivka and Miller (1998).
    For our study, unlike most previous researchers, we also need to specify which categories the
underreported newly unemployed are coming from.                    Figure A1 reports the observed ratios of
rotation 1 and 5 shares to the total for the various duration groups, with average values summarized
in Table A1. One interesting feature is that under the redesign, the fraction of those with 7-12
month duration from rotations 1 and 5 is very similar to that for other rotations, whereas the
fraction of those with 13 or more months is much lower.40 Based on the values in Table A1, we
should scale up the estimated values for Ut1 and scale down the estimated values of Ut2.3 and Ut13.+
relative to the pre-1994 numbers. The values for Ut4.6 and Ut7.12 seem not to have been aﬀected
much by the redesign. Our preferred adjustment for data subsequent to the 1994 redesign is to
multiply Ut1 by 1.15, Ut2.3 by 0.87, Ut13.+ by 0.77, and leave Ut4.6 and Ut7.12 as is. We then multiplied
all of our adjusted duration ﬁgures by the ratio of total BLS reported unemployment to the sum
of our adjusted series in order to match the BLS aggregate exactly.
    Hornstein (2012) adopted an alternative adjustment, assuming that all of the imputed newly
unemployed came from the U 2.3 category.               He chose to multiply Ut1 by 1.10 and subtract the
added workers solely from the Ut2.3 category. As a robustness check we also report results using
   40
      One possible explanation is digit preference— an individual is much more likely to report having been unemployed
for 12 months than 13 or 14 months. When someone in rotation 5 reports they have been unemployed for 12 months,
BLS simply counts them as such, and if they are still unemployed the following month, BLS imputes to them a
duration of 13 months. The imputed number of people 13 months and higher is signiﬁcantly bigger than the self-
reported numbers, just as the imputed number of people with 2-3 months appears to be higher than self-reported.


                                                         52
Hornstein’s proposed adjustment in Section 5.1, as well as results using no adjustments at all.
     An alternative might be to to use the ratios for each t in Figure A1 rather than to use the aver-
ages from Table A1. However, as Shimer (2012) and Elsby, Michaels and Solon (2009) mentioned,
such an adjustment would be based on only about one quarter of the sample and thus multiplies
the sampling variance of the estimate by about four, which implies that noise from the correction
procedure could be misleading in understanding the unemployment dynamics.
     Table A1. Average ratio of each duration group’s share in the ﬁrst/ﬁfth rotation group to that
in total unemployment

                                               U1      U 2.3   U 4.6   U 7.12   U 13.+

                               1989-1993      1.01     1.01    0.96     1.02    0.97
                               1994-2007      1.15     0.87    0.95     1.05    0.77


     B. Estimation algorithm
     The system in Section 2.1 can be written as


                                                 xt = F xt−1 + vt


                                                    yt = h(xt ) + rt

for xt = (ξ ′t , ξ ′t−1 , ..., ξ′t−47 )′ , E(vt vt′ ) = Q, and E(rt rt′ ) = R. The function h(.) as well as elements of
the variance matrices R and Q depend on the parameter vector θ = (δ̃ 1 , δ̃ 2 , δ̃ 3 , R1 , R2.3 , R4.6 , R7.12 ,
R13+ , σw     w     x     x ′
        L , σ H , σ L , σ H ) . The extended Kalman ﬁlter (e.g., Hamilton, 1994b) can be viewed as an

iterative algorithm to calculate a forecast x̂t|t−1 of the state vector conditioned on knowledge of θ and
                        ′ , y ′ , ..., y ′ )′ with P
observation of Yt−1 = (yt−1  t−2        1           t|t−1 the MSE of this forecast. With these we can

approximate the distribution of yt conditioned on Yt−1 as N(h(x̂t|t−1 ), Ωt ) for Ωt = Ht′ Pt|t−1 Ht + R
and Ht = ∂h(xt )/∂x′t |xt =x̂t|t−1 from which the approximate likelihood function associated with that
θ,
                                                       T
                                           ℓ(θ) =      t=1 ln f(yt |Yt−1 ; θ)


      ln f (yt |Yt−1 ; θ) = −(1/2) ln(2π) − (1/2) ln |Ωt | − (1/2)[yt − h(x̂t|t−1 )]′ Ω−1
                                                                                       t [yt − h(x̂t|t−1 )],




                                                          53
can be maximized numerically. The forecast of the state vector can be updated by iterating on


                                          Kt = Pt|t−1 Ht (Ht′ Pt|t−1 Ht + R)−1


                                                  Pt|t = Pt|t−1 − Kt Ht′ Pt|t−1

                                              x̂t|t = x̂t|t−1 + Kt (yt − h(x̂t|t−1 ))

                                                            x̂t+1|t = F x̂t|t

                                                     Pt+1|t = F Pt|t F ′ + Q.

    Prior to the starting date January 1976 for our sample, BLS aggregates are available but not the
micro data that we used to construct Ut13.+ . For the initial value for the extended Kalman ﬁlter,
we calculated the values that would be implied if pre-sample values had been realizations from an
initial steady state, estimating the (4 × 1) vector ξ̄ 0 from the average values for Ū 1 , Ū 2.3 , Ū 4.6 , and
Ū 7.+ over February 1972 - January 1976 using the method described in Section 1.1. Our initial
guess was then x̂1|0 = ι48 ⊗ ξ̄ 0 where ι48 denotes a (48 × 1) vector of ones. Diagonal elements of
P1|0 determine how much the presample values of ξ j are allowed to diﬀer from this initial guess ξ̂ j|0 .
For this we set E(ξ j − ξ̂ j|0 )(ξ j − ξ̂ j|0 )′ = c0 I4 + (1 − j)c1 I4 with c0 = 10 and c1 = 0.1. The value
for c0 is quite large relative to the range of ξ t|T over the complete observed sample, ensuring that
the particular value we speciﬁed for x̂1|0 has little inﬂuence. For k < j we specify the covariance41
E(ξ j − ξ̄ 0 )(ξ k − ξ̄ 0 )′ = E(ξ j − ξ̄ 0 )(ξ j − ξ̄ 0 )′ . The small value for c1 forces presample ξ j to be close
to ξ k when j is close to k, again consistent with the observed month-to-month variation in ξ̂ t|T .
    Smoothed inferences about xt using the full sample of available data, x̂t|T = E(xt |YT ) and their
variance matrix Pt|T = E[(xt − x̂t|T )(xt − x̂t|T )′ ] can be calculated by iterating backwards on the




  41
       In other words,
                                                                                                            
                                     c 0 I4          c 0 I4             c 0 I4       ···         c0 I4
                                 
                                    c 0 I4     c 0 I4 + c 1 I4    c 0 I4 + c 1 I4   ···     c0 I4 + c1 I4   
                                                                                                             
                                    c 0 I4     c 0 I4 + c 1 I4   c0 I4 + 2c1 I4     ···    c0 I4 + 2c1 I4   
                         P1|0   =                                                                           .
                                       ..              ..                 ..                      ..        
                                        .               .                  .        ···            .        
                                     c 0 I4     c 0 I4 + c 1 I4   c0 I4 + 2c1 I4     ···   c0 I4 + 47c1 I4



                                                                    54
following equations for t = T − 1, T − 2, ..., 1:


                                                   Jt = Pt|t F ′ Pt+1|t
                                                                   −1




                                         x̂t|T = x̂t|t + Jt (x̂t+1|T − x̂t+1|t )

                                        Pt|T = Pt|t + Jt (Pt+1|T − Pt+1|t )Jt′ .

These smoothed inferences x̂t|T and functions of them are plotted in Figures 5-7 and 10.
    We calculated standard errors for the estimate θ̂ as in equation (3.13) in Hamilton (1994b):


                                       E(θ̂ − θ)(θ̂ − θ)′ ≃ V = K1−1 K2 K1−1

                                                            ∂ℓ(θ)
                                                   K1 =
                                                            ∂θ∂θ′       θ=θ̂
                                                                                                         ′
                               T        ∂ ln f (yt |Yt−1 ; θ)             ∂ ln f (yt |Yt−1 ; θ)
                     K2 =      t=1                                                                           .
                                                 ∂θ              θ=θ̂              ∂θ             θ=θ̂

    To obtain standard errors for the variance decompositions in Figure 9 and Table 3, we gen-
erated J = 1, 000 draws from the asymptotic distribution of θ̂, θ[j] ∼ N(θ̂, V ), j = 1, ..., J and
calcuated qs,k (θ [j] ) as in equation (21) for each s and each k = 1, ..., 4. The standard deviation
                   4
of qs,k (θ[j] )/              [j]
                   k=1 qs,k (θ )    across draws j was used to get the error bands and standard errors in
Figure 9 and Table 3.
    The standard errors used for Figures 5 and 6 incorporate both ﬁlter and parameter uncertainty.
The matrix Pt|T summarizes uncertainty we would have about xt even if we knew the true value of
the parameters in θ. Given that we also have to estimate θ, the true uncertainty is greater than
that represented by Pt|T . Following Ansley and Kohn (1986) we calculate the total variance as

                                                                               ′
                                                  Pt|T    θ=θ̂
                                                                 + Zt V Zt

                                                             ∂ x̂t|T
                                                   Zt =                            .
                                                 (4×12)       ∂θ′       θ=θ̂

The values of {Zt }Tt=1 can be found by numerical diﬀerentiation, e.g., replace θ̂ with θ̂ + δei for
δ = 10−8 and ei the ith column of I12 and then redo the iteration to calculate x̂t|T (θ̂ + δei ). The


                                                             55
ith column of Zt is then δ −1 [x̂t|T (θ̂ + δei ) − x̂t|T |(θ̂)].
    C. Derivation of linearized variance and historical decompositions
    The state equation ξ t+1 = ξ t + εt+1 implies




                                    ξ t+s = ξ t + εt+1 + εt+2 + εt+3 + · · · + εt+s

                                             = ξ t + ut+s .


Letting yt = (Ut1 , Ut2.3 , Ut4.6 , Ut7.12 , Ut13.+ )′ denote the (5 × 1) vector of observations for date t, our
model implies that in the absence of measurement error yt would equal h(ξ t , ξ t−1 , ξ t−2 , ..., ξ t−47 )
where h(·) is a known nonlinear function. Hence


                      yt+s = h(ut+s + ξ t , ut+s−1 + ξ t , ..., ut+1 + ξt , ξt , ξt−1 , ..., ξ t−47+s ).

We can take a ﬁrst-order Taylor expansion of this function around ut+j = 0 for j = 1, 2, ..., s,



                                                                   s
      yt+s ≃ h(ξ t , ..., ξ t , ξ t , ξ t−1 , ..., ξ t−47+s ) +        [Hj (ξ t , ξ t , ..., ξ t , ξ t , ξ t−1 , ..., ξ t−47+j )]ut+s+1−j
                                                                  j=1


for Hj (·) the (5 × 4) matrix associated with the derivative of h(·) with respect to its jth argument.
Using the deﬁnition of ut+j , this can be rewritten as

                                                                         s
                      yt+s ≃ cs (ξ t , ξ t−1 , ..., ξ t−47+s ) +             [Ψs,j (ξ t , ξ t−1 , ..., ξ t−47+j )]εt+j
                                                                        j=1


from which (18) follows immediately.
    Similarly, for purposes of a historical decomposition note that the smoothed inferences satisfy


                               ξ̂ t+s|T = ξ̂t|T + ε̂t+1|T + ε̂t+2|T + ε̂t+3|T + · · · + ε̂t+s|T

where ε̂t+s|T = ξ̂ t+s|T − ξ̂ t+s−1|T . For any date t + s we then have the following model-inferred




                                                                       56
value for the number of people unemployed:


                            ι5 ′ h(ξ̂ t+s|T , ξ̂ t+s−1|T , ξ̂ t+s−2|T , ..., ξ̂ t+s−47|T ).


For an episode starting at some date t, we can then calculate


                          ι5 ′ h(ξ̂ t|T , ξ̂t|T , ξ̂ t|T , ..., ξ̂ t|T , ξ̂ t−1|T , ..., ξ̂ t+s−47|T ).


This represents the path that unemployment would have been expected to follow between t and t+s
as a result of initial conditions at time t if there were no new shocks between t and t +s. Given this
path for unemployment that is implied by initial conditions, we can then isolate the contribution
of each separate shock between t and t + s. Using the linearization in equation (18) allows us to
represent the realized deviation from this path in terms of the contribution of individual historical
shocks as in (22).
     D. Alternative estimates of unemployment-continuation probabilities
     There is an unresolved controversy in the literature about how to measure outﬂows from un-
employment.     Our measure (28) follows van den Berg and van Ours (1996), van den Berg and
van der Klaauw (2001), Elsby, Michaels and Solon (2009), Shimer (2012), and Elsby, Hobijn and
Şahin (2013) in deriving ﬂow estimates from the observed change in the number of unemployed
by duration. An alternative approach, employed by Fujita and Ramey (2009) and Elsby, Hobijn
and Şahin (2010), is to look at only those individuals for whom there is a matched observation
of unemployment in month t − 1 and a status of employment or out of the labor force in month
t.   In the absence of measurement error, the two estimates should be the same, but in practice
they turn out to be quite diﬀerent. One reason for the discrepancy is misclassiﬁcation. For ex-
ample, an individual who goes from long-term unemployed to out of the labor force to back to
long-term unemployed in three successive months counts as a successful “graduate” from long-term
unemployment using matched ﬂows but is contributing to the stubborn persistence of long-term
unemployment when using the stock data. A follow-up paper to Elsby, Hobijn and Şahin (2010) by
Elsby et al. (2011) documented that of the individuals who were employed or out of the labor force
in month t − 1 and who were recorded as unemployed in month t, more than half reported their



                                                              57
duration of unemployment to be 5 weeks or longer. Another important reason is that individuals
for whom two consecutive observations are available diﬀer in important ways from those for whom
some observations are missing. Abowd and Zellner (1985) and Frazis et al. (2005) acknowledged
that these measurement errors are more likely to bias the matched ﬂow data than the stock data
and suggested methods to correct the bias.
   Since our goal is to understand how the reported stock of long-term unemployed came to be so
high and why it falls so slowly, we feel that our approach, which is consistent with the observed
stock data by construction, is preferable for our application.
   E. Details of robustness tests
   The standard errors in Table 3 were calculated as follows. For each model, we generated 500
draws for the k-dimensional parameter vector (where k is reported in the ﬁrst row of the table)
from a N(θ̂, V̂ ) distribution where θ̂ is the MLE and V̂ is the (k × k) variance matrix from inversed
hessian of the likelihood function. For each draw of θ (ℓ) we calculated the values implied by that
θ(ℓ) and then calculated the standard error of that inference across the draws θ(1) , ..., θ (500) .
   Shimer (2012) argued that this time-aggregation bias would result in underestimating the im-
portance of outﬂows in accounting for cyclical variation in unemployment, and Fujita and Ramey
(2009), Shimer (2012) and Hornstein (2012) all formulated their models in continuous time.
   On the other hand, Elsby, Michaels and Solon (2009) questioned the theoretical suitability of
a continuous-time conception of unemployment dynamics, asking if it makes any sense to count a
worker who loses a job at 5:00 p.m. one day and starts a new job at 9:00 a.m. the next as if they
had been unemployed at all. We agree, and think that deﬁning the central object of interest to
be the fraction of those newly unemployed in month t who are still unemployed in month t + k,
as in our baseline model, is the most useful way to pose questions about unemployment dynamics.
Nevertheless, and following Kaitz (1970), Perry (1972), Sider (1985), Baker (1992), and Elsby,
Michaels and Solon (2009) we also estimated a version of our model formulated in terms of weekly
frequencies as an additional check for robustness.
   We can do so relatively easily if we make a few simplifying assumptions. We view each month
t as consisting of 4 equally-spaced weeks and assume that in each of these weeks there is an
inﬂow of wit workers of type i, each of whom has a probability pit (0) = exp[− exp(xit )] of exiting
unemployment the following week. This means that for those type i individuals who were newly

                                                    58
unemployed during the ﬁrst week of month t, wit [pit (0)]3 are still unemployed as of the end of the
month.   Thus for the model interpreted in terms of weekly transitions, equations (10) and (11)
would be replaced by


                   Ut1 =        {wit + wit [pit (0)] + wit [pit (0)]2 + wit [pit (0)]3 } + rt1
                           i=H,L


                                   4
                Ut2.3 =                wi,t−1 [pi,t−1 (1)]8−s + wi,t−2 [pi,t−2 (2)]12−s + rt2.3
                          i=H,L s=1

for pit (τ ) given by (5) and (8). Note that although this formulation is conceptualized in terms of
weekly inﬂow and outﬂows wi and pi , the observed data yt are the same monthly series used in our
other formulations, and the number of parameters is the same as for our baseline formulation.




                                                       59
       1.4                                                                                          1.4


       1.3                                                                                          1.3


       1.2                                                                                          1.2


       1.1                                                                                          1.1


        1                                                                                                1


       0.9                                                                                          0.9


       0.8                                                                                          0.8


       0.7                                                                                          0.7


       0.6                                                                                          0.6


       0.5                                                                                          0.5
                                                                                    U1                                                                                         U2.3
                                                                                    U1(avg)                                                                                    U2.3(avg)
       0.4                                                                                          0.4
                 1996    1998    2000     2002    2004    2006    2008    2010    2012                        1996    1998    2000    2002    2004    2006    2008    2010    2012




                                         Panel A: U 1                                                                                Panel B: U 2.3
        1.4                                                                                        1.4


        1.3                                                                                        1.3


        1.2                                                                                        1.2


        1.1                                                                                        1.1


             1                                                                                      1


        0.9                                                                                        0.9


        0.8                                                                                        0.8


        0.7                                                                                        0.7


        0.6                                                                                        0.6


        0.5                                                                                        0.5
                                                                                    U4.6                                                                                     U7.12
                                                                                    U4.6(avg)                                                                                U7.12(avg)
        0.4                                                                                        0.4
                  1996    1998    2000     2002    2004    2006    2008    2010    2012                      1996    1998    2000    2002    2004    2006    2008    2010    2012




                                         Panel C: U 4.6                                                                             Panel D: U 7.12
       1.4
                                                                                   U13+
       1.3                                                                         U13+(avg)


       1.2


       1.1


        1


       0.9


       0.8


       0.7


       0.6


       0.5


       0.4
                 1996    1998    2000     2002    2004    2006    2008    2010    2012




                                        Panel E: U 13.+



   Figure A1. Ratio of each duration group’s share in the ﬁrst and ﬁfth rotation groups to that in
all rotation groups




                                                                                              60
                               Appendix References
   Ansley, F. Craig, and Robert Kohn. (1986). "Prediction Mean Squared Error for State Space
Models with Estimated Parameters," Biometrika, 73(2):467-473.
   Hamilton, James D. (1994b). "State-Space Models," in Robert F. Engle and Daniel L. Mc-
Fadden, eds., Handbook of Econometrics, Volume IV, Chapter 50, pp. 3039-3080. Amsterdam:
Elsevier.




                                             61
