NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EFFICIENCY OF FLEXIBLE BUDGETARY INSTITUTIONS
T. Renee Bowen
Ying Chen
Hülya K. Eraslan
Jan Zápal
Working Paper 22457
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22457

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2016

We thank discussants Marina Azzimonti and Antoine Loeper. We also thank Gabriel Carroll,
Sebastien DiTella, Roger Lagunoff, Alessandro Riboni and seminar and conference participants
at Stanford University, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Duke University, Ural Federal
University, University of Chicago, University of Mannheim, University of Warwick, LSE,
University of Nottingham, UC Berkeley, Max Planck Institute in Bonn, Paris Workshop in
Political Economy, the NBER Summer Institute Political Economy and Public Finance
Workshop, the 2014 SITE Workshop on the Dynamics of Collective Decision Making, SED 2015
in Warsaw, SAET 2015 in Cambridge, EEA 2015 in Mannheim, and Econometric Society 2015
World Congress in Montreal for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by T. Renee Bowen, Ying Chen, Hülya K. Eraslan, and Jan Zápal. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Efficiency of Flexible Budgetary Institutions
T. Renee Bowen, Ying Chen, Hülya K. Eraslan, and Jan Zápal
NBER Working Paper No. 22457
July 2016
JEL No. C73,C78,D61,D78,H61
ABSTRACT
Which budgetary institutions result in efficient provision of public goods? We analyze a model
with two parties bargaining over the allocation to a public good each period. Parties place
different values on the public good, and these values may change over time. We focus on
budgetary institutions that determine the rules governing feasible allocations to mandatory and
discretionary spending programs. Mandatory spending is enacted by law and remains in effect
until changed, and thus induces an endogenous status quo, whereas discretionary spending is a
periodic appropriation that is not allocated if no new agreement is reached. We show that
discretionary only and mandatory only institutions typically lead to dynamic inefficiency and that
mandatory only institutions can even lead to static inefficiency. By introducing appropriate
flexibility in mandatory programs, we obtain static and dynamic efficiency. An endogenous
choice of mandatory and discretionary programs, sunset provisions and state-contingent
mandatory programs can provide this flexibility in increasingly complex environments.

T. Renee Bowen
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
trbowen@stanford.edu
Ying Chen
Johns Hopkins University
Department of Economics
Wyman Park Building 544E
3400 N Charles St
Baltimore, MD 21218
ying.chen@jhu.edu

Hülya K. Eraslan
Department of Economics MS-22
Rice University
P.O. Box 1892
Houston, TX 77251-1892
eraslan@rice.edu
Jan Zápal
CERGE-EI
Politickych veznu 7
Prague, 11121
Czech Republic
and IAE-CSIC and Barcelona GSE
j.zapal@cerge-ei.cz

1

Introduction
Allocation of resources to public goods is typically decided through budget negotiations.

In many democratic governments these negotiations occur annually and are constrained by
the budgetary institutions in place. In designing budgetary institutions one may have various
goals, such as efficiency, responsiveness to citizens’ preferences, or accountability. There has
been increasing interest among policy-makers in understanding how to achieve these goals
in both developed and developing countries (see, for example, Santiso, 2006; Shah, 2007).1
Economic research has also recognized the importance of budgetary institutions (see, for example, Hallerberg, Strauch and von Hagen, 2009).2 These studies emphasize the importance
of various dimensions of budgetary institutions including transparency and centralization of
decision-making. We focus on a different dimension in this paper: the rules governing feasible allocations to mandatory and discretionary spending programs.3 Discretionary programs
require periodic appropriations, and no spending is allocated if no new agreement is reached.
By contrast, mandatory programs are enacted by law, and spending continues into the future until changed. Thus under mandatory programs, spending decisions today determine
the status quo level of spending for tomorrow.
Naturally, there may be disagreement on the appropriate level of public spending, and the
final spending outcome is the result of negotiations between parties that represent different interests. Negotiations are typically led by the party in power whose identity may change over
time, bringing about turnover in agenda-setting power. Bowen, Chen and Eraslan (2014)
show that in a stable economic environment, mandatory programs improve the efficiency
of public good provision over discretionary programs by mitigating the inefficiency due to
turnover. However, the economic environment may be changing over time, potentially re1

The OECD has devoted resources to surveying budget practices and procedures across countries since
2003. See International Budget Practices and Procedures Database, OECD (2012).
2
See also Alesina and Perotti (1995) for a survey of the early literature recognizing the importance of
budgetary institutions.
3
This terminology is used in the United States budget. Related institutions exist in other budget negotiations, for example the budget of the European Union is categorized into commitment and payment
appropriations. The main distinction is that one has dynamic consequences because agreements are made
for future budgets, and the other does not.

2

sulting in evolving preferences. Hence, the party in power today must consider how current
spending on the public good affects future spending when preferences and the agenda-setter
are possibly different from today. In this paper we investigate the role of budgetary institutions in the efficient provision of public goods in an environment with these features.
Specifically, we analyze an environment with disagreement over the value of the public good,
changing economic conditions, and turnover in political power.
In this environment it is natural to expect that mandatory programs may have some drawbacks. Indeed, in settings different from ours, Riboni and Ruge-Murcia (2008), Zapal (2011)
and Dziuda and Loeper (2015) note that inefficiency can arise from mandatory programs
when preferences are evolving.4 In accord with these results, we first show that mandatory
programs in isolation lead to inefficiency in public good spending, but the main contribution
of our paper is to show that efficiency can be obtained when appropriate flexibility is added
to mandatory programs. We show this in increasingly complex environments.
We begin by analyzing a model in which two parties bargain over the spending on a
public good in each of two periods. The parties place different values on the public good,
and these values may deterministically change over time, reflecting changes in the underlying
economic environment. To capture turnover in political power, we assume the proposing
party is selected at random each period. Unanimity is required to implement the proposed
spending on the public good. We investigate the efficiency properties of the equilibrium
outcome of this bargaining game under different budgetary institutions.
We distinguish between static Pareto efficiency and dynamic Pareto efficiency. A statically Pareto efficient allocation in a given period is a spending level such that no alternative
would make both parties better off and at least one of them strictly better off in that period. A dynamically Pareto efficient allocation is a sequence of spending levels, one for each
period, that needs to satisfy a similar requirement except that the utility possibility frontier
is constructed using the discounted sum of utilities. Dynamic efficiency puts intertemporal
restrictions on spending levels in addition to requiring static efficiency for each period, making it a stronger requirement than static Pareto efficiency. We show that if parties disagree
4

We further discuss how our results relate to these and other papers at the end of the Introduction.

3

about the value of the public good in all periods, then any equilibrium in which spending
varies with the identity of the proposer cannot be dynamically Pareto efficient. That is,
dynamic Pareto efficiency requires that parties insure against political risk. We further show
that when preferences are evolving over time, dynamic Pareto efficiency typically requires
that spending levels change accordingly. This means that with evolving preferences dynamic
Pareto efficiency requires that parties avoid gridlock.
Comparing equilibrium public good allocations with the efficient ones, we show that discretionary only institutions lead to static efficiency but dynamic inefficiency, mandatory only
institutions can lead to static and dynamic inefficiency, whereas allowing an endogenous
combination of mandatory and discretionary programs results in both static and dynamic
efficiency if the value of the public good is decreasing over time. Furthermore, if temporary
cuts to mandatory programs are allowed, an endogenous choice of mandatory and discretionary programs results in both static and dynamic efficiency for any deterministic change
in the value of the public good. Sequestration and furloughs are examples of temporary cuts
to mandatory programs seen in practice.
The primary reason for dynamic inefficiency of discretionary only budget institutions is
that they lead to political risk. Specifically, since the status quo of a discretionary spending
program is exogenously zero, the equilibrium level of spending varies with the party in power.
With mandatory only budgetary institutions, any equilibrium is dynamically inefficient
because the second period’s spending level either varies with the identity of the proposing
party, which leads to political risk, or is equal to the first period’s level, which results in
gridlock. Even static inefficiency may result with mandatory only budget institutions. This
is because the parties’ concerns about their future bargaining positions, which are determined
by the first period’s spending level, can lead the parties to reach an outcome that goes against
their first-period interests.
In contrast, budgetary institutions that allow flexibility with a combination of discretionary and mandatory programs avoid both political risk and gridlock, resulting in dynamic
efficiency.5 To see why this is true, first consider the case when the value of the public good is
5

Examples of budget functions in the United States with significant fractions of both mandatory and

4

decreasing over time for both parties. The party in power in the first period finds it optimal
to set the size of the mandatory program to a level that is statically efficient in the second
period. Given this, the status quo is maintained in the second period regardless of which
party comes into power, thereby eliminating political risk. The party in power in the first
period can then use discretionary spending to increase the total spending to the desired level
in the first period, avoiding gridlock. Thus dynamic efficiency is achieved by a combination
of positive discretionary and mandatory spending. Now consider any time profile of public
good spending (either increasing or decreasing) that dynamic efficiency might require. If
discretionary spending can be negative, which we interpret as a temporary cut in mandatory
programs, then the party in power in the first period can tailor the spending to the desired
level and achieve dynamic efficiency. The main insight is that the flexibility afforded by
a combination of mandatory and discretionary programs delivers efficiency. However, this
efficiency result breaks down with a longer time horizon because to eliminate political risk
in all future periods, the first-period proposer must be able to set all future status quos
independently, which is not feasible with a simple combination of mandatory and discretionary programs. In this case, we show that efficiency is achieved with sunset provisions
with appropriately chosen expiration dates.
To extend our result to an even richer environment, we consider a model with an arbitrary
time horizon and stochastic preferences that depend on the economic state. We analyze a
budgetary institution in which proposers choose a spending rule that gives spending levels
conditional on the realization of the state. We show that the first-period proposer chooses a
rule that is dynamically efficient and once chosen, this spending rule is retained because no
future proposer can make a different proposal that is better for itself and acceptable to the
other party. Thus state-contingent mandatory programs allow sufficient flexibility to achieve
dynamic efficiency, even though we consider spending rules that cannot condition on the
proposer identity.
discretionary spending include income security, commerce and housing credit, and transportation (see Budget
of the United States Government, 2015). Policymakers explicitly specify the budget enforcement act category,
that is, mandatory or discretionary, when proposing changes to spending on budget functions (see, for
example, House Budget Committee, 2014).

5

The use of state-contingent programs dates back to at least Ancient Egypt, where the rate
of taxation depended on the extent of Nile flooding in any given year (see Breasted, 1945,
page 191). Such state-contingency can also be found in practice in modern economies as
automatic adjustments embedded in mandatory programs. For example, in the United States
unemployment insurance may fluctuate with the unemployment rate through “extended” or
“emergency” benefits. These benefits have been a feature of the unemployment insurance law
since 1971, and are triggered by recession on the basis of certain unemployment indicators
(see Nicholson and Needels, 2006).6 Similarly, in Canada the maximum number of weeks one
can receive unemployment benefits depends on the local rate of unemployment (see Canadian
Minister of Justice, 2014, Schedule I, page 180). The efficiency of state-contingent spending
programs may explain why they are successfully implemented in practice.
Our work is related to several strands of literature. A large body of political economy
research studies efficiency implications of policies that arise in a political equilibrium.7 As
highlighted in Besley and Coate (1998) inefficiency can arise because policies either yield
benefits in the future when the current political representation might not enjoy them, or alter
the choices of future policy makers, or may change the probability of the current political
representation staying in power. Our paper shares with the rest of the literature the first
two sources of inefficiency, but unlike the rest of the literature, our main focus is on linking
these sources of inefficiency to budgetary institutions that specify the rules governing feasible
allocations to mandatory and discretionary spending programs.
Modeling mandatory spending programs as an endogenous status quo links our work to
a growing dynamic bargaining literature.8 With the exception of Bowen, Chen and Eraslan
6

See also Federal-State Extended Unemployment Compensation Act of 1970, U.S. House of Representatives, Office of the Legislative Counsel (2013).
7
See, for example, Persson and Svensson (1984); Alesina and Tabellini (1990); Krusell and Rı́os-Rull
(1996); Dixit, Grossman and Gul (2000); Lizzeri and Persico (2001); Battaglini and Coate (2007); Acemoglu,
Golosov and Tsyvinski (2008, 2011); Aguiar and Amador (2011); Azzimonti (2011); Bai and Lagunoff (2011);
Van Weelden (2013); Callander and Krehbiel (2014); Bierbrauer and Boyer (2014).
8
This literature includes Baron (1996); Kalandrakis (2004, 2010); Riboni and Ruge-Murcia (2008); Diermeier and Fong (2011); Zapal (2011); Battaglini and Palfrey (2012); Duggan and Kalandrakis (2012); Piguillem and Riboni (2012, 2015); Diermeier, Egorov and Sonin (2013); Levy and Razin (2013); Baron and Bowen
(2014); Bowen, Chen and Eraslan (2014); Chen and Eraslan (2014); Forand (2014); Kalandrakis (2014); Ma
(2014); Nunnari and Zapal (2014); Dziuda and Loeper (2015); Anesi and Seidmann (2015).

6

(2014) and Zapal (2011) this literature has focused on studying models only with policies
that have the endogenous status quo property. In the language of our model, this literature
has focused on mandatory spending programs only. Bowen, Chen and Eraslan (2014) model
discretionary and mandatory spending programs, but do not allow for an endogenous choice
of these two types of programs. Moreover, unlike in their model, we allow the values parties
attach to the public good to vary over time, which plays an important role in our results.
Bowen, Chen and Eraslan (2014) show that mandatory programs ex-ante Pareto dominate
discretionary programs under certain conditions, whereas we show that with evolving preferences mandatory programs with appropriate flexibility achieve dynamic efficiency. Zapal
(2011) demonstrates that a budgetary institution that allows for distinct current-period policy
and future-period status quo eliminates static inefficiency. This result parallels the efficiency
of an endogenous choice of mandatory and discretionary programs that we show, but we
do this in an environment with political turnover and more general variation in preferences.
Furthermore, we also demonstrate the efficiency of state-contingent mandatory programs in
this richer setting.
Our focus on budgetary institutions connects our work to papers studying fiscal rules and
fiscal constitutions.9 This literature has focused on other fiscal rules or constitutions, for
example, constraints on government spending and taxation, limits on public debt or deficits,
or decentralization of spending authority.
In the next section we describe our model. In Section 3 we discuss Pareto efficient allocations and define Pareto efficient equilibria. We discuss institutions with only discretionary
spending in Section 4. In Section 5 we give properties of equilibria for institutions that allow
mandatory spending (with or without discretionary spending), and give efficiency properties
of mandatory only institutions. In Section 6 we discuss institutions that allow for an endogenous choice of mandatory and discretionary spending, as well as sunset provisions. In
Section 7 we consider state-contingent mandatory spending. We conclude in Section 8. All
proofs omitted in the main text are in the Appendix.
9

See, for example, Persson and Tabellini (1996a,b); Stockman (2001); Besley and Coate (2003); Besley
and Smart (2007); Caballero and Yared (2010); Yared (2010); Halac and Yared (2014); Azzimonti, Battaglini
and Coate (2015).

7

2

Model
Consider a stylized economy and political system with two parties labeled A and B.

There are two time periods indexed by t ∈ {1, 2}.10 In each period t, the two parties decide
an allocation to a public good xt ∈ R+ . The stage utility for party i ∈ {A, B} in period t
is uit (xt ). Party i seeks to maximize its dynamic payoff from the sequence of public good
allocations ui1 (x1 ) + δui2 (x2 ), where δ ∈ (0, 1] is the parties’ common discount factor.
We assume uit is twice continuously differentiable, strictly concave, and attains a maximum at θit for all i ∈ {A, B} and t ∈ {1, 2}. This implies uit is single-peaked with θit denoting
party i’s ideal level of the public good in period t.11 We assume parties’ ideal levels of the
public good are positive and party A’s ideal is lower than party B’s. That is, 0 < θAt ≤ θBt for
all t. Parties’ ideal levels of the public good may vary across periods. In particular, they may
be increasing with θi1 < θi2 for all i ∈ {A, B}, decreasing with θi1 > θi2 for all i ∈ {A, B},
divergent with θA2 < θA1 < θB1 < θB2 , or convergent with θA1 < θA2 < θB2 < θB1 .
We consider a political system with unanimity rule.12 At the beginning of each period,
a party is randomly selected to make a proposal for the allocation to the public good. The
probability that party i proposes in a period is pi ∈ (0, 1).13 Spending on the public good may
be allocated by way of different programs - a discretionary program, which expires after one
period, or a mandatory program, for which spending will continue in the next period unless
the parties agree to change it. Denote the proposed amount allocated to a discretionary
program in period t as kt , and to a mandatory program as gt . If the responding party agrees
to the proposal, the implemented allocation to the public good for the period is the sum of
the discretionary and mandatory allocations proposed, so xt = kt + gt ; otherwise, xt = gt−1 .
10

In Section 7 we consider a more general model with any number of periods and random preferences.
Because of the opportunity cost of providing public goods, it is reasonable to model parties’ utility
functions as single-peaked as in, for example, Baron (1996).
12
Most political systems are not formally characterized by unanimity rule, however, many have institutions
that limit a single party’s power, for example, the “checks and balances” included in the U.S. Constitution.
Under these institutions, if the majority party’s power is not sufficiently high, then it needs approval of the
other party to set new policies.
13
More generally, the probability that party i proposes in period t is pit . In the two-period model, pi1
does not play a role, and for notational simplicity we write pi as the probability that party i proposes in
period 2. In Section 7 we extend our model to an arbitrary time horizon and we use the general notation.
11

8

Denote a proposal by zt = (kt , gt ). We require gt ≥ 0 to ensure a positive status quo each
period. Let Z ⊆ R × R+ be the set of feasible proposals. The set Z is determined by the
rules governing mandatory and discretionary programs, and hence we call Z the budgetary
institution. We consider the following institutions: only discretionary programs, in which case
Z = R+ × {0} and gt−1 = 0 for all t; only mandatory programs, in which case Z = {0} × R+ ;
both mandatory and positive discretionary, in which case Z = R+ ×R+ ; and both mandatory
and discretionary where discretionary spending may be positive or negative, in which case
Z = {(kt , gt ) ∈ R × R+ |kt + gt ≥ 0}. It is natural to think of spending as positive, but it
is also possible to have temporary cuts to spending on mandatory programs, for example
government furloughs that temporarily reduce salaries of public employees. This temporary
reduction in mandatory spending can be thought of as negative discretionary spending as it
reduces total spending in the current period, but does not affect the status quo for the next
period.
A pure strategy for party i in period t is a pair of functions σit = (πit , αit ), where
πit : R+ → Z is a proposal strategy for party i in period t and αit : R+ × Z → {0, 1} is
an acceptance strategy for party i in period t.14 Party i’s proposal strategy πit = (κit , γit )
associates with each status quo gt−1 an amount of public good spending in discretionary
programs, denoted by κit (gt−1 ), and an amount in mandatory programs, denoted by γit (gt−1 ).
Party i’s acceptance strategy αit (gt−1 , zt ) takes the value 1 if party i accepts the proposal zt
offered by the other party when the status quo is gt−1 , and 0 otherwise.15
We consider subgame perfect equilibria and restrict attention to equilibria in which (i)
αit (gt−1 , zt ) = 1 when party i is indifferent between gt−1 and zt ; and (ii) αit (gt−1 , πjt (gt−1 )) = 1
for all t, gt−1 ∈ R+ , i, j ∈ {A, B} with j 6= i. That is, the responder accepts any proposal that
it is indifferent between accepting and rejecting, and the equilibrium proposals are always
14

In this two-period model, we show that equilibrium strategies in the second period are unique. Thus,
in equilibrium, the second-period strategy does not depend on the history except through the status quo,
so writing strategies as depending on history only through the status quo is without loss of generality. This
result extends to the finite-horizon case of state-contingent mandatory spending considered in Section 7. For
the infinite-horizon case, the restriction on strategies implies a Markov restriction on the equilibrium.
15
We are interested in efficiency properties of budgetary institutions. Because the utility functions are
strictly concave, Pareto efficient allocations do not involve randomization. Hence, if any pure strategy
equilibrium is inefficient, allowing mixed strategies does not improve efficiency.

9

accepted.16 We henceforth refer to a subgame perfect equilibrium that satisfies (i) and (ii)
simply as an equilibrium.
Denote an equilibrium by σ ∗ . Let party i ∈ {A, B} be the proposer and party j ∈ {A, B}
be the responder in period 2. (When we use i to denote the proposer and j to denote the
responder without any qualifier, it is understood that i 6= j.) Given conditions (i) and (ii),
∗
for any g1 admissible under Z, the equilibrium proposal strategy (κ∗i2 (g1 ), γi2
(g1 )) of party i

in period 2 solves
max
(k2 ,g2 )∈Z

ui2 (k2 + g2 )
(P2 )

s.t. uj2 (k2 + g2 ) ≥ uj2 (g1 ).
Let Vi (g; σ2 ) be the expected second-period payoff for party i given first-period mandatory
spending g and second-period strategies σ2 = (σA2 , σB2 ). That is
Vi (g; σ2 ) = pA ui2 (κA2 (g) + γA2 (g)) + pB ui2 (κB2 (g) + γB2 (g)).
If party i is the proposer and party j is the responder in period 1, then for any g0 admissible
∗
(g0 )) of party i in period 1 solves
under Z the equilibrium proposal strategy (κ∗i1 (g0 ), γi1

max
(k1 ,g1 )∈Z

ui1 (k1 + g1 ) + δVi (g1 ; σ2∗ )

(P1 )

s.t. uj1 (k1 + g1 ) + δVj (g1 ; σ2∗ ) ≥ uj1 (g0 ) + δVj (g0 ; σ2∗ ).

3

Pareto efficiency
In this section we characterize Pareto efficient allocations and define Pareto efficient equi-

libria, both in the static and the dynamic sense.

3.1

Pareto efficient allocations

We distinguish between the social planner’s static problem (SSP), which determines static
Pareto efficient allocations, and the social planner’s dynamic problem (DSP), which determines dynamic Pareto efficient allocations.
We define a statically Pareto efficient allocation in period t as the solution to the following
16

Any equilibrium is payoff equivalent to some equilibrium (possibly itself) that satisfies (i) and (ii).
Similar restrictions are made in Bowen, Chen and Eraslan (2014) and the proof follows the same arguments
as in that paper. We omit the arguments here for space considerations.

10

maximization problem
maxxt ∈R+ uit (xt )

(SSP)

s.t. ujt (xt ) ≥ u
for some u ∈ R, i, j ∈ {A, B} and i 6= j.17 By Proposition 1, statically Pareto efficient
allocations are all those between the ideal points of the parties.
Proposition 1. An allocation xt is statically Pareto efficient in period t if and only if xt ∈
[θAt , θBt ].
Denote a sequence of allocations by x = (x1 , x2 ) and party i’s discounted dynamic payoff
P
from x by Ui (x) = 2t=1 δ t−1 uit (xt ). We define a dynamically Pareto efficient allocation as
the solution to the following maximization problem
maxx∈R2+ Ui (x)

(DSP)

s.t. Uj (x) ≥ U
for some U ∈ R, i, j ∈ {A, B} and i 6= j. Denote the sequence of party i’s static ideals
by θ i = (θi1 , θi2 ) for all i ∈ {A, B}, and denote the solution to (DSP) as x∗ = (x∗1 , x∗2 ).18
Proposition 2 characterizes the dynamically Pareto efficient allocations.19
Proposition 2. A dynamically Pareto efficient allocation x∗ satisfies the following properties:
1. For all t, x∗t is statically Pareto efficient. That is, x∗t ∈ [θAt , θBt ] for all t.
2. Either x∗ = θ A , or x∗ = θ B , or u0At (x∗t ) + λ∗ u0Bt (x∗t ) = 0 for some λ∗ > 0, for all t.
Proposition 2 part 2 implies that if x∗ 6= θ i for all i ∈ {A, B}, and θAt 6= θBt in period t
then we must have
−

u0At (x∗t )
= λ∗
u0Bt (x∗t )

17

(1)

The social planner’s static problem (SSP) is a standard concave programming problem so the solution
is unique for a given u if it exists.
18
Note the solution to (DSP) depends on U , but for notational simplicity we suppress this dependency
and denote the solution to (DSP) as x∗ . The solution to (DSP) is unique for a given U if it exists.
19
In the proof of Proposition 2 in the Appendix, we generalize (DSP) to any number of periods and prove
Proposition 2 for this more general problem.

11

for some λ∗ > 0.20 By (1) if parties A and B do not have the same ideal level of the public
good in periods 1 and 2, then in a dynamically Pareto efficient allocation, either the allocation
is equal to party A’s or party B’s ideal in both periods, or the ratio of their marginal utilities
is equal across these two periods, i.e.,

u0A1 (x∗1 )
u0B1 (x∗1 )

=

u0A2 (x∗2 )
.
u0B2 (x∗2 )

The intuition for the latter is that if

the ratio of marginal utilities is not constant across periods, then there is an intertemporal
reallocation such that at least one party is strictly better off and the other party is no worse
off. In both cases there is a dynamic link across periods.

3.2

Pareto efficient equilibrium

We define a dynamically Pareto efficient equilibrium given an initial status quo g0 as
an equilibrium that results in a dynamically Pareto efficient allocation for any realization of the sequence of proposers. More precisely, denote an equilibrium strategy profile
∗
∗
∗
∗
as σ ∗ = ((σA1
, σA2
), (σB1
, σB2
)) with σit∗ = ((κ∗it , γit∗ ), αit∗ ). An equilibrium allocation for

σ ∗ given initial status quo g0 is a possible realization of total public good spending for
∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗
(g0 ), and xσ2 (g0 ) =
each period xσ (g0 ) = (xσ1 (g0 ), xσ2 (g0 )), where xσ1 (g0 ) = κ∗i1 (g0 ) + γi1
∗
∗
∗
κ∗j2 (γi1
(g0 )) + γj2
(γi1
(g0 )) for some i, j ∈ {A, B}. The random determination of proposers

induces a probability distribution over allocations given an equilibrium σ ∗ . Thus any element in the support of this distribution is an equilibrium allocation for σ ∗ .21 We require
every allocation in the support of this distribution to be dynamically Pareto efficient for the
equilibrium to be dynamically Pareto efficient.
Definition 1. An equilibrium σ ∗ is a dynamically Pareto efficient equilibrium given initial
∗

status quo g0 if and only if every equilibrium allocation xσ (g0 ) for σ ∗ given initial status quo
g0 is dynamically Pareto efficient.
A statically Pareto efficient equilibrium given initial status quo g0 is analogously defined
as an equilibrium in which the realized allocation to the public good is statically Pareto
efficient in all periods t given initial status quo g0 . Thus a necessary condition for σ ∗ to be a
This is because if u0Bt (x∗t ) = 0, then part 2 of Proposition 2 implies that we must also have u0At (x∗t ) = 0
which is not possible when θAt 6= θBt .
21
For example, if A is the proposer in period 1 and B is the proposer in period 2, then the equilibrium
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
allocation is xσ1 (g0 ) = κ∗A1 (g0 ) + γA1
(g0 ), and xσ2 (g0 ) = κ∗B2 (γA1
(g0 )) + γB2
(γA1
(g0 )).
20

12

dynamically Pareto efficient equilibrium is that σ ∗ is a statically Pareto efficient equilibrium.
The analysis of efficiency properties of equilibria under different budgetary institutions
is aided by the following results. We first show that if parties’ ideal levels of the public
good are different in both periods, then given a spending level in the first period, a unique
spending level in the second period is required for the allocation to be dynamically Pareto
efficient. Given strict concavity of the utility functions, the solution to equation (1) for a
fixed λ∗ is unique, and thus given some allocation in period t0 , the allocations in all other
periods are uniquely pinned down. This means that if the equilibrium level of spending in
period 2 varies with the identity of the period-2 proposer, then the equilibrium cannot be
dynamically Pareto efficient. Thus dynamically Pareto efficient equilibria avoid political risk.
We formalize this in Lemma 1.22
Lemma 1. Suppose θAt 6= θBt for all t. If allocations x and x̃ are both dynamically Pareto
efficient and xt0 = x̃t0 for some t0 , then x = x̃.
We next show that dynamic Pareto efficiency typically requires variation across periods
when parties’ ideals are evolving. We say that the parties are in gridlock if the spending in
period 2 does not change when preferences are different from period 1. Thus dynamically
Pareto efficient allocations typically avoid gridlock. We formalize this result in Lemma 2. If
θi1 6= θi2 , we can write uit (xt ) = ui (xt , θit ), and we say that utilities have increasing marginal
returns if

∂ui
∂xt

is strictly increasing in θit for all t, xt and i ∈ {A, B}.23 The increasing

marginal returns property ensures that if both parties’ ideals increase (or decrease) over time,
then the spending level in any dynamically Pareto efficient allocation must also increase (or
decrease) over time.24 This property is satisfied by commonly used utility functions such as
22

Note that our definition of a dynamically Pareto efficient equilibrium requires ex-post dynamic Pareto
efficiency, that is, allocations must be dynamically Pareto efficient for each realized path of proposers. Two
other notions of a dynamically Pareto efficient equilibrium might be considered: Ex-ante dynamic Pareto
efficiency, before the realization of the first-period proposer, and interim dynamic Pareto efficiency, after the
realization of the first-period proposer but before the realization of the second-period proposer. By Lemma
1, if θAt 6= θBt for any t, then ex-post efficiency implies interim efficiency. We can interpret our results as
showing which budgetary institutions result in dynamically Pareto efficient allocations conditional on the
initial party in power. Ex-ante Pareto efficiency would require the first-period allocation to be invariant to
the party in power, a stronger requirement than ex-post or interim Pareto efficiency.
23
Increasing marginal returns is stronger than strict supermodularity (e.g., Edlin and Shannon, 1998).
24
This is stated formally in Lemma A1 in the Appendix.

13

uit (xt ) = −(xt − θit )2 .
Lemma 2. Under any of the following conditions, we have x∗1 6= x∗2 :
1. Parties’ ideals are increasing or decreasing and not overlapping, that is, θA1 < θB1 <
θA2 < θB2 or θA2 < θB2 < θA1 < θB1 .
2. Parties’ ideals are increasing or decreasing, and utilities have increasing marginal returns.
3. Parties’ ideals are divergent or convergent, uit (xt ) = −(|xt − θit |)r with r > 1 for all t
and i ∈ {A, B} and x∗1 6=

4

θA1 θB2 −θB1 θA2
.
θB2 −θB1 +θA1 −θA2

Discretionary spending
Suppose spending is allocated through discretionary programs only, implying that the

status quo in each period is exogenous and equal to zero. In this case there is no dynamic link
between the previous period’s policy and the current period’s status quo, and Z = R+ × {0}.
Without the dynamic link between periods, the bargaining between the two parties is a
static problem, similar to the monopoly agenda-setting model in Romer and Rosenthal (1978,
1979).25 For this section we denote a proposal in period t by kt since gt is zero. Consider
any period t. Since uBt is single-peaked at θBt and 0 < θAt ≤ θBt , we have uBt (0) < uBt (θAt ).
Hence, if party A is the proposer in period t, it proposes its ideal policy kt = θAt , which
is accepted by party B. If party B is the proposer in period t, however, whether it can
implement its ideal policy depends on the locations of the parties’ ideal points relative to the
status quo. Specifically, let φoAt be the highest policy that makes party A as well off as the
status quo in period t. That is,
φoAt = max{x ∈ R+ |uAt (x) ≥ uAt (0)}.
Note that φoAt > θAt . We next characterize the equilibrium and its efficiency properties.
25

Note that when only discretionary spending is allowed, g0 = g1 = 0, and hence the proposer’s first-period
problem (P1 ) becomes a static problem identical to (P2 ).

14

Proposition 3. Under a budgetary institution that allows only discretionary spending programs, given the initial status quo of zero:
1. The equilibrium is statically Pareto efficient.
2. The equilibrium is dynamically Pareto inefficient if and only if θAt 6= θBt for all t.
Specifically, the equilibrium level of spending in period t is xt = θAt if party A is the proposer
and is xt = min{θBt , φoAt } ∈ [θAt , θBt ] if party B is the proposer.
The efficiency properties can be seen from the equilibrium strategies. Static efficiency obtains since the equilibrium spending is in the interval [θAt , θBt ] for all t. Dynamic inefficiency
arises if θAt 6= θBt for all t because the equilibrium spending level depends on the identity of
the proposer, hence there is dynamic inefficiency due to political risk by Lemma 1.26 When
θAt 6= θBt for at most one period, dynamic efficiency is equivalent to static efficiency. This
is because the restriction in (1) does not apply when θAt = θBt , hence it does not place a
dynamic restriction on spending levels.27

5

Mandatory spending
When mandatory programs are allowed, the proposing party in the first period takes

into account the effect of the amount allocated to the mandatory program on the secondperiod spending because it becomes the status quo in the second period. This creates a
dynamic link between periods. We show that this dynamic game admits an equilibrium and
give properties of the equilibrium proposal strategies in period 2.28 The result applies to
any budgetary institution that allows mandatory spending programs, in combination with
discretionary spending or in isolation. We formalize this result in the next subsection.
26

Political risk is the only source of inefficiency in part because the status quo spending in the discretionary
only institution is exogenously zero, and hence always lower than both parties’ ideal points. If the exogenous
status quo is between the ideal points in both periods, then the source of dynamic inefficiency is gridlock
because in equilibrium the spending is stuck at the status quo. We find it natural that in our model of public
spending the exogenous status quo is fixed at zero.
27
The result is stated for the two-period model, but a straightforward generalization of the argument
shows that in a model with an arbitrary number of periods, Proposition 3 holds if the condition in part 2 is
replaced by θAt 6= θBt for at least two periods.
28
Equilibrium existence is not immediate because lower hemicontinuity of the second-period acceptance
correspondence requires a non-trivial proof. The proof is given in the Appendix.

15

5.1

Preliminaries

Define the functions φAt and φBt which are analogous to φoAt . The value φAt (gt−1 ) is the
highest acceptable spending level to party A and φBt (gt−1 ) is the lowest acceptable spending
level to party B when the status quo is gt−1 . That is,
φAt (gt−1 ) = max{x ∈ R+ |uAt (x) ≥ uAt (gt−1 )},
φBt (gt−1 ) = min{x ∈ R+ |uBt (x) ≥ uBt (gt−1 )}.
These are illustrated below in Figure 1. If gt−1 < θAt , then φAt (gt−1 ) > gt−1 and if gt−1 ≥
θAt , then φAt (gt−1 ) = gt−1 . If gt−1 ≤ θBt , then φBt (gt−1 ) = gt−1 and if gt−1 > θBt , then
φBt (gt−1 ) < gt−1 .
uAt

uBt

g

θAt

g 0 = φAt (g 0 ) φAt (g)

gt−1

g = φBt (g) φBt (g 0 )

θBt

g0

gt−1

Figure 1: φAt and φBt

Proposition 4. Under any budgetary institution that allows mandatory spending programs,
an equilibrium exists. For any g1 ∈ R+ , the equilibrium spending in period 2 is unique and
satisfies
∗
κ∗A2 (g1 ) + γA2
(g1 ) = max{θA2 , φB2 (g1 )},
∗
(g1 ) = min{θB2 , φA2 (g1 )}.
κ∗B2 (g1 ) + γB2

Furthermore:
∗
1. κ∗i2 (g1 ) + γi2
(g1 ) ∈ [θA2 , θB2 ] for all i ∈ {A, B} and all g1 ∈ R+ .

16

2. If θA2 6= θB2 , then
∗
∗
κ∗A2 (g1 ) + γA2
(g1 ) = κ∗B2 (g1 ) + γB2
(g1 ) = g1

if g1 ∈ [θA2 , θB2 ],

∗
∗
κ∗A2 (g1 ) + γA2
(g1 ) < κ∗B2 (g1 ) + γB2
(g1 )

if g1 ∈
/ [θA2 , θB2 ].

Proposition 4 gives the equilibrium level of total spending in the second period, which is
unique for any status quo. Part 1 implies that the equilibrium level of spending in period 2 is
statically Pareto efficient. Part 2 gives properties of the equilibrium spending if the parties’
ideals are different. If the status quo is statically Pareto efficient, then it is maintained. If the
status quo is not statically Pareto efficient, then the equilibrium proposal is different from
the status quo and depends on the identity of the proposer - specifically, it is lower when A
is the proposer than when B is the proposer.
Figure 2 is an example of equilibrium spending in period 2 for quadratic loss utility.
While the exact form depends on the specific utility function, any second-period strategy
has similar properties. Consider party A as the proposer in period 2. If g1 < θA2 , then
party A proposes its ideal policy x2 = θA2 , which is accepted since uB2 (g1 ) < uB2 (θA2 ). If
g1 ∈ [θA2 , θB2 ], then party A proposes x2 = g1 since any x2 < g1 would be rejected by party
B and party A prefers g1 to any x2 > g1 . If g1 > θB2 , then party B accepts all proposals in
the interval [φB2 (g1 ), g1 ] since these are closer to θB2 than g1 is. Since θA2 < θB2 < g1 , either
θA2 ∈ [φB2 (g1 ), g1 ] or θA2 < φB2 (g1 ). If θA2 ∈ [φB2 (g1 ), g1 ], then party A proposes x2 = θA2 .
If θA2 < φB2 (g1 ), then party A proposes the policy closest to θA2 that is acceptable to B,
which is φB2 (g1 ). For quadratic loss utility function, if g1 ≥ θB2 and φB2 (g1 ) ≥ θA2 , we have
φB2 (g1 ) = 2θB2 − g1 , which is linear and decreasing in g1 . For general strictly concave uB2 ,
if g1 ≥ θB2 and φB2 (g1 ) ≥ θA2 , then φB2 (g1 ) is decreasing in g1 , but may not be linear.
Figure 2 indicates the potential sources of dynamic inefficiency with mandatory programs.
If the status quo is in [θA2 , θB2 ], then the period-2 spending is equal to the status quo, so there
is potential for gridlock. If the status quo is outside [θA2 , θB2 ], then the period-2 spending
depends on the identity of the proposer and political risk is a source of dynamic inefficiency.
We show in the next section that with only mandatory spending programs at least one of
these sources of dynamic inefficiency arises, except in special cases.

17

x2
∗ (g )
κ∗B2 (g1 ) + γB2
1

θB2

θA2

∗ (g )
κ∗A2 (g1 ) + γA2
1
θA2

g1

θB2

gridlock
political risk

Figure 2: Period-2 equilibrium strategies with mandatory spending for uit (xt ) = −(xt − θit )2

5.2

Inefficiency with mandatory spending only

Suppose now that spending is allocated through mandatory programs only, that is, Z =
{0} × R+ . Since kt is zero for any t, the equilibrium discretionary proposal κ∗it (gt−1 ) is zero
for all i ∈ {A, B}, all t and all gt−1 ∈ R+ . For the rest of the section we thus denote a
proposal in period t by gt .
We begin by noting that equilibrium allocations can be dynamically Pareto efficient in
the absence of a conflict in period 2 or in the absence of variation in ideal levels of public
good spending, but these are special cases.29 We show that equilibrium allocations are in
general dynamically Pareto inefficient and can even be statically Pareto inefficient. Others
have shown inefficiency with an endogenous status quo and evolving preferences in settings
different from ours.30 By demonstrating inefficiency with mandatory spending only in our
setting, we highlight its sources: political risk and gridlock. This helps to understand how
appropriate flexibility in mandatory spending avoids inefficiency, which we show in the next
section. Proposition 5 gives conditions under which equilibria are dynamically Pareto inefficient with mandatory spending only.
29

We show this in Section A3.4 in the Appendix.
For example, Riboni and Ruge-Murcia (2008) show dynamic inefficiency in the context of central bank
decision-making, and Zapal (2011) and Dziuda and Loeper (2015) show static inefficiency in other settings.
30

18

Proposition 5. Under a budgetary institution that allows only mandatory spending programs, any equilibrium σ ∗ is dynamically Pareto inefficient for any initial status quo g0 ∈ R+ ,
if either of the following conditions holds:
1. Parties’ ideals are increasing or decreasing and not overlapping, that is θA1 < θB1 <
θA2 < θB2 or θA2 < θB2 < θA1 < θB1 .
2. Parties’ ideals are increasing or decreasing, θAt 6= θBt for all t and utilities have increasing marginal returns.
Furthermore, if parties’ ideals are divergent or convergent and uit (xt ) = −(|xt − θit |)r with
r > 1, then for any equilibrium σ ∗ , there exists a unique g0 such that σ ∗ is dynamically Pareto
efficient if the initial status quo is g0 .
Proposition 5 parts 1 and 2 give conditions under which equilibria are dynamically Pareto
inefficient for all initial status quos, when parties’ ideals are increasing or decreasing. The
final part states that when preferences are divergent or convergent, for a certain class of
utility functions, dynamic efficiency is obtained only for a unique initial status quo.31
To gain some intuition for Proposition 5, note that because of the second-period conflict
between the two parties, either the level of public good spending in period 2 varies with the
identity of the proposing party, which results in political risk, or neither party changes the
status quo, which results in gridlock.32
The next result shows that equilibrium allocations under mandatory spending programs
can violate not only dynamic, but also static Pareto efficiency.
31

Dynamic inefficiency also obtains in a finite-horizon model with more than two periods under the conditions in Proposition 5, when the fluctuations in preferences apply to the last two periods.
32
The only source of dynamic inefficiency with discretionary only institutions is political risk while either
political risk or gridlock is a potential source of dynamic inefficiency with mandatory only institutions. With
political turnover but stable preferences, gridlock is not a source of inefficiency. In this environment political
risk does not arise with mandatory only institutions as shown in Proposition A1, and hence these achieve
dynamic Pareto efficiency. In the same environment, discretionary only institutions do not eliminate political
risk and are inefficient by Proposition 3. Conversely, in an environment without political turnover but
evolving preferences, discretionary only institutions can be dynamically Pareto efficient, whereas mandatory
only institutions are generically inefficient.

19

Proposition 6. Suppose uit (xt ) = −(xt −θit )2 for all i ∈ {A, B} and all t. Under a budgetary
institution that allows only mandatory spending programs, if either θA2 < θA1 < θB2 or
θA2 < θB1 < θB2 , then there exists a nonempty open interval I such that any equilibrium σ ∗
is statically Pareto inefficient for any initial status quo g0 ∈ I.
The key condition of Proposition 6 is θA2 < θi1 < θB2 for some i ∈ {A, B}. This has a
natural interpretation, indicating that future polarization between the two parties must be
greater than intertemporal preference variation for at least one party. Note that this occurs
when party A’s ideal is decreasing, or party B’s ideal is increasing, implying that static
Pareto inefficiency can arise when the ideal levels are increasing, decreasing or divergent.
Since the proposition does not rule out θA1 = θB1 , static Pareto inefficiency can arise even in
the absence of first-period conflict between the two parties.
Figure 3 provides an example of static inefficiency. The parameters used satisfy the
conditions in Proposition 6. Specifically, the ideal levels of the two parties diverge, that
is, θA2 < θA1 < θB1 < θB2 . The figure plots equilibrium public good spending in period
1 proposed by each party for initial status quo g0 ∈ [0, 2]. What the figure shows is that
∗
(g0 ) ∈
/ [θA1 , θB1 ] for at least one of the parties, that is, the
unless g0 ∈ [θA1 , θB1 ], we have γi1

equilibrium is statically Pareto inefficient.
x1

1

∗ (g )
γB1
0

θB2
θB1
θA1

∗ (g )
γA1
0

θA2
0

0

θA1

θB1

1

2

g0

Figure 3: Period-1 equilibrium strategies when all spending is mandatory
θ A = (0.4, 0.2), θ B = (0.6, 0.8), pA = pB = 21 , δ = 1, uit (xt ) = −(xt − θit )2
The reason for static inefficiency is the dual role of g1 : it is the spending in period 1 but it
also determines the status quo in period 2. As an example, consider the case when party A’s
20

ideal is decreasing as in Figure 3. If party A is the proposer in the first period, then it has an
incentive to propose spending close to its period-1 ideal, but since period-1 spending is the
status quo for period 2, it also has an incentive to propose spending lower than its period-1
ideal. When party B’s acceptance constraint is not binding, party A proposes spending that
is a weighted average of θA1 and θA2 , giving rise to static inefficiency.

6

Mandatory and discretionary combined
We have seen that discretionary or mandatory programs in isolation typically lead to

dynamic inefficiency. A natural question is whether the flexibility afforded by a combination
of the two achieves dynamic efficiency. We now address this question by considering the case
in which parties can endogenously choose the amount allocated to each of these programs. We
begin by showing that when discretionary spending can only be positive, that is, Z = R+ ×R+ ,
we obtain dynamic efficiency under certain conditions.
Proposition 7. Under a budgetary institution that allows positive discretionary and mandatory spending, if utilities have increasing marginal returns and parties’ ideals are decreasing,
then every equilibrium is dynamically Pareto efficient for any initial status quo g0 ∈ R+ .
We present the proof of Proposition 7 in the main text since it is instructive. First,
consider the following alternative way of writing the social planner’s dynamic problem:
max

(x1 , xA2 , xB2 )∈R3+

ui1 (x1 ) + δ[pA ui2 (xA2 ) + pB ui2 (xB2 )]
(DSP’)

s.t. uj1 (x1 ) + δ[pA uj2 (xA2 ) + pB uj2 (xB2 )] ≥ U ,
for some U ∈ R, i, j ∈ {A, B} and i 6= j. The difference between the original social planner’s
problem (DSP) and the modified social planner’s problem (DSP’) is that in the modified
problem, the social planner is allowed to choose a distribution of allocations in period 2.
Since the utility functions are concave, it is not optimal for the social planner to randomize
and therefore the solution to (DSP) is also the solution to (DSP’). To state this result
formally, we denote the solution to (DSP) given U ∈ R by x∗ (U ) = (x∗1 (U ), x∗2 (U )).
Lemma 3. The solution to the modified social planner’s problem (DSP’) is x1 = x∗1 (U ) and
xA2 = xB2 = x∗2 (U ).
21

Now fix the initial status quo g0 . Denote fj (g0 ) as responder j’s status quo payoff. That
is fj (g0 ) = uj1 (g0 ) + δVj (g0 ; σ2∗ ) with σ2∗ given in Proposition 4. The next result says that
the equilibrium mandatory spending in period 1 is the dynamically Pareto efficient level
of spending for period 2 corresponding to U , and the sum of the equilibrium mandatory
and discretionary spending is the dynamically Pareto efficient level of spending for period 1
corresponding to U , where U is responder j’s status quo payoff.
Lemma 4. Under a budgetary institution that allows positive discretionary and mandatory
spending, if utilities have increasing marginal returns and parties’ ideals are decreasing, then
for any equilibrium σ ∗ , given initial status quo g0 , the equilibrium proposal strategy for party
∗
i in period 1 satisfies γi1
(g0 ) = x∗2 (U ) and κ∗i1 (g0 ) = x∗1 (U ) − x∗2 (U ), where U = fj (g0 ).

Proof. If party i is the proposer in period 1, then party i’s equilibrium proposal strategy
∗
(κ∗i1 (g0 ), γi1
(g0 )) is a solution to

max

(k1 ,g1 )∈R2+

ui1 (k1 + g1 ) + δVi (g1 ; σ2∗ )
(P1 )

s.t. uj1 (k1 + g1 ) +

δVj (g1 ; σ2∗ )

≥ uj1 (g0 ) +

δVj (g0 ; σ2∗ ),

where
∗
∗
Vi (g; σ2∗ ) = pA ui2 (κ∗A2 (g) + γA2
(g)) + pB ui2 (κ∗B2 (g) + γB2
(g)).

For notational simplicity we write x∗1 and x∗2 instead of x∗1 (U ) and x∗2 (U ). We first show
that (x∗1 − x∗2 , x∗2 ) is in the feasible set for (P1 ). As shown in Lemma A1 in the Appendix, if
the parties’ ideals are decreasing and utilities have increasing marginal returns, any Pareto
efficient allocation is decreasing. This implies x∗1 > x∗2 , and thus (x∗1 − x∗2 , x∗2 ) ∈ R2+ is feasible.
∗
We next show that if γi1
(g0 ) = x∗2 and κ∗i1 (g0 ) = x∗1 − x∗2 , then the induced equilibrium
∗

∗
allocation is x∗1 in period 1 and x∗2 in period 2. It is straightforward to see xσ1 (g0 ) = γi1
(g0 ) +
∗

κ∗i1 (g0 ) = x∗1 . To see that xσ2 (g0 ) = x∗2 , first note that by Proposition 2 part 1, x∗2 ∈ [θA2 , θB2 ].
∗
∗
Proposition 4 part 2 then implies that κ∗A2 (x∗2 ) + γA2
(x∗2 ) = κ∗B2 (x∗2 ) + γB2
(x∗2 ) = x∗2 .

Finally, we show that (x∗1 −x∗2 , x∗2 ) is the maximizer of (P1 ). Suppose not. Then proposing
∗
∗
(κ∗i1 (g0 ), γi1
(g0 )) is better than proposing (x∗1 − x∗2 , x∗2 ). That is, proposing (κ∗i1 (g0 ), γi1
(g0 ))

gives proposer i a higher dynamic payoff while giving the responder j a dynamic payoff at
22

∗
least as high as fj (g0 ). Hence, if (κ∗i1 (g0 ), γi1
(g0 )) 6= (x∗1 − x∗2 , x∗2 ), then the allocation with
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
x1 = γi1
(g0 ) + κ∗i1 (g0 ), xA2 = κ∗A2 (γi1
(g0 )) + γA2
(γi1
(g0 )), xB2 = κ∗B2 (γi1
(g0 )) + γB2
(γi1
(g0 ))

does better than x1 = x∗1 and xA2 = xB2 = x∗2 in (DSP’), which contradicts Lemma 3.



By Lemma 4, for status quo g0 and period-1 proposer i ∈ {A, B}, the equilibrium outcome
∗

∗

∗
(g0 ) + κ∗i1 (g0 ) = x∗1 (U ) and xσ2 (g0 ) =
is dynamically Pareto efficient since xσ1 (g0 ) = γi1
∗
(g0 ) = x∗2 (U ) where U = fj (g 0 ). Hence σ ∗ is a dynamically Pareto efficient equilibrium for
γi1

any g0 ∈ R+ . This completes the proof of Proposition 7.
If the parties’ ideals are increasing, and only positive discretionary spending is allowed
together with mandatory spending, in general we do not obtain dynamic efficiency. This is
because with increasing ideals we need discretionary spending in period 1 to be x∗1 − x∗2 < 0
to achieve efficiency, which is not feasible. This suggests however that allowing negative
discretionary spending restores dynamic Pareto efficiency, and indeed we have this result.
Proposition 8. Under a budgetary institution that allows positive and negative discretionary
spending and positive mandatory spending, that is, Z = {(kt , gt ) ∈ R × R+ |kt + gt ≥ 0}, every
equilibrium σ ∗ is dynamically Pareto efficient for any initial status quo g0 ∈ R+ .
We omit the proof of Proposition 8 since it is a slight modification of the proof of Proposition 7. Negative discretionary spending implies that the total spending in the current period
is lower than the status quo spending in the next period. As such, we can regard temporary
cuts in mandatory spending as negative discretionary spending. Figure 4 below provides
an example of equilibrium allocations for budgetary institutions that allow for mandatory
spending programs, either in isolation or in combination with discretionary spending. The
parameters used are the same as in Figure 3.
In Figure 4 the dashed blue line illustrates the set of dynamically Pareto efficient allocations, and the solid red line illustrates the set of equilibrium allocations - an initial status
quo and a sequence of proposers induces an equilibrium allocation in the set. As shown in
panels 4a and 4b, when mandatory spending and only positive discretionary spending are allowed, for some status quos and some realization of proposers, equilibrium allocations do not
coincide with any dynamically Pareto efficient allocation. By contrast, when both positive
23

x2

x2
x∗

θB2

x

σ∗

x2
x∗

θB2

θA2

x

σ∗

θA2

θA1

θB1

(a) Mandatory only

x1

x∗ xσ

θB2

∗

θA2

θA1

θB1

x1

θA1

θB1

x1

(b) Mandatory and positive only (c) Mandatory and positive or
discretionary
negative discretionary

Figure 4: Equilibrium allocations under different budgetary institutions
θ A = (0.4, 0.2), θ B = (0.6, 0.8), pA = pB = 12 , δ = 1, uit (xt ) = −(xt − θit )2
and negative discretionary spending are allowed, for any status quo and any realization of
proposers, the equilibrium allocation coincides with a dynamically Pareto efficient allocation.
The reason the combination of mandatory and discretionary spending achieves dynamic
Pareto efficiency is that the proposer in the first period can perfectly tailor the spending in
that period to first-period preferences, and independently choose the next period’s status quo.
Although the first-period proposer cannot specify the whole sequence of allocations, neither
gridlock nor political risk arises in equilibrium because spending fluctuates with preferences
and the chosen second-period status quo is maintained regardless of who the proposer is.
Allowing positive and negative discretionary spending together with mandatory spending
provides sufficient flexibility to achieve this.
When there are more than two periods or preferences evolve stochastically, however,
simply combining mandatory and discretionary spending no longer allows the proposer to
perfectly tailor the spending in the current period to the preferences in that period and
independently choose the status quos for all future periods. Therefore efficiency can no
longer be achieved. In order to achieve efficiency, more flexibility is needed. We illustrate
next that if preferences evolve deterministically, then sunset provisions with appropriately
chosen expiration dates achieve efficiency with more than two periods.

24

Sunset provisions Consider the following three-period extension with sunset provisions.
A proposal in period t is zt = (kt , st , gt ). As before, kt is discretionary spending for period t
and gt is mandatory spending. The new component is sunset provision st , which is spending
that applies in periods t and t + 1 and expires thereafter. If zt is accepted, then the spending
in period t is xt = kt + st + gt and the status quo in period t + 1 is (st , gt ). If zt is rejected,
then the spending in period t is xt = st−1 + gt−1 and the status quo in period t + 1 is (0, gt−1 ).
Note that an accepted proposal z1 = (k1 , s1 , g1 ) determines spending in the first period
x1 = k1 + s1 + g1 , the status quo spending in the second period x2 = s1 + g1 and the
status quo spending in the third period x3 = g1 . Therefore, sunset provisions in combination
with mandatory and discretionary spending allow the proposer to choose today’s spending
independently of future status quos, and choose future status quos independently of each
other (this is not possible with only mandatory and discretionary spending). In the first
period the proposer can tailor the status quo spending for each future period such that
the future proposer in that period has no incentive to change it. Following the intuition
of Lemma 4, the equilibrium first-period proposal z1 = (k1 , s1 , g1 ) induces an allocation
x = (k1 + s1 + g1 , s1 + g1 , g1 ), which is dynamically Pareto efficient and remains unchanged
in later periods. This avoids gridlock by allowing spending to fluctuate with the evolving
preferences, and eliminates political risk by ensuring that the spending levels do not depend
on the identity of future proposers. This result holds more generally. Specifically, beyond
three periods, multiple sunset provisions with different expiration dates allow the proposer
to choose status quo spending for each future period independently and therefore provide
sufficient flexibility required for dynamic efficiency.33
Stochastically evolving preferences require further flexibility for efficiency to be achieved.
In the next section we consider a model with arbitrary time horizon and stochastic preferences
and show that state-contingent mandatory spending provides such flexibility.
33

Note that with sunset provisions, flexibility is introduced by adding dimensions to the policy space. It
is possible that these additional policy instruments are not available, in which case one might ask if reducing
flexibility by placing bounds on mandatory and discretionary programs might improve efficiency. That is, we
might restrict the set of policies to Z = [a, b] × [c, d] ⊆ R × R+ and ask what values of (a, b, c, d) are optimal.
We leave this inquiry to future work.

25

7

State-contingent mandatory spending
Consider a richer environment in which parties bargain in T ≥ 2 periods and preferences

are stochastic in each period reflecting uncertainties in the economy.34 The economic state
(henceforth we refer to the economic state as simply the state) in each period t is st ∈ S
where S is a finite set of n = |S| possible states. We assume the distribution of states
has full support in every period, but do not require the distribution to be the same across
periods.35 The utility of party i in period t when the spending is x and the state is s is ui (x, s).
As before, we assume ui (x, s) is twice continuously differentiable and strictly concave in x.
Further, ui (x, s) attains a maximum at θis and we assume 0 < θAs < θBs for all s ∈ S. The
state is drawn at the beginning of each period before a proposal is made. We denote the
probability that party i proposes in period t by pit ∈ (0, 1), which can depend on t arbitrarily.
In this setting, we consider a budgetary institution that allows state-contingent mandatory
spending. As discussed in the Introduction, these state-contingent programs have been used
historically, and are still in use.
A proposal in period t is a spending rule gt : S → R+ where gt (s) is the level of public good
spending proposed to be allocated to the mandatory program in state s. If the responding
party agrees to the proposal, the allocation implemented in period t is gt (st ); otherwise the
allocation in period t is given by the status quo spending rule gt−1 (st ). In this environment,
a strategy for party i in period t is σit = (γit , αit ). Let M be the space of all functions
from S to R+ . Then γit : M × S → M is a proposal strategy for party i in period t and
αit : M × S × M → {0, 1} is an acceptance strategy for party i in period t. A strategy for
party i is σi = (σi1 , . . . , σiT ) and a profile of strategies is σ = (σ1 , σ2 ).
With stochastic preferences the social planner chooses an allocation rule xt : S → R+ for
all t ∈ {1, . . . , T } to maximize the expected payoff of one of the parties subject to providing
the other party with a minimum expected dynamic payoff. Formally, a dynamically Pareto
34

Note that T can be finite or infinite. In the case of infinite horizon we assume δ ∈ (0, 1) so that dynamic
utilities are well-defined.
35
We assume full support in this section for expositional simplicity, but Proposition 10 below still holds
in an extension in which the distribution of states has different supports in different periods.

26

efficient allocation rule solves the following maximization problem:
PT t−1
max
Est [ui (xt (st ), st )]
t=1 δ
{xt :S→R+ }T
t=1

PT

s.t.

t=1

δ

t−1

(DSP-S)

Est [uj (xt (st ), st )] ≥ U ,

for some U ∈ R, i, j ∈ {A, B} and i 6= j. We denote the solution to (DSP-S) by the sequence
of functions x∗ = {x∗t }Tt=1 . The next proposition characterizes dynamically Pareto efficient
allocation rules, analogous to Proposition 2.
Proposition 9. Any dynamically Pareto efficient allocation rule satisfies:
1. For any t and t0 , x∗t = x∗t0 .
2. For all s ∈ S and all t, either
−

u0i (x∗t (s), s)
= λ∗
u0j (x∗t (s), s)

for some λ∗ > 0, or x∗t (s) = θAs , or x∗t (s) = θBs .
Proposition 9 first says that the dynamically Pareto efficient allocation rule is independent
of time, i.e., the same allocation rule is used each period. The second part of the proposition
says that the dynamically Pareto efficient allocation rule either satisfies the condition that
the ratio of the parties’ marginal utilities is constant across states, or is one party’s ideal in
each state.
We next define a dynamically Pareto efficient equilibrium and show that dynamic ef∗

ficiency is obtained by state-contingent mandatory spending. Define recursively xσt (g0 )
∗

∗
for t ∈ {1, . . . , T } by xσ1 (g0 ) = γi1
(g0 , s1 ) for some i ∈ {A, B} and some s1 ∈ S, and
∗

∗

xσt (g0 ) = γit∗ (xσt−1 (g0 ), st ) for some i ∈ {A, B} and some st ∈ S and t ∈ {2, . . . , T }. An equilibrium allocation rule for σ ∗ given initial status quo g0 is a possible realization of a spending
∗

∗

rule for each period, xσ (g0 ) = {xσt (g0 )}Tt=1 . The random determination of proposers and
states in each period induces a probability distribution over allocation rules given an equilibrium σ ∗ . Thus any element in the support of this distribution is an equilibrium allocation
rule for σ ∗ .

27

Definition 2. An equilibrium σ ∗ is a dynamically Pareto efficient equilibrium given initial
∗

status quo g0 ∈ M if and only if every equilibrium allocation rule xσ (g0 ) for σ ∗ given initial
status quo g0 is dynamically Pareto efficient.
Proposition 10. Under state-contingent mandatory spending, an equilibrium is either dynamically Pareto efficient for any initial status quo g0 ∈ M or is outcome-equivalent to a
dynamically Pareto efficient equilibrium.
The result in Proposition 10 is in stark contrast to the inefficiency results for mandatory
spending given in Propositions 5 and 6. Recall that dynamic efficiency fails in the model with
evolving (deterministic) preferences and fixed mandatory spending because the proposer in
period 1 cannot specify spending in the current period separately from the status quo for the
next period. Proposition 10 can be understood in an analogous way to the efficiency result
with discretionary and mandatory spending combined. In the first period the proposer can
tailor the status quo for each state such that any acceptable proposal other than the status
quo makes the future proposer worse off, giving the future proposer no incentive to change
it. This avoids gridlock by allowing spending to fluctuate with the economic state, and
eliminates political risk by ensuring that the spending levels do not depend on the identity
of future proposers.36 Thus, even though the identity of the proposer is not contractible, in
equilibrium inefficiency arising from proposer uncertainty is eliminated through the status
quo. State-contingent mandatory spending therefore overcomes inefficiency due to two kinds
of uncertainty - uncertainty about states, which is contractible, and uncertainty about the
proposer identity, which is not contractible.

8

Conclusion
In this paper we demonstrate that discretionary only and mandatory only budgetary

institutions typically result in dynamic inefficiency, and may result in static inefficiency in the
36

We can regard the two-period model analyzed in the previous sections as a special case of an extension
of this section’s model in which the distribution of states has different supports in different periods with a
degenerate distribution in each period. The state-contingent mandatory programs achieve dynamic efficiency
by allowing the total spending in period 1 to be different from the status quo spending in period 2, which
can also be achieved by a combination of mandatory and discretionary programs in the two-period setting.

28

case of mandatory only budgetary institutions. However, we show that bargaining achieves
dynamic Pareto efficiency in increasingly complex environments when flexibility is introduced
either through the endogenous combination of mandatory and discretionary programs, or
through sunset provisions, or through a state-contingent mandatory program. We show that
these budgetary institutions eliminate political risk and gridlock by allowing the proposer to
choose status quos that are not changed by future proposers because they fully account for
fluctuations in preferences.
We have considered mandatory spending programs that are fully state-contingent, but it
is possible that factors influencing parties’ preferences, such as the mood of the electorate,
cannot be contracted on. In this case it seems there is room for inefficiency even with mandatory spending that depends on a contractible state. It is possible that further flexibility with
discretionary spending may be helpful. Such combinations are observed in practice; for example, in the United States, unemployment insurance is provided through both state-contingent
mandatory programs and discretionary programs.37 However, including discretionary spending may leave more room for political risk. We leave for future work exploring efficiency
implications of discretionary and mandatory spending when a part of the state may not be
contracted on.

References
Acemoglu, D., Golosov, M. and Tsyvinski, A. (2008), ‘Political economy of mechanisms’,
Econometrica 76(3), 619–641.
Acemoglu, D., Golosov, M. and Tsyvinski, A. (2011), ‘Power fluctuations and political economy’, Journal of Economic Theory 146(3), 1009–1041.
Aguiar, M. and Amador, M. (2011), ‘Growth in the shadow of expropriation’, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 126(2), 651–697.
Alesina, A. and Perotti, R. (1995), ‘The political economy of budget deficits’, Staff Papers International Monetary Fund 42(1), 1–31.
Alesina, A. and Tabellini, G. (1990), ‘A positive theory of fiscal deficits and government
37

See Department of Labor Budget in Brief, United States Department of Labor (2015).

29

debt’, Review of Economic Studies 57(3), 403–414.
Anesi, V. and Seidmann, D. J. (2015), ‘Bargaining in standing committees with an endogenous default’, forthcoming in Review of Economic Studies .
Azzimonti, M. (2011), ‘Barriers to investment in polarized societies’, American Economic
Review 101(5), 2182–2204.
Azzimonti, M., Battaglini, M. and Coate, S. (2015), ‘The costs and benefits of balanced
budget rules: Lessons from a political economy model of fiscal policy’, Working Paper .
Bai, J. and Lagunoff, R. (2011), ‘On the ‘Faustian’ dynamics of policy and political power’,
Review of Economic Studies 78(1), 17–48.
Baron, D. (1996), ‘A dynamic theory of collective goods programs’, American Political
Science Review 90(2), 316–330.
Baron, D. and Bowen, T. R. (2014), ‘Dynamic coalitions’, Working paper .
Battaglini, M. and Coate, S. (2007), ‘Inefficiency in legislative policy-making: A dynamic
analysis’, American Economic Review 97(1), 118–149.
Battaglini, M. and Palfrey, T. (2012), ‘The dynamics of distributive politics’, Economic
Theory 49(3), 739–777.
Besley, T. and Coate, S. (1998), ‘Sources of inefficiency in a representative democracy: A
dynamic analysis’, American Economic Review 88(1), 139–156.
Besley, T. and Coate, S. (2003), ‘Centralized versus decentralized provision of local public
goods: A political economy approach’, Journal of Public Economics 87(12), 2611–2637.
Besley, T. and Smart, M. (2007), ‘Fiscal restraints and voter welfare’, Journal of Public
Economics 91(3-4), 755–773.
Bierbrauer, F. J. and Boyer, P. (2014), ‘Efficiency, welfare, and political competition’, CESifo
Working Paper Series 4814.
Bowen, T. R., Chen, Y. and Eraslan, H. (2014), ‘Mandatory versus discretionary spending:
The status quo effect’, American Economic Review 104(10), 2941–2974.
Breasted, J. H. (1945), A History of Egypt, Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York, NY.
Budget of the United States Government (2015), ‘Budget of the United States Government,
Fiscal year 2015, Historical Tables and Public Budget Database’.
30

URL: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/collectionGPO.action?collectionCode=BUDGET
Caballero, R. J. and Yared, P. (2010), ‘Future rent-seeking and current public savings’,
Journal of International Economics 82(2), 124–136.
Callander, S. and Krehbiel, K. (2014), ‘Gridlock and delegationin a changing world’,
American Journal of Political Science 58(4), 819–834.
Canadian Minister of Justice (2014), ‘Employment Insurance Act’.
URL: http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/pdf/e-5.6.pdf
Chen, Y. and Eraslan, H. (2014), ‘Dynamic Agenda Setting’, Working Paper .
Diermeier, D., Egorov, G. and Sonin, K. (2013), ‘Endogenous property rights’, National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series 19734.
Diermeier, D. and Fong, P. (2011), ‘Legislative bargaining with reconsideration’, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 126(2), 947–985.
Dixit, A., Grossman, G. M. and Gul, F. (2000), ‘The dynamics of political compromise’,
Journal of Political Economy 108(3), 531–568.
Duggan, J. and Kalandrakis, T. (2012), ‘Dynamic legislative policy making’, Journal of
Economic Theory 147(5), 1653–1688.
Dziuda, W. and Loeper, A. (2015), ‘Dynamic collective choice with endogenous status quo’,
forthcoming in Journal of Political Economy .
Edlin, A. S. and Shannon, C. (1998), ‘Strict monotonicity in comparative statics’, Journal of
Economic Theory 81(1), 201–219.
Forand, J. G. (2014), ‘Two-party competition with persistent policies’, Journal of Economic
Theory 152, 64–91.
Halac, M. and Yared, P. (2014), ‘Fiscal rules and discretion under persistent shocks’,
Econometrica 82(5), 1557–1614.
Hallerberg, M., Strauch, R. R. and von Hagen, J. (2009), Fiscal Governance in Europe,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
House Budget Committee (2014), ‘The path to prosperity: Fiscal year 2015 budget resolution’.
URL: http://budget.house.gov/fy2015/
31

Kalandrakis, A. (2014), ‘Pareto efficiency in the dynamic one-dimensional bargaining model’,
University of Rochester Wallis Institute of Political Economy Working Paper Series 66.
Kalandrakis, T. (2004), ‘A three-player dynamic majoritarian bargaining game’, Journal of
Economic Theory 116(2), 294–322.
Kalandrakis, T. (2010), ‘Minimum winning coalitions and endogenous status quo’,
International Journal of Game Theory 39(4), 617–643.
Krusell, P. and Rı́os-Rull, J.-V. (1996), ‘Vested interests in a positive theory of stagnation
and growth’, Review of Economic Studies 63(2), 301–329.
Levy, G. and Razin, R. (2013), ‘Dynamic legislative decision making when interest groups
control the agenda’, Journal of Economic Theory 148(5), 1862–1890.
Lizzeri, A. and Persico, N. (2001), ‘The provision of public goods under alternative electoral
incentives’, American Economic Review 91(1), 225–239.
Ma, Y. (2014), ‘Curse or blessing? On the welfare consequences of divided government and
policy gridlock’, Working Paper .
Nicholson, W. and Needels, K. (2006), ‘Unemployment insurance: Strengthening the relationship between theory and policy’, Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(3), 47–70.
Nunnari, S. and Zapal, J. (2014), ‘Dynamic elections and ideological polarization’, Working
Paper .
OECD (2012), ‘International budget practices and procedures database’.
URL: http://www.oecd.org/gov/budgeting/
Persson, T. and Svensson, L. E. O. (1984), ‘Time-consistent fiscal policy and government
cash-flow’, Journal of Monetary Economics 14(3), 365–374.
Persson, T. and Tabellini, G. (1996a), ‘Federal fiscal constitutions: Risk sharing and moral
hazard’, Econometrica 64(3), 623–646.
Persson, T. and Tabellini, G. (1996b), ‘Federal fiscal constitutions: Risk sharing and redistribution’, Journal of Political Economy 104(5), 979–1009.
Piguillem, F. and Riboni, A. (2012), ‘Dynamic bargaining over redistribution in legislatures’,
Working Paper .
Piguillem, F. and Riboni, A. (2015), ‘Spending-biased legislators: Discipline through dis32

agreement’, Quarterly Journal of Economics 130(2), 901–949.
Riboni, A. and Ruge-Murcia, F. J. (2008), ‘The dynamic (in)efficiency of monetary policy
by committee’, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 40(5), 1001–1032.
Romer, T. and Rosenthal, H. (1978), ‘Political resource allocation, controlled agendas, and
the status quo’, Public Choice 33(48), 27–43.
Romer, T. and Rosenthal, H. (1979), ‘Bureaucrats versus voters: On the political economy of
resource allocation by direct democracy’, Quarterly Journal of Economics 93(4), 563–587.
Santiso, C. (2006), ‘Budget institutions and fiscal responsibility: Parliaments and the political
economy of the budget process’, World Bank Institute Working Paper Series 35863.
Shah, A. (2007), Budgeting and Budgetary Institutions, The World Bank, Washington DC.
Stockman, D. R. (2001), ‘Balanced-budget rules: Welfare loss and optimal policies’, Review
of Economic Dynamics 4(2), 438–459.
Takayama, A. (1974), Mathematical Economics, Dryden Press, Hinsdale, IL.
United States Department of Labor (2015), ‘Fiscal year 2015 Department of Labor budget
in brief’.
URL: http://www.dol.gov/dol/budget/2015/pdf/fy2015bib.pdf
U.S. House of Representatives, Office of the Legislative Counsel (2013), ‘Federal-state extended unemployment compensation act of 1970’.
URL: http://legcounsel.house.gov/Comps/fseuca70.pdf
Van Weelden, R. (2013), ‘Candidates, credibility, and re-election incentives’, Review of
Economic Studies 80(4), 1622–1651.
Yared, P. (2010), ‘Politicians, taxes and debt’, Review of Economic Studies 77(2), 806–840.
Zapal, J. (2011), ‘Explicit and implicit status-quo determination in dynamic bargaining:
Theory and application to FOMC directive’, Working paper .

33

Appendix
A1
A1.1

Pareto efficiency
Proof of Proposition 1

First, we show that if xt is statically Pareto efficient, then xt ∈ [θAt , θBt ]. Consider
xt ∈
/ [θAt , θBt ]. Then we can find x0t in either (xt , θAt ) or (θBt , xt ) such that uAt (x0t ) > uAt (xt )
and uBt (x0t ) > uBt (xt ), and therefore xt is not a solution to (SSP).
Second, we show that if x̃t ∈ [θAt , θBt ], then x̃t is statically Pareto efficient. Let u =
ujt (x̃t ). Denote the solution to (SSP) as x̂t (u). Since u0At (xt ) < 0 and u0Bt (xt ) > 0 for all
xt ∈ (θAt , θBt ), the solution to (SSP) is x̂t (u) = x̃t for any x̃t ∈ [θAt , θBt ].

A1.2



Proof of Proposition 2

We prove the result for a more general model with T ≥ 2. Denote a sequence of allocations
by x = {xt }Tt=1 and party i’s discounted dynamic payoff from x = {xt }Tt=1 by Ui (x) =
PT t−1
uit (xt ). We define a dynamically Pareto efficient allocation in the T -period problem
t=1 δ
as the solution to the following maximization problem
maxx∈RT+ Ui (x)

(DSP)

s.t. Uj (x) ≥ U
for some U ∈ R, i, j ∈ {A, B} and i 6= j. Denote the sequence of party i’s static ideals by
θ i = {θit }Tt=1 for all i ∈ {A, B}, and denote the solution to (DSP) as x∗ = {x∗t }Tt=1 .
To prove part 1, by way of contradiction, suppose x∗t0 ∈
/ [θAt0 , θBt0 ]. By Proposition 1 there
exists x̂t0 such that uit0 (x̂t0 ) ≥ uit0 (x∗t0 ) for all i ∈ {A, B}, and uit0 (x̂t0 ) > uit0 (x∗t0 ) for at least
one i ∈ {A, B}. Now consider x̂ = {x̂t }Tt=1 , with x̂t = x∗t for all t 6= t0 . Then Ui (x̂) ≥ Ui (x∗ )
for all i ∈ {A, B}, and Ui (x̂) > Ui (x∗ ) for at least one i ∈ {A, B}. Thus x∗ is not dynamically
Pareto efficient.
Next we prove part 2 by considering possible values of U . Fix i, j ∈ {A, B} with i 6= j.
Since for any U > Uj (θ j ) the solution does not exist, we only need to consider U ≤ Uj (θ j ).
For U = Uj (θ j ), the solution to (DSP) is x∗ = θ j and for any U ≤ Uj (θ i ), the solution to
34

(DSP) is x∗ = θ i . What remains is to consider the case when U ∈ (Uj (θ i ), Uj (θ j )). Suppose
θ A = θ B , then Uj (θ i ) = Uj (θ j ), which implies x∗ = θ i . So consider θ A 6= θ B .
For the rest of the proof, suppose U ∈ (Uj (θ i ), Uj (θ j )). Consider a relaxed version of
(DSP) with the constraint x ∈ RT+ dropped. Denote the solution to the relaxed problem
as x̂ = {x̂t }Tt=1 . Similar to the proof of part 1, if x̂t ∈
/ [θAt , θBt ], then both parties can be
made strictly better off in period t. Thus if x̂ is a solution to the relaxed problem, then
x̂t ∈ [θAt , θBt ] for all t. It follows that the solution to the relaxed problem is the same as the
solution to (DSP). The Lagrangian of the relaxed problem is


L (x, λ) = Ui (x) − λ −Uj (x) + U .

(A1)

By Takayama (1974, Theorem 1.D.4), if the Jacobian of the constraint has rank 1 then the
solution to (DSP) satisfies



∂L x̂, λ̂
∂xt

= δ t−1 u0it (x̂t ) + λ̂δ t−1 u0jt (x̂t ) = 0

(A2)

with λ̂ ≥ 0. The Jacobian is
"

∂ujt (x̂t )
δ t−1
∂xt

T #
,

(A3)

t=1

and it has rank 1 if there exists t0 such that x̂t0 6= θjt0 , which we show next. Suppose x̂ = θ j .
This implies Uj (x̂) > U . Because there exists t0 such that θit0 6= θjt0 , we can find α ∈ (0, 1)
such that x = {xt }Tt=1 with xt0 = αθit0 + (1 − α)θjt0 and xt = x̂t for all t 6= t0 satisfies the
constraints in (DSP) and strictly increases the value of the objective function relative to x̂.
If λ̂ = 0, we obtain x̂ = θ i , violating the Uj (x) ≥ U constraint, and hence λ̂ > 0.

A1.3



Proof of Lemma 1

Since x and x̃ are dynamically Pareto efficient, by Proposition 2 part 1, xt ∈ [θAt , θBt ]
and x̃t ∈ [θAt , θBt ] for all t. There are three possible cases.
Case (i): xt0 = x̃t0 = θAt0 . By Proposition 2, part 2 either x = θ A , or x = θ B , or
u0At0 (xt0 )+λ∗ u0Bt0 (xt0 ) = 0 for some λ∗ > 0. Since θAt 6= θBt for any t, xt0 = θAt0 implies x 6= θ B .
Next note that u0At (θAt ) = 0 for all t and u0Bt (θAt ) 6= 0 for any t, hence u0At0 (xt0 )+λ∗ u0Bt0 (xt0 ) 6=
0 for any λ∗ > 0. Thus, it must be that x = θ A . A similar argument shows that x̃ = θ A ,

35

proving that x = x̃.
Case (ii): xt0 = x̃t0 = θBt0 . Analogous to case (i), if xt0 = x̃t0 = θBt0 , then x = x̃ = θ B .
Case (iii): xt0 = x̃t0 ∈ (θAt0 , θBt0 ). Note that x 6= θ i for any i. By Proposition 2, part
u0

(x 0 )

2 it must be that u0At0 (xt0 ) + λ∗ u0Bt0 (xt0 ) = 0 for some λ∗ > 0. This implies − u0At0 (xt0 ) = λ∗ .
Bt0

t

u0 (x̃ 0 )
Similarly,
= 0 for some λ̃ > 0, implying − u0At0 (x̃t0 ) = λ̃∗ . Since xt0 = x̃t0
t
Bt0
u0At (xt )
u0 (x̃ )
∗
∗
it follows that λ = λ̃ . Then by Proposition 2 part 2, − u0 (xt ) = − u0At (x̃tt ) = λ∗ for all
Bt
Bt
u0At (x)
∗
t. To prove xt = x̃t for all t, it remains to show that − u0 (x) = λ has a unique solution
Bt

u0At0 (x̃t0 ) + λ̃∗ u0Bt0 (x̃t0 )

∗

for any λ∗ > 0. To see this, first note that x 6= θ i for any i implies xt ∈ (θAt , θBt ) for
all t because otherwise, xt = θit for some i and some t, and by previous arguments this
implies x = θ i , which is a contradiction. From properties of uAt and uBt , we know that
u0 (x)

u0 (x)

u0 (x)

− u0At (x) is continuous on (θAt , θBt ), − u0At (x) > 0 for all x ∈ (θAt , θBt ), limx→θ+ − u0At (x) = 0,
At
Bt
Bt
h 0
iBt
0
0
00
u0At (x)
uAt (x)
u00
∂
At (x)uBt (x)−uA (x)uB (x)
limx→θ− − u0 (x) = ∞ and ∂x − u0 (x) = −
>
0
for
all
x
∈
(θ
At , θBt ).
(u0 (x))2
Bt

Bt

Bt

Bt

u0 (x)

Hence, by the Intermediate Value Theorem, a solution to − u0At (x) = λ∗ exists and by the
strict monotonicity of

A1.4

u0 (x)
− u0At (x) ,
Bt

Bt

it is unique.



Proof of Lemma 2

To show part 1, note that by Proposition 2 part 1, any dynamically Pareto efficient
allocation x∗ satisfies x∗1 ∈ [θA1 , θB1 ] and x∗2 ∈ [θA2 , θB2 ]. If θB1 < θA2 or θB2 < θA1 , then
x∗1 6= x∗2 .
Part 2 follows from Lemma A1 below and part 3 follows from Lemma A2 below.
Lemma A1. Suppose utilities have increasing marginal returns. If θit0 > θit00 for all i ∈
{A, B}, then any dynamically Pareto efficient allocation x∗ satisfies x∗t0 > x∗t00 .
Proof. Since x∗ is dynamically Pareto efficient, it follows that for some α ∈ [0, 1], x∗ is a
solution to the following maximization problem
max αUA (x) + (1 − α)UB (x),

x∈RT
+

which implies that x∗t is a solution to the following maximization problem
max αuA (xt , θAt ) + (1 − α)uB (xt , θBt )

xt ∈R+

for all t.
36

Let f (xt , θAt , θBt ) = αuA (xt , θAt ) + (1 − α)uB (xt , θBt ). Since
θit for all i, we have that

∂f
∂xt

∂ui
∂xt

is strictly increasing in

is strictly increasing in θit for all i. It follows from standard

monotone comparative statics results (for example, Edlin and Shannon, 1998, Theorem 3)
that if θit0 > θit00 for all i ∈ {A, B}, then x∗t0 > x∗t00 .



Lemma A2. Suppose uit (xt ) = −(|xt − θit |)r where r > 1. Then an allocation x is dynamically Pareto efficient if and only if x = αθ i + (1 − α)θ j for some α ∈ [0, 1].
Proof. Fix i, j ∈ {A, B} with i 6= j in (DSP). For any U > Uj (θ j ) the solution to (DSP)
does not exist, so assume U ≤ Uj (θ j ).
Suppose θ i = θ j . Then for any U ≤ Uj (θ j ) there exists a unique solution to (DSP),
x∗ = θ i . In this case x∗ = αθ i + (1 − α)θ j for any α ∈ [0, 1].
Suppose θ i 6= θ j . For U = Uj (θ j ), the solution is x∗ = θ j = αθ i + (1 − α)θ j where α = 0.
For any U ≤ Uj (θ i ), the solution is x∗ = θ i = αθ i + (1 − α)θ j where α = 1.
For the rest of the proof, suppose U ∈ (Uj (θ i ), Uj (θ j )) and θ i 6= θ j . Consider a relaxed
version of (DSP) with the constraint x ∈ RT+ dropped. Denote the solution to the relaxed
/ [θAt , θBt ],
problem as x̂ = {x̂t }Tt=1 . Similar to the proof of Proposition 2 part 1, if x̂t ∈
then both parties can be made strictly better off in period t. Thus if x̂ is a solution to the
relaxed problem, then x̂t ∈ [θAt , θBt ] for all t. It follows that the solution to the relaxed
problem is the same as the solution to (DSP). The Lagrangian of the relaxed problem is
L(x, λ) = Ui (x) − λ[−Uj (x) + U ]. Since Uj (x) > U when x = θ j , by Takayama (1974,
Theorem 1.D.2),

∂L(x̂,λ̂)
∂xt

= 0 with λ̂ ≥ 0 for all t is both sufficient and necessary for x̂.

Assume i = A. If i = B, the argument is similar and omitted. Since x̂t ∈ [θAt , θBt ] for
all t, we have

∂L(x̂,λ̂) 1
∂xt r

= −(x̂t − θAt )r−1 + λ̂(θBt − x̂t )r−1 . Hence

∂L(x̂,λ̂)
∂xt

= 0 is equivalent to

−(x̂t − θAt )r−1 + λ̂(θBt − x̂t )r−1 = 0. If λ̂ = 0, we obtain x̂ = θ A , violating the UB (x) ≥ U
constraint, and hence λ̂ > 0. If θAt 6= θBt , then

∂L(x̂,λ̂)
∂xt

= 0 cannot be satisfied if x̂t = θAt

or x̂t = θBt . Hence for all t such that θAt 6= θBt , we have x̂t ∈ (θAt , θBt ) and therefore
x̂t −θAt
θBt −x̂t

1

= λ̂ r−1 with λ̂ > 0.

At
Fix t0 such that θBt0 6= θAt0 . If θAt 6= θBt , then θBt − x̂t = (θBt0 − x̂t0 ) θθBt0 −θ
since
−θ 0
Bt

1

λ̂ r−1 and

x̂t0 −θAt0
θBt0 −x̂t0

1

At

x̂t −θAt
θBt −x̂t

=

= λ̂ r−1 . If θAt = θBt , then x̂t = θBt , and so again we have θBt − x̂t = (θBt0 −
37


r
θ −x̂
δ t−1 (−(θBt − θAt )r ) = θ Bt00−θ t00 UB (θ A ).
Bt
At
Bt
At

r
θBt0 −x̂t0
Since λ̂ > 0, we have UB (x̂) = U . Hence, θ 0 −θ 0 UB (θ A ) = U is necessary and sufficient

−θAt
x̂t0 ) θθBt0 −θ
. Thus UB (x̂) =
0



θBt0 −x̂t0
θBt0 −θAt0

r P

T
t=1

Bt

At

for x̂ to solve (DSP) with U . Rearranging, we get x̂t0 = αθAt0 + (1 − α)θBt0 where α =

 r1
U
. To conclude the proof, note that if UB (θ A ) < U < UB (θ B ) = 0, then α ∈ (0, 1),
UB (θ A )
and conversely, for any α ∈ (0, 1), the allocation x = αθ A + (1 − α)θ B solves (DSP) with
U = αr UB (θ A ).

A2



Discretionary spending

The following lemma is useful in the proof of Proposition 3.
Lemma A3. Suppose there exists at most one t0 such that θAt0 6= θBt0 . Then an allocation
x is dynamically Pareto efficient if and only if xt is statically Pareto efficient in period t for
all t.
Proof. The “only if” part follows from Proposition 2 part 1 which states that if x = {xt }Tt=1
is dynamically Pareto efficient, then xt satisfies static Pareto efficiency for all t.
To show the “if” part, suppose x = {xt }Tt=1 is an allocation such that xt is statically
Pareto efficient in period t for all t. The proof is trivial if θ A = θ B , so we consider the case
when there is a unique t0 such that θAt0 6= θBt0 . We will show that x solves (DSP). Since
θAt = θBt for t 6= t0 , by Proposition 1, xt = θAt for all t 6= t0 and xt0 solves
maxx∈R+ uit0 (x)
s.t. ujt0 (x) ≥ u
for some ū. Since xt0 solves the problem above, it also solves
P
0
maxx∈R+ δ t −1 uit0 (x) + t6=t0 δ t−1 uit (θAt )
P
P
0
0
s.t. δ t −1 ujt0 (x) + t6=1 δ t−1 ujt (θAt ) ≥ δ t −1 u + t6=t0 δ t−1 ujt (θAt ).
P
P
t−1
t−1
ujt (xt ), it follows that x solves
Since {θAt }t6=t0 maximizes
uit (xt ) and
t6=t0 δ
t6=t0 δ
P
0
(DSP) with U = δ t −1 u + t6=t0 δ t−1 ujt (θAt ).


38

A2.1

Proof of Proposition 3

We first characterize the equilibrium. Since the status quo spending is zero, party A
accepts any proposal kt such that 0 ≤ kt ≤ φoAt . To find party B’s optimal proposal, there
are two cases to consider. (i) Suppose θBt ≤ φoAt . Then, since uAt is single-peaked at
θAt ≤ θBt , we have uAt (θBt ) ≥ uAt (φoAt ) = uAt (0) and therefore party A accepts kt = θBt in
period t. In this case, party B’s optimal proposal in period t is equal to its ideal point θBt .
(ii) Suppose θBt > φoAt . Then, given the single-peakedness of uBt , the optimal policy for B
that is acceptable to A is equal to φoAt . In this case, party B proposes kt = φoAt < θBt . Hence,
party B’s optimal proposal is min{θBt , φoAt }.
Note that the policy implemented in period t is equal to θAt when party A is the proposer
and is equal to min {θBt , φoAt } ≥ θAt when party B is the proposer. It follows that the
policy implemented in period t is in [θAt , θBt ] and therefore is statically Pareto efficient by
Proposition 1.
For the equilibrium’s dynamic efficiency properties, consider the following two cases. (i)
Suppose θAt 6= θBt for all t. In this case, min{θBt , φoAt } > θAt , which implies that the policy
implemented in period t varies with the identity of the proposer. By Lemma 1, this implies
dynamic Pareto inefficiency. (ii) Suppose there is at most one t0 such that θAt0 6= θBt0 . In this
case, by Lemma A3, an allocation x is dynamically Pareto efficient if and only if xt is statically
Pareto efficient in all periods. Thus, the equilibrium is dynamically Pareto efficient.

A3

Mandatory spending

A3.1

Proof of Proposition 4



We first prove equilibrium existence by showing that a solution exists for the proposer’s
problem in period 2 given any status quo g1 , and given this solution, a solution exists for the
proposer’s problem in period 1.
Consider the problem of the proposing party i ∈ {A, B} in the second period under status
quo g1 ∈ R+ and budgetary institution Z that allows for mandatory spending. The proposing

39

party’s maximization problem is:
max(k2 ,g2 )∈Z ui2 (k2 + g2 )
s.t. uj2 (k2 + g2 ) ≥ uj2 (g1 ).

(P2 )

Consider the related problem
max

x2 ∈Aj2 (g1 )

ui2 (x2 )

(P20 )

where Aj2 (g1 ) = {x ∈ R+ |uj2 (x) ≥ uj2 (g1 )} is the responder’s acceptance set under status
quo g1 . If x̂2 is a solution to (P20 ), then any (k̂2 , ĝ2 ) ∈ Z such that k̂2 + ĝ2 = x̂2 is a solution
to (P2 ). We use the following properties of Aj2 .
Lemma A4. Aj2 (g1 ) is non-empty, convex and compact for any g1 ∈ R+ and Aj2 is continuous.
Proof. Non-emptiness follows from g1 ∈ Aj2 (g1 ) for all g1 ∈ R+ . Convexity follows from
strict concavity of uj2 . To show compactness, we show that Aj2 (g1 ) is closed and bounded
for all g1 ∈ R+ . Closedness follows from continuity of uj2 . For boundedness, note that uj2
is differentiable and strictly concave, which implies that uj2 (x) < uj2 (y) + u0j2 (y)(x − y) for
any x, y ∈ R+ . Selecting y > θj2 gives u0j2 (y) < 0 and taking the limit as x → ∞, we
have limx→∞ uj2 (x) = −∞. We next establish upper and lower hemicontinuity of Aj2 using
Lemma A5.
Lemma A5. Let X ⊆ R be closed and convex, let Y ⊆ R and let f : X → Y be a continuous
function. Define ϕ : X  X by
ϕ(x) = {y ∈ X|f (y) ≥ f (x)}.

(A4)

1. If ϕ(x) is compact ∀x ∈ X, then ϕ is upper hemicontinuous.
2. If f is strictly concave, then ϕ is lower hemicontinuous.
Proof. To show part 1, since ϕ(x) is compact for all x ∈ X, it suffices to prove that if xn → x
and yn → y with yn ∈ ϕ(xn ) for all n ∈ N, then y ∈ ϕ(x). Since yn ∈ ϕ(xn ), we have
f (yn ) ≥ f (xn ). Since f is continuous, xn → x and yn → y, it follows that f (y) ≥ f (x), hence
y ∈ ϕ(x).
40

To show part 2, fix x ∈ X, let y ∈ ϕ(x) and consider any xn → x. We show that
there exists a sequence yn → y and n0 such that yn ∈ ϕ(xn ) for all n ≥ n0 . First suppose
f (y) > f (x). Set yn = y. Clearly, yn → y. By continuity of f , there exists n0 such that
f (yn ) ≥ f (xn ) for all n ≥ n0 , that is, yn ∈ ϕ(xn ). Next suppose f (y) = f (x). There
are two cases to consider. First, if y = x, set yn = xn . Clearly yn → y and yn ∈ ϕ(xn )
for all n. Second, suppose y 6= x. By strict concavity of f , there exist at most one such
y ∈ X. Set yn = y whenever f (xn ) ≤ f (x). When f (xn ) > f (x), by strict concavity of
f and the Intermediate Value Theorem, because xn → x, there exists n0 such that for all
n ≥ n0 , there is a unique yn 6= xn such that f (yn ) = f (xn ) > f (x). Because yn = y whenever
f (xn ) ≤ f (x) = f (y) and f (yn ) = f (xn ) whenever f (xn ) > f (x), yn ∈ ϕ(xn ) for all n ≥ n0
and yn → y follows from continuity of f .



To see that Aj2 is upper and lower hemicontinuous, note that it can be written as ϕ in
(A4) with X = R+ closed and convex, Y = R and f = u continuous and strictly concave,
and we showed before that Aj2 is compact-valued.



By Lemma A4, for any g1 ∈ R+ , the acceptance set Aj2 (g1 ) is non-empty and compact.
Applying the Weierstrass’s Theorem, a solution exists for (P20 ).
We next show that a solution exists to the proposer’s problem in period 1. Recall the
continuation value Vi is given by
∗
∗
Vi (g1 ; σ2∗ ) = pA ui2 (κ∗A2 (g1 ) + γA2
(g1 )) + pB ui2 (κ∗B2 (g1 ) + γB2
(g1 )),

(A5)

∗
(g1 ) is a solution to (P20 ) for all i ∈ {A, B}. For any g1 ∈ R+ , and
where κ∗i2 (g1 ) + γi2

i ∈ {A, B}, let Vi (g1 ) = Vi (g1 ; σ2∗ ) and
Fi (k1 , g1 ) = ui1 (k1 + g1 ) + δVi (g1 ),

(A6)

fi (g1 ) = ui1 (g1 ) + δVi (g1 ).
Lemma A6 establishes some properties of Vi , Fi and fi .
Lemma A6. Vi , Fi and fi are continuous. Vi is bounded.
Proof. To show continuity of Vi , first note that given ui2 is strictly concave, the solution
to (P20 ) is unique for any g1 ∈ R+ . Since Aj2 is non-empty, compact valued and is contin41

uous by Lemma A4, applying the Maximum Theorem we have that the correspondence of
maximizers in (P20 ) is upper hemicontinuous. Since a singleton-valued upper hemicontinuous
∗
correspondence is continuous as a function, κ∗i2 + γi2
is continuous. Thus Vi (g1 ) is continuous.

Continuity of Fi and fi follow from their definitions and continuity of Vi .
∗
To show boundedness of Vi , first note that ui2 (κ∗k2 (g1 ) + γk2
(g1 )) ≤ ui2 (θi2 ) for all k ∈

{A, B} and g1 ∈ R+ because θi2 is the unique maximizer of ui2 . Moreover, for i 6= j, if
∗
(g1 )) < ui2 (θj2 ) for some k ∈ {A, B} and some g1 ∈ R+ , then k could
ui2 (κ∗k2 (g1 ) + γk2

make an alternative proposal that the responder would accept and k would strictly prefer. It
∗
follows that ui2 (κ∗k2 (g1 ) + γk2
(g1 )) ≥ ui2 (θj2 ). Thus Vi (g1 ) ∈ [ui2 (θj2 ), ui2 (θi2 )] for any g1 . 

Fix the initial status quo g0 ∈ R+ . When only mandatory spending programs are allowed,
Z = {0} × R+ , and party i’s equilibrium proposal satisfies κ∗i1 (g0 ) = 0 and
∗
γi1
(g0 ) ∈ arg max fi (g1 ) s.t. fj (g1 ) ≥ fj (g0 ).

(A7)

g1 ∈R+

When both types of spending are allowed, we have Z = R+ × R+ or Z = {(kt , gt ) ∈ R ×
R+ |kt +gt ≥ 0}, depending on whether discretionary spending can be negative. In equilibrium
party i’s proposal satisfies
∗
(κ∗i1 (g0 ), γi1
(g0 )) ∈ arg max Fi (k1 , g1 ) s.t. Fj (k1 , g1 ) ≥ Fj (0, g0 ).

(A8)

(k1 ,g1 )∈Z

We show that in each of these problems, the objective function is continuous and the constraint set is compact for any g0 ∈ R+ . Lemma A6 establishes continuity of Fi and fi and
boundedness of Vi . Compactness follows from an argument analogous to the one made for
the second period. Hence for any g0 ∈ R+ , a solution to each of the optimization problems
exists, and therefore an equilibrium exists.
We now show that for any g1 ∈ R+
∗
(g1 ) = max{θA2 , φB2 (g1 )},
κ∗A2 (g1 ) + γA2

(A9)

∗
κ∗B2 (g1 ) + γB2
(g1 ) = min{θB2 , φA2 (g1 )}.

(A10)

Consider (A9). The proof of (A10) is similar and omitted. Note that φB2 (g1 ) = min{x ∈
R+ |uB2 (x) ≥ uB2 (g1 )} = min AB2 (g1 ). There are two possible cases.

42

Case (i): φB2 (g1 ) ≤ θA2 . Since θB2 ∈ AB2 (g1 ), φB2 (g1 ) ∈ AB2 (g1 ) and θA2 ∈ [φB2 (g1 ), θB2 ],
by convexity of AB2 (g1 ), we have θA2 ∈ AB2 (g1 ). Since θA2 maximizes uA2 , it follows that
x̂2 = θA2 = max {θA2 , φB2 (g1 )}.
Case (ii): φB2 (g1 ) > θA2 . Since φB2 (g1 ) = min AB2 (g1 ), for any x < φB2 (g1 ) we have
x ∈
/ AB2 (g1 ). Since uA2 (x) is strictly decreasing for x > θA2 , we have x̂2 = φB2 (g1 ) =
max {θA2 , φB2 (g1 )}.
We now prove parts 1 and 2. For part 1, let Z be a budgetary institution that allows
∗
(g1 ) ∈
/ [θA2 , θB2 ], there exists (k20 , g20 ) ∈ Z with k20 + g20 ∈
mandatory spending. If κ∗i2 (g1 ) + γi2
∗
∗
[θA2 , θB2 ] such that uA2 (κ∗i2 (g1 ) + γi2
(g1 )) < uA2 (k20 + g20 ) and uB2 (κ∗i2 (g1 ) + γi2
(g1 )) < uB2 (k20 +
∗
(g1 ) ∈ [θA2 , θB2 ].
g20 ). Hence κ∗i2 (g1 ) + γi2

For part 2, assume θA2 6= θB2 . There are three possible cases.
Case (i): g1 ∈ [θA2 , θB2 ]. Because uA2 (k2 + g2 ) < uA2 (g1 ) for any k2 + g2 > g1 and
uB2 (k2 + g2 ) < uB2 (g1 ) for any k2 + g2 < g1 , party A does not propose or accept any proposal
such that k2 + g2 > g1 and party B does not propose or accept any proposal such that
∗
∗
k2 + g2 < g1 . Hence κ∗A2 (g1 ) + γA2
(g1 ) = κ∗B2 (g1 ) + γB2
(g1 ) = g1 .
∗
Case (ii): g1 < θA2 . In this case κ∗A2 (g1 )+γA2
(g1 ) = θA2 since θA2 is the unique maximizer

of uA2 and uB2 (θA2 ) > uB2 (g1 ). By the definition of φA2 we have φA2 (g1 ) > θA2 when g1 < θA2 .
∗
(g1 ) > θA2 .
Hence from (A10) we have κ∗B2 (g1 ) + γB2

Case (iii): g1 > θB2 . Using an argument analogous to case (ii), we have κ∗B2 (g1 ) +
∗
∗
γB2
(g1 ) = θB2 and κ∗A2 (g1 ) + γA2
(g1 ) < θB2 .

A3.2



Proof of Proposition 5

Note that the proposition applies only when θAt 6= θBt for all t. We first prove parts 1
and 2. Assume, towards a contradiction, that σ ∗ is a dynamically Pareto efficient equilibrium
given g0 ∈ R+ . The following lemma is useful.
Lemma A7. Let Z = {0} × R+ . Suppose θAt 6= θBt for all t. For any g0 ∈ R+ , if σ ∗ is
∗

a dynamically Pareto efficient equilibrium given g0 , then any equilibrium allocation xσ (g0 )
∗

∗

satisfies xσ1 (g0 ) = xσ2 (g0 ).
Proof. Fix a dynamically Pareto efficient equilibrium σ ∗ given g0 . The equilibrium spending
43

∗

∗

∗
∗
in period 2 is either γA2
(xσ1 (g0 )) or γB2
(xσ1 (g0 )). Since σ ∗ is an equilibrium and θAt 6= θBt for
∗

∗

∗

∗

∗

∗
∗
∗
∗
all t, we have either γA2
(xσ1 (g0 )) 6= γB2
(xσ1 (g0 )) or xσ2 (g0 ) = γA2
(xσ1 (g0 )) = γB2
(xσ1 (g0 )) =
∗

xσ1 (g0 ) by Proposition 4 part 2. In the former case, the level of spending in period 2 depends
on the identity of the period-2 proposer, contradicting that σ ∗ is a dynamically Pareto efficient
∗

∗

equilibrium given g0 by Lemma 1. Thus, we must have xσ1 (g0 ) = xσ2 (g0 ).
∗



∗

By Lemma A7, we have xσ1 (g0 ) = xσ2 (g0 ). To see part 1, note that Proposition 2 part 1
∗

∗

implies that xσ1 (g0 ) ∈ [θA1 , θB1 ] and xσ2 (g0 ) ∈ [θA2 , θB2 ], which is impossible if θA1 < θB1 <
∗

∗

θA2 < θB2 or if θA2 < θB2 < θA1 < θB1 . To see part 2, (xσ1 (g0 ), xσ2 (g0 )) is not a dynamically
Pareto efficient allocation since any dynamically Pareto efficient allocation satisfies x∗1 6= x∗2
when parties’ ideals are increasing or decreasing and θAt 6= θBt for all t by Lemma A1.
We next prove the remaining result. We first show that for any equilibrium σ ∗ , there
exists g0 such that σ ∗ is dynamically Pareto efficient given g0 . To show that, we make use of
the following lemma.
Lemma A8. Let Z = {0} × R+ . Suppose (x̃, x̃) is a dynamically Pareto efficient allocation.
If gt−1 = x̃, then γit∗ (gt−1 ) = x̃ for all i ∈ {A, B} and all t in any equilibrium.
Proof. Consider the second period. Since (x̃, x̃) is dynamically Pareto efficient, x̃ ∈ [θA2 , θB2 ]
∗
by Proposition 2 part 1. Thus γi2
(x̃) = x̃ for all i ∈ {A, B} by Proposition 4.
∗
(x̃) = x̂ 6= x̃ for some
Consider the first period. Suppose, towards a contradiction, γi1

i ∈ {A, B}. Note that party i can achieve a dynamic payoff of at least ui1 (x̃) + δui2 (x̃) for
all i ∈ {A, B} by following the strategy of always proposing x̃ when proposing and rejecting
any proposal when responding. Hence, uj1 (x̂) + δVj (x̂) ≥ uj1 (x̃) + δuj2 (x̃) for all j ∈ {A, B}
since x̂ is an equilibrium proposal.
∗
∗
Note that Vj (x̂) = pA uj2 (γA2
(x̂))+pB uj2 (γB2
(x̂)) ≤ uj2 (x̂0 ) by strict concavity of uj2 where
∗
∗
x̂0 = pA γA2
(x̂) + pB γB2
(x̂). Hence uj1 (x̂) + δuj2 (x̂0 ) ≥ uj1 (x̃) + δuj2 (x̃) for all j ∈ {A, B}.

Since the solution to (DSP) is unique for any given Ū (see footnote 18), this contradicts the
dynamic efficiency of (x̃, x̃).



By Lemma A2, x is a dynamically Pareto efficient allocation if and only if x = αθ A +
(1 − α)θ B for some α ∈ [0, 1]. This implies any dynamically Pareto efficient allocation
44

(x∗1 , x∗2 ) can be written as x∗1 (α) = αθA1 + (1 − α)θB1 and x∗2 (α) = αθA2 + (1 − α)θB2 . Let
α∗ =

θB1 −θB2
.
θB1 −θB2 +θA2 −θA1

Note that α∗ ∈ (0, 1) since sgn [θB1 − θB2 ] = sgn [θA2 − θA1 ] and

θi1 6= θi2 for all i ∈ {A, B}. Note also that x∗1 (α) = x∗2 (α) if and only if α = α∗ . By Lemma
A8, any equilibrium σ ∗ is dynamically Pareto efficient given g0 if g0 = x∗1 (α∗ ).
In the remainder of the proof, we let σ ∗ be a dynamically Pareto efficient equilibrium
given g0 and show that we must have g0 = x∗1 (α∗ ). We do this in three steps.
∗

∗
Step 1: We show that γA1
(g0 ) ∈ (θA1 , θB1 )∩(θA2 , θB2 ). By Lemma A7, we have xσ1 (g0 ) =
∗

∗

∗

xσ2 (g0 ). Recall that x∗1 (α) = x∗2 (α) if and only if α = α∗ . Thus xσ1 (g0 ) = xσ2 (g0 ) =
x∗1 (α∗ ) = x∗2 (α∗ ). Note that x∗1 (α∗ ) ∈ (θA1 , θB1 ) and x∗2 (α∗ ) ∈ (θA2 , θB2 ) since α∗ ∈ (0, 1).
∗

∗

∗
(g0 ) = xσ1 (g0 ) ∈
Since xσ1 (g0 ) = x∗1 (α∗ ) = x∗2 (α∗ ) and α∗ is unique, it follows that γA1

(θA1 , θB1 ) ∩ (θA2 , θB2 ).
∗
∗
Step 2: We now show that fA (γA1
(g0 )) = fA (g0 ) and fB (γA1
(g0 )) = fB (g0 ). To see this,
∗
∗
∗
(g0 ) is proposed by A and
(g0 )) ≥ fB (g0 ) since γA1
(g0 )) ≥ fA (g0 ) and fB (γA1
note that fA (γA1
∗
(g0 )) ≥
accepted by B under status quo g0 . Suppose, towards a contradiction, that fA (γA1
∗
fA (g0 ) and fB (γA1
(g0 )) > fB (g0 ). Since fi (g1 ) = ui1 (g1 ) + δVi (g1 ), where Vi (g1 ) = ui2 (g1 ) for

all g1 ∈ [θA2 , θB2 ] by Proposition 4 part 2, fA (g1 ) is strictly decreasing and fB (g1 ) is strictly
∗
(g0 ) ∈ (θA1 , θB1 ) ∩ (θA2 , θB2 ) and fi is
increasing in g1 on [θA1 , θB1 ] ∩ [θA2 , θB2 ]. Since γA1
∗
∗
(g0 )) for all i ∈ {A, B},
(g0 ) − ) > fi (γA1
continuous, there exists  > 0 such that fi (γA1
∗
so that proposing γA1
(g0 ) cannot be optimal for A, which is a contradiction. By a similar
∗
∗
argument, it is impossible to have fA (γA1
(g0 )) > fA (g0 ) and fB (γA1
(g0 )) ≥ fB (g0 ).
∗
∗
(g0 )) = fB (g0 ), then g0
(g0 )) = fA (g0 ) and fB (γA1
Step 3: Finally, we show that if fA (γA1
∗
must be equal to x∗1 (α∗ ). As shown earlier, γA1
(g0 ) = x∗1 (α∗ ). We show that the system of

equations
fA (x∗1 (α∗ )) = fA (g0 )

fB (x∗1 (α∗ )) = fB (g0 )

(A11)

has a unique solution in g0 . Clearly, g0 = x∗1 (α∗ ) solves (A11). To see that no other solution
exists, suppose g 0 6= x∗1 (α∗ ) solves (A11). Since x∗1 (α∗ ) ∈ [θA1 , θB1 ] ∩ [θA2 , θB2 ] solves (A11)
and fA is strictly monotone on [θA1 , θB1 ] ∩ [θA2 , θB2 ], we must have g 0 ∈
/ [θA1 , θB1 ] ∩ [θA2 , θB2 ].
Next we show that it is not possible to have g 0 ∈ R+ \[θA2 , θB2 ] using the following lemma.

45

Lemma A9. Let Z = {0} × R+ . Suppose θA2 < θB2 . For any g1 ∈ R+ \ [θA2 , θB2 ], g̃(g1 ) =
∗
∗
∗
pA γA2
(g1 ) + pB γB2
(g1 ) satisfies g̃(g1 ) ∈ (θA2 , γB2
(g1 )) ⊆ [θA2 , θB2 ], VA (g1 ) < VA (g̃(g1 )) and

VB (g1 ) < VB (g̃(g1 )).
Proof. Fix g1 < θA2 . Note that κ∗i2 (g1 ) = 0 for all i ∈ {A, B} and all g1 ∈ R+ since Z =
∗
∗
{0}×R+ . From the proof of Proposition 4, if g1 < θA2 , then γA2
(g1 ) = θA2 and γB2
(g1 ) > θA2 .
∗
∗
We also have γB2
(g1 ) ≤ θB2 by Proposition 4 part 1. Hence g̃(g1 ) ∈ (θA2 , γB2
(g1 )) ⊆ [θA2 , θB2 ].
∗
Note that Vi (g1 ) = pA ui2 (θA2 ) + pB ui2 (γB2
(g1 )). Moreover, since g̃(g1 ) ∈ [θA2 , θB2 ], we
∗
have Vi (g̃(g1 )) = ui2 (g̃(g1 )) = ui2 (pA θA2 + pB γB2
(g1 )) by Proposition 4 part 2. By strict

concavity of ui2 , it follows that Vi (g1 ) < Vi (g̃(g1 )) for i ∈ {A, B}. When g1 > θB2 , the
argument is similar and omitted.



If g 0 ∈ R+ \ [θA2 , θB2 ] solves (A11) we have fi (g 0 ) = ui1 (g 0 ) + δVi (g 0 ) = fi (x∗1 (α∗ )) for all
i ∈ {A, B}. From Lemma A9, there exists g̃ 0 ∈ [θA2 , θB2 ] such that Vi (g 0 ) < Vi (g̃ 0 ) for all
i ∈ {A, B}. Since g̃ 0 ∈ [θA2 , θB2 ], Vi (g̃ 0 ) = ui2 (g̃ 0 ) by Proposition 4 part 2. Hence ui1 (g 0 ) +
δui2 (g̃ 0 ) > fi (x∗1 (α∗ )) for all i ∈ {A, B}. Furthermore, fi (x∗1 (α∗ )) = ui1 (x∗1 (α∗ )) + δui2 (x∗2 (α∗ ))
for all i ∈ {A, B} since x∗1 (α∗ ) = x∗2 (α∗ ) ∈ [θA2 , θB2 ]. Thus ui1 (g 0 ) + δui2 (g̃ 0 ) > ui1 (x∗1 (α∗ )) +
δui2 (x∗2 (α∗ )) for all i ∈ {A, B}, which violates dynamic Pareto efficiency of (x∗1 (α∗ ), x∗2 (α∗ ))
as it is Pareto dominated by (g 0 , g̃ 0 ). Hence, it is not possible to have g 0 ∈ R+ \ [θA2 , θB2 ].
Since g 0 ∈
/ [θA1 , θB1 ] ∩ [θA2 , θB2 ] and g 0 ∈
/ R+ \ [θA2 , θB2 ], it follows that if [θA2 , θB2 ] ⊆
[θA1 , θB1 ], then g0 = x∗1 (α∗ ) is the unique solution to (A11). If instead [θA1 , θB1 ] ⊆ [θA2 , θB2 ],
then we need to rule out g 0 ∈ [θA2 , θA1 ] ∪ [θB1 , θB2 ]. Note that fB (g0 ) = uB1 (g0 ) + δuB2 (g0 ) if
g0 ∈ [θA2 , θB1 ] by Proposition 4 part 2, which implies that fB (g0 ) is strictly increasing in g0
on [θA2 , θB1 ]. Since x∗1 (α∗ ) solves (A11), it is not possible to have g 0 ∈ [θA2 , θA1 ]. By a similar
argument, it is not possible to have g 0 ∈ [θB1 , θB2 ]. Thus, there is a unique solution to (A11)
if [θA1 , θB1 ] ⊆ [θA2 , θB2 ].

A3.3



Proof of Proposition 6

Denote gi∗ ∈ arg maxg1 ∈R+ fi (g1 ) for i ∈ {A, B} where fi is defined as in (A6). We first
show that gA∗ is unique and gA∗ ∈
/ [θA1 , θB1 ] when θA2 < θA1 < θB2 . The proof that gB∗ is
unique and gB∗ ∈
/ [θA1 , θB1 ] when θA2 < θB1 < θB2 is analogous and omitted.
46

Define Qk ⊂ R+ for k = 1, . . . , 5 as
Q1 = (0, max {0, 2θA2 − θB2 }),
Q2 = (max {0, 2θA2 − θB2 }, θA2 ),
Q3 = (θA2 , θB2 ),
Q4 = (θB2 , 2θB2 − θA2 ),
Q5 = (2θB2 − θA2 , ∞).
Note that Qk may be empty for some k. Recall Vi (g1 ) is player i’s continuation payoff when
mandatory spending in period 1 is g1 . We use the following result.
Lemma A10. Let Z = {0} × R+ . If uit (xt ) = −(|xt − θit |)r for all i ∈ {A, B} and for all
t where r > 1, then Vi00 (g1 ) exists and Vi00 (g1 ) ≤ 0 for all i ∈ {A, B} whenever g1 ∈ Qk for
some k = 1, . . . , 5.
Proof. First, by Proposition 4, the second period equilibrium strategies are
∗
γA2
(g1 ) = max {θA2 , min {g1 , 2θB2 − g1 }},
∗
γB2
(g1 ) = min {θB2 , max {g1 , 2θA2 − g1 }}.
∗
Second, note that γA2
(g1 ) is constant in g1 on Q1 ∪ Q2 ∪ Q5 , equal to g1 on Q3 and equal to
∗
(g1 ) is constant in g1 on Q1 ∪ Q4 ∪ Q5 , equal to 2θA2 − g1 on
2θB2 − g1 on Q4 . Similarly, γB2

Q2 and equal to g1 on Q3 . This implies



−pB u0i2 (2θA2 − g1 )



 0
Vi0 (g1 ) = ui2 (g1 )



−pA u0i2 (2θB2 − g1 )



0

if g1 ∈ Q2
if g1 ∈ Q3

(A12)

if g1 ∈ Q4
if g1 ∈ Q1 ∪ Q5 .

Thus Vi00 (g1 ) exists and, by strict concavity of ui2 , we have Vi00 (g1 ) ≤ 0 for all i ∈ {A, B} and
for all g1 ∈ Qk for k ∈ {1, . . . , 5}.



By Lemma A10, if Z = {0} × R+ and uit (xt ) = −(xt − θit )2 for all i ∈ {A, B} and all t,
then VA is continuously differentiable on R+ \ {2θA2 − θB2 , θA2 , θB2 , 2θB2 − θA2 }. Inspection
of (A12) shows that VA (g1 ) is increasing on [0, θA2 ]. Since fA (g1 ) = uA1 (g1 ) + δVA (g1 ) and
θA1 > θA2 , we have gA∗ > θA2 . Similarly, since fA is strictly decreasing on Q5 , it is not possible
47

to have gA∗ ∈ Q5 . From (A12) and θA2 < θB2 , we have
lim VA0 (g1 ) = u0A2 (θB2 ) < 0 < lim+ VA0 (g1 ) = −pA u0A2 (θB2 ),

−
g1 →θB2

g1 →θB2

lim

g1 →(2θB2 −θA2 )−

VA0 (g1 )

=0=

(A13)

lim

g1 →(2θB2 −θA2 )+

VA0 (g1 ).

This implies gA∗ ∈
/ {θB2 , 2θB2 − θA2 }. Thus gA∗ ∈ Q3 ∪ Q4 and fA0 (gA∗ ) = 0.
∗
∗
∗
∗
Suppose gA,k
satisfies fA0 (gA,k
) = 0 and gA,k
∈ Qk for k ∈ {3, 4}, then gA,3
=
∗
gA,4
=

θA1 +δθA2
1+δ

and

θA1 +δpA (2θB2 −θA2 )
.
1+δpA

∗
∗
Since θA2 < θA1 , we have gA,3
∈ (θA2 , θA1 ) and hence gA,3
∈ [θA2 , θB2 ]. We need to show
∗
that gA,4
does not maximize fA when θA2 < θA1 < θB2 . By Proposition 4 part 2 we can
∗
∗
and compare these values. We have
and gA,4
evaluate fA at gA,3
∗
δ
fA (gA,3
) = − 1+δ
(θA1 − θA2 )2 ,
∗
fA (gA,4
)

=

δpA
− 1+δp
(2θB2
A

(A14)
2

2

− θA1 − θA2 ) − δ(1 − pA )(θB2 − θA2 ) .

∗
∗
Using (A14), fA (gA,4
) < fA (gA,3
) is equivalent to


2
2
2
1
1
(θ
−
θ
)
<
p
A2
A 1+δpA (2θB2 − θA1 − θA2 ) + (1 − pA )(θB2 − θA2 ) .
1+δ A1

Note that for pA ∈ (0, 1) and δ ∈ (0, 1] we have

1
1+δ

<

1
1+δpA

(A15)

< 1. In addition by

θA2 < θA1 < θB2 we have (θA1 − θA2 )2 < (2θB2 − θA1 − θA2 )2 and (θA1 − θA2 )2 < (θB2 − θA2 )2 .
Thus the right side of (A15) is a weighted average of two values, each of which is strictly
∗
larger than the value on the left side. Hence gA,3
is the unique global maximum and is

statically Pareto inefficient.
The following lemma completes the proof.
Lemma A11. Let Z = {0} × R+ . If fi has a unique global maximum at gi∗ for some
i ∈ {A, B}, then there exists an open interval I containing gi∗ such that if g0 ∈ I, then
∗
γj1
(g0 ) ∈ I for all j ∈ {A, B}.
∗
Proof. Fix i ∈ {A, B}. Note that in any equilibrium σ ∗ , we have fi (γj1
(g0 )) ≥ fi (g0 ) for any

j ∈ {A, B} and any initial status quo g0 ∈ R+ since party i can always propose g0 when it is
the proposer and can always reject a proposal not equal to g0 when it is the responder.
Since gi∗ is the unique global maximum of fi and fi is continuous, there exists an open
48

interval I containing gi∗ such that if g0 ∈ I and ĝ0 ∈
/ I, then fi (g0 ) > fi (ĝ0 ). It follows that
if fi (g̃0 ) ≥ fi (g0 ) where g0 ∈ I, then g̃0 ∈ I.
∗
(g0 )) ≥ fi (g0 ), it
Consider g0 ∈ I. Suppose party i is the proposer in period 1. Since fi (γi1
∗
∗
(g0 )) ≥
(g0 ) ∈ I. Suppose party j 6= i is the proposer in period 1. Since fi (γj1
follows that γi1
∗
fi (g0 ), it follows that γj1
(g0 ) ∈ I.

A3.4



Efficiency with mandatory spending only

Proposition A1. Under a budgetary institution that allows only mandatory spending programs, any equilibrium σ ∗ is dynamically Pareto efficient for any initial status quo g0 ∈ R+ ,
if either of the following conditions holds:
1. θA2 = θB2 .
2. ui1 = ui2 for all i ∈ {A, B}.
∗
(g1 ) = θA2 for all i ∈ {A, B} and
Proof. Suppose first θA2 = θB2 . By Proposition 4 part 1, γi2

all g1 ∈ R+ . Thus, the equilibrium level of spending in period 2 is statically Pareto efficient
for any g0 . The continuation value of each party i ∈ {A, B} is thus Vi (g1 ) = ui2 (θA2 ) for all
g1 ∈ R+ . Given the initial status quo g0 , the problem of the proposing party i ∈ {A, B} in the
first period is max(0,g1 )∈Z ui1 (g1 )+δui2 (θA2 ) subject to uj1 (g1 )+δuj2 (θA2 ) ≥ uj1 (g0 )+δuj2 (θA2 ).
Since ui2 (θA2 ) and uj2 (θA2 ) are constants, this problem is equivalent to (SSP) with u =
uj1 (g0 ). Thus, the equilibrium level of spending in period 1 is also statically Pareto efficient
for any g0 . Therefore the equilibrium is dynamically Pareto efficient by Lemma A3.
Suppose now ui1 = ui2 for all i ∈ {A, B}. The following lemmas are useful.
Lemma A12. Suppose uit = uit0 for all i ∈ {A, B} and all t and t0 . An allocation x = {xt }Tt=1
is dynamically Pareto efficient if and only if xt0 = xt ∈ [θAt , θBt ] for all t and t0 .
Proof. Note that uit = uit0 for all i ∈ {A, B} and all t and t0 implies θit = θit0 for all i ∈ {A, B}
and all t and t0 .
We first prove the “only if” part. If x∗ = θ A , or x∗ = θ B , then the result follows
immediately. Suppose x∗ 6= θ A and x∗ 6= θ B . There are two cases to consider: (i) Suppose
49

θAt = θBt for some t. This implies θAt = θBt for all t. By Proposition 2 part 1, x∗t = θit for
all t, and hence x∗t = x∗t0 for all t and t0 . (ii) Suppose θAt 6= θBt for some t. This implies
θAt 6= θBt for all t. By Proposition 2 part 2, we have, for any t and t0 ,
u0At (x∗t )
u0At0 (x∗t0 )
=
.
u0Bt (x∗t )
u0Bt0 (x∗t0 )
u0 (x)

Since uit = uit0 for all i ∈ {A, B} and all t and t0 , and the solution to − u0At (x) = λ∗ is
Bt

∗

unique for any λ > 0 and t as shown in the proof of Lemma 1, it follows that x∗t0 = x∗t . By
Proposition 2 part 1, we have x∗t ∈ [θAt , θBt ].
We now prove the “if” part. As shown in the previous paragraph, any dynamically Pareto
efficient allocation x∗ satisfies x∗ = {x̃}Tt=1 for some x̃. Note that we can let ui = uit for any
P
P
i ∈ {A, B} and rewrite (DSP) as maxx∈R+ ui (x) Tt=1 δ t−1 subject to uj (x) Tt=1 δ t−1 ≥ U ,
which is equivalent to (SSP). By Proposition 1, if x̃ ∈ [θA1 , θB1 ], then x̃ solves (SSP) for
P

ū = uj (x̃). It follows that {x̃}Tt=1 solves (DSP) for U = uj (x̃) Tt=1 δ t−1 .
Lemma A13. Let Z = {0} × R+ . If ui1 = ui2 for all i ∈ {A, B}, then for any equilibrium
∗
(g0 ) = x∗2 (U ) where U = fj (g0 ).
σ ∗ and initial status quo g0 , we have γi1

Proof. When both positive and negative discretionary and mandatory spending are allowed,
∗
(g0 ) = x∗2 (U )
by the argument in the proof of Lemma 4, the period-1 proposal satisfies γi1

and κ∗i1 (g0 ) = x∗1 (U ) − x∗2 (U ) where U = fj (g0 ). Since ui1 = ui2 , by Lemma A12, any
(x∗1 (U ), x∗2 (U )) satisfies x∗1 (U ) = x∗2 (U ), which implies x∗1 (U ) − x∗2 (U ) = 0. Hence, when only
mandatory spending is allowed, which requires that κ∗i1 (g0 ) = 0, the equilibrium period-1
∗
proposal still satisfies γi1
(g0 ) = x∗2 (U ).



For notational convenience we omit U below. By Lemma A12, x∗1 = x∗2 ∈ [θA2 , θB2 ]. By
∗
Lemma A13, γi1
(g0 ) = x∗2 for all i ∈ {A, B} and any initial status quo g0 ∈ R+ . It follows that
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
γi1
(g0 ) ∈ [θA2 , θB2 ]. By Proposition 4 part 2, we have γA2
(γi1
(g0 )) = γB2
(γi1
(g0 )) = γi1
(g0 ).
∗

Hence, for any σ ∗ , we have xσ (g0 ) = (x∗1 , x∗2 ) with x∗1 = x∗2 ∈ [θA2 , θB2 ] for any g0 ∈ R+ . By
Lemma A12, any σ ∗ is dynamically Pareto efficient given g0 ∈ R+ .

50



A4
A4.1

State-contingent mandatory spending
Proof of Proposition 9

We prove part 1 by contradiction. Suppose x∗t 6= x∗t0 for some t 6= t0 . Then there exists
s ∈ S such that x∗t (s) 6= x∗t0 (s). Without loss of generality, assume x∗t (s) < x∗t0 (s).
From strict concavity of ui for all i ∈ {A, B}, we have αui (x∗t (s), s) + (1 − α)ui (x∗t0 (s), s) <
ui (αx∗t (s) + (1 − α)x∗t0 (s), s) for any α ∈ (0, 1). Let α =

δ t−1
δ t−1 +δ t0 −1

∈ (0, 1) and x0 = αx∗t (s) +

(1 − α)x∗t0 (s), we have
0

0

δ t−1 ui (x∗t (s), s) + δ t −1 ui (x∗t0 (s), s) < (δ t−1 + δ t −1 )ui (x0 , s)

(A16)

for all i ∈ {A, B}, which contradicts that x∗ is a solution to (DSP-S).
P
Next we prove part 2. Fix i, j ∈ {A, B} with i 6= j. For any U > Tt=1 δ t−1 Es [uj (θjs , s)],
P
(DSP-S) has no solution, so assume U ≤ Tt=1 δ t−1 Es [uj (θjs , s)].
P
For U = Tt=1 δ t−1 Es [uj (θjs , s)], the solution to (DSP-S) is x∗t (s) = θjs for all t and s ∈ S
P
and for any U ≤ Tt=1 δ t−1 Es [uj (θis , s)], the solution to (DSP-S) is x∗t (s) = θis for all t and
P
P
s ∈ S. What remains is the case when U ∈ ( Tt=1 δ t−1 Es [uj (θis , s)], Tt=1 δ t−1 Es [uj (θjs , s)]).
From the Lagrangian for (DSP-S), the first order necessary condition with respect to xt (s)
for any t and s ∈ S is δ t−1 u0i (x∗t (s), s) + λ∗ δ t−1 u0j (x∗t (s), s) = 0 for some λ∗ ∈ (0, ∞), which
u0 (x∗ (s),s)

simplifies to − u0i (xt∗ (s),s) = λ∗ .
j

A4.2



t

Proof of Proposition 10

Suppose the state in period 1 is s1 . Consider the following problem:
P
max
ui (x1 (s1 ), s1 ) + Tt=2 δ t−1 Es [ui (xt (s), s)]
{xt :S→R+ }T
t=1

s.t. uj (x1 (s1 ), s1 ) +

PT

t=2

δ

t−1

0

(DSP-S’)

Es [uj (xt (s), s)] ≥ U ,

0

for some U ∈ R, i, j ∈ {A, B} and i 6= j.
The difference between (DSP-S’) and (DSP-S) is that x1 (s) for s ∈ S \ {s1 } does not enter
(DSP-S’), so the solution to (DSP-S’) does not pin down x1 (s) for s ∈ S \ {s1 }.
Analogous to the proof of Proposition 7, consider the following alternative way of writing

51

the social planner’s problem:
max

B
T
{xA
t ,xt :S→R+ }t=1

ui (xi1 (s1 ), s1 ) +

s.t. uj (xi1 (s1 ), s1 ) +

T
X
t=2
T
X

B
δ t−1 Es [pA ui (xA
t (s), s) + pB ui (xt (s), s)]

(DSP-S”)
0

B
δ t−1 Es [pA uj (xA
t (s), s) + pB uj (xt (s), s)] ≥ U .

t=2
0

for some U ∈ R, i, j ∈ {A, B} and i 6= j.
Since uA and uB are strictly concave in x for all s, clearly any solution to (DSP-S”)
B
satisfies xA
t (s) = xt (s) for all t and s. So we can just consider (DSP-S’).

Lemma A14. If x is a solution to (DSP-S’), then for any t, t0 ≥ 2, xt = xt0 . Moreover,
x1 (s1 ) = xt (s1 ) for t ≥ 2.
The proof of Lemma A14 is immediate from the proof of Proposition 9. We then have
the following result.
Lemma A15. If x is a solution to (DSP-S) for some U , then it is a solution to (DSP-S’)
0

0

for some U . If x is a solution to (DSP-S’) for some U and it satisfies that x1 (s) = xt (s)
for t ≥ 2 and for all s, then x is a solution to (DSP-S) for some U .
Proof. Fix i, j ∈ {A, B} with i 6= j and s1 ∈ S and let p1 be the probability distribution of s in
period 1. First, note that x1 (s) for any s ∈ S\{s1 } does not enter either the objective function
or the constraint in (DSP-S’). Hence if x is a solution to (DSP-S) with U , then x is a solution
P
0
to (DSP-S’) with U = U +(1−p1 (s1 ))uj (x1 (s1 ), s1 )− s∈S\{s1 } p1 (s)uj (x1 (s), s). Second, note
that by Proposition 9, if x = {xt }Tt=1 is a solution to (DSP-S), then xt = xt0 for any t and t0 .
0

Hence, if x with x1 (s) = xt (s) for t ≥ 2 and for all s ∈ S solves (DSP-S’) with U , then x is a
P
0
solution to (DSP-S) with U = U − (1 − p1 (s1 ))uj (x1 (s1 ), s1 ) + s∈S\{s1 } p1 (s)uj (x1 (s), s). 
We prove Proposition 10 by establishing Lemmas A16 and A17 below. With slight abuse
of terminology, we call a spending rule g ∈ M dynamically Pareto efficient if {gt }Tt=1 with
gt = g for all t is a dynamically Pareto efficient allocation rule.
Lemma A16. For any t, if the status quo gt−1 is dynamically Pareto efficient, then γit (gt−1 , st ) =
gt−1 for all st ∈ S and all i ∈ {A, B}.
52

Proof. Suppose the state in period t is st . For any status quo gt−1 in period t, the proposer i’s
P
0
equilibrium continuation payoff is weakly higher than ui (gt−1 (st ), st )+ Tt0 =t+1 δ t −t Es [ui (gt−1 (s), s)]
and the responder j’s equilibrium continuation payoff is weakly higher than uj (gt−1 (st ), st ) +
PT
t0 −t
Es [uj (gt−1 (s), s)]. To see this, note that for any status quo in any period, a ret0 =t+1 δ
sponder accepts a proposal if it is the same as the status quo, implying that a proposer can
maintain the status quo by proposing it. Hence, proposer i can achieve the payoff above by
proposing to maintain the status quo in period t and in future periods continue to propose to
maintain the status quo if it is the proposer and rejects any proposal other than the status
quo if it is the responder. Similarly, responder j can achieve the payoff above by rejecting
any proposal other than the status quo in period t and in future periods continue to reject
any proposal other than the status quo if it is the responder and propose to maintain the
status quo if it is the proposer.
Consider proposer i’s problem in period t
max ui (gt (st ), st ) + δVit (gt ; σ ∗ )

gt ∈M

s.t. uj (gt (st ), st ) + δVjt (gt ; σ ∗ ) ≥ uj (gt−1 (st ), st ) + δVjt (gt−1 ; σ ∗ ),
where Vit (g; σ ∗ ) is the expected discounted utility of party i ∈ {A, B} in period t generated by
strategies σ ∗ when the status quo is g. As shown in the previous paragraph, uj (gt−1 (st ), st ) +
P
0
δVjt (gt−1 , σ ∗ ) ≥ uj (gt−1 (st ), st ) + Tt0 =t+1 δ t −t Es [uj (gt−1 (s), s))].
Suppose the solution to the proposer’s problem in period t is gt∗ 6= gt−1 . Then there exists
an allocation with xt = gt∗ and future allocations induced by status quo gt∗ and σ ∗ such that
P
0
party i’s dynamic payoff is higher than ui (gt−1 (st ), st ) + Tt0 =t+1 δ t −t Es [ui (gt−1 (s), s)] and
P
0
party j’s dynamic payoff is higher than uj (gt−1 (st ), st ) + Tt0 =t+1 δ t −t Es [uj (gt−1 (s), s))]. But
if gt−1 is dynamically Pareto efficient, then having allocation in all periods t0 ≥ t equal to
P
0
gt−1 is a solution to (DSP-S’) with U = uj (gt−1 (st ), st ) + Tt0 =t+1 δ t −t Es [uj (gt−1 (s), s))], a
contradiction.



Lemma A17. For any initial status quo g0 and any s1 ∈ S, the proposer makes a proposal in
period 1 that is dynamically Pareto efficient, that is, γi1 (g0 , s1 ) is dynamically Pareto efficient
for all i ∈ {A, B}.
53

Proof. Fix g0 and s1 . Let fj (g0 , s1 ) be the responder j’s status quo payoff. That is,
fj (g0 , s1 ) = uj (g0 (s1 ), s1 ) + δVj1 (g0 ; σ ∗ ).
0

0

0

0

Let U = fj (g0 , s1 ) and denote the solution to (DSP-S’) by x(U ) = (x1 (U ), . . . , xT (U )).
0

0

By Lemma A14, xt (U ) = xt0 (U ) for any t, t0 ≥ 2. Without loss of generality, suppose
0

0

0

0

x(U ) satisfies x1 (U ) = xt (U ) for t ≥ 2. Note that x1 (U ) is a dynamically Pareto efficient
allocation.
0

0

∗
∗
We next show that γi1
(g0 , s1 ) = x1 (U ). First note that if γi1
(g0 , s1 ) = x1 (U ), then, since
0

0

x1 (U ) is dynamically Pareto efficient, the induced equilibrium allocation is x(U ) by Lemma
0

∗
(g0 , s1 ) = x1 (U ) is the solution to the proposer’s
A16. We show by contradiction that γi1
0

∗
(g0 , s1 ) is strictly better than proposing x1 (U ),
problem. Suppose not. Then proposing γi1
∗
(g0 , s1 ) gives i a strictly higher dynamic payoff while giving j a dynamic
that is, proposing γi1
0

payoff at least as high as fj (g0 , s1 ). But since x(U ) is a solution to (DSP-S’) and hence a
solution to (DSP-S”), this is a contradiction.

54



