NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BUFFERING VOLATILITY:
A STUDY ON THE LIMITS OF GERMANY’S ENERGY REVOLUTION
Hans-Werner Sinn
Working Paper 22467
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22467

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2016, Revised June 2017

Lecture in honour of Cees Withagen, given at his farewell conference in Amsterdam, April 2016.
The research assistance provided by Wolfgang Meister along with Hans-Dieter Karl and
Christoph Zeiner is gratefully acknowledged. Helmut Alt, Ralph Schuster and Christoph
Weissbart kindly provided background data and information. The author is emeritus professor at
Ludwig-Maximilian University of Munich. He has no financial interests in the nuclear, fossil fuel
or green energy industries nor is he affiliated with a political party. He wishes to thank the editors
and three anonymous referees for their extremely useful advice. The paper is dedicated to
Wolfgang Meister who has served the ifo Institute for many years with commitment, precision
and care and who is now retiring. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Hans-Werner Sinn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Buffering Volatility: A Study on the Limits of Germany’s Energy Revolution
Hans-Werner Sinn
NBER Working Paper No. 22467
July 2016, Revised June 2017
JEL No. Q4
ABSTRACT
Squaring hourly demand and wind-solar production data for Germany and a number of
neighbouring countries with the results of the EU’s ESTORAGE project, this paper studies the
limits of Germany’s energy revolution in view of the volatility of wind and solar power. In
addition to pumped storage, it considers double-structure buffering, demand management,
Norwegian hydro-dam buffering and international diversification via grid expansion. If Germany
operated in autarchy and tried to handle the volatility of wind-solar production without using
stores while replacing all nuclear and fossil fuel in power production, on average 61%, and at the
margin 94%, of wind-solar production would have to be wasted, given the current level of other
renewables. To avoid any waste, the wind-solar market share in an autarchic solution must not be
expanded to more than 30%. By using Norway’s hydro plants the share could be expanded to
36%. If Norway were to build all the pumped-storage plants the ESTORAGE study deems
feasible, Germany’s wind-solar market share could be expanded by another 24 percentage points
to about 60%, which corresponds to 48% of the combined German and Norwegian markets.
Additionally expanding the market to Switzerland, Austria and Denmark and building the
maximal number of pumped stores would increase the combined wind-solar market share for all
five countries to nearly 50%.

Hans-Werner Sinn
Ifo Institute Leibniz Institute for Economic Research
at University of Munich
Poschingerstr. 5
81679 Munich
GERMANY
and NBER
sinn@ifo.de

1. Germany’s Energy Revolution
With its Energiewende Germany is planning a true energy revolution,1 dramatically boosting
the market share of wind and solar energy in the production of electric power, crowding out
fossil energy in general, and exiting nuclear energy. This paper studies the challenges posed
by this endeavour, focusing on the difficulties of coping with the enormous volatility of wind
and solar energy.
Arguably, the most prominent and promising strategies to buffer volatility involve
pumped-storage plants, demand management, double structures retaining conventional plants
as back-ups as well as grid expansion to other countries including Norway’s hydro plant
facilities. This paper discusses these options, squaring hourly production and consumption
data for Germany and a number of neighbouring countries with new data on the geological
and economic possibilities for the construction of pumped-storage stemming from the EU’s
ESTORAGE project. According to the EU Commission, pumped storage plants “offer a new
era of smarter energy management” that would help Europe to move to green energy and fight
climate change.2
Germany’s green energy revolution has been going on for two decades, but accelerated
substantially after the 2011 Fukushima accident, as Germany reacted with the decision to
abandon all of its 17 nuclear power stations, which at that time accounted for a good fifth of
the country’s production of electric power. By the end of 2015, nine nuclear plants were shut
down, with a phase-out of the remaining plants scheduled for 2022.
Germany also wants to phase out fossil fuel. In the Kyoto agreement the EU
committed to an 8% reduction (United Nations 1998) in CO2 emissions, and in the subsequent
EU negotiations it agreed to contribute by cutting its own emissions by 21% (European
Communities 2002) by 2012. Moreover, Germany announced that it will reduce its emissions
by a further 19 percentage points by 2020, so as to achieve an overall reduction of 40% versus
1990.3 Following the EU decisions, it intends to cut emissions by 80% by 2050.4
The double exit from nuclear and fossil energy is ambitious. The dimensions of this
task are illustrated in Figure 1, which offers an overview of Germany’s entire final energy
1

For discussions of the feasibility, see Nitsch et al. (2010), Klaus et al. (2010), and Sachverständigenrat für
Umweltfragen (2011). For a discussion of the economic aspects, see Edenhofer et al. (2013).
2
See DNV GL (2015) and European Commission (2016).
3
Bundesministerium für Umwelt, Naturschutz, Bau und Reaktorsicherheit (2014).
4
European Commission (2011).

3

structure by sources and final uses of energy in 2014 (which happens to be very similar to that
of the OECD as a whole).
Figure 1: Germany’s final energy production (2014, %)

Calculations based on: AG Energiebilanzen (2015, 2016), AG Energiebilanzen, Bruttostromerzeugung in
Deutschland nach Energieträgern, http://www.agenergiebilanzen.de/index.php?article_id=29&fileName=20160128_brd_stromerzeugung1990-2015.pdf.
Note: The percentages shown relate to Germany’s final energy production of 2450.2 TWh by source. Final
energy production is defined as aggregate production minus the energy sector’s own consumption.

The figure shows that in 2014, with a share in final energy production of 3.5%, wind
and solar power contributed about as much energy as the remaining nuclear power plants,
which accounted for 3.4%. Thus, a near doubling of Germany’s current wind and solar plants
compared to 2014 would make it possible to replace all of the country’s remaining nuclear
power plants, which seems like a feasible goal.5 This, however, would not yet constitute a
contribution towards curbing the emission of fossil fuels, which account for 84% of
Germany’s entire final energy production and result largely from the production of heat for
homes and for processing purposes, as well as from transportation. A full decarbonisation

5

See Kunz and Weigt (2014) who, in their ex-post evaluation of the nuclear phase-out, come to a similar
conclusion.

4

strategy, the discussion of which goes beyond the scope of this paper, would involve much
more than just producing more electricity from wind and solar energy.6
The reader should note in this context that the percentages mentioned refer to the
entire final energy production rather than electricity production alone, which represents only
one fifth of the total. Thus, while wind and solar power constitute 3.5% of the total final
energy production, they account for about 16% of electricity production, as mentioned above.
If we add the other green power sources shown in Figure 1, which account for nearly 11% of
electric power, green power boasts a share of 27.0% of total final electric energy production.
Other things equal, this share would rise to around 42% if all nuclear energy were to be
replaced with wind and solar energy.
After replacing nuclear power, Germany’s next logical endeavour would be to replace
electric power generation from coal, natural gas and other fossil sources such as oil products
and non-renewable fossil waste, which account for a combined 13% of total final energy
consumption, or 58% of Germany’s current electric power generation.
2. Smoothing Wind and Solar Power
Germany’s landscape has been transformed by wind and solar plants in recent years. In 2014,
a total of around 24,000 wind turbines were scattered across the country, predominantly in
northern Germany. These turbines are so frequent in the north that there is hardly any place in
nature where the blinking red warning lights of the generators, typically with an overall height
of 150 to 250 meters, cannot be seen on the horizon at night. Moreover, the roofs of private
dwellings all over Germany, primarily those of farm buildings, are often covered with solar
panels (while land space covered with such panels is rare, given that ground panels are no
longer permitted).
The policy tool with which Germany achieved this astounding conversion of its
landscape is feed-in tariffs. These tariffs are fixed prices for green electricity, guaranteed for
twenty years, combined with a priority right to deliver the power to the grid prior to
conventional power sources. Grid companies are forced to connect even the most remote wind
generators and solar panels free-of-charge.7 Instead of following the law of one price, the
German authorities have developed a complicated set of alternative prices differentiated by
calendar time of instalment and types of installation. The prices have come down over time.
6

For an extensive analysis of Germany’s options, see Hillebrandt et al. (2015).
According to Ferroni and Hopkirk (2016), the investment necessary to connect remote locations consume so
much energy that solar panels become energy sinks instead of serving as energy sources. Cf. also Trainer (2014).
7

5

In 2015, the prices for new installations were 8.90 cents per kWh for wind and 9.23 cents per
kWh for solar power.8 As a rule, the less efficient the appliances are, the higher are the prices,
so as to give all technologies a “fair” chance.9
While Germany’s achievements are impressive, there is a fundamental problem
relating to the volatility of wind and solar power. As promising as the aggregate statistics that
add and relate energy from different sources may be, they overlook the inherent quality
differences among these sources in terms of continuity and adjustability of supply.
Figure 2 shows hourly data on all German wind and solar electricity fed into the grid
in 2014. The highly volatile curves give the flow of produced electricity in terms of GW.
They have been trend-adjusted to eliminate the underlying growth in installed plants during
the year. On average, 24,256 wind power plants were installed, each with a production
capacity of 1,481 kW and 1.5 million solar power plants each with a production capacity of
26 kW.
Figure 2: Wind and solar power in Germany 2014 (hourly data)

Sources: Amprion, http://www.amprion.net/windenergieeinspeisung, Tennet,
http://www.tennettso.de/site/Transparenz/veroeffentlichungen/netzkennzahlen/tatsaechliche-und-prognostiziertewindenergieeinspeisung, Transnet BW, https://www.transnetbw.de/de/kennzahlen/erneuerbareenergien/windenergie?activeTab=table&app=wind, 50 Hertz,
http://www.50hertz.com/de/Kennzahlen/Windenergie/Hochrechnung, Bundesverband Windenergie,
https://www.wind-energie.de/infocenter/statistiken/deutschland/installierte-windenergieleistung-deutschland.
Amprion, http://www.amprion.net/photovoltaikeinspeisung, Tennet,
http://www.tennettso.de/site/Transparenz/veroeffentlichungen/netzkennzahlen/tatsaechliche-und-prognostizierte8

This was 5.74 or 6.07 cents higher, respectively, than the wholesale prices for electric power. See
Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Energie (2014), and European Energy Exchange AG (2016). Note,
however, that the wholesale prices themselves may have been depressed by the merit order effect resulting from
the zero marginal cost of wind-solar power, once the plants are installed. It is debatable how large this effect is.
After all, the wholesale price in France, for example, exceeded the German wholesale price by less than 0.05
cents per kWh. See European Energy Exchange AG (2016).
9

For a critical assessment of price differentiation in general, see, for example, Karp and Liu (2002).

6

solarenergieeinspeisung_land?lang=de_DE, Transnet BW,
https://www.transnetbw.de/de/kennzahlen/erneuerbare-energien/fotovoltaik, 50 Hertz,
http://www.50hertz.com/de/Kennzahlen/Photovoltaik/Hochrechnung, Bundesverband Solarwirtschaft,
https://www.solarwirtschaft.de/fileadmin/media/pdf/2016_3_BSW_Solar_Faktenblatt_Photovoltaik.pdf,
Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Energie, http://www.erneuerbareenergien.de/EE/Redaktion/DE/Downloads/zeitreihen-zur-entwicklung-der-erneuerbaren-energien-indeutschland-1990-2015.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=6.
Note: The data have been trend-adjusted to compensate for the slight growth in plant capacity over the year
without changing the average. In 2014, there were on average 24,256 wind power plants and about 1.5 million
solar power plants installed in Germany.

While the installed wind power production capacity was 35.92 GW, average
production was 5.85 GW, just 16.3% of capacity, and secured production which was available
in 99.5% of the hours, was 0.13 GW, or 4 per mille of capacity. At 37.34 GW, the installed
solar capacity was nearly the same as in the case of wind power. However, the average
production was only 3.7 GW, which is 9.9% of capacity, and, of course, secured production
was zero. On average, a wind power plant in Germany produced 241.4 kW, and a solar power
plant 2.55 kW.
In order to make green power usable despite its volatility, buffers are needed. The
following paragraphs first study a storage strategy, assuming ideal stores that can be filled and
emptied without friction. Later in this paper more realistic buffering strategies will be studied,
based on storage with frictions and double structures as well as international grid expansions.
What comes closest to ideal storage is pumped-storage plants (PSP), of which Germany
currently has 35. When there is an excess supply of energy, water is pumped from a lower
lake or river to an upper storage lake, and when additional energy is needed it is generated by
releasing water from the upper lake. On average, a German pumped-storage plant has a
volume of 1.077 GWh, and the total energy volume of all pumped-storage plants is 0.038
TWh. Unfortunately, Germany’s geological conditions do not allow for much more volume to
be built. According to the ESTORAGE project, just one big additional pumped-storage plant
with a volume of 0.007 TWh could reasonably be constructed in Germany in addition to its
present facilities, bringing Germany’s total storage volume to 0.045 TWh.10
Figure 3 shows the outcome of a thought experiment in which the actual, volatile
production of wind and solar energy is flowing into a store, while the steady outflow equals
the average inflow, i.e. the 5.85 GW or 3.7 GW, respectively, shown in Figure 2. The
assumption of a steady, non-volatile outflow is made here and in the next few pages to ensure
that wind and solar power is able to replace conventional base load power sources without
imposing additional buffering needs on them or other conventional sources, which would
10

See DNV GL (2015), p. 40.

7

reduce their degree of capacity utilization and profitability. The three curves shown in the
figure depict the volume of stored energy in terms of TWh at each point in time during the
year for wind power, for solar power and for the two weather-dependent power flows
together. By construction, the final volume by the end of the year is equal to the initial
volume, both being chosen such that the year’s minimum is zero. The highest points of the
curves give the storage volume necessary to smooth Germany’s respective wind, solar and
joint wind-solar power production in 2014.
Obviously the wind store is fullest at 9.96 TWh, equivalent to 9,243 pumped-storage
devices of the German variety, or 264 times the country’s actual pumped-storage volume. The
solar storage curve in turn peaks at a storage volume of 8.06 TWh or 7,486 pumped-storage
plants.
However, separate stores for wind and solar energy are not advisable as wind and solar
power are negatively correlated. While wind is strong in the winter, from December to March,
solar power reaches its peak in the summer months. The wind store is fullest in the second
half of March (22 March 2014), and the solar store has its maximum content in early October
(4 October 2014), about half a year later.
The hollow curve in Figure 3 shows the aggregate of the wind and solar storage
curves. It was calculated by adding the wind and solar storage volumes and abolishing
unnecessary storage space such that the storage volume would again be zero at the lowest
stock of energy stored, which is the case in early December. The highest storage volume,
which would be reached in the second half of August, gives the necessary storage size, at 6.89
TWh or 6,395 pumped-storage plants. It is remarkable that this required storage volume is not
only smaller than the sum of the separate required storage volumes, but is even smaller than
the storage requirement for each of the two power sources considered individually.11

11

Complementary information can be gained by taking a look at statistical data. While the variance of hourly
wind power production in 2014 was 2.95*1019 W2h2, the variance of the solar power production was 3.06*1019
W2h2, and the variance of wind and solar production together was 5.07*1019 W2h2. As the variance of the sum of
wind and solar power is less than the sum of the respective variances, the correlation between the variables is
negative. In fact, the correlation coefficient between wind and solar power is -0.16. It is worth noting, however,
that statistical information based on the sum of squared deviations from a mean is only a rather loose and indirect
indicator of storage needs, as the temporary variance in periods when the store is neither full nor empty is
irrelevant for the maximum storage need. As Figure 3 shows, the storage need for wind and solar power taken
together is less than the required storage volume for each of these power sources alone, despite the fact that the
combined variance is higher than each of the single variances.

8

Figure 3: Storage needs for wind and solar power, separately and jointly (German hourly data
2014)

3. Volatile Demand
The next step in the analysis involves taking the volatility of power consumption (the load)
into account. As a strategy of buffering wind and solar power implies huge storage needs,
there is some hope that recognition of volatile consumption may further lower storage
requirements. After all, it is often argued that green electricity may help to “break the
consumption peaks” in Germany, as sun power is positively correlated with consumption over
the course of the day. Figure 4 looks into this issue.
Figure 4: Wind and solar power (lower line) compared to aggregate gross power consumption
(upper line) (German hourly data 2014)

Source: European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity, https://www.entsoe.eu/dbquery/consumption/mhlv-a-specific-country-for-a-specific-month, as well as sources given for Figure 2.
Note: Trend-adjusted data for wind and solar production. The Euro Network consumption data refer to
consumption before distribution losses. They are not fully compatible with the AG Energiebilanzen data used in
Figure 1 and result in a slightly higher share of wind and solar energy (16.6% instead of the 16% mentioned
there). Cf. https://www.entsoe.eu/Documents/Publications/Statistics/20150531_MS_guidelines_public.pdf.

9

The figure shows the aggregate hourly electricity consumption gross of distribution
losses in addition to the hourly joint production of wind and solar energy. Obviously it is also
very volatile, even more volatile than the production of wind and solar power, but indeed the
series are positively correlated.12
Figure 5 informs about the storage need resulting from the attempt to smooth both
supply and demand in the German market. The hollow curve repeats the wind-solar storage
curve of Figure 3, the grey curve shows the storage curve for demand smoothing alone, and
the solid curve shows the storage curve for supply and demand taken together.
The thought experiment underlying the demand-storage curve is that volatile demand
is serviced from a store, which is replenished with a constant inflow equal to the average
outflow. By construction, this strategy implies that the store’s end-of-year energy stock is the
same as the stock at the beginning of the year. Again, the required storage volume is the
store’s maximum volume resulting from an initial level that empties the store for at least one
hour during the year. The calculations show that the lowest storage volume (zero) is reached
by 11 April and volume peaks on 20 October at 11.18 TWh or 10,379 pumped-storage plants
of the German variety.
Figure 5: Buffering wind power, solar power and power demand with storage devices (based
on German hourly data of 2014)

12

The correlation coefficient is +0.30.

10

By contrast, the thought experiment behind the (solid) curve, smoothing both supply
and demand, is that all conventional plants (including coal, gas, nuclear, biomass, hydro and
waste etc., see Figure 1) produce a constant flow of energy large enough to cover the average
annual difference between volatile consumption and volatile wind-solar production. This
constant flow from conventional plants is assumed to be equal to their actual average 2014
production, which stood at 48.00 GW. Otherwise, the calculations follow the same logic as
above. They show that the combined store is empty by mid-March and full in late August (25
August), which is nearly the date at which the store for smoothing wind and solar energy
alone would be full (24 August). The storage volume at the latter date, which is 11.29 TWh, is
the necessary storage volume. This volume is much higher than the volume that turned out to
be necessary to buffer solar and wind production (6.89 TWh), as was shown in Figure 3, but
only a little higher than the volume needed to smooth consumption alone, which is 11.18
TWh. Thus, the integration of wind and solar power at their current volumes into the German
grid would not actually require substantially more storage volume than smoothing demand
alone.
It is important to note, however, that this is just a snapshot result, as Germany plans to
rapidly expand its wind and solar power and build many more wind and solar plants in the
future. Given that all geographical regions that could possibly be distinguished by their
climate conditions have already been scattered with wind turbines and solar panels, it is
assumed that the power produced by the new plants will be perfectly correlated with the
power generated by the existing ones.13 Thus, an expansion of production will proportionally
expand the production curve shown in Figure 4, including its mean and standard deviation. As
illustrated by the two peaks above the point of maximum storage, a doubling and trebling of
Germany’s current wind and solar plants at identical locations would strongly increase the
storage needs way beyond the 2014 figures to 15.24 TWh and 22.10 TWh, respectively,
which would be equivalent to 14,153 and 20,517 pumped-storage plants of the average
German size. Trebling Germany’s current wind and solar production would imply that half
(49.80%) of its electric power supply was generated by wind and solar power.
To take this thought experiment to an extreme, let us assume that the wind-solar
market share is expanded to 100%, while no other power plants are available. In this case, a
storage capacity of 42.93 TWh or 39,854 pumped-storage plants of the average German size
would be needed. This is 1,139 times the country’s current pumped-storage volume. While
13

Indeed, as Ahlborn (2015) shows, the coefficient of variation of German wind power has not exhibited a
declining trend in recent years which would have indicated at least some degree of stochastic independence.

11

the average wind-solar production would be equal to Germany’s consumption, the capacity of
the respective plants would be about eight times the average consumption.
Sometimes the size of storage devices is described as a power flow measured in
gigawatts, rather than volume or stock measured in gigawatt hours. Indeed, the question is not
only how much energy can be stored, but also how quickly it can be released. Could pumpedstorage devices face an additional constraint in this respect?14 The answer is given by the
triangular slope measure in the right-hand region of Figure 5, which refers to the situation in
2014. The month with the steepest negative slope in the diagram is November. Here, the
store’s energy volume falls by 3.72 TWh in the month’s 720 hours, which implies a necessary
withdrawal power or production capacity of around 5.16 GW. As Germany’s existing 35
pumped-storage plants have a joint production capacity of 6.57 GW, this obviously would not
be a binding constraint. However, if all of the pumped stores were emptied simultaneously so
as to meet the 5.16 GW power demand, they would last for just 7 hours and 18 minutes. This
shows that only the volume, or “labour” to use the physical term, and not “power”, is a
binding constraint.
4. Demand Management
The public debate tends to focus on demand management and smart grids that would help
adjust electricity demand to volatile supply. Peak load pricing could help increase the
correlation between supply and demand so as to reduce storage requirements. Indeed, there is
a lot of potential flexibility on the demand side. Dishwashers and washing machines, as well
as tumble dryers, could be programmed to operate during periods of ample supply and at
correspondingly low prices. Refrigerators and freezers have a certain inertia and internal
storage potential, so they do not need a power connection all the time. Hot water boilers could
be heated with electric current when available and store the heat for a couple of days.
Similarly, brick houses with substantial temperature inertia could be heated and cooled at
times when cheap power is available. Pre-cooking meals and shifting power-consuming
activities also implies greater flexibility. Even industries could shift non-frequent, but power
consuming activities to times of high supply.
Unfortunately, however, closer inspection of Figure 5 reveals that the storage
requirement results from long-term seasonal fluctuations rather than short-term frequencies of
a few hours or days. It would be necessary to store energy from August to the winter months
14

For an analysis of the storage problem based on power needs, see Hack, Unz and Beckmann (2014).

12

through March, in other words for nearly 7 months, to address the volatility issue. Obviously,
the freezer would not keep cold for half a year. Neither would it be enough to heat a house at
intervals that are months apart, particularly not in summer when everything is warm anyway.
Storing dirty dishes and laundry for months before they would be washed is theoretically
possible, but that would require unreasonably large stocks of dishes and clothes.
To assess the extent to which demand management, which absorbs the high
frequencies, could possibly contribute to reducing storage space, the combined storage curve
of Figure 5 has been recalculated after smoothing the difference between consumption and
green (wind and solar) production with moving averages stretching over a day, a week or a
month. This thought experiment is extreme in that it assumes a complete demand
management within the time periods considered, adjusting demand perfectly to volatile windsolar supply, to a far greater extent than would ever be possible in reality. The results are
shown in Figure 6.
Figure 6: Absorbing high frequencies with demand management (hourly data Germany 2014)

Obviously, short-term demand management would hardly affect storage requirements.
While a storage capacity of 11.29 TWh would be necessary without demand management,
intra-day demand management would only reduce the storage requirement by 0.9% to 11.19
TWh, intra-week management by 5.9% to 10.62 TWh and intra-month management by 11.0%
to 10.05 TWh. Thus, instead of 10,478 ideal pumped-storage plants, 9,332 would be needed if
consumption were reallocated within a month so as to coincide with green production peaks.
This is still an enormous quantity compared to the 35 pumped-storage plants that exist in
Germany.
13

5. The Double-Structure Strategy
Given the difficulties related to storage strategies and the limited potential of demand
management, the reader may wonder how Germany manages to integrate its wind and solar
power into its power supply. After all, the fluctuations are already present and storage plants
have a miniscule volume relative to what would be needed. The answer is that Germany uses
its existing fossil fuel plants and a few hydro and bio-energy plants to cushion the shocks
resulting from inserting wind and solar energy into the grid (cf. Figure 1).15 In fact, the
difference between the consumption and production curves in Figure 4 is being offset
primarily by conventional production in Germany and to some extent by international trade, a
topic that will be dealt with later. When the wind blows and/or the sun is shining, substantial
shares of the energy production come from German wind and solar energy, while
conventional plants produce at a reduced pace or stand still. When there is no wind and
sunshine, by contrast, conventional plants are used to fill the energy gaps and produce as
much as they did before the wind and solar plants became available.
Gas power plants are most useful for buffering short-term fluctuations, but as these
plants produce rather expensive electricity, most of the buffering is done by hard coal power
plants. It is true that such plants cannot react as quickly as gas plants to fluctuating demands.
Intra-day fluctuations are very difficult to handle. However, as the production of these plants
can be doubled or cut in half within a few hours, and even a cold start does not take more than
a day or two, the degree of flexibility offered is enough to cover most of the seasonal needs
described in Figures 5 and 6. Thus coal and methane stores that are refilled from mines and
natural sites serve as principal buffers for German wind and solar energy.
To some extent even lignite plants and nuclear power plants are used to buffer
volatility. In the case of lignite plants, a couple of days are required for a cautious shut down
and re-start to avoid damage to the steam boilers. Moreover, while nuclear plants require days

15

Detailed calculations of the back-up power necessary to complement wind and solar energy in Germany can
be found in Wagner (2016), who extended the working paper version of this contribution to a greater number of
years and somewhat different topics. Wagner and Rachlew (2016) argue that wind and solar energy cannot
simply replace nuclear energy as is intended, but need additional gas-power plants to serve as buffers or backups. The importance of back-ups, moreover, is emphasized in the meta-study screening German and French
publications by Grand et al. (2016). Based on a complex model of the European energy market, Bertsch et al.
(2016) predict that, as wind and solar energy is expanded, market forces would automatically provide more gas
power plants, even without explicit pricing schemes awarding the flexibility such plants would offer. Hirth
(2015) argues that the need to hold back-up power in reserve may limit the optimal wind share to only 20%.

14

for a stop and a subsequent cold start, their output can be reduced to 50% within minutes, an
option which has been rarely used due to safety considerations.16
While the German buffering strategy works, it is expensive, as it involves double
structures with double fixed costs. On the one hand, it has undermined the profitability of
conventional power plants, as it reduced their running hours and hence capacity utilization.
This has not only made existing plants unprofitable,17 but has even threatened the existence of
huge power companies like Eon or RWE. On the other hand, the double-structure strategy has
strongly increased the price of electric energy in Germany. In the first half of 2016, German
electricity cost 29.69 cents per kWh for final household consumers, compared to merely 16.85
cents in France.18
The high cost of electric power partly results from the differing wholesale prices in
Germany and France, and partly from taxes and a feed-in surcharge for green energy. The
network companies have to pay the green producers the publicly-administered prices, but
when these prices exceed the wholesale price at the market, the excess is generally imposed as
a surcharge on consumers, with a few exceptions for energy-intensive firms. The feed-in
surcharge increased from 0.19 cent per kWh in 2000 to 6.35 cent in 2016, which was
equivalent to a total subsidy of 24 billion euros.19 To put this figure into perspective, this
represents about a hundred times the annual budget of government-financed Max-Planck
Institute in Greifswald which runs an experimental nuclear fusion reactor, the Stellerator.
While the German double-structure strategy aims at contributing to the solution of a
worldwide public-goods problem, it is uneconomical from a national point of view. The
reason is that, without taking ecological considerations into account, wind and solar plants
pay off if, and only if, their average cost is below the marginal cost of producing electricity
from fossil fuels. Given that conventional plants are needed as buffers, their fixed costs
cannot be spared. It is only their running hours, i.e., the marginal production costs including
16

F. Vahrenholt in a Lecture at the Bavarian Academy of Science, January 2012,

17

Bavaria has practically abandoned its gas power plant Irsching since April 2016, despite the fact that it is one
of the newest and most efficient facilities of its kind in Europe, because the prioritized feed-in of green power
has reduced its running hours below the profitability threshold. Hirth and Ziegenhagen (2015) report that
Germany reduced its back-up power by 15% in the period 2008-2014, while wind and solar power tripled, but
they attribute this observation to other reasons, including improvement in forecasting and intra-day trading.
18
Consumption between 2,500 kWh and 5,000 kWh per year. Eurostat, Database, Environment and energy,
Energy, Energy statistics – prices of natural gas and electricity, Energy statistics – natural gas and electricity
prices (from 2007 onwards), Electricity prices for domestic consumers – bi-annual data.
19

See Fraunhofer ISE (2014), Figure 1; Netztransparenz.de, Erneuerbare Energien Gesetz, EEG-Umlage; and
Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Energie (2016).

15

the direct energy cost that can be reduced by wind and solar power to the extent that this
power is available. In 2016, the marginal cost of producing electricity from lignite was about
0.6 cents per kWh, and 2 cents from hard coal. Adding 0.8 cents per kWh or 0.7 cents per
kWh, respectively, for the emission rights at 2015 average prices (7.5 euros per ton of CO2)
gives a marginal cost of 1.4 cents per kWh for lignite and 2.7 cents per kWh for hard coal.20
By contrast, the feed-in tariffs for electricity from new wind and solar plants, which are
presumably just large enough to cover the average cost, are about 9 cents per kWh, as
mentioned above. Thus, for the German strategy to be economical from a national point of
view, the average cost of wind and solar energy would have to fall by over two thirds.
Nevertheless, of course, a potential reduction in CO2 emissions and world-wide learning
effects might well justify the extra cost from a global perspective.
To date, black-outs have been avoided, as conventional plants are powerful enough to
provide enough electricity in dark and lull periods. Moreover, conventional plants have been
kept in place despite the reduction in running hours, as the fixed costs for existing plants were
sunk. However, problems may arise when the operating hours for conventional plants are
curtailed further in line with the planned expansion of wind and solar power, because it is
unclear whether it will be worthwhile to replace worn out old conventional plants with a
sufficient number of new ones. Germany has not yet introduced a pricing scheme that would
compensate the owners of traditional power plants, including gas-powered plants, for offering
their flexibility services. Under the current pricing regime, wind and solar power incur the
risk of destroying the business model for conventional plants, even though these plants are
indispensable back-ups for green energy.
Moreover, obvious limitations are exposed when the production peaks overshoot
consumption, given that conventional plants including hydroelectric power stations can, at
best, be driven down to zero output and are unable to absorb and store energy.
As Figure 4 above suggests, such a point had not been reached until 2014. Despite the
huge volatility in production and demand, German power demand exceeded wind and solar
power production in each and every hour of 2014.21 Nevertheless, there were obviously times
in March, April and August when the upward production peaks came close to downward
demand peaks.

20

Own calculations based on Dena, German Energy Agency (2016) and Statistik der Kohlenwirtschaft e. V.
(2016).
21
In higher resolution data, however, overshooting spikes may have occurred.

16

6. Double Structure cum Storage
This section discusses the efficiency of the double-structure buffering strategy should the
production of wind and solar energy be gradually expanded in Germany such that production
peaks exceed power consumption. As conventional plants face a non-negativity constraint, the
overshooting peaks will either have to be wasted, buffered by stores or absorbed by other
countries curtailing their production. This section abstracts from the last possibility and
explores the problems involved with a national solution. The subsequent sections deal with
the buffering roles of neighbouring countries.
In a first step, it is assumed that Germany buffers as much of the volatility as possible
by adjusting the production of conventional plants inversely to wind and solar power and
wastes the overshooting production spikes. In a second step it is assumed that the
overshooting spikes are stored and released at times of excess demand.
Figure 7 shows the result of doubling wind and solar power relative to 2014, bringing
the share of this energy up to 33% of aggregate output. While 2014 is only one example of the
seasonal volatility of demand and supply, it does not seem to be an outlier.22 As explained
above, it is assumed in the calculations that the output of new plants is perfectly correlated
with that of existing plants as no new locations can be found.
Figure 7: Doubling German production of wind and solar energy relative to 2014 (hourly
data)

As shown in the figure, doubling the wind-solar output means that some of the
production spikes would overshoot consumption demand. Thus, even if the conventional
plants were perfectly flexible, Germany would already have reached the limits of its double22

Analyses of previous years already conducted by the author did not generate qualitatively different results as
the year 2014 was not characterized by unusual weather conditions.

17

structure buffering strategy, unless the volatility in its energy supply could be buffered by
stores or other countries or some of the output is wasted.23 Let us recall that the 33% output
share reached by doubling wind and solar power would only generate enough additional
energy to enable Germany to decommission all of its remaining nuclear plants. Thus, only
higher percentages of wind and solar power would make it possible to crowd out fossil fuel in
Germany.
While the volume of the overshooting spikes shown in Figure 7 is small, only 0.4% of
the annual wind and solar production, it would grow progressively with further increases in
the production of wind and solar energy, as is shown in Figure 8. The figure shows two curves
that relate the market share of wind and solar energy as measured on the abscissa with the
“double-structure efficiency” measured on the ordinate. The left curve is without storage, the
right one with ideal, frictionless storage. Double-structure efficiency is defined as the fraction
of wind and solar power that does not exceed demand, and hence does not have to be wasted
even if no storage device is available.
Consider first the left, downward-bending curve without storage. The curve indicates
strongly declining average returns to wind and solar production if Germany only resorts to
double-structure buffering. Obviously, efficiency stays close to 100% for wind-solar market
shares of up to about 30%, but dwindles progressively towards zero as the market share
approaches 100%.24 Thus, for market shares that go beyond just replacing Germany’s
remaining nuclear plants and help reduce CO2 emissions, energy storage becomes useful, if
not indispensable.
It is worth recalling that, as mentioned in Section 1, the share of other green energy
sources, i.e. biomass, hydropower and waste, in the power market is 11%. Thus, given the
share of these other sources, a wind-solar market share of 89% would be equivalent to a
situation where 100% of the electric power stems from renewable sources.25 This is indicated
by the grey area in the diagram.
The downward bending curve shows that a market share of 50% is associated with an
efficiency of 94%, a market share of 70% is associated with an efficiency of 73% and a
23

Schill (2014) studies the implications of alternative must-run production levels for conventional plants,
showing that the surplus waste is an increasing function of the must-run level.
24
This confirms the finding of Huber et al. (2014), based on theoretical wind-solar feed-in data derived from a
meteorological model, that beyond a wind-solar market share of 30% flexibility requirements increase strongly.
25
Wagner (2014a) finds that Germanys wasted surplus would be sufficient, if properly smoothed, to service
Polish power demand. In another paper Wagner (2014b) argues that Europe’s surplus energy with a 100%
renewables share would be enough to service both Poland and Germany.

18

market share of 89% with an average efficiency of just 39%, implying that 61% of the
produced wind and solar energy would be lost, if no stores were available.
Figure 8: Efficiency losses from buffering with conventional plants and wasting overshooting
production spikes (German hourly data, 2014)

Legend: The diagram shows the average efficiency of wind and solar energy resulting from the double-structure
strategy as a function of the market share of wind and solar energy in aggregate German power consumption.
While the left-hand curve is based on the assumption that the surplus energy resulting from overshooting spikes
is wasted, it is assumed for the right-hand curve that the surplus energy is smoothed via perfect stores and
supplied to the grid, increasing the share of wind and solar power in total power consumption associated with
any given level of double-structure efficiency. The percentages above and directly below the curves give the
respective shares of wind and solar energy as a percentage of total power consumption. The bold percentage
figures below the left-hand curve give the respective efficiency of the double-structure strategy without storage
aid.

It is worth noting that the downward-bending curve refers to average efficiency of
wind and solar production. As the curve is falling, marginal efficiency must be even lower
than average efficiency. Thus, for example, only 58% of the additional wind-solar energy that
would be necessary to increase the market share from 50% to 60% would be usable without
storage. Similarly, the step from 60% to 70% involves a marginal efficiency of 39%, the step
from 70% to 80% one of 23% and the step from 80% to 89% represents a marginal efficiency
of only 10%. Directly at the 89% level, where all electricity stems from renewables, the
marginal efficiency is just 6%; i.e. 94% of the last bit of wind-solar energy produced to
perfectly crowd out nuclear and fossil fuel and close the gap to the current level of power
from hydro dams, waste and biomass will be lost.26
Let us now turn to storage, whose potential in the ideal case without storage frictions
is represented by the right-hand curve. Storage increases the market share of wind and solar
power for any given set of plants and hence for any given level of double-structure efficiency
26

The step from 90% to 95% would involve a marginal efficiency of 3%, and the step from 95% to 99% one of 7
per mille, but, as explained, this is irrelevant territory in the German case.

19

measured at the ordinate. It thus shifts the market-share curve to the right. The respective
curve shows the case of ideal friction-less storage where all the surplus energy can be used.
With ideal storage, a market share of 89% could be reached with plants that, in the case of
wasting the surplus, would only have implied a market share of 68%. In the more realistic
case of frictions, which is depicted in Table 1, a somewhat higher figure emerges, as will be
explained below.
The storage volume required for alternative levels of wind-solar production is shown
in Table 1. It is calculated on the assumption that all surplus power is channelled into stores,
and subsequently released as quickly as possible by satisfying any excess of demand over
wind-solar production (the excess load) when it occurs, displacing the corresponding amount
of conventional power. Emptying the stores as quickly as possible at times of insufficient
solar and wind is a useful way of gaining free storage space for new overshooting spikes and
minimizing the storage space required. As an identical repetition of the consumption and
production pattern from year to year is assumed, the storage volume at the beginning of the
year is set equal to the volume at the end of the year, while the calculation of minimal storage
space again implies that the store is empty for at least one hour per year. As much buffering as
possible is done by reducing conventional production – the double structure strategy – and as
little as possible by storage.27 It is assumed that storage involves a round-trip efficiency of
75% (81% input, 92.6% output).
The main column (1) of Table 1 shows the alternative market shares of wind and solar
energy and the associated degrees of efficiency of the German double-structure strategy
without stores, i.e. basically the information contained in the downward-bending curve of
Figure 8. The main column (2) refers to the case of pumped storage with friction losses. Its
sub-columns show the respective i) wind-solar market share (including the remittances from
the stores), ii) degree of overall efficiency with storage and iii) required storage volume. Each
line in the table shows one particular multiple of the wind and solar devices installed in
Germany in 2014.

27

This assumption distinguishes the buffering strategy from other assumptions made in the literature. See, for
example, Heide et al. (2010, 2011) who, in their forecast model based on European weather data, assume that the
store absorbs all variation from overshooting and undershooting spikes alike, while 100% of the power produced
and consumed comes from wind and solar energy. In their approach, expanding wind and solar energy further
reduces the required storage because the storage need results from filling the wind-solar production deficits with
overshooting production, while the overshooting energy production not needed for that purpose is wasted. Huber
and Weissbart (2015) have applied this approach to China, assuming more limited contributions by wind and
solar power.

20

Table 1: Efficiency of alternative double-structure-cum-storage strategies (German hourly
data, 2014)

* Pumped-storage “round-trip” efficiency of 75%, composed of 81% input efficiency (electric power to lake
store) and 92.6% output efficiency (lake store to electric power).

The first line of the table shows Germany’s status quo in the year 2014 where the
wind-solar market share is 16.6% and there are no overshooting spikes. The second and third
lines refer to the cases where Germany respectively uses its current 0.038 TWh pumpedstorage volume or extends it to 0.045 TWh, which is the maximum the EU’s ESTORAGE
project deems feasible. .28 They show, unsurprisingly, that these tiny pumped-storage volumes
contribute very little. Even with the extension to 0.045 TWh, Germany could achieve windsolar market shares of not more than 29.7% without wasting surplus energy. While this is
nearly double the volume of 2014, it would not yet mean that all nuclear plants are replaced.
So the contribution to mitigating the climate problem would be zero.
The subsequent lines refer to the theoretical cases of higher market shares, which
might be reached with or without the help of more pumped-storage plants. Suppose Germany
wanted to achieve a wind-solar market share of 50%. Without the help of stores and by
wasting the overshooting spikes, it would achieve an efficiency of 93.8%, implying that 6.2%
of production would be lost.29 Alternatively, that same market share could be reached by
installing a pumped-storage volume of 2.1 TWh, which increases the overall efficiency to
98.7% and makes it therefore possible to use fewer wind-solar plants. This storage volume is
28

See DNV GL (2015), p. 40.
On the basis of meteorologically modeled feed-in data for wind and solar energy in Texas, Denhom and Hand
(2011) find that a market share of 50% can be reached at an efficiency of 90%. This is a similar order of
magnitude as reported in Table 1. Recall, however, that marginal efficiency for going beyond 50% to 60% would
be only 58%.
29

21

less than one tenth of the 22.1 TWh that in Figure 5 was shown to be necessary (with ideal
stores) in the absence of double-structure buffering.30 It is still, however, around 55 times
Germany’s current pumped-storage capacity; or 47 times the volume that would be available
after the EU’s ESTORAGE program were realized.
Let us now return to the case where a wind-solar market share of 89% is reached that
would just fill the gap left after deducting the 11% resulting from hydro power, waste and
biomass. As was mentioned above, without storage this market share would result in an
efficiency of 39.3%, implying a waste of 60.7% of wind-solar production (last line of column
(1)). On the other hand, by installing pumped-stores (with frictions) with a volume of 16.3
TWh – 362 times the volume the ESTORAGE project considers feasible for Germany – it
would be possible to boost the efficiency to 93.3% so that the 100% renewables case could be
reached with a production level that, without the stores, would merely have resulted in a
wind-solar share of 69.8%.
7. Norwegian Hydro Lakes
If Germany cannot solve its volatility problems in autarchy, other countries may help out by
offering buffering services. Currently, there are severe obstacles to this option, as is shown by
the frequent occurrence of negative prices for electric energy in Germany and the installation
of phase shifter transformers by neighbouring countries that block the international flow of
electric power.31 However, there is significantly more potential in the future once the national
grids are better connected and appropriate pricing schemes for offering buffering services are
developed.32 Improving the connections with Norway seems a particularly promising option,

30

In the first version of this paper, another storage strategy was used in that the overshooting spikes were stored
while the store was reduced by way of withdrawing a steady flow, perhaps for sales in other countries, while the
undershooting spikes were buffered with conventional sources. For a market share of 50%, it resulted in a
required ideal, friction-less storage volume of 3.5 TWh. See Sinn (2016, July version of this paper).
31
In 2014 German exports net of imports on average accounted for 6.6% of final German energy consumption.
Exports alone stood at 14.5% and imports at 7.9% (see Arbeitsgemeinschaft Energiebilanzen e. V.,
Auswertungstabellen zur Energiebilanz Deutschland 1990 bis 2015). Between December 2012 and December
2013, the German energy market had 97 hours with negative spot prices with an average price per kWh of – 4.1
cent as foreign grids struggled to absorb Germany’s wind-solar production spikes. Poland and the Czech
Republic have installed phase shifter transformers to prevent German energy deliveries to Austria flowing via
their grids. Austria, in turn, has resisted improving interconnector capacity with Germany to ward off the
transmission of German power, because it wants to force German power companies to buy the power on the
Austrian spot market that they have promised in forward contracts, but cannot deliver due to transmission
bottlenecks. This has caused political irritations between Austria and Germany, prompting the European
regulation agency ACER to propose a separation of the previously joint power markets. Cf. Mihm and Geinitz
(2016). Theoretical studies explaining the negative prices include Nicolosi (2011) and Götz, Henkel, Lenck and
Lenz (2014).
32
Cf. Auer and Haas (2016).

22

as the country has huge hydro dams and also offers many potential locations for further
pumped-storage sites.
Hydro plants provide Norway with nearly all of the electric power the country needs,
but they may also serve as buffers for German volatility. When the wind in Germany blows
and the sun shines, Norway could reduce the outflow from its reservoirs and use German
power to service its consumers instead of using its own power. Conversely, in windless, dark
periods it could release more water from its hydro lakes to produce excess energy for exports
to Germany. Indeed, with a storage capacity of 84 TWh, Norway’s hydro dams are huge,
theoretically large enough to cover Germany’s storage needs even if the country abstains from
using its double-structure buffering strategy (see Sections 2 and 3).33 For example, as was
shown in Figure 5, a trebling of the German wind and solar production, which would bring
the wind-solar market share to nearly 50%, would result in a required ideal storage volume of
“only” 22.1 TWh.
It is true that despite the huge Norwegian storage volume, there may be the problem
that the dams are already full when German wind and solar energy arrives, and that bringing
the turbines to a standstill would mean that some of the water flowing in from Norwegian
rivers cannot be stored. Thus, in principle, there could be a stock constraint despite the
enormous storage volume of the hydro dams. Fortunately, however, Norwegian supply and
German demand are positively correlated. As is shown in Figures 5 and 6, Germany would
need most of the stored energy from November through March, because this is when the
stores empty quickly, but this happens to be when Norwegian dams are rather full, as most of
the rain in Norway falls from September to December.34 Conversely, there would be German
excess energy available for filling the dams from April to August. Thus, the problem of
insufficient free storage space does not seem to be serious.
There are, however, three other, potentially more problematic constraints related to
the“Norwegian solution” that also need to be taken into account:
(1) The transmission constraint
The capacity of deep-sea cables between Germany and Norway might be insufficient.
(2) The power constraint
The country’s power turbines might not have enough power in dark, windless periods when
both Norwegian consumption and the re-export of power to Germany need to be serviced.
33
34

Sachverständigenrat für Umweltfragen (2011, p. 157).
See wetter.de, Klima für Norwegen, http://www.wetter.de/klima/europa/norwegen-c47.html.

23

(3) The non-negativity constraint
As hydro plants cannot go in reverse mode, pumping lake water upstream, Norway would
have to absorb the German power by stopping the turbines, servicing its own consumption
with the import from Germany and accumulating the river energy not needed in the dams.
However, Norway’s own consumption may be too small to absorb all the power coming in.
To help assess the importance of these constraints, Figure 9 shows the Norwegian
power demand as well as the net delivery of power from Germany that would be necessary to
absorb the volatility resulting from a 53% wind and solar market share in Germany, assuming
that Germany gives up its double-structure strategy and has its conventional plants run at
constant speed. This is the case where in autarchy double structure buffering and wasting the
overshooting spikes would generate a wind-solar market share of 50%. (See Figure 8 and
Table 1.) The purpose of this figure is not yet to discuss a viable solution but to demonstrate
the challenges and roles of the three constraints in a thought experiment where the two
markets, and only these markets, are combined to a common “copper plate”. The case of a
broader market incorporating more countries will be considered in the following section. As
in Figure 5, the German volatility results from proportionally scaling up the country’s 2014
hourly wind and solar power production, while the hourly demand pattern stays unchanged.
The (positive and negative) net delivery to Norway is the algebraic difference between
German demand and German wind-solar supply. While Norway imports the energy from
Germany and re-exports it as needed, it is assumed that its average annual power generation
remains constant.
Figure 9: Norwegian power demand and hypothetical German net export of power to Norway
when conventional German plants generate a constant power flow and wind-solar energy has
a 53% market share in Germany (hourly data 2014)

24

Source: For Germany, see Figure 2. For Norway, European Network of Transmission System Operators for
Electricity, https://www.entsoe.eu/db-query/consumption/mhlv-a-specific-country-for-a-specific-month.
Note: This graph shows a hypothetical scenario to demonstrate the role of the power and non-negativity
constraints. It is assumed that conventional German plants generate a constant power flow and that the volatility
resulting from wind and solar power as well as from German demand would have to be fully buffered by
Norway. The more volatile curve shows the hourly net delivery of German power to Norway and the other curve
shows Norwegian hourly power demand.

Let us first consider the transmission constraint (1). As the graph shows, the power
spikes that would have to be transmitted through the deep-sea cables to Norway often lie in
the range of about 80 GW and peak at about 90 GW, while the retransmission from Norway
to Germany would be a bit smoother, peaking at around 50 GW. These are huge numbers
relative to the transmission capacity currently available. In 2011 the transmission capacity
was 1.5 GW, while an expansion to 4.3 GW was planned.35 In September 2016 the
construction works for the NordLink cable with a capacity of 1.4 GW started, which is
scheduled to become available in 2020.36 Thus the transmission capacity would have to be
increased by a factor of about 60 relative to today and 20 relative to what has been planned.
Consider next the power constraint (2). The graph shows that Norwegian demand
peaks in mid-January at 23.0 GW. This is below, but close to the nominal production capacity
of Norwegian plants, which stands at 29 GW.37 Obviously, this capacity would be insufficient
to produce enough energy to service both Norwegian demand and the return delivery of
energy to Germany in dark and windless periods. The curve depicting German net delivery to
Norway has negative peaks of nearly –50 GW from November to January, while Norwegian
demand often peaks close to the 23 GW mentioned above in similar periods of the year. Thus,
the capacity of Norway’s turbines would have to increase by over 2 ½ fold to accommodate
the needs.
Let us finally turn to the non-negativity constraint (3). Figure 9 shows that imports
from Germany would have huge spikes of up to 90 GW (early May), overshooting Norwegian
consumption more than sevenfold, by up to 78 GW. These overshooting spikes cannot be
stored by simply stopping Norway’s own production, as the hydro plants cannot be used to
pump water upstream.

35

See Sachverständigenrat für Umweltfragen (2011).
See
http://www.ndr.de/nachrichten/schleswig-holstein/Spatenstich-fuer-XXL-Stromtrasse-nachNorwegen,nordlink130.html
37
See International Hydropower Association, 2015 Key Trends in Hydropower, p. 2,
https://www.hydropower.org/sites/default/files/publicationsdocs/IHA%202015%20Key%20Trends%20in%20Hydropower.pdf.
36

25

This is obviously a very serious constraint, because Norway has hardly any pumpedstorage plants. The few devices that do exist are not used for energy storage, but to prevent
upper lakes from drying out in periods with too little rain and tilting ecologically.38
Solving the problem by investing in new plants is not easy, as geological conditions
often do not allow for the complementation of an existing hydro lake with a second
downstream lake from which the water could be pumped back upstream. It is true that hydro
power lakes sometimes empty into fjords, which could then serve as the “second lake” from
which water can be pumped back. Fjord water could also be pumped uphill into artificial
basins yet to be built. However, such strategies involve high ecological risks and are therefore
not seen as viable options in Europe.39 Nevertheless, Norway does offer significant pumpedstorage potentials.
Currently, the pumped-storages plants of Western Europe including Switzerland and
Norway have at most 327 GWh of storage volume.40 According to the ESTORAGE project,
which looked for economic solutions by combining existing lakes with pipes and flexible
pumped-storage turbines, another 2.291 TWh of pumped-storage volume could reasonably be
built to achieve a total storage volume of up to 2.618 TWh in Western Europe.41 The
expansion would constitute an eightfold increase in the current pumped-storage volume
available in Western Europe. Of this increase, 59% or 1.356 TWh could be built in Norway
alone.42 It would be equivalent to 1,259 plants of the current German variety, although much
bigger plants are planned in Norway.
This is a sizeable number, but it would nevertheless be small compared to the number
of plants that would be required if hydro lakes and pumped-storage lakes were to buffer
Germany’s volatility without resorting to the double structure strategy. To buffer the
overshooting spikes shown in Figure 9, which would result from a 53% wind and solar market
share in Germany and remain after maximal hydro-dam buffering in Norway, and to allow
Germany’s conventional plants to produce a constant flow of output, an ideal pumped-storage
38

In 2014 Norway’s pumped stores generated an accumulated annual gross flow of 780 GWh. This is a tiny
number, which should not be confused with information about the storage volume even though it is expressed in
terms of GWh. 780 GWh is 12% of Germany’s 5,857 GWh which were produced from a storage volume of just
38 GWh. See Eurostat, Database Environment and Energy, Energy, Energy statistics – quantities, annual data,
Energy statistics – Supply, transformation and consumption, Supply, transformation and consumption of
electricity – annual data.
39
There is, however, a sea-water pumped-storage plant in Okinawa, Japan. See Hiratsuka, Arai and Yoshimura
(1993).
40
See European Commission (2016).
41
See DNV GL (2015), p. 10, and European Commission (2016).
42
DNV GL (2015), p. 40 and p. 43. The study shows that five percentage points or 114 GWh of the feasible
storage volume would be located in very distant regions in northern Norway.

26

capacity of 8.2 TWh would be needed in the scenario without frictions, and 6.64 TWh in the
realistic case with frictions. This is much less than the German pumped-storage requirements
mentioned in Figure 5, because the Norwegian hydro dams would absorb most of the
volatility. Nevertheless, it would still be nearly five times the maximum considered feasible in
Norway and Germany together (1.401 TWh) by the ESTORAGE project.43
8. Double Structures, Hydro Dams and Extended Copper Plates
In view of the limited potential of a pure hydro-dam buffering strategy, this section
investigates a more balanced strategy that combines hydro-dam buffering with ordinary
double-structure buffering of the German kind, while exploiting potential diversification gains
for power demand, as well as for wind and solar output, by combining alternative countries in
a common “copper plate”.44 Firstly, a common market including Germany and Norway is
modelled; and subsequently, in a second step, Switzerland, Austria and Denmark, three
neighbouring countries with significant shares of green production facilities, are added to the
copper plate. The trade links of the five countries are thereby fully taken into account.
The calculations aim to assess the pumped-storage volume needed for alternative
wind-solar market shares in Germany and in the respective combined market, if energy wastes
are to be avoided. They are slightly too optimistic, as not all data on volatile energy sources
are available. While hourly data on power demand have been published for all five countries,
hourly data for wind power are only available for Germany, Denmark and Austria, and for
solar power in the cases of Germany and Denmark.45 It seems, however, that the data not
published on an hourly basis refer to negligible quantities.46
43

This is the sum of the existing German volume of 0.038 TWh and the new volume of 1.356 TWh for Norway
and 0.007 TWh for Germany that the ESTORAGE project considers feasible. See DNV GL (2015), p. 40.
44
For studies concentrating on the design of European and national power lines and grid extensions to buffer the
volatility see, for example, Spiecker and Weber (2012), Weigt et al. (2010), Neuhoff et al. (2013), Hagspiel et
al. (2014) and Hirth and Ziegenhagen (2015). For a study focusing on the USA, see Heal (2016).
45

The data are taken from: Amprion, http://www.amprion.net/windenergieeinspeisung, and
http://www.amprion.net/photovoltaikeinspeisung;
Tennet,
http://www.tennettso.de/site/Transparenz/
veroeffentlichungen/netzkennzahlen/tatsaechliche-und-prognostizierte-windenergieeinspeisung,
and
http://www.tennettso.de/site/Transparenz/veroeffentlichungen/netzkennzahlen/tatsaechliche-und-prognostiziertesolarenergieeinspeisung_land?lang=de_DE;
Transnet
BW,
https://www.transnetbw.de/de/transparenz/
marktdaten/kennzahlen; 50 Hertz, http://www.50hertz.com/de/Kennzahlen/Windenergie/Hochrechnung, and
http://www.50hertz.com/de/Kennzahlen/Photovoltaik/Hochrechnung; Austrian Power Grid, https://www.apg.
at/de/markt/Markttransparenz/erzeugung/Erzeugung%20pro%20Typ;
Energinet DK, http://www.energinet.
dk/en/el/engrosmarked/udtraek-af-markedsdata/Sider/default.aspx; European Network of Transmission System
Operators for Electricity, https://www.entsoe.eu/db-query/consumption/mhlv-a-specific-country-for-a-specificmonth.
46
E.g. wind power is only 1.6% of power production in Norway and 0.2% in Switzerland, and solar power
accounts for 0.0% in Norway and Switzerland. See European Network of Transmission System Operators for

27

It is assumed that as much of the volatility stemming from wind and solar energy as
possible is buffered by both conventional plants and hydro dams both facing non-negativity
constraints; and that pumped-storage plants are only used for buffering the production spikes,
if any, that overshoot combined international demand. The method used for calculating the
minimal storage volume is the same as in Section 6. While pumped storage involves the same
frictions as assumed above (see Footnote, Table 1), hydro-dam buffering is frictionless, given
that no round-trip water flows occur. It is assumed that hydro-dam buffering is mean
preserving, while conventional power production is crowded out, as the production of wind
and solar energy is expanded.
The expansion towards higher wind-solar market shares again assumes that the
relative distribution of plants across the locations (within the countries and across the
countries) remains unchanged such that the new plants are perfectly correlated with the
existing ones. Thus the relative wind-solar production quantities across the countries remain
the same as before the expansion. The pumped-storage plants are assumed to be commonly
used, and the remittances from these plants (after deducting the friction losses) to the
respective countries are proportional to their wind and solar production figures. Potential
international diversification gains from non-perfectly correlated regional demand and windsolar supply patterns are automatically taken into account by aggregating the markets. The
transmission (1) and power (2) constraints, as well as the stock constraint that might result
from already filled hydro reservoirs, are assumed not to be binding.
Table 2 presents an informative selection from a large number of calculations that
were made for (i) alternative wind-solar market shares in Germany, (ii) the corresponding
wind-solar shares in the respective aggregate international market and (iii) the pumpedstorage volumes required in the group of countries considered. The second column of Table 2
shows alternative wind-solar market shares in Germany, while the third, repeating parts of
Table 1, states the required pumped-storage volume if Germany operates in autarchy. The
fourth and fifth columns give the wind-solar market share in the joint German-Norwegian
market and the required pumped-storage volume in Germany and Norway that would result
from the same installations of wind and solar plants. The sixth and seventh columns provide
the analogous results for the extended market of all five countries. The calculations use the
2014 hourly demand data, as well as the available hourly data on wind and solar power
production for the respective country groups, as explained above. The first column numbers
Electricity, Detailed Monthly Production, https://www.entsoe.eu/db-query/production/monthly-production-for-aspecific-country.

28

the lines and, as a point of reference, the first line shows the status quo of the year 2014 where
no storage was needed as there were no overshooting spikes.
Table 2: Pumped-storage needs and wind-solar market shares with double-structure and
hydro-dam buffering for alternative country groups (hourly data, 2014)

Let us first consider the case where Germany and Norway merge, focusing on lines 2
and 3. If no further pumped-storage plants are built and the German storage volume remains
at its present level of 0.038 TWh, Norwegian hydro-dam buffering would increase the
maximal market share of wind and solar energy that Germany could realize without wasting
some of its energy from 29.2% (line 2) to 35.8% (line 3). The latter would be equivalent to a
wind-solar share of 28.6% (line 3) in the joint German-Norwegian market.
Even higher market shares are possible when Switzerland, Austria and Denmark join
the German-Norwegian market. Denmark has no stores, but adds volatility due to its heavy
reliance on wind power, which has a market share of 42.7%.47 On the other hand,
mountainous Switzerland and Austria have a number of pumped-storage plants that may help
to buffer the volatility. While no data on the Swiss and Austrian storage volumes have been
published, an estimate based on published production data would put this volume at 0.035
TWh.48 This is similar to Germany's 0.038 TWh existing storage volume, bringing the total

47

See European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity, Detailed Monthly Production,
https://www.entsoe.eu/db-query/production/monthly-production-for-a-specific-country. In 2014, wind and solar
power together accounted for 44.7% in Denmark.
48
According to Eurostat data, in 2014 Austrian and German pumped-storage plants produced accumulated gross
energy flows of 3,826 GWh and 5,857 GWh, respectively (see Eurostat, Database Environment and Energy,
Energy, Energy statistics – quantities, annual data, Energy statistics – Supply, transformation and consumption,
Supply, transformation and consumption of electricity – annual data). Similarly, Swiss statistics show that

29

existing storage volume of the five countries considered to 0.073 TWh. As line 4 shows, the
German wind-solar market share could now be increased to 43.1%, while the maximal windsolar share in the aggregate market of all five countries considered would be equal to 33.7%.
Let us now discuss the necessary expansions of the pumped-storage volume to achieve
specific wind-solar market shares and compare them with the geologically feasible expansion
data according to the ESTORAGE project. Line 5 shows that to reach a market share of 50%
in autarchy, Germany would need a (domestic or foreign) pumped-storage volume of 2.114
TWh, which is equivalent to 1,962 pumped-storage plants of the German type. However, if
supported by Norway’s hydro dams, it would only need a pumped-storage volume of 0.305
TWh, equivalent to 283 German plants. This is a huge reduction in the required pumpedstorage volume to only one seventh, confirming the hope that the creation of a GermanNorwegian copper plate would substantially alleviate the German volatility problem.49
Building the additional 267 GWh of pumped-storage volume (in addition to the 0.038 TWh
Germany currently has) to reach the required volume is not an impossible task, as it would
amount to only about one fifth of the 1.363 TWh additional pumped-storage volume that the
ESTORAGE project considers feasible for Norway and Germany.
To achieve a wind-solar market share of 50% for Germany while integrating all five
countries, an overall pumped-storage volume of 0.251 TWh is needed. Interestingly enough,
this volume is only slightly smaller than the 0.305 TWh that would be required if only
Germany and Norway were combined. Thus, the additional hydro-dam and double-structure
buffering possibilities, as well as the potential diversification gains that Austria, Switzerland
and Denmark bring in, largely outweigh the need to handle the volatility of Denmark’s wind
power. As the table shows, a 50% wind-solar market share for Germany is equivalent to a
market share of 39.1% in the five countries taken together.
As seen in line 6, more wind and solar power would be possible in Germany, if
Norway and Germany chose to maximally expand their pumped-storage volumes according to
the ESTORAGE project, bringing the total volume of these two countries to the 1.401 TWh

Switzerland produced 1,585 GWh (see Swiss Federal Office of Energy, Topics, Hydropower,
http://www.bfe.admin.ch/themen/00490/00491/index.html?lang=en). Assuming that Swiss and Austrian plants
on average have the same ratios of production flows and storage volumes as Germany, which has a joint storage
volume of 0.038 TWh, a storage volume of 24,627 MWh for Austria and 10,202 MWh for Switzerland can be
estimated.
49

This fits to a result of a pricing study carried out by Hirth (2016). Using Swedish data, the author shows that
the value of wind power declines with an increasing market share, but less so the more hydro power is available.

30

mentioned towards the end of Section 9.50 In this case, a maximal German wind-solar market
share of 59.5% would be possible if no spikes are to be wasted, corresponding to a wind-solar
market share of 47.6% in the combined Norwegian-German market. As Germany has a
market share of 11% for other renewables (biomass, waste, hydro dams) and Norway one of
100% (hydro dams), the non-wind-solar renewables in the joint Norwegian-German market
would produce 29% of aggregate demand, bringing the total share of renewables in the joint
market to about 77%.
Interestingly enough, despite their huge storage potential of 84 TWh, a comparison of
lines 2, 3 and 6 shows that Norwegian hydro dams turn out to be less important for
Germany’s needs than the potential additional pumped stores, nearly all of which would be
located in Norway. While the pumped stores make it possible to increase the German windsolar market share by 23.7 percentage points (from 35.8% to 59.5%), the hydro dams, taken
by themselves, would only allow an expansion of 6.6 percentage points (from 29.2% to
35.8%). This shows the importance of the non-negativity constraint discussed in the previous
section. Thus, the value of the Norwegian strategy for Germany lies more in the grid
expansion as such than in the Norwegian 84 TWh hydro-storage volume. Had there been no
hydro stores, and had Norway’s own power demand been serviced with conventional fossil
fuel plants supported by the pumped stores, the potential buffering service for Germany
would have been largely the same; although, of course, the service would have come from an
environmentally problematic energy source.
Even in Austria, Germany and Switzerland more pumped stores could be built
according to the ESTORAGE project. Adding the ESTORAGE estimate for the potential
expansion by 0.166 TWh in Switzerland and by 0.008 TWh in Austria, as well as the above
estimate of these countries’ existing pumped-storage volume of 0.035 TWh to the GermanNorwegian maximum of 1.401 TWh, gives a future maximal pumped-storage volume of
1.610 TWh for all five countries taken together.51 As line 7 shows, with this pumped-storage
volume, Germany’s wind-solar market share could be expanded to 63.3%, and the
corresponding wind-solar share in the aggregate market of the five countries would be 49.5%.
Thus, even when all pumped-storage plants are built that the ESTORAGE project deems
feasible and when double-structure buffering and hydro-dam buffering are used to their fullest
extent, no more than half of the energy in the expanded copper plate including Norway,

50
51

See also DNV GL (2015), p. 40.
Ibidem.

31

Denmark, Germany, Austria and Switzerland could be produced with wind and solar power
without wasting some of this power.
As seen in lines 8 and 9, which are marked in grey, wind-solar market shares above
50% would require more pumped-storage volume than could be built in the countries
considered. For example, a wind-solar market share of 52.4% in the combined GermanNorwegian market would only be possible if these two countries could exclusively use the
entire 2.618 TWh that could be made available in all western European countries according to
the ESTORAGE study (line 8). Similarly, a share of 52.9% could be reached in the joint
market of all five countries if all potential future storage plants of western Europe could be
used by these five countries alone (line 9).
9. Further Options
Whether these results suggest that the glass is half full or half empty depends on how one
looks at the matter. Optimists would emphasize the substantial crowding out of fossil fuel,
though not fossil fuel plants, that they imply. Pessimists might recall that, according to Figure
1, electric power accounts for only one fifth of the total energy consumption and that fossil
fuel use outside the electricity sector constitutes 71% of Germany’s entire final energy
consumption. In view of the difficulties involved in trying to push the wind-solar market share
in power production beyond 50%, how can Germany then hope to bite significantly into this
71% by way of expanding the use of electricity, for example by moving to electric cars? After
all, expanding electricity production would not imply that pumped storage volumes could also
be expanded.
Some have argued that the emergence of electric cars would make it possible to use
their lithium-ion batteries as buffers. However, these batteries are very expensive and cannot
be used for seasonal storage, given that the cars have to be available for daily use.52 Car
batteries would be useful to smooth intra-day volatility while the cars are parked, but as
argued above in the context of Figure 5, such high frequency volatility is not the issue.
However, there are other storage options.53 Arguably, the most promising alternative
to pumped storage is methane storage.54 Methane is basically the same as natural gas.

52

The battery of the most powerful variant of the Tesla cars stores about 90 kWh, while the BMW i3, popular in
Germany, stores only about 19 kWh. One million of Tesla’s most powerful batteries would be equivalent to
about 80 pumped-storage plants of the German kind.
53
See Rosen (2007), Sterner (2009), Fuchs et al. (2012), Vahrenholt (2012) and Lund et al. (2015) for
overviews of the available options.

32

Germany has a dense methane distribution net and a methane storage capacity of 267 TWh,
which is far more than would be needed to smooth the normal volatility in German power
demand and supply.55 The problem, however, lies in converting electric power to methane and
back. The available technologies are inefficient and expensive.56 Firstly, traditional alkaline
electrolysis requires a continuous input of electric power and cannot easily handle volatile
inputs. Other short-term stores are needed before electrolysis can begin. Secondly,
methanation requires substantial supplies of CO2, which may be an unwanted by-product of
production processes but cannot cheaply be delivered in a suitable form. In combination with
carbon capture and storage strategies, however, such supply might become more cheaply
available. Thirdly, the methanation process implies substantial production of waste heat in the
summer, when the green energy surplus that is to be stored is produced. Estimates of the
original electric energy input that can be recuperated by using methane to run a gas power
plant typically range from a fifth to a third.57 Thus, even without counting the cost of the
appliances involved – namely the methanation devices, the gas power plants and the storages
– the electric power coming out of the gas power stations would cost three to five times as
much as the original electric power input. Taking the cost of the appliances into account, the
production cost would multiply.
Of course, the methane could be used for heating rather than electricity production.
While this would improve technical efficiency, it would mean converting a high quality
energy resource (electric current) into a low quality resource (heat), which would come close
to wasting the electric power. According to Carnot’s Theorem, any conversion of heat into

54

For a discussion of alternative chemical storage options see Sterner (2009) and Nitsch et al. (2010, Section
4.1.2 , p. 74 - 79).
55
See Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Energie (2015). The ministry states a storage volume of 24.6
billion m3. The figure mentioned in the text that follows as 1m3 is equivalent to 10.848 kWh.
56
Firstly, hydrogen H 2 is produced from water ( H2O ) by electrolysis, i.e. by using the electric power to split off
the oxygen ( O2 ). In a second step the hydrogen is combined with carbon dioxide ( CO2 ) by a chemical process
that normally requires high temperature and pressure, generating methane ( C H4 ) and water.
57

Sometimes even bigger variations are reported. For example, Jentsch (2015, p. 10 n) reports a degree of
efficiency for electrolysis of between 40% - 67% (current) and 62% - 79% (future). Götz, Lefebvre et al. (2016,
p. 1383) report an efficiency degree of 70% (current). While the maximum theoretical degree of efficiency for
producing methane from hydrogen is 83 %, the latter authors report 78% for the efficiency actually achieved.
The degree of efficiency for the most modern combined gas and steam turbines reaches 60%. This gives an
overall efficiency degree ranging between 19% and 37%. The German government optimistically reports an
overall
efficiency
degree
of
35%
on
its
web
page:
https://www.bundesregierung.de/Content/DE/Artikel/2014/12/2014-12-16-nicht-abschalten-sondernumwandeln.html.

33

motion energy or electric energy involves huge efficiency losses for physical reasons, quite
apart from the technical reasons that add to these losses.58
The methane generated from electricity costs a multiple of the methane (natural gas)
available in the market. While a kilowatt hour of methane from Russia in the first quarter of
2016 cost a power station 2.42 cents, the same amount of methane produced from wind and
solar power would cost about 25 cents, i.e. about 10 times as much.59
Instead of methane, hydrogen could be stored. This would theoretically reduce the
inefficiency insofar as the loss from converting hydrogen to methane could be avoided.
However, in practice, round trip efficiency of hydrogen storage is hardly much higher than
methane storage.60 Moreover, hydrogen cannot be stored as easily as methane given that it
diffuses through all kinds of pipeline materials and tends to corrode them.
Given the difficulties with seasonal storage solutions, it has been argued that it might
eventually be better to waste the overshooting spikes, rather than storing them and installing
correspondingly more wind-solar plants to compensate for the losses.61 Indeed, German
power grid companies are regularly paying wind turbine owners to not produce electricity to
avoid unusable surplus production or even negative prices. However, this results from the
legal priority right they enjoy and says very little about its economic rationality.62 In view of
the strongly diminishing marginal returns of wind-solar production (Figure 8) with a marginal
wind-solar efficiency of just 6% when wind, solar, biomass, waste and hydro power account
for all of Germany’s energy needs, this view does not seem overly convincing. While the
wasting strategy could be considered for low values of the wind-solar market share, solutions
with storage seem unavoidable for sizeable market shares.
Whether or not wasting is cheaper than storage is an open question. While the authors
of the ESTORAGE study made economic viability an explicit selection criterion, the study
lacks a detailed analysis of the economic benefits and costs involved. Unfortunately, a reliable

58

o

o

Thus, for example, a plant that uses vapor at a temperature of 800 C and exhausts it at 100 C cannot have an
efficiency degree of more than 65.2%. In practice, gas power stations recoup only about half the energy
contained in methane into electric energy.
59
See Götz, Lefebvre et al. (2016), Table 9, which offers an overview of several studies on the production cost
of substitute natural gas produced. Cf. also Statistik der Kohlenwirtschaft e. V. (2016).
60
According to Klaus et al. (2010, p. 38), the round-trip efficiency would be 7 percentage points higher than that
of methane storage, which the authors estimate at 35%. In a UK pilot plant storing wind and solar power as
hydrogen and converting the hydrogen back to electric power by way of using a micro-hydroelectric turbine, a
round-trip efficiency of just 16% was achieved. See Gammon et al. (2006).
61
See Schill (2014).
62
The payments for stopping the turbines are 90% of the administered feed-in tariffs that could have been
earned. The compensation payments have been rising progressively in recent years. In 2015, German producers
of wind power were entitled to 366 million euros in compensation payments. See Bundesnetzagentur (2016).

34

analysis cannot be provided here either, as the cost per unit of storage volume of Norwegian
pumped-storage solutions is not available to the author.
Nevertheless, a back-of-the-envelope calculation of the revenue from storage in terms
of saved wind-solar plants is at least possible. Let us consider again line 7 of Table 2, which
refers to the maximal wind-solar market share of 49.5% that could be reached in the five
countries when all pumped-storage plants (1.610 TWh) were constructed that the
ESTORAGE project deems feasible. This market share corresponds to a wind-solar
production gross of pumped-storage friction losses equal to 49.9% of aggregate demand. To
reach the market share of 49.5% despite wasting the overshooting spikes, a wind-solar
production equal to 51.5% of aggregate demand would be necessary. The necessary increase
in gross output of 1.6 percentage points difference, which is equivalent to a an extra
production of 1.396 GW or 12,225 GWh in one year, is the waste saved due to the pumpedstorage plants, which have the above-mentioned volume of 1.610 TWh.
Let us assume an average wind-solar cost of € 0.09 per kWh or € 90,000 per GWh. It
follows that the economic value of the overshooting spikes that in one year could be saved is
about € 1.100 billion or € 683,519 per GWh storage volume. Discounted at a rate of 2%, this
corresponds to an average revenue per GWh storage volume in terms of the present value of
saved energy of € 34.86 million, or a present value of € 56.11 billion for the entire pumped
storage volume that could be installed.
By similar reasoning, the marginal revenue in terms of the present value of spared
wind-solar production of one additional GWh storage volume can be calculated provided that
1.610 TWh storage volume are already installed. One additional GWh storage would make it
possible to generate an extra production of wind-solar power of 3.12 MW or 27.3 GWh in one
year, which corresponds to a present value of € 125.36 million per GWh.
Whether this is enough to justify the investment depends on the cost of pumpedstorage plants. German costs are known, but the plants are tiny and expensive. German plants
have an average volume of 1.077 GWh, typically involve the construction of a new water
basin, and cost between € 350 million and € 600 million.63 It therefore would not be
worthwhile to build them for seasonal storage purposes. By contrast, the new plants the

63

See “Energiespeicher Riedl: 2016 wird über Millionen-Bau entschieden”, Passauer Neue Presse online,
http://www.pnp.de/lokales/stadt_und_landkreis_passau/hauzenberg/1306395_Ein-Kraftpaket-inWartestellung.html,
and
“Jochberg:
Viele
Fragen
offen”,
Süddeutsche
Zeitung
online,
http://www.sueddeutsche.de/muenchen/wolfratshausen/geplantes-pumpspeicherwerk-jochberg-viele-fragenoffen-1.1610717.

35

ESTORAGE project considers for Norway have an average volume of 42 GWh,64 and they
only involve connecting existing lakes, as this was one of the selection criteria. Given that the
construction and service cost of a pumped-storage plant that just connects existing lakes
depends on the flow capacity of the power station, rather than the volumes of the lakes, it
seems that the Norwegian costs might only be a small fraction of the respective German costs,
perhaps even 1/40 or so, which may justify them being erected to avoid the waste. However,
future research will have to provide a thorough answer to this question.
An entirely different alternative to producing electricity from weather-dependent
sources would be to make the existing fossil fuel plants “clean” by capturing their CO2
emissions and storing it. This would allow them to operate for another couple of decades. The
available options are now well-researched.65 The main problem with such a solution is the
space that it requires. When fossil fuels are burned, each carbon atom is combined with two
oxygen atoms, and these must also be disposed of. This implies that the waste volume is much
bigger than the space emptied by extracting the resources. Burning a cubic meter of highgrade anthracite coal, for instance, results in 5.4 cubic meters of liquid CO2.66 Another
problem is the huge energy cost of absorbing liquid CO2 from the exhaust pipes of fossil fuel
plants. As this involves multiple heating and cooling substances that would carry the CO2,
about one third of the generated energy is lost. A third problem is safety considerations due to
the fact that the higher weight of CO2 relative to oxygen makes deposit leakages potentially
dangerous when the air is still.67 This is one of the reasons why it has proven impossible to
install a CCS plant in Germany to date.
For the time being, Germany might also consider reducing its CO2 emissions by
replacing coal with gas power plants. Methane is amply available and, as half of its energy
comes from the combustion of hydrogen rather than carbon atoms, its combustion generates
only about half of the CO2 emissions that coal-fired plants do. Moreover, methane would
make it easily possible to reduce the output of climate gases in traffic, as the frequent
conversions of gasoline engines to methane consumption in Italy and elsewhere are showing.
Finally, Germany and other countries might reconsider the nuclear option. Nuclear
fusion, which allows a safe operation as fusion reactors cannot melt down and emit only
negligible amounts of radioactivity, might be the most promising option for the long run.

64

See DNV GL (2015), p. 72 and own calculations.
Cf. IEA (2016), Scott et al. (2013), Koelbl et al. (2014) and Sinn (2012, pp. 53-60).
66
See Sinn (2012, p. 56, Table 2.1).
67
See Ploetz (2003).
65

36

Indeed, the international ITER consortium in Geneva as well as Germany’s Stellerator project
in Greifswald have made significant progress in recent years.
For the time being, however, safer fission reactors could be considered. Sweden,
Germany’s long-term role model for social reforms, has cancelled its pioneering decision of
1980 (after the Harrisburg accident) to exit nuclear power by 2010, and is now planning to
construct ten new reactors as replacements for older ones.68 When a new generation of policy
makers takes office, the nuclear exit decision may well be re-considered by the German
electorate.
10. Top Ten Takeaways
Scaling the volatile 2014 hourly wind-solar power output of Germany and a number of
neighbouring countries, this paper explores the buffering possibilities resulting from grid
expansions, back-up plants, demand management, Norwegian hydro dams, and, in particular,
pumped-stores using the results of the EU’s ESTORAGE project. These are the paper’s top
ten takeaways:
(1) Smoothing German wind and solar power jointly requires less storage space than
smoothing either of them separately, as wind and solar energy exhibit a negative seasonal
correlation.
(2) Smoothing both German power demand and wind-solar power supply at the 2014 market
share (16.6%) would require an ideal friction-less storage volume of 11.3 TWh. While this is
about the same as is needed to smooth the wind-solar supply alone, storage requirements will
increase sharply as wind-solar production expands. At a market share of 50%, the required
storage volume would be 22.1 TWh, equivalent to 20,517 plants of the average German size.
This is 491 times the amount that the ESTORAGE project deems feasible for Germany.
(3) Ideal demand management, which would perfectly correlate demand and wind-solar
energy supply, would reduce the storage volume needed to smooth Germany’s current excess
of demand over wind-solar supply by no more than 0.9%, 5.9% or 11.0%, respectively,
depending on whether demand is adjusted during a day, a week or a month.
(4) In view of the storage problems, Germany has opted for double-structure buffering with
conventional plants serving as back-ups. Double-structure buffering involves double fixed
costs. From a national point of view, without taking ecological considerations into account,
the installation of new wind and solar plants pays off if, and only if, their average cost is
68

See Milne (2016).

37

below the marginal cost of producing electricity from fossil fuels. Today, the wind-solar
plants are a long way from satisfying this condition.
(5) If Germany were to rely solely on domestic double-structure buffering, it would have to
waste the overshooting production spikes from wind and solar production. The marginal and
average wind-solar efficiency would decline progressively beyond a market share of 30%, i.e.
in the range where a contribution to mitigating the climate change can be made, because
nuclear power has been fully replaced by wind-solar power. If the country nonetheless wanted
to also crowd out its entire power production from fossil fuels, the average waste would be
61% and the marginal waste 94% of its gross wind-solar production, given the current level of
other renewables (waste, biomass and hydro).
(6) If Germany tried to achieve a 50% wind-solar market share without wasting the surplus
energy by combining double-structure buffering and pumped-storage, it would need a
pumped-storage volume of 2.1 TWh. This is less than a tenth of what it would need without
double-structure buffering, but nevertheless 47 times the maximum the ESTORAGE project
deems feasible for Germany.
(7) It might help Germany to be able to use Norway’s 84 TWh of hydro dams as buffers by
connecting the grids and creating a common electricity market. However, hydro-dam
buffering suffers from a non-negativity constraint just as conventional plants. If Germany
tried to unload the volatility resulting from a 53% wind-solar market share onto Norway
without using domestic back-ups, its production spikes would overshoot the Norwegian
hydro-dam absorption possibilities more than sevenfold. To smooth the remaining volatility,
both countries would need a combined pumped-storage volume of 6.64 TWh, which is nearly
five times the maximum deemed feasible by the ESTORAGE project (1.401 TWh).
(8) Norwegian hydro-dam buffering would nevertheless be useful if complemented by
German and Norwegian pumped-storage plants, as well as German back-up plants. To
achieve a wind-solar market share of 50% in Germany, a pumped-storage volume of 0.305
TWh would be sufficient. This is just one seventh of the volume that Germany would need in
autarchy and much less than the 1.401 TWh that could be made available in both countries
together.
(9) Because of the non-negativity constraint, potential Norwegian pumped-storage plants are
more important for Germany than the existing Norwegian hydro dams. While Germany could
increase its waste-free wind-solar market share by 6.6 percentage points if it merged its grid
with Norway’s to participate in hydro-dam buffering, it could add another 23.7 points by
receiving support from the additional pumped-storage plants that would be feasible according
38

to the ESTORAGE project, despite the fact that the latter are tiny relative to the existing
hydro dams.
(10) Adding Switzerland, Austria and Denmark to the German-Norwegian grid, while
building all the pumped-storage plants the ESTORAGE project deems feasible in these five
countries, would make it possible to expand the waste-free German wind-solar market share
to 63% and reach a corresponding wind-solar market share of barely 50% in the five countries
taken together.
References
Auer, H., and R. Haas (2016), “On Integrating Large Shares of Variable Renewables into the Electricity
System”, Energy 115, pp. 1592–1601.
Ahlborn, D. (2015), “Glättung der Windeinspeisung durch Ausbau der Windkraft?”, Energiewirtschaftliche
Tagesfragen 65, vol. 12, pp. 37–39.
Arbeitsgemeinschaft Energiebilanzen (2015), Energieverbrauch in Deutschland im Jahr 2014,http://www.agenergiebilanzen.de/index.php?article_id=20&archiv=13&year=2015.
(2016),
Auswertungstabellen
zur
Energiebilanz
Deutschland
1990-2015,
http://www.agenergiebilanzen.de/resources/img/dl_bnt_pdf.gif.
Bertsch, J., C. Growitsch, S. Lorenczik, and S. Nagl (2016), “Flexibility in Europe's Power Sector — An
Additional Requirement or an Automatic Complement?”, Energy Economics 53, pp. 118–131.
Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Energie (2014), Gesetz für den Ausbau erneuerbarer Energien
(Erneuerbare-Energien-Gesetz - EEG 2014), http://www.bmwi.de/Redaktion/DE/Downloads/G/gesetzfuer-den-ausbau-erneuerbarer-energien.html.
(2015),
Versorgungssicherheit
bei
Erdgas,
Monitoring-Bericht
nach
§
51
EnWG,
https://www.bmwi.de/BMWi/Redaktion/PDF/Publikationen/monitoring-bericht-nach-51-enwg-zurversorgungssicherheit-bei-erdgas,property=pdf,bereich=bmwi2012,sprache=de,rwb=true.pdf.
- (2016), EEG in Zahlen: Vergütungen, Differenzkosten und EEG-Umlage 2000 bis 2017, http://erneuerbareenergien.de/EE/Redaktion/DE/Downloads/eeg-in-zahlen-pdf.pdf?__blob=publicationFile.
Bundesministerium für Umwelt, Naturschutz, Bau und Reaktorsicherheit (2014), Aktionsprogramm Klimaschutz
2020,
http://www.bmub.bund.de/fileadmin/Daten_BMU/Download_PDF/Aktionsprogramm_Klimaschutz/akti
onsprogramm_klimaschutz_2020_broschuere_bf.pdf.
Bundesnetzagentur (2016), 3. Quartalsbericht 2015 zu Netz- und Systemsicherheitsmaßnahmen,
http://www.bundesnetzagentur.de/SharedDocs/
Downloads/DE/Allgemeines/Bundesnetzagentur/Publikationen/Berichte/2016/Quartalsbericht_Q4_201
5.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=1.
Dena, German Energy Agency (2016), Dena Grid Study II – Integration of Renewable Energy Sources in the
German Power Supply System from 2015 – 2020 with an Outlook to 2025. Summary of the main results
by the project steering group,
https://shop.dena.de/fileadmin/denashop/media/Downloads_Dateien/esd/9106_Ergebniszusammenfassu
ng_dena-Netzstudie_II_englisch.pdf.
Denholm, P., and M. Hand (2011), “Grid Flexibility and Storage Required to Achieve Very High Penetration of
Variable Renewable Electricity”, Energy Policy 39, pp. 1817–1830.
DNV GL (2015), Overview of Potential Locations for New Pumped Storage Plants in EU
15, Switzerland
and Norway, ESTORAGE, Seventh Framework Programme, Theme 5,
Edenhofer, O., L. Hirth, B. Knopf, M. Pähle, S. Schlörner, E. Schmid, F. Ueckerdt (2013), “On the Economics of
Renewable Energy Sources”, Energy Economics 40, Supplement 1, p. S 12 – S 23.
European Commission (2011), Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council,
the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the, A Roadmap for Moving to a
Competitive Low Carbon Economy in 2050, EUR-Lex Document, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legalcontent/EN/NOT/?uri=CELEX:52011DC0112.>
(2016),
Variable
Speed
Pumped
Storage
Hydro
Plants
Offer
a
New
Era
of
Smarter
Energy
Management,
17
May
2016,
http://cordis.europa.eu/news/rcn/125319_en.html.

39

European Communities (2002), Council Decision of 25 April 2002 Concerning the Approval, on Behalf of the
European Community, of the Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change and the Joint Fulfilment of Commitments thereunder, Official Journal of the European
Communities,
15.5.2002,
L130/1-20,
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legalcontent/EN/TXT/?uri=OJ:JOL_2002_130_R_0001_01.
European Energy Exchange AG (2016), Market Data, Power, Spot Market, https://www.eex.com/en/marketdata/power/spot-market.
Ferroni, F., and R. J. Hopkirk (2016), “Energy Return on Energy Invested (ERoEI) for Photovoltaic Solar
Systems in Regions of Moderate Isolation”, Energy Policy 94, pp. 336–44.
Fraunhofer
ISE
(2014),
Kurzstudie
zur
historischen
Entwicklung
der
EEG-Umlage,
https://www.ise.fraunhofer.de/content/dam/ise/de/documents/publications/studies/ISE_Kurzstudie_EEG
_Umlage_2014_07_14.pdf.
Fuchs, G., B. Lunz, M. Leuthold and D. U. Sauer (2012), Technology Overview on Electric Storage. Overview
on the Potential and Deployment Perspectives of Electric Storage Technologies, RWTH Aachen.
Gammon, R., A. Roy, J. Barton and M. Little (2006), “Hydrogen and Renewables Integration (HARI)”, Centre
for Renewable Energy Systems Technology (CREST), Loughborough University.
Götz, P., J. Henkel, T. Lenck and K. Lenz (2014), Negative Electricity Prices: Causes and Effects. An Analysis
of Recent Developments and a Proposal for a New Flexibility Law, Agora Energiewende, Berlin,
https://www.agora-energiewende.de/fileadmin/Projekte/2013/Agora_Negative_Electricity_Prices_Web.
pdf.
Götz, M., J. Lefebvre, F. Mörs, A. McDaniel Koch, F. Graf, S. Bajohr, R. Reimert and Th. Kolb (2016),
“Renewable Power-to-Gas: A Technological and Economic Review”, Renewable Energy 85, pp. 1371–
90.
Grand, D., Ch. Le Brun, R. Vidil, and F. Wagner (2016), “Electricity Production by Intermittent Renewable
Sources: A Synthesis of French and German Studies”, The European Physical Journal Plus 131, pp.
329–340.
Hack, N., S. Unz, M. Beckmann (2014), “Stand der Technik zur Umwandlung und
Speicherung elektrischer
Energie”, VGB Power Tech, International Journal for Electricity and Heat Generation 4, pp.
45–52.
Hagspiel, S., C. Jägemann, D. Lindenberger, T. Brown, S. Cherevatskiy, and E. Tröster (2014), “Cost-optimal
Power System Extension under Flow-based Market Coupling”, Energy 66, pp. 654–666.
Heal, G. (2016), “Notes on the Economics of Energy Storage”, NBER Working Paper 22752,
October.
Heide, D., L von Bremen, M. Greiner, C. Hoffmann, M. Speckmann, M. Bofinger et al. (2010), “Seasonal
Optimal Mix of Wind and Solar Power in a Future, Highly Renewable Europe”, Renew Energy 35, pp.
2483-2489.
Heide, D., M. Greiner, L von Bremen, C. Hoffmann (2011), “Reduced Storage and Balancing Needs in
a
Fully Renewable European Power System with Excess Wind and Solar
Power Generation”,
Renewable Energy 36, pp. 2515–32.
Hillebrandt, K. et al. (2015), Pathways to Deep Carbonisation in Germany, Sustainable Development Solutions
Network (SDSN) and Institute for Sustainable Development and
Decarbonisation
(IDDRI),
https://www.deepdecarbonization.org/wp- content/uploads/2015/09/DDPP_DEU.pdf
Hiratsuka, A., T. Arai and T. Yoshimura (1993), “Seawater Pumped-storage Power Plant in Okinawa Island
Japan”, Engineering Geology 35, pp. 237–246.
Hirth, L., (2015), “The Optimal Share of Variable Renewables: How the Variability of Wind and Solar Power
Affects their Welfare-optimal Deployment”, The Energy Journal Vol. 36 No. 1, pp. 149–184.
- (2016), “The Benefits of Flexibility: The Value of Wind Energy with Hydropower”, Applied Energy 181, pp.
210–223
Hirth, L., and I. Ziegenhagen (2015), “Balancing Power and Variable Renewables: Three Links”, Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews 50, pp. 1035–1051.
Huber, M., D. Dimkova, and T. Hamacher (2014), “Integration of Wind and Solar Power in Europe:
Assessment of Flexibility Requirements”, Energy 69, pp. 236–246.
Huber, M., and Ch. Weissbart (2015), “On the Optimal Mix of Wind and Solar Generation in the Future
Chinese Power System”, Energy 90, pp. 235–43.
IEA (2016), 20 Years of Carbon Capture and Storage. Accelerating Future Deployment, International Energy
Agency, Paris 2016.
Jentsch, M. (2015), Potenziale von Power-to-Gas Energiespeichern, Fraunhofer-Institut für Windenergie und
Energiesystemtechnik IWES, Stuttgart.
Rausser,
A.
Karp, L., and X. Liu (2002), “Welfare Gains under Tradable CO2 Permits”, in: C. Moss, G.
Schmitz, T. Taylor, D. Zilberman, Agricultural Globalization, Trade and
the
Environment,
Kluwer,
Norwell, Mass.
Klaus, T., C. Vollmer, K. Werner, H. Lehmann, and K. Müschen (2010), Energieziel 2050: 100% Strom aus
erneuerbaren Quellen, Umweltbundesamt, Federal Republic of Germany.

40

Koelbl, B. S., M.A. van den Broek, A.P.C. Faaij, and D. P. van Vuuren, (2014), “Uncertainty in Carbon Capture
and Storage (CCS) Deployment Projections: A Cross-model Comparison Exercise”, Climatic Change
123, pp. 461–476.
Kunz, F., and H. Weigt (2014), “Germany`s Nuclear Phase Out: A Survey of the Impact since 2011 and Outlook
to 2023”, Economics of Energy & Environmental Policy Vol. 3, No. 2, pp. 13–27.
Lund, P. D., J. Lindgren, J. Mikkola, and J. Salpakari (2015), “Review of Energy System Flexibility Measures to
Enable High Levels of Variable Renewable Electricity”, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews
45, pp. 785–807.
Mihm, A., and C. Geinitz (2016), “Stromstreit an der deutsch-österreichischen Grenze”, Frankfurter Allgemeine
Zeitung No. 253, 29 October, p. 22, http://www.faz.net/aktuell/wirtschaft/energiepolitik/stromhandelan-grenze-zu-oesterreich-eingeschraenkt-14502066.html.
Milne R. (2016), “Boost to Nuclear Energy as Sweden Agrees to Build More Reactors”, Financial Times, 10
June 2016.
Neuhoff, K., J. Barquin, J. W. Bialek, R. Boyd, C. J. Dent, F. Echavarren, T. Grau, C. von Hirschhausen, B. F.
Hobbs, F. Kunz, C. Nabe, G. Papaefthymiou, C. Weber, and H. Weigt (2013), “Renewable Electric
Energy Integration: Quantifying the Value of Design of Markets for International Transmission
Capacity”, Energy Economics 40, pp.760–772.
Nicolosi, M. (2011), The Economics of Renewable Electricity Market Integration. An Empirical and ModelBased Analysis of Regulatory Frameworks and their Impacts on the Power Market, inaugural
dissertation, Wirtschafts- und Sozialwissenschaftliche Fakultät, University of Cologne.
Nitsch, J., T. Pregger, Y. Scholz, T. Naegler, M. Sterner, N. Gerhardt, A. von Oehsen, C. Pape, Y.-M. SaintDrenan, and B. Wenzel (2010), Langfristszenarien und Strategien für den Ausbau der erneuerbaren
Energien in Deutschland bei Berücksichtigung der Entwicklung in Europa und global, Leitstudie 2010,
DLR,
Fraunhofer
IWES
and
IFnE,
BMU-FKZ03MAP146,
http://elib.dlr.de/69139/1/Leitstudie_2010.pdf.
Ploetz, C. (2003), “Sequestrierung von CO2: Technologien, Potentiale, Kosten und Umweltauswirkungen”,
in: Wissenschaftlicher Beirat der Bundesregierung, Globale Umweltveränderungen, Externe Expertise
für das WBGU-Hauptgutachten 2003, Welt im Wandel: Energiewende zur Nachhaltigkeit, Springer.
Rosen. J. (2007), The Future Role of Renewable Energy Sources in European Electricity Supply. A Model-based
Analysis for the EU-15, inaugural dissertation, University of Karlsruhe.
Sachverständigenrat für Umweltfragen (2011), Wege zur 100% erneuerbaren Stromversorgung,
Bundesministerium für Umwelt und Energie, Berlin,
http://www.umweltrat.de/Shared
Docs/Downloads/DE/02_Sondergutachten/2011_07_SG_Wege_zur_100_Prozent_erneuerbaren_Strom
versorgung.pdf;__blob=publicationFile.
Schill, W.-P. (2014), “Residual Load, Renewable Surplus Generation and Storage Requirements in Germany”,
Energy Policy 73, pp. 65–79.
Scott, V., S. Gilfillan, N. Markusson, H. Chalmers, and R. S. Haszeldine (2013), “Last Chance for Carbon
Capture and Storage”, Nature Climate Change Vol. 3, pp. 105–111.
Sinn, H.-W. (2012), The Green Paradox. A Supply-side Approach to Global Warming, MIT Press, Cambridge.
- (2016), “Buffering Volatility: A Study on the Limits of Germany’s Energy Revolution”, CESifo Working Paper
5950, June, and NBER Working Paper 22467, July.
Spiecker, S., and C. Weber (2012), “Integration of Fluctuating Renewable Energy in Europe”, in D. Klatte, H.-J.
Lüthi, K. Schmedders, eds., Operation Research Proceedings 2011, Springer, Berlin.
Statistik der Kohlenwirtschaft e. V. (2016), Entwicklung ausgewählter Energiepreise, as of 2 May 2016,
www.kohlenstatistik.de.
Sterner, M. (2009), Bioenergy and Renewable Power Methane in Integrated 100%
Renewable
Energy
Systems. Limiting Global Warming by Renewable Energy
Systems, Dissertation, University of
Kassel.
Trainer, T. (2014), “Some Inconvenient Theses”, Energy Policy 64, pp. 168–74.
United Nations (1998), Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/convkp/kpeng.pdf.
Vahrenholt, F. (2012), “Wettbewerbsfähigkeit von Erneuerbaren Energieträgern”, in: Bayerische Akademie
der Wissenschaften, ed., Die Zukunft der Energieversorgung: Atomausstieg, Versorgungssicherheit
und Klimawandel. Rundgespräche der Kommission für Ökologie, vol. 41, pp. 33-42, Publishing
Company Dr. Friedrich Pfeil, Munich.
Wagner, F. (2014a), “Electricity by Intermittent Sources: An Analysis Based on the German Situation 2012”,
The European Physical Journal Plus 129, pp. 20–37.
- (2014b), “Considerations for an EU-wide Use of Renewable Energies for Electricity Generation”, The
European Physical Journal Plus 129, pp. 219–232.
- (2016 ), “Surplus from and Storage of Electricity Generated by Intermittent Sources”, The European Physical
Journal Plus 131, pp. 445–465.

41

Wagner, F., and E. Rachlew (2016), “Study on a Hypothetical Replacement of Nuclear Electricity by Wind
Power in Sweden”, The European Physical Journal Plus 131, pp. 173–180.
Weigt, H., T. Jeske, F. Leuthold, and C. von Hirschhausen (2010), “Take the Long Way Down: Integration of
Large-scale North Sea Wind Using HVDC Transmission”, Energy Policy 38, pp. 3164–3173.

42

