                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  DOES “BAN THE BOX” HELP OR HURT LOW-SKILLED WORKERS? STATISTICAL
  DISCRIMINATION AND EMPLOYMENT OUTCOMES WHEN CRIMINAL HISTORIES
                              ARE HIDDEN

                                      Jennifer L. Doleac
                                      Benjamin Hansen

                                      Working Paper 22469
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22469


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2016




Thanks to Amanda Agan, Shawn Bushway, David Eil, Kirabo Jackson, Jonathan Meer, Sonja
Starr, and participants at the 2016 IRP Summer Research Workshop for helpful comments and
conversations. Thanks also to Emily Fox and Anne Jordan for excellent research assistance. This
study was generously supported by the Russell Sage Foundation. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Jennifer L. Doleac and Benjamin Hansen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does “Ban the Box” Help or Hurt Low-Skilled Workers? Statistical Discrimination and Employment
Outcomes When Criminal Histories are Hidden
Jennifer L. Doleac and Benjamin Hansen
NBER Working Paper No. 22469
July 2016
JEL No. J15,J7,J78,K42

                                          ABSTRACT

Jurisdictions across the United States have adopted "ban the box" (BTB) policies preventing
employers from conducting criminal background checks until late in the job application process.
Their goal is to improve employment outcomes for those with criminal records, with a secondary
goal of reducing racial disparities in employment. However, removing information about job
applicants' criminal histories could lead employers who don't want to hire ex-offenders to try to
guess who the ex-offenders are, and avoid interviewing them. In particular, employers might
avoid interviewing young, low-skilled, black and Hispanic men when criminal records are not
observable. This would worsen employment outcomes for these already-disadvantaged groups. In
this paper, we use variation in the details and timing of state and local BTB policies to test BTB's
effects on employment for various demographic groups. We find that BTB policies decrease the
probability of being employed by 3.4 percentage points (5.1%) for young, low-skilled black men,
and by 2.3 percentage points (2.9%) for young, low-skilled Hispanic men. These findings support
the hypothesis that when an applicant's criminal history is unavailable, employers statistically
discriminate against demographic groups that are likely to have a criminal record.


Jennifer L. Doleac
Frank Batten School of Leadership & Public Policy
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, VA 22904
jdoleac@virginia.edu

Benjamin Hansen
Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403
and NBER
bchansen@uoregon.edu
1     Introduction

Mass incarceration was an important crime reduction policy during the past several decades, but

it has come under intense scrutiny due to its high financial cost, diminishing public-safety returns,

and collateral damage to the families and communities of those who are incarcerated. There is

substantial interest in reallocating public resources to more cost-effective strategies, with greater

emphasis on rehabilitating offenders. Due in part to this change in focus, individuals are now being

released from state and federal prisons more quickly than they are being admitted. According

to the most recent data, over 637,000 people are released each year (Carson and Golinelli, 2014).

However, recent data also suggest that approximately two-thirds of those released will be re-arrested

within three years (Cooper et al., 2014). This cycle signals our failure to help re-entering offenders

transition to civilian life, and limits our ability to reduce incarceration rates. Breaking this cycle is

a top policy priority.

    Connecting ex-offenders with jobs is often considered a necessary – though not sufficient – step

toward successful re-entry outcomes. The classic Becker (1968) model of criminal behavior suggests

that better employment options for would-be offenders reduce crime. Individuals who have been

convicted of a crime often have difficulty finding employment, which does appear to increase their

likelihood of committing another crime (Schnepel, 2015; Yang, 2016). Part of the reason that finding

employment is difficult for this group is that ex-offenders, on average, have less education and job

experience than non-offenders. However, there is evidence that employers discriminate against those

with criminal records, even when other observable characteristics are identical (Pager, 2003). This is

likely due to statistical discrimination.1 On average, ex-offenders are more likely than non-offenders

to have engaged in violent, dishonest, or otherwise antisocial behavior, and – based on current

recidivism rates – are more likely to engage in similar behavior in the future.2 Ex-offenders also

have higher rates of untreated mental illness, addiction, and emotional trauma (Justice Center,

2016; Wolff and Shi, 2012). These are all valid concerns for employers seeking reliable, productive
   1
     Some employers’ discrimination could be taste-based – that is, they simply don’t like ex-offenders, and no ad-
ditional information about individuals with records could change their feelings. This distinction does not alter the
predicted effects of "ban the box", but does matter when considering alternative policies.
   2
     This not only affects an individual’s expected tenure on the job, but increases potential financial costs to the
employer. For instance, employers might worry about theft, or that future violent behavior could result in a negligent-
hiring lawsuit.



                                                          3
employees. However, this reasoning is little comfort to someone coming out of prison and hoping

to find gainful legal employment, but willing to revert to illegal activity if none can be found. In

addition, since black and Hispanic men are more likely to have criminal records, making a clean

record a condition for employment could exacerbate racial disparities in employment.3

    If even a few ex-offenders are more job-ready than some non-offenders, then employers’ statistical

discrimination against those with criminal records hurts the most job-ready ex-offenders. This has

motivated the "ban the box" (BTB) movement, which calls for employers to delay asking about

an applicant’s criminal record until late in the hiring process. Advocates of BTB believe that if

employers can’t tell who has a criminal record, job-ready ex-offenders will have a better chance at

getting an interview. During that interview, they will be able to signal their otherwise-unobservable

job-readiness to the employer. This could increase employment rates for ex-offenders, and thereby

decrease racial disparities in employment outcomes.

    However, this policy does nothing to address the average job-readiness of ex-offenders. A criminal

record is still correlated with lack of job-readiness4 . For this reason, employers will still seek to avoid

hiring individuals with criminal records. When BTB removes information about a criminal record

from job applications, employers will likely respond by using the remaining observable information

to try to guess who the ex-offenders are, and avoid interviewing them. Surveys by Holzer et al.

(2006) show that employers are most concerned about hiring those who were recently incarcerated.

Since young, low-skilled, black and Hispanic men are the most likely to fall in this category (Bonczar,

2003; Yang, 2016), employers may respond to BTB by avoiding interviews with these groups. As a

result, racial disparities could increase rather than decrease.

    This papers asks whether BTB is a net positive or negative for racial minorities. To answer this

question, we exploit variation in the adoption and timing of state and local BTB policies to test

BTB’s effects on employment outcomes for various demographic groups, using individual-level data

from the 2004-2014 Current Population Survey (CPS). We focus on the probability of employment

for black and Hispanic men who are relatively young (age 25-34)5 and low-skilled (no college degree),
    3
      The best data available suggest that a black man born in 2001 has a 32% chance of serving time in prison at
some point during his lifetime, compared with 17% for Hispanic men and 6% for white men (Bonczar, 2003).
    4
      We use "job-readiness" to refer to a range of characteristics that make someone an appealing employee, including
reliability and productivity.
    5
      We follow the literature and focus on individuals age 25 and over because most individuals have completed their



                                                          4
as they are the ones most likely to be recently-incarcerated. This group contains the most intended

beneficiaries of BTB as well as the most people who could be unintentionally hurt by the policy.

If BTB enables some re-entering offenders to get their foot in the door and communicate their

job-readiness to employers, we might see a positive effect on employment for this group. However,

if young, low-skilled black and Hispanic men as a whole are now less likely to be called in for

interviews, then the net effect on employment could be negative.

    Indeed, we find net negative effects on employment for these groups: On average, young, low-

skilled black men are 3.4 percentage points (5.1%) less likely to be employed after BTB than before.

This effect is statistically significant (p < 0.05) and robust to a variety of alternative specifications

and sample definitions. We also find that BTB reduces employment by 2.3 percentage points (2.9%)

for young, low-skilled Hispanic men. This effect is only marginally significant (p < 0.10) but also

fairly robust. Both effects are unexplained by pre-existing trends in employment, and – for black

men – persist long after the policy change. The effects are larger for the least skilled in this group

(those with no high school diploma or GED), for whom a recent incarceration is more likely.

    We expect BTB’s effects on employment to vary with the local labor market context. For

instance, it would be difficult for an employer to discriminate against all young, low-skilled black

men if the local low-skilled labor market consists primarily of black men, or if there are very

few applicants for any open position. We find evidence that such differential effects exist. BTB

reduces black male employment significantly everywhere but in the South (where a larger share

of the population is black). Similarly, BTB reduces Hispanic male employment everywhere but

in the West (where a larger share of the population is Hispanic). This suggests that employers

are less likely to use race as a proxy for criminality in areas where the minority population of

interest is larger – perhaps because discriminating against that entire set of job applicants is simply

infeasible. In addition, we find evidence that statistical discrimination based on race is less prevalent

in tighter labor markets: BTB’s negative effects on black and Hispanic men are larger when national

unemployment is higher. In other words, employers are more able to exclude broad categories of

job applicants in order to avoid ex-offenders when applicants far outnumber available positions.
education by that age. In our sample, only about 1% of low-skilled men ages 25-34 are enrolled in school. Since
we are using education level as a proxy for skill level, using final education increases the precision of our estimates
(relative to, for instance, considering all 19 year olds "low-skilled" because they don’t yet have a college degree).



                                                          5
    Our hypothesis is that employers are less likely to interview young, low-skilled black and Hispanic

men because these groups include a lot of ex-offenders. This hypothesis suggests that employers

will instead interview and hire individuals from demographic groups unlikely to include recent

offenders. We find some evidence suggesting that this does indeed happen. Older, low-skilled black

men and highly-educated black women are significantly more likely to be employed after BTB.6

Effects on white men and women are also positive, though statistically insignificant. However, total

employment might go down when employers are not able to see which applicants have criminal

records. BTB increases the expected cost of interviewing job applicants, because there’s a higher

chance that any interview could end in a failed criminal background check. In addition, while

employers might be willing to substitute college graduates or others who are clearly job-ready, those

individuals might not be willing to accept a low-skilled job at the wage the employer is willing to

pay.7 Indeed, we find no effect on employment for men with college degrees.

    We are not the only researchers interested in the effects of BTB on employment. Three other

current papers study the effect of this policy: all find effects consistent with statistical discrimination.

However, ours is the only one to focus on employment outcomes for young, low-skilled men – the

group with the most to gain or lose from BTB.8

    Agan and Starr (2016) exploited the recent adoption of BTB in New Jersey and New York to

conduct a field experiment on the effect of the policy on the likelihood of getting an interview.

They submitted thousands of fake job applications from young, low-skilled men, randomizing the

race and criminal history of the applicant. They found that before BTB white applicants were

called back slightly more often than black applicants were. That gap became six times larger after

BTB went into effect. White ex-offenders benefited the most from the policy change: after BTB,

employers seem to assume that all white applicants are non-offenders. After BTB, black applicants

were called back at a rate between the ex-offender and non-offender callback rates from before BTB

– that is, those with records were helped, but those without records were hurt. Since the researchers
   6
     The effect on black women could represent intrahousehold substitution, rather than substitution by employers.
That is, women might be more likely to work when their partners are unable to find jobs.
   7
     This is similar to the well-known "lemons problem" in economics, where asymmetric information between a buyer
and seller causes a market to unravel and no transactions to be made (Akerlof, 1970).
   8
     This distinction can potentially matter in quantifying the effects of policies in labor markets. For instance, Borjas
(2015) finds that Mariel boatlift substantially reduced wages for low-skill prime working age males while Card (1990)
found limited evidence of the labor supply shock affected the overall population.



                                                            6
create the applications themselves, they kept other factors like education constant. The differences

in interview rates before and after the policy change are therefore solely due to the changing factors

– race and criminal history. The limitation of this approach is that fake applicants can’t do real

interviews that lead to real jobs. It’s possible that the few ex-offenders granted interviews would

be more likely to get the job after BTB implementation than before. However, if employers are

reluctant to hire ex-offenders, those applicants might be rejected once their criminal history is

revealed late in the process (between the interview and the job offer). These later steps are critical

in determining the true social welfare consequences of BTB. Overall, our results are consistent with

these changes in callback rates: young, low-skilled black men without records were hurt by BTB,

and young, low-skilled white men might have been helped.

   Starr (2015), available in early draft form, uses CPS data from 2004 to 2014 to measure the effect

of BTB on government employment rates for black men ages 18 to 64. Preliminary results suggest

that BTB reduced public employment for this group. There are several differences from our study:

Starr limited her sample to specific cities that adopt BTB at some point, so non-BTB cities are not

used as controls, and the analysis does not consider county or state BTB policies. She also does not

consider effects of BTB policies on the full metro area, though that entire labor market is potentially

treated. She focuses only on employment in government jobs, which are directly affected by public

BTB policies. Finally, she does not consider effects on other demographic subgroups. Despite these

different methods and samples, her findings are similar to ours.

   Shoag and Veuger (2016) use annual 2005-2014 data from the American Community Survey

(ACS) along with a difference-in-difference strategy, to consider the effects of BTB on residents of

high-crime neighborhoods (a proxy for those with criminal records), using those living in low-crime

neighborhoods (a proxy for those without criminal records) as a control group. They find that low-

skilled black men ages 19-65 who live in high-crime neighborhoods do better after BTB, relative to

those in low-crime neighborhoods, and interpret this as evidence that BTB has a beneficial effect on

ex-offenders. However, using low-crime neighborhood residents as controls is problematic because

they are also treated by the policy: if employers use race as a proxy for criminality in the absence of

information about criminal histories, BTB will make those without criminal records worse off. BTB

should shrink the employment gap between those with and without records, because they now look


                                                  7
identical to employers. This is what the study finds. These effects are consistent with the theory

described above and with our results.

      Ban the box policies seek to limit employers’ access to criminal histories. This access itself is

relatively new. Before the internet and inexpensive computer storage became available in the 1990s,

it was not easy to check job applicants’ criminal histories. This is the world that BTB advocates

would like to recreate. Of course this world differs from our own in many other respects, but

nevertheless it is helpful to consider how employment outcomes changed as criminal records became

more widely available during the 1990s and early 2000s. A number of studies address this, and their

findings foreshadow our own: when information on criminal records is available, firms are more

likely to hire low-skilled black men (Bushway, 2004; Holzer et al., 2006; Finlay, 2009; Stoll, 2009).

In fact, many of those studies explicitly predicted that limiting information on criminal records, via

BTB or similar policies, would negatively affect low-skilled black men as a group.9

      There is plenty of evidence that statistical discrimination increases when information about

employees is less precise. Autor and Scarborough (2008) measure the effects of personality testing

by employers on hiring outcomes. Conditioning hiring on good performance on personality tests

(such as popular Myers-Briggs tests) was generally viewed as disadvantaging minority job candidates

because minorities tend to score lower on these tests. However, the authors note that this will only

happen if employers’ assumptions about applicants in the absence of information about test scores

are more positive than the information that test scores provide. If, in contrast, minorities score

better on these tests than employers would have thought, adding accurate information about a job
  9
      A few striking quotes from that literature:
        [S]ome advocates seek to suppress the information to which employers have access regarding criminal
        records. But it is possible that the provision of more information to these firms will increase their general
        willingness to hire young black men, as we show here and since we have previously found evidence that
        employers who do not have such information often engage in statistical discrimination against this
        demographic group. (Holzer et al., 2004)

        Employers have imperfect information about the criminal records of applicants, so rational employers
        may use observable correlates of criminality as proxies for criminality and statistically discriminate
        against groups with high rates of criminal activity or incarceration. (Finlay, 2009)

        [Ban the box] may in fact have limited positive impacts on the employment of ex-offenders....More
        worrisome is the likelihood that these bans will have large negative impacts on the employment of those
        whom we should also be concerned about in the labor market, namely minority – especially black – men
        without criminal records, whose employment prospects are already poor for a variety of other reasons.
        (Stoll, 2009)




                                                             8
applicant’s abilities will help minority applicants. They find that in a national firm that was rolling

out personality testing, the use of these tests had no effect on the racial composition of employees,

though they did allow the firm to choose employees who were more productive.

       Wozniak (2015) found that when employers required drug tests for employees, black employment

rates increased by 7-30%, with the largest effects on low-skilled black men. As in the personality

test context, the popular assumption was that if black men are more likely to use drugs, employers’

use of drug tests when making hiring decisions would disproportionately hurt this group. It turned

out that a drug test requirement allowed non-using black men to prove their status when employers

would otherwise have used race as a proxy for drug use.

       In another related paper, Bartik and Nelson (2016) hypothesize that banning employers from

checking job applicants’ credit histories will negatively affect employment outcomes for groups that

have lower credit scores on average (particularly black individuals). The reasoning is as above: in

the absence of information about credit histories, employers will use race as a proxy for credit scores.

They find that, consistent with statistical discrimination, credit check bans reduce job-finding rates

by 7-16% for black job-seekers. As with BTB policies, one goal of banning credit checks was to

reduce racial disparities in employment, so this policy was counterproductive.

       Our study therefore contributes to a growing literature showing that well-intentioned policies

that remove information about negative characteristics can do more harm than good.10 Advocates

for these policies seem to think that in the absence of information, employers will assume the

best about all job applicants. This is often not the case. In all of the above examples, providing

information about characteristics that are less favorable, on average, among black job-seekers –

criminal records, personality tests, drug tests, and credit histories – actually helped black men

and black women find jobs. These outcomes are what we would expect from standard statistical

discrimination models. More information helps the best job candidates avoid discrimination.

       The availability of criminal records is just one facet of an ongoing debate about data availability.

Improvements in data storage and internet access have made a vast array of information about our
  10
    An additional study focuses on a different population but its findings are consistent with the same statistical
discrimination theory as those described above: Thomas (2016) finds that when the Family and Medical Leave Act
limited employers’ information about female employees’ future work plans, it decreased employers’ investment in
female employees as a group. After the FMLA, women were promoted at lower rates than before the law.




                                                        9
pasts readily available to those in our present, including to potential employers, love interests,

advertisers, and fraudsters. This often seems unfair to those who – like many ex-offenders – are

trying to put their pasts behind them. The policy debate about whether and how to limit this data

availability is complicated both by free speech concerns and logistical issues – once information is

distributed publicly, what are the chances of being able to make it private again? Even so, a great

deal of effort has gone into defining who should have access to particular data, often with the goal

of improving the economic outcomes of disadvantaged groups.11 As this and related studies have

shown, well-intentioned policies of this sort often have unintended consequences, and providing more

information is often a better strategy.

         This paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 provides background on BTB policies. Section 3

describes our data. Section 4 presents our empirical strategy. Section 5 describes our results.

Section 6 presents robustness checks. Section 7 discusses and concludes.



2         Background on BTB policies

The first BTB law was implemented in Hawaii in 1998, and – as of December 2015 – similar

policies exist in 34 states and the District of Columbia. In addition, President Obama "banned

the box" on employment applications for federal government jobs in late 2015. Without BTB, it is

common for employment applications to include a box that the applicant must check if he or she has

been convicted of a crime, along with a question about the nature and date(s) of any convictions.

Anecdotally, many employers simply discard the application of anyone who checks this box. BTB

policies prevent employers from asking about criminal records until late in the hiring process, when

they are preparing to make a job offer.

         BTB policies fall into three broad categories: (1) those that affect public employers (that is,

government jobs only), (2) those that affect private employers with government contracts, and (3)

those that affect all private employers. We’ll refer to these as "public BTB", "contract BTB", and

"private BTB" policies, respectively. In practice, public BTB policies are the most common, and are
    11
    See for example, the "right to be forgotten" movement in Europe, which included a ruling that – at a person’s
request – search engines must "remove results for queries that include the person’s name" (Google, 2016). See also
the White House’s recent recommendations on consumer data privacy, available at https://www.whitehouse.gov/
sites/default/files/privacy-final.pdf.



                                                       10
passed first. Contract BTB policies are typically the next step. Private BTB policies are typically

the final step a jurisdiction takes. Every jurisdiction in our sample with a contract BTB policy also

has a public BTB policy. Similarly, every jurisdiction in our sample with a private BTB policy also

has a contract BTB policy. Due to the relatively limited adoption of contract and private BTB

policies to date, our analysis focuses primarily on the effects of having at least a public BTB policy.

    There’s reason to expect public BTB laws to affect both public and private sector jobs. Most

importantly, these policies were typically implemented due to public campaigns aimed at convincing

employers to give ex-offenders a second chance. Public BTB policies were intended in part to model

the best practice in hiring, and there is anecdotal evidence that this model – in combination with

public pressure – pushed private firms to adopt BTB even before they were legally required to.

Indeed, several national private firms such as Wal-Mart, Target, and Koch Industries, voluntarily

"banned the box" on their employment applications during this period, in response to the BTB

social movement.12

    Public BTB laws might also affect private sector jobs because workers are mobile between the

two sectors, and likely sort themselves based on where they feel most welcome. Because BTB likely

affected jobs in both sectors, we will focus on the net effect of BTB policies on the probability that

individuals work at all.



3    Data

Our analysis considers BTB policies effective by December 2014. Figure 1 maps the cities, counties,

and states with BTB policies by that date.13 Information on the timing and details of BTB policies

comes primarily from NELP (2016). The details of local policies used in this analysis are listed in

Table 3. When information about a policy’s effective date was available, we used that date as the

start date of the policy; otherwise we used the date the policy was announced or passed by the

legislature. If only the year (month) of implementation was available, we used January 1 of that

year (the first of that month) as the start date.
  12
     We do not consider the effects of those voluntary bans here, but do note that a principal-agent problem could
lead to the same effects as for government bans. A CEO might be inclined to hire ex-offenders, but the managers
who are actually making the hiring decisions might still want to avoid supervising individuals with criminal records.
  13
     Appendix Figure A-1 shows maps of BTB policies by year, for 2004 through 2014.



                                                         11
       Information on individual characteristics and employment outcomes comes from monthly Cur-

rent Population Survey (CPS) data for 2004 through 2014.14 The CPS is a repeated cross-section

that targets those eligible to work. It excludes anyone under age 15 as well as those in the Armed

Forces or in an institution such as a prison. Each monthly sample consists of about 60,000 occupied

households; the response rate averages 90 percent (CPS, 2016). Excluding those who are incarcer-

ated could affect our analysis: If BTB increases recidivism and incarceration by making it more

difficult to find a job, some of the people now unemployed because of the policy will be excluded

from the CPS sample. Any such sample selection will bias our estimates upward, so that BTB

policies look more helpful than they are.

       The CPS provides information on age, sex, race, ethnicity, education level, and current employ-

ment (if employed, and employer type). Since our hypotheses center on statistical discrimination

by race and ethnicity, we limit our analysis to individuals who are white non-Hispanic, black non-

Hispanic, or Hispanic (hereafter referred to as white, black, and Hispanic, respectively). We consider

three levels of educational achievement: no high school diploma, no college degree, and college de-

gree.15 We code someone as "employed" if they answer yes to the question, "Last week, did you

do any work for pay?" This should be the most reliable measure of employment for our population

of interest, for whom temporary, seasonal, or informal jobs are common. We restrict our sample to

those who are U.S. citizens, and who do not consider themselves retired.16

       Our goal is to measure the effect of BTB on individuals in the local labor market, so we assign

treatment at the level of Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs). All individuals are matched to

states, and about three-quarters are matched to MSAs.17 We consider individuals treated by BTB
  14
     We use the public-use CPS files available from the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). These raw
data contain item non-response codes when a respondent did not answer a question, rather than imputed responses.
Many studies use CPS data from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS); in those files, all responses
are fully cleaned and imputations replace non-responses. In light of increasing evidence of widespread non-response
in surveys like the CPS, and the effect that imputations have on the accuracy and precision of empirical estimates
(Meyer et al., 2015), we prefer the raw data, particularly for the relatively disadvantaged population of interest here.
  15
     In the CPS, these are determined using the "highest level of school completed or degree received" variable. For
our purposes, no high school diploma means the respondent has up to 12 years of high school but no diploma or
GED; no college degree means the respondent has up through some college but did not earn an associate degree or
bachelor degree; college means the person has an associate degree or higher. Note that the no high school diploma
category is a subset of the "no college degree" category; these are two ways to define low-skilled and we focus on the
latter to maximize statistical power.
  16
     The data also include whether the respondent reports being disabled and/or unable to work, but we use these
variables with caution as they could be endogenous to local labor market conditions and individuals’ employment
prospects.
  17
     About half of respondents are matched to counties. Running our analysis at the county-level yields qualitatively


                                                          12
if their state has a BTB policy, or if any jurisdiction in their MSA has a BTB policy. For individuals

living outside of an MSA, only state-level policies matter.

    Our primary group of interest is young (ages 25-34), low-skilled (no college degree) men. We

focus on this group for several reasons: (1) The age profile of criminal offenders is such that most

crimes are committed by young men. In 2012, 60% of criminal offenders were age 30 or younger

(Kearney et al., 2014). So, employers concerned about job applicants’ future criminal behavior

should be most concerned about younger individuals. (2) Employers report the most reluctance to

hire individuals who were recently incarcerated (Holzer et al., 2004), and those who are recently

released tend to be young because they were young when they were convicted.18 (3) The vast

majority of ex-offenders have a high school diploma (or GED) or less.19

    There are 855,772 men ages 25-34 in our sample; 503,419 of those have no college degree. In

that subset, 11.9% are black, 14.0% are Hispanic, and the remaining 74.1% are white. Forty-six

percent of the young, low-skilled men in our sample lived in areas that were treated by BTB as of

December 2014.

    Summary statistics for the full working-age male population (ages 25-64) in the CPS are shown

in Table 1. Summary statistics for our primary population of interest – low-skilled men ages 25-34

– are presented in Table 2.

    Individuals affected by BTB policies are not randomly distributed across the U.S. As Table 2

shows, those affected by BTB are much more likely to live in metro areas. Appendix Table A-1 shows

the effect of state characteristics on the likelihood of at least one jurisdiction in that state adopting a

BTB policy by December 2014. States with BTB policies are more urban, have more black residents,

have more college-educated residents, and have residents with higher earnings. When all of these

characteristics are considered together, the strongest predictor of having a BTB policy is having a

larger black population. (The remaining characteristics are statistically insignificant.)

    For the subset of states affected by a BTB policy20 , Appendix Table A-2 shows the effect of state
similar but less precise results.
  18
     Individuals released from state prison between 2000 and 2013 were 35 years old, on average, and the standard
deviation was 11 years (Yang, 2016).
  19
     Fifty-two percent of those released from state prison between 2000 and 2013 had less than a high school degree,
and 41 percent had a high school degree but no college degree. Only 1% of released offenders had a college degree
(Yang, 2016). This is partly because many inmates have the opportunity to earn a GED while incarcerated, but
college classes are typically unavailable.
  20
     This includes states with residents affected by BTB policies adopted in neighboring states, because they live in


                                                         13
characteristics on the date of the first BTB policy adopted in the state. States that are more urban

tend to adopt BTB policies earlier, as do states with higher-earning residents. States with larger

black populations tend to adopt BTB policies later, as do states with higher rates of poverty. When

these characteristics are combined into a single regression, none of them are statistically significant,

and the correlation between local poverty rates and BTB date reverses. However, the coefficients

are still somewhat large.

    Overall, this is a policy that has, so far, been adopted by urban areas. Those with larger black

populations – and so presumably where black male employment is a more salient policy issue – are

more likely to adopt BTB policies, although it appears that they were not the earliest adopters. The

effects of BTB found in this paper should be considered in light of these associations: the results

of this study speak to the effects of BTB in the types of jurisdictions that adopted the policy by

December 2014. Given that areas that don’t adopt BTB look different from those that do adopt

BTB, we conduct robustness checks that use only similar jurisdictions as control groups. We also

pay close attention to the "parallel trends" assumption of our difference-in-difference identification

strategy.



4     Empirical Strategy

We consider the effect of BTB policies on the probability that individuals are employed, based on

a linear probability model. We use the following specification:


    Employedi = α + β1 BT Bm,t + β2 δM SA + β3 Di + β4 λtime∗region + β5 δM SA ∗ f (time)t + ei ,                 (1)


where i indexes individuals. δM SA are MSA fixed effects. Di is a vector of individual characteristics

that help explain variation in employment, including race, ethnicity, age fixed effects, fixed effects

for years of education, and an indicator for whether the individual is currently enrolled in school.

λtime∗region are time-by-region fixed effects (where time is the month of the sample, 0 to 132,

and region is the Census region).21 δM SA ∗ f (time)t are MSA-specific time trends, using a linear
MSAs that span state borders.
 21
    Using Census division instead of region yields nearly identical results but is far more computationally intensive.




                                                         14
function of time. BT B is equal to 1 if any BTB policy (affecting government employers and possibly

government contractors and/or private firms) is in effect in the individual’s MSA. Standard errors

are clustered by state. The coefficient of interest, β1 , tells us the effect that a BTB policy has on

the probability that an individual is employed.

   To test for differential policy effects by race, we add BT B ∗ Black and BT B ∗ Hispanic terms

to equation 1. Since low-skilled white men are not a control group – they could be helped or hurt by

the policy – the differential effect is not the primary outcome of interest. We also compute the total

effect of BTB on black men and Hispanic men (BT B + BT B ∗ Black and BT B + BT B ∗ Hispanic,

respectively) to estimate the impact on each of these subgroups.

   Our preferred specification fully interacts all of the control variables with race. This is equivalent

to running the regressions separately by race, but still allows us to directly test for differential policy

effects. Allowing this additional flexibility (where the effect of all controls can vary with race) reduces

our statistical power and often has little effect on the estimates. However, for some subgroups it

makes a difference. We view this fully-interacted specification as the most conservative approach.

For the sake of transparency we will show how the main results change as each set of controls is

added.

   For each 25- to 34-year-old man in our sample, the full set of controls adjusts for: the average

employment probability for men of the same race/ethnicity within his MSA, the employment trend

for that race/ethnicity group in his MSA, monthly region-specific employment shocks (such as the

housing crash), and his individual characteristics. Any remaining variation in his likelihood of

employment would come from idiosyncratic, individual-level factors (for instance, an illness or a

fight with a supervisor), or MSA-specific shocks that don’t affect nearby MSAs – such as adoption

of a BTB policy. Our identifying assumption is that the adoption and timing of BTB policies are

exogenous to other interventions or local job market changes that might affect employment, so that

– in the absence of BTB – employment probabilities would evolve similarly to those in nearby MSAs

without the policy. The most likely threat to identification is that BTB policies were voluntarily

adopted by areas that were motivated to help ex-offenders find jobs. The timing of these policies

likely coincides with new, local interest in hiring those with criminal records. This should bias our

estimated effects upwards, toward finding positive effects on young, low-skilled, black and Hispanic


                                                    15
men.



5         Results

Figure 2 shows a local linear graph of the residuals from equation 1, for young, low-skilled black

men. Time is recentered so that 0 is the effective date of a jurisdiction’s BTB policy. For places

without BTB, we recenter using the average effective date – October 2010.22 Based on the pre-BTB

period, the identifying assumption that BTB and non-BTB jurisdictions would evolve similarly in

the absence of BTB – that is, that the treatment and control groups exhibit parallel trends – looks

reasonable: the two lines follow each other closely before the date-zero threshold. After that date,

however, the lines quickly diverge, with employment outcomes worsening in BTB-adopting places

and improving slightly elsewhere. When we consider individuals who live in non-BTB places as a

counterfactual for those who live in BTB-adopting places, it appears that BTB dramatically hurt

employment outcomes for this group.

         Figures 3 and 4 show equivalent graphs for Hispanic and white men, respectively. BTB appears

to have a negative effect on Hispanic men, though the pre-trends for BTB and non-BTB areas are

not as similar as they were for black men. That said, residuals hover around zero for both sets of

jurisdictions before the policy change. They then fall for individuals treated by BTB, while they

increase for those living in non-BTB locations. There is no apparent effect on white men.

         To consider these outcomes more rigorously, Table 4 presents our main results for men ages 25-34

with no college degree. We consider the overall effect of BTB, and test for differential effects by race

and ethnicity (black and Hispanic). We also present the total effect of BTB on these subgroups.

Each column adds control variables from equation 1 and/or restricts the sample of analysis.

         Column 1 shows the effects of BTB in the full sample, controlling only for MSA fixed effects.

With no additional information about the individual or the time period, it appears that BTB reduces

the average probability that low-skilled men are employed, by 5.0 percentage points. This effect is

larger for black men, by 2.2 percentage points, and that difference is marginally significant. There
    22
    To allow sufficient time on either side of the threshold in the graph, we use only jurisdictions where at least 18
months of data were available before and after the date of the policy change. This excludes approximately 20% of
our sample, as a large number of jurisdictions adopted BTB in 2013 and 2014. However, the full sample is included
in all regressions.



                                                         16
is no differential effect on Hispanic men.

      Column 2 adds detailed information about the individual, including age fixed effects, fixed effects

for precise years of education, and whether they are currently enrolled in school. This reduces the

magnitude of the above effects slightly, but qualitatively they are very similar.

      Column 3 begins to add information about labor market trends, with time-by-region fixed effects;

time is the month of the sample and region is the Census region. Controlling flexibly for labor market

shocks is important, as our sample period (2004 through 2014) includes the Great Recession. Many

BTB policies are implemented at the state-level, so we cannot control for month-specific state-level

shocks. However, most of the non-BTB labor market shocks we are worried about, such as the

housing crash, affected MSAs throughout the Census region. These fixed effects should absorb that

type of variation.23

      Controlling for time-by-region fixed effects wipes out the overall effect of BTB, reducing that

coefficient to a small and statistically-insignificant negative 1 percentage point. However, the

differentially-negative effect of BTB on black men remains: 2.2 percentage points (relative to a

pre-BTB employment baseline for black men of 67.7%). Combined with the coefficient on BT B,

the total negative effect on black male employment is a statistically significant 3.2 percentage points

(p < 0.01). There is no significant effect on Hispanic men in this specification.

      Column 4 further controls for non-BTB labor market trends with MSA-specific linear time

trends. This makes the estimate slightly more precise but has little effect on the estimates.

      The effects of the controls and time trends might vary with race – for instance, the employment

trend for black men in a particular MSA might be different from the trend for white men. Column

5 presents the results of a fully-interacted model, where the effects of all of the control variables

in equation 1 are allowed to differ across race/ethnicity groups (white, black, and Hispanic). This

reduces our statistical power substantially, but is the most conservative approach to isolating the

effect of BTB. It is equivalent to running the regressions separately by race. Based on these esti-

mates, BTB reduced employment for black men by a statistically-significant 3.4 percentage points

(5.1%), and for Hispanic men by a marginally-significant 2.3 percentage points (2.9%). This is our

preferred specification.
 23
      Using (smaller) Census divisions instead of Census regions yields nearly identical results.



                                                           17
   One concern about using non-BTB jurisdictions as controls is that they tend to be less urban and

have smaller black populations than places that adopt BTB. Even after controlling for pre-existing

trends, they might not be good counterfactuals for the places likely to adopt BTB. Columns 6 and

7 restrict the sample to places that are similar to BTB-adopting labor markets.

   Column 6 considers only individuals living in MSAs – that is, it excludes individuals living in

more rural areas. (In our dataset, those individuals could still have been affected by state-level

policies.) Since BTB-adopting jurisdictions tend to be more urban, perhaps it makes the most

sense to compare them only with similarly-urban places. Under this restriction, we lose about one-

third of our original sample. When we limit attention to individuals in or near cities, we lose some

statistical power but the total effect on black and Hispanic men is similar to before: BTB reduces

employment for black men by 2.9 percentage points (p < 0.05) and by 2.3 percentage points (p <

0.10) for Hispanic men.

   Column 7 restricts attention to only jurisdictions that adopted BTB by December 2014. If some

types of places are more motivated to help ex-offenders or reduce racial disparities in employment,

and thus to adopt BTB, labor market trends might be fundamentally different than they are in

other places. This compares apples with apples, so to speak – we consider only individuals who live

in places that eventually adopt BTB, and rely only on variation in the timing of policy adoption to

identify BTB’s effect. This reduces our sample to under half of what it was originally, so we again

lose statistical power, but the magnitudes of the estimates are very similar to those in column 5.

BTB has no significant effect on white male employment, but reduces the probability of employment

by 3.1 percentage points for black men (p < 0.05), and by 2.0 percentage points for Hispanic men

(not statistically significant).

   Overall, these results tell the same story as the graphs described above. It is reassuring to find

such similar effects across most specifications and samples. In particular, our robustness samples

including only metro areas or only BTB-adopting places show extremely similar effects. The fully-

interacted model is required to detect BTB’s effect on Hispanic men, but that effect is also robust

to different sample definitions. We see no significant effect of BTB on white men without college

degrees in this age group.




                                                18
5.1       Differential effects by region

Given differences in racial composition and labor markets across the country, we might expect BTB

to have different effects in different places. Table 5 separately considers the effects of BTB by

Census region. To simplify presentation, we show the results separately by race, so the coefficients

are comparable to the total effects (by race) in the fully-interacted model from column 5 above.

       We see that young, low-skilled white men are not affected by BTB anywhere. However, the

employment probabilities of their black peers are significantly reduced in three regions: the North-

east (7.4%), the Midwest (7.5%), and the West (8.8%). The negative effect on black men is much

smaller (2.3%) and not statistically significant in the South, where a larger share of the population

is black.24

       Similarly, we see evidence of differential effects for Hispanic men, though limited statistical power

means that none of the coefficients are statistically significant. The coefficients are negative across

all four regions, but are much larger in the Northeast (3.5%), the Midwest (5.7%), and the South

(3.6%). The estimated effect for Hispanic men living in the West – where a larger share of the

population is Hispanic – is near zero.25

       These results suggest that the larger the black or Hispanic population, the less likely employers

are to use race/ethnicity as a proxy for criminality.


5.2       BTB in weak vs. strong labor markets

Employers might be quicker to exclude large categories of job applicants – such as those with

criminal records, or young black men – when they have many applicants to choose from than when

it is relatively difficult to find qualified employees. We therefore might expect a policy like BTB

to have larger negative effects on the employment of young, low-skilled black and Hispanic men

when the unemployment rate is high than when it is low. Table 6 adds terms that allow the effect

of BTB to vary with the national unemployment rate. (We use the national unemployment rate

rather than state or local unemployment rates to limit concerns about reverse causality.) Effects
  24
     Based on 2010 Cenus data, 19% of the population in the South is black, compared with 12% in the Northeast,
10% in the Midwest, and 5% in the West (Rastogi et al., 2011).
  25
     Based on 2010 Cenus data, 29% of the population in the West is Hispanic, compared with 13% in the Northeast,
7% in the Midwest, and 16% in the South (Ennis et al., 2011).



                                                       19
are shown separately by race (equivalent to the total effects estimated in column 5 in Table 4).

   Columns 1 and 2 show the effect on white men, including linear and quadratic functions of the

unemployment rate, respectively. The total effects of BTB are calculated at 5%, 6%, 7%, 8% and 9%

national unemployment. (During this period, the unemployment rate ranged from 4.4% to 10.0%.)

The effect of the policy is slightly positive when unemployment is low, and slightly negative when

unemployment is high, but at all unemployment rates the effect of BTB on white men is near-zero

and statistically insignificant.

   Columns 3 and 4 show the effect on black men. Again the effect of BTB is more negative

when unemployment is high, but now the estimated total effects are relatively large and negative

even at low unemployment. The negative total effect becomes statistically significant at 7% or 8%

unemployment, and at 9% unemployment the total effect of BTB on black men is over 3.6 percentage

points and statistically significant (p < 0.05).

   Columns 5 and 6 show the effect on Hispanic men. The same pattern emerges: the total effect

of the policy is more negative as the unemployment rate rises, and that effect becomes statistically

significant when unemployment reaches 7% or 8%. With the quadratic term included, the total

effect of BTB on Hispanic men is near-zero and statistically insignificant at 5% unemployment, but

reaches -3.2% (p < 0.05) at 9% unemployment.

   These results confirm that employers are more likely to statistically discriminate when the supply

of labor greatly exceeds the demand for it. They also suggest that BTB policies may have worsened

the effect of the recent recession for these disadvantaged groups.


5.3    Substitution to other groups

BTB has the predicted effects on the group most directly affected by the policy, decreasing the

probability of employment for young, low-skilled black and Hispanic men. Other groups might

also be affected, as the beneficiaries of statistical discrimination. In particular, we might expect

employers to prefer groups that are less likely to include recently-incarcerated offenders, such as

older applicants, those with college degrees, women, and/or white applicants. However, it is also

possible that increasing the asymmetric information problem in this labor market could reduce total

employment.


                                                   20
   Table 7 presents the results of a fully-interacted model (equivalent to column 5 in Table 4 above)

for other demographic groups.

   Column 1 considers men ages 25-34 with college degrees. This group is far less likely to include

individuals with criminal records, so employers might be more willing to interview them after BTB

removes criminal history information from job applications. However, college-educated men are

unlikely to be interested in low-skilled jobs. We see that the effect of BTB on employment in this

group is very small and statistically insignificant.

   Column 2 considers the effect of BTB on older working-age men, ages 35-64, with no high school

diploma. These men are still more likely to have a criminal record, but are much less likely than

younger men to have been recently incarcerated and/or to still be actively engaged in criminal

behavior or associating with people who are. A previous criminal conviction might therefore be

less worrisome for a potential employer. We see that this is the case with respect to black men:

on average, BTB increases their employment by 4.3 percentage points (9.4%), though this effect is

not statistically significant. However, the effect on Hispanic men is negative and about as large as

before: 2.8 percentage points (3.9%).

   Column 3 considers the effect for older men (age 35-64) with no college degree – our preferred

definition of "low-skilled". Here we see that BTB increases black male employment by a statistically

significant 2.8 percentage points (4.3%). The effect on Hispanic men is also positive (1.5 percentage

points, which is 1.9% of the pre-BTB baseline) but not statistically significant. This suggests that

employers are weighting age more heavily when they consider job applicants, substituting away from

young black and Hispanic men and toward older black (and possibly Hispanic) men of the same

educational level, to avoid hiring the more worrisome ex-offenders.

   Column 4 considers the effect on older men with a college degree. As for highly-educated younger

men, we see no effects here.

   Column 5 considers young (age 25-34) women with no high school diploma. Women are less

likely than men to have a criminal record, and particularly less likely to commit violent crime.

If violent behavior is a primary concern for employers, we might see substitution into this group.

However, female employment might also respond to male partners’ inability to find a job, so an

increase in employment might tell us more about intrahousehold responses than employers’ pref-


                                                  21
erence. There is some evidence that white women are more likely to work when BTB is in effect

(employment increases by 1.2 percentage points, 2.6% of the baseline), and that black women work

less (employment decreases by 2.9 percentage points, 6.4% of the baseline), but neither effect is

statistically significant.

    Column 6 considers young women with no college degree. There are no significant effects here,

although Hispanic women in this group seem to benefit slightly, on average.

    Column 7 considers young women with a college degree. BTB increases employment by a

statistically significant 3.2 percentage points (3.9%) for black women in this group. Given that

college-educated women and men without college degrees are likely working in different labor mar-

kets, this probably reflects intrahousehold substitution of labor rather than employers’ preference

for hiring women due to BTB.


5.4    Persistence of effects over time

It’s possible that BTB increases the expected cost of hiring low-skilled black and Hispanic men

such that the policy permanently lowers employment for these groups. Alternatively, we might

expect BTB to have a temporary effect if employers and workers eventually adapt to the policy and

return to the pre-BTB equilibrium. For instance, employers might figure out new ways to screen

job applicants, and workers might learn new ways to signal their job-readiness to employers.

    Table 8 shows the cumulative effects of BTB on employment over time, for young, low-skilled

white, black, and Hispanic men, respectively. The coefficients show the effect of BTB during the

first year, the second year, the third year, and four or more years after the policy went into effect.

    Across all years, BTB’s effect on white men is near-zero and statistically insignificant. However,

BTB’s effect on black men is large and grows over time. BTB reduces employment for black men by

2.7 percentage points (not statistically significant) during the first year, 5.1 percentage points (p <

0.01) during the second year, 4.1 percentage points (p < 0.10) during the third year, 8.4 percentage

points (p < 0.01) during the fourth year, and an average of 7.7 percentage points (p < 0.05) during

the fifth and later years. This suggests that BTB has a permanent effect on employment for black

men.

    Effects on Hispanic men tell a slightly different story: BTB reduces employment for this group


                                                  22
by 1.6 percentage points (not statistically significant) during the first year after the policy goes into

effect, by 3.0 percentage points (p < 0.10) during the second year, and by 2.6 percentage points (not

statistically significant) during the third year. However, after the third year the effect declines to

near-zero. It appears that young Hispanic men adapt to the policy over time, perhaps by using their

networks to find jobs and signal their job-readiness to employers. This is consistent with previous

evidence that labor market networks play a particularly important role in hiring for low-skilled

Hispanics (Hellerstein et al., 2011).



6     Robustness

6.1   Effects on young men without a high school diploma

In the above analyses, we define "low-skilled" as having no college degree, for two reasons: (1) this

group includes the vast majority of ex-offenders, and (2) it provides sufficient sample size to draw

sound conclusions. However, we expect effects to be larger in magnitude for the subset of that

population with less education.

    Table A-3 presents the main results for those without a high school diploma or GED. The

total effects of BTB on black and Hispanic men are indeed larger in magnitude, but imprecisely

estimated due to the relatively small sample. Our preferred specification (column 5) estimates that

BTB reduces employment for black men by 14.9 percentage points (33% of the baseline); the 95%

confidence interval suggests that this negative effect could range from 7.2 percentage points (16%)

to 22.5 percentage points (50%). For Hispanic men we estimate that BTB reduces employment by

9.5 percentage points (13%); the 95% confidence interval suggests this negative effect could range

from 4.2 percentage points (5.8%) to 14.8 percentage points (20%).

    We also find suggestive evidence that BTB has a positive effect on white men with no high

school diploma. On average, white men in this group are 3.9 percentage points (5.6%) more likely

to be employed after BTB than before, but this effect is not statistically significant.




                                                   23
6.2    Effects of individual states on the main estimates

The implementation and effects of BTB could vary across states, and particular states might be

driving our main results. Looking at effects by region provides some evidence on this issue, but

we now focus on the effects of individual states. Tables A-4 and A-5 reproduce column 5 from

Table 4, dropping each state, in turn. Across the board, the results are qualitatively consistent with

our main results, but there are some states that have particularly strong effects on the estimates.

Excluding Colorado or New Jersey, for instance, increases the magnitude and statistical significance

of the effect on Hispanic men, suggesting those states are outliers. Dropping Virginia increases

the magnitude and statistical significance of the effect on black men, while dropping DC or South

Carolina reduces the magnitude of that effect slightly.



7     Discussion

"Ban the box" has arisen as a popular policy aimed at helping ex-offenders find jobs, with a related

goal of decreasing racial disparities in employment. However, BTB does not address employers’

concerns about hiring those with criminal records, and so could increase discrimination against

groups that are more likely to include recently-incarcerated ex-offenders – particularly young, low-

skilled black and Hispanic men.

    In this paper, we exploit the variation in adoption and timing of state and local BTB policies to

estimate BTB’s effects on employment for these groups. We find that BTB reduces the probability

of employment for young black men without a college degree by 3.4 percentage points (5.1%), and

for young Hispanic men without a college degree by 2.3 percentage points (2.9%). The effect on

black men is particularly robust across different specifications and samples.

    These effect sizes may seem large but they are consistent with those found in related studies.

Holzer et al. (2006) found that the last hire was 37% more likely to be a black man when firms

conducted criminal background checks, while Bartik and Nelson (2016) found that banning credit

history checks reduced the likelihood of finding a job by 7-16% for black job-seekers. Given relatively

high turnover rates in the low-skilled labor market,26 it does not take long for increases or decreases
  26
     Based on data from the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS), industries with high proportions of
low-skilled jobs, such as construction, retail trade, and hospitality services, have monthly separations hovering around


                                                          24
in hiring rates to result in a large change in employment. For instance, in a similar context Wozniak

(2015) found that allowing drug testing by employers increased employment for black men by 7-30%.

    In light of these other studies and estimated turnover rates, our estimates are plausible and may

actually be somewhat small. Indeed, our effects are likely biased upwards (toward finding positive

effects of BTB) for two reasons: (1) Jurisdictions that adopt BTB are typically more motivated to

help ex-offenders find jobs, and this motivation alone should increase employment for those with

criminal records. (2) The CPS excludes individuals who are incarcerated, so if some of the men

who are unemployed as a result of BTB commit crime and are sent to prison, they will end up not

being included in our sample.

    This is the first paper to consider the effects of BTB on the employment of young, low-skilled

black and Hispanic men, but our findings are consistent with theory and other research about

statistical discrimination in employment. There is rapidly-increasing evidence that BTB has unin-

tentionally done more harm than good when it comes to helping disadvantaged job-seekers find jobs.

Increasing employment rates for ex-offenders is a top policy priority, for good reason, but policy-

makers cannot simply wish away employers’ concerns about hiring those with criminal records.

Policies that directly address those concerns – for instance, by providing more information about

job applicants with records, or improving the average ex-offender’s job-readiness – could have greater

benefits without the unintended consequences found here.



References

Agan, A. and Starr, S. (2016). Ban the box, criminal records, and statistical discrimination: A field

  experiment. University of Michigan Law and Economics Research Paper No. 16-012.

Akerlof, G. (1970). The market for "lemons": Quality uncertainty and the market mechanism.

  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3):488–500.
5-6% of total employment. (Data are unavailable by age and skill level, so this likely underestimates the degree of
turnover for our population of interest.) If we conservatively assume (1) a 5.5% monthly separation rate for the jobs
held by young, low-skilled black men, and (2) that BTB reduces hiring rates for this population by 7%, then we
would expect a 5% reduction in employment within 14 months. This is in line with our results from Table 8.




                                                         25
Autor, D. H. and Scarborough, D. (2008). Does job testing harm minority workers? evidence from

  retail establishments. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(1):219–277.

Bartik, A. W. and Nelson, S. T. (2016). Credit reports as resumes: The incidence of pre-employment

  credit screening. MIT Economics Working Paper Number 16-01.

Becker, G. S. (1968). Crime and punishment: An economic approach. The Journal of Political

  Economy, pages 169–217.

Bonczar, T. P. (2003). Prevalence of imprisonment in the u.s. population, 1974-2001. Bureau of

  Justice Statistics NCJ 197976.

Borjas, G. J. (2015). The wage impact of the Marielitos: A reappraisal. Industrial & Labor Relations

  Review, forthcoming.

Bushway, S. D. (2004). Labor market effects of permitting employer access to criminal history

  records. Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice, 20:276–291.

Card, D. (1990). The impact of the Mariel boatlift on the Miami labor market. Industrial & Labor

  Relations Review, 43(2):245–257.

Carson, E. A. and Golinelli, D. (2014). Prisoners in 2012: Trends in admissions and releases,

  1991-2012. Bureau of Justice Statistics NCJ 243920.

Cooper, A. D., Durose, M. R., and Snyder, H. N. (2014). Recidivism of prisoners released in 30

  states in 2005: Patterns from 2005 to 2010. Bureau of Justice Statistics, NCJ 244205. Available

  at http://www.bjs.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=4986.

CPS (2016).    About the Current Population Survey.        Available at http://www.census.gov/

  programs-surveys/cps/about.html.

Ennis, S. R., Rios-Vargas, M., and Albert, N. G. (2011). The Hispanic Population: 2010. 2010

  Census Brief.




                                                26
Finlay, K. (2009). Effect of employer access to criminal history data on the labor market outcomes of

  ex-offenders and non-offenders. In Autor, D. H., editor, Studies of Labor Market Intermediation,

  pages 89–125.

Google (2016). Google transparency report: Frequently asked questions. Available at https:

  //www.google.com/transparencyreport/removals/europeprivacy/faq/?hl=en.

Hainmueller, J. (2012). Entropy balancing for causal effects: A multivariate reweighting method to

  produce balanced samples in observational studies. Political Analysis, 20(1):25–46.

Hellerstein, J. K., McInerney, M., and Neumark, D. (2011). Neighbors and coworkers: The impor-

  tance of residential labor market networks. Journal of Labor Economics, 20(4):659–695.

Holzer, H. J., Raphael, S., and Stoll, M. A. (2004). The effect of an applicant’s criminal history on

  employer hiring decisions and screening practices: Evidence from los angeles. National Poverty

  Center Working Paper Number 04-15, University of Michigan.

Holzer, H. J., Raphael, S., and Stoll, M. A. (2006). Perceived criminality, criminal background

  checks, and the racial hiring practices of employers. Journal of Law and Economics, 49:451–480.

Justice Center (2016). NRRC Facts & Trends. Available at https://csgjusticecenter.org/nrrc/

  facts-and-trends/.

Kearney, M. S., Harris, B. H., Jacome, E., and Parker, L. (2014). Ten economic facts about crime

  and incarceration in the united states. The Hamilton Project.

Meyer, B. D., Mok, W. K. C., and Sullivan, J. X. (2015). Household surveys in crisis. Journal of

  Economic Perspectives, 29(4):199–226.

Pager, D. (2003). The mark of a criminal record. American Journal of Sociology, 108(5):937–975.

Rastogi, S., Johnson, T. D., Hoeffel, E. M., and Jr., M. P. D. (2011). The black population: 2010.

  2010 Census Brief.

Schnepel, K. (2015). Good jobs and recidivism. Economic Journal, forthcoming.



                                                 27
Shoag, D. and Veuger, S. (2016). No woman no crime: Ban the box, employment, and upskilling.

  AEI Working Paper.

Starr, S. (2015). Do ban-the-box laws reduce employment barriers for black men? Unpublished

  conference draft.

Stoll, M. A. (2009). Ex-offenders, criminal background checks, and racial consequences in the labor

  market. University of Chicago Legal Forum, pages 381–419.

Thomas, M. (2016). The impact of mandated maternity benefits of the gender differential in pro-

  motions: Examining the role of adverse selection. Working paper.

Wolff, N. and Shi, J. (2012). Childhood and adult trauma experiences of incarcerated persons and

  their relationship to adult behavioral health problems and treatment. International Journal of

  Environmental Research and Public Health, 9:1908–1926.

Wozniak, A. (2015). Discrimination and the effects of drug testing on black employment. Review

  of Economics and Statistics, 97(3):548–566.

Yang, C. (2016). Local labor markets and criminal recidivism. Working paper.

Zhao, Q. and Percival, D. (2016). Entropy balancing is doubly robust. Stanford Working Paper.




                                                28
8      Figures and Tables

                     Figure 1: Jurisdictions with BTB policies by December 2014




    Jurisdictions with BTB policies are represented by yellow shading (state-level policies), orange
                   shading (county-level policies), and red dots (city-level policies.)




                                                  29
Figure 2: Effect of BTB on probability of employment for black men ages 25-34, no college degree




  Data source: CPS 2004-2014. Sample includes black men ages 25-34 who do not have a college
   degree. To allow at least 18 months of data before and after the effective date, this graph is
 limited to jurisdictions that implemented BTB between June 2005 and July 2013. The mean of
the effective dates applying to this group for BTB-adopting jurisdictions in this window – October
                 2010 – is used as the "effective date" for the no-BTB jurisdictions.




                                               30
Figure 3: Effect of BTB on probability of employment for Hispanic men ages 25-34, no college
degree




Data source: CPS 2004-2014. Sample includes Hispanic men ages 25-34 who do not have a college
   degree. To allow at least 18 months of data before and after the effective date, this graph is
 limited to jurisdictions that implemented BTB between June 2005 and July 2013. The mean of
 the effective dates applying to this group for BTB-adopting jurisdictions in this window – May
                2010 – is used as the "effective date" for the no-BTB jurisdictions.




                                               31
Figure 4: Effect of BTB on probability of employment for white men ages 25-34, no college degree




 Data source: CPS 2004-2014. Sample includes white, non-Hispanic men ages 25-34 who do not
have a college degree. To allow at least 18 months of data before and after the effective date, this
 graph is limited to jurisdictions that implemented BTB between June 2005 and July 2013. The
mean of the effective dates applying to this group in BTB-adopting jurisdictions in this window –
             May 2010 – is used as the "effective date" for the no-BTB jurisdictions.




                                                32
                   Table 1: Summary Statistics
                           Men ages 25-34 Men ages 35-64
                            Mean      (SD)     Mean      (SD)
BTB                        0.1930 (0.3946) 0.1870 (0.3899)
Employed                   0.8335 (0.3725) 0.8026 (0.3981)
No HS diploma or GED 0.0769 (0.2665) 0.0847 (0.2784)
No college degree          0.5883 (0.4921) 0.5804 (0.4935)
College degree or more     0.4117 (0.4921) 0.4196 (0.4935)
Enrolled in school         0.0145 (0.1196) 0.0023 (0.0478)
Age                        29.492 (2.8835) 48.930 (8.0649)
White                      0.7934 (0.4048) 0.8399 (0.3667)
Black                      0.0965 (0.2953) 0.0893 (0.2851)
Hispanic                   0.1100 (0.3129) 0.0709 (0.2566)
Northeast                  0.1881 (0.3908) 0.2154 (0.4111)
Midwest                    0.2563 (0.4366) 0.2526 (0.4345)
South                      0.3155 (0.4647) 0.3118 (0.4632)
West                       0.2401 (0.4271) 0.2202 (0.4144)
Metro area                 0.7089 (0.4543) 0.6819 (0.4657)
N                               855,772           2,873,182
      Data source: 2004-2014 Current Population Survey.




                             33
       Table 2: Summary Statistics: Men ages 25-34 with no college degree
                               All         Never adopted BTB Adopted BTB
White Non-Hispanic
BTB                      0.1414 (0.3484)           0 (0)         0.3408 (0.4740)
Employed                 0.8087 (0.3933)     0.8110 (0.3915)     0.8055 (0.3958)
No HS diploma or GED 0.1094 (0.3121)         0.1198 (0.3247)     0.0947 (0.2927)
Enrolled in school       0.0115 (0.1068)     0.0099 (0.0989)     0.0139 (0.1169)
Age                      29.424 (2.8935)     29.433 (2.8886)     29.411 (2.9003)
Northeast                0.1883 (0.3910)     0.1583 (0.3651)     0.2307 (0.4213)
Midwest                  0.2873 (0.4525)     0.2513 (0.4338)     0.3380 (0.4730)
South                    0.2909 (0.4542)     0.3541 (0.4782)     0.2017 (0.4013)
West                     0.2335 (0.4231)     0.2362 (0.4248)     0.2297 (0.4206)
Metro area               0.6127 (0.4871)     0.4261 (0.4945)     0.8760 (0.3295)
N                            373,237             218,413             154,824
Black Non-Hispanic
BTB                      0.2006 (0.4005)           0 (0)         0.3481 (0.4764)
Employed                 0.6564 (0.4749)     0.6588 (0.4741)     0.6547 (0.4755)
No HS diploma or GED 0.1498 (0.3569)         0.1659 (0.3720)     0.1380 (0.3449)
Enrolled in school       0.0132 (0.1143)     0.0122 (0.1097)     0.0140 (0.1175)
Age                      29.371 (2.9194)     29.419 (2.8761)     29.336 (2.9504)
Northeast                0.1228 (0.3283)     0.0405 (0.1971)     0.1834 (0.3870)
Midwest                  0.1898 (0.3921)     0.0930 (0.2905)     0.2609 (0.4392)
South                    0.5916 (0.4915)     0.7943 (0.4042)     0.4427 (0.4967)
West                     0.0957 (0.2942)     0.0722 (0.2587)     0.1130 (0.3166)
Metro area               0.8174 (0.3864)     0.6110 (0.4875)     0.9690 (0.1733)
N                             59,872              25,363              34,509
Hispanic
BTB                      0.2687 (0.4433)           0 (0)         0.4435 (0.4968)
Employed                 0.7921 (0.4058)     0.8138 (0.3893)     0.7779 (0.4156)
No HS diploma or GED 0.2283 (0.4198)         0.2481 (0.4319)     0.2154 (0.4111)
Enrolled in school       0.0149 (0.1211)     0.0141 (0.1178)     0.0154 (0.1232)
Age                      29.303 (2.8739)     29.251 (2.8762)     29.338 (2.8719)
Northeast                0.1376 (0.3445)     0.0394 (0.1946)     0.2014 (0.4011)
Midwest                  0.1065 (0.3084)     0.0856 (0.2798)     0.1200 (0.3250)
South                    0.2983 (0.4575)     0.5669 (0.4955)     0.1236 (0.3291)
West                     0.4577 (0.4982)     0.3081 (0.4617)     0.5550 (0.4970)
Metro area               0.8394 (0.3672)     0.7058 (0.4557)     0.9262 (0.2614)
N                             70,310              27,710              42,600
Data source: 2004-2014 Current Population Survey. Standard errors in parentheses.




                                       34
            Table 3: Ban the Box policies implemented by December 2014

State                   Jurisdiction             Law Type        Start Date
California              State                      Public       June 25, 2010
                        Alameda County             Public       March 1, 2007
                        Berkeley                   Public      October 1, 2008
                        Carson City                Public       March 6, 2012
                        Compton                    Public        July 1, 2011
                        Compton                   Contract       July 1, 2011
                        East Palo Alto             Public      January 1, 2005
                        Oakland                    Public      January 1, 2007
                        Pasadena                   Public        July 1, 2013
                        Richmond                   Public    November 22, 2011
                        Richmond                  Contract      July 30, 2013
                        Santa Clara                Public        May 1, 2012
                        San Francisco              Public     October 11, 2005
                        San Francisco             Contract      April 4, 2014
                        San Francisco             Private       April 4, 2014
Colorado                State                      Public      August 8, 2012
Connecticut             State                      Public      October 1, 2010
                        Bridgeport                 Public      October 5, 2009
                        Hartford                   Public       June 12, 2009
                        New Haven                  Public     February 1, 2009
                        Norwich                    Public     December 1, 2008
District of Columbia    Washington                 Public      January 1, 2011
Delaware                State                      Public        May 8, 2014
                        Wilmington                 Public    December 10, 2012
                        New Castle County          Public     January 28, 2014
Florida                 Jacksonville               Public    November 10, 2008
                        Pompano Beach              Public     December 1, 2014
                        Tampa                      Public     January 14, 2013
Georgia                 Atlanta                    Public      January 1, 2013
                        Fulton County              Public       July 16, 2014
Hawaii                  State                      Public      January 1, 1998
                        State                     Contract     January 1, 1998
                        State                     Private      January 1, 1998
Illinois                State                      Public      January 1, 2014
                        State                     Contract      July 19, 2014
                        State                     Private       July 19, 2014
                        Chicago                    Public       June 6, 2007
                        Chicago                   Contract    November 5, 2014
                        Chicago                   Private     November 5, 2014
Indiana                 Indianapolis               Public       May 25, 2014
Kentucky                Louisville                 Public      March 13, 2014
Kansas                  Kansas City                Public     November 6, 2014
                        Wyandotte County           Public     November 6, 2014
Louisiana               New Orleans                Public     January 10, 2014
Maryland                State                      Public      October 1, 2013
                        Baltimore                  Public     December 1, 2007
                        Baltimore                 Contract      April 1, 2014
                        Baltimore                 Private       April 1, 2014
                        Prince George’s County     Public     December 4, 2014
Massachusetts           State                      Public      August 6, 2010
                        Boston                     Public        July 1, 2006
                        Cambridge                  Public        May 1, 2007
                        Cambridge                 Contract    January 28, 2008
                        Worcester                  Public       June 23, 2009
Michigan                Ann Arbor                  Public        May 5, 2014
                        Detroit                    Public    September 13, 2010


                                        35
                        Table 3: (continued)

State            Jurisdiction             Law Type        Start Date
                 Detroit                   Contract      June 1, 2012
                 East Lansing               Public       April 15, 2014
                 Genesee County             Public       June 1, 2014
                 Kalamazoo                  Public      January 1, 2010
                 Muskegon                   Public     January 12, 2012
Minnesota        State                      Public      January 1, 2009
                 State                     Contract     January 1, 2009
                 State                     Private       May 13, 2013
                 Minneapolis                Public     December 1, 2006
                 St. Paul                   Public     December 5, 2006
Missouri         Columbia                   Public     December 1, 2014
                 Columbia                  Contract    December 1, 2014
                 Columbia                  Private     December 1, 2014
                 Kansas City                Public       April 4, 2013
                 St. Louis                  Public      October 1, 2014
Nebraska         State                      Public       April 16, 2014
New Jersey       Atlantic City              Public    December 23, 2011
                 Atlantic City             Contact    December 23, 2011
                 Newark                     Public    September 19, 2012
                 Newark                    Contract   September 19, 2012
                 Newark                    Private    September 19, 2012
New Mexico       State                      Public       March 8, 2010
New York         New York City              Public      October 3, 2011
                 New York City             Contract     October 3, 2011
                 Buffalo                    Public       June 11, 2013
                 Buffalo                   Contract      June 11, 2013
                 Buffalo                   Private       June 11, 2013
                 Rochester                  Public       May 20, 2014
                 Rochester                 Contract      May 20, 2014
                 Rochester                 Private       May 20, 2014
                 Woodstock                  Public    November 18, 2014
                 Yonkers                    Public     November 1, 2014
North Carolina   Carrboro                   Public     October 16, 2012
                 Charlotte                  Public     February 28, 2014
                 Cumberland County          Public    September 6, 2011
                 Durham                     Public     February 1, 2011
                 Durham County              Public      October 1, 2012
                 Spring Lake                Public       June 25, 2012
Ohio             Alliance                   Public     December 1, 2014
                 Akron                      Public     October 29, 2013
                 Cincinnati                 Public      August 1, 2010
                 Cleveland                  Public    September 26, 2011
                 Canton                     Public       May 15, 2013
                 Cuyahoga County            Public    September 30, 2012
                 Franklin County            Public       June 19, 2012
                 Hamilton County            Public       March 1, 2012
                 Lucas County               Public     October 29, 2013
                 Massillon                  Public      January 3, 2014
                 Stark County               Public        May 1, 2013
                 Summit County              Public    September 1, 2012
                 Youngstown                 Public      March 19, 2014
Oregon           Multnomah County           Public     October 10, 2007
                 Portland                   Public        July 9, 2014
Pennsylvania     Allegheny County           Public    November 24, 2014
                 Lancaster                  Public      October 1, 2014
                 Philadelphia               Public       June 29, 2011


                                 36
                             Table 3: (continued)

State                 Jurisdiction              Law Type         Start Date
                      Philadelphia              Contract       June 29, 2011
                      Philadelphia              Private        June 29, 2011
                      Pittsburgh                 Public      December 17, 2012
Rhode Island          State                      Public        July 15, 2013
                      State                     Contract       July 15, 2013
                      State                     Private        July 15, 2013
                      Providence                 Public         April 1, 2009
Tennessee             Memphis                    Public         July 9, 2010
                      Hamilton County            Public       January 1, 2012
Texas                 Austin                     Public       October 16, 2008
                      Travis County              Public        April 15, 2008
Virginia              Newport News               Public       October 1, 2012
                      Richmond                   Public        March 25, 2013
                      Portsmouth                 Public         April 1, 2013
                      Norfolk                    Public        July 23, 2013
                      Petersburg                 Public      September 3, 2013
                      Alexandria                 Public        March 19, 2014
                      Arlington County           Public      November 3, 2014
                      Charlottesville            Public        March 1, 2014
                      Danville                   Public         June 3, 2014
                      Fredericksburg             Public       January 1, 2014
                      Virginia Beach             Public      November 1, 2013
Washington            Seattle                    Public        April 24, 2009
                      Seattle                   Contract      January 1, 2013
                      Spokane                    Public        July 31, 2014
                      Pierce County              Public       January 1, 2012
Wisconsin             Dane County                Public       February 1, 2014
                      Milwaukee                  Public       October 7, 2011
Source: National Employment Law Project (2016) and local legislation.




                                      37
                                  Table 4: Effects on employment for men ages 25-34 with no   college degree
                                                  (1)          (2)         (3)      (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)
                BTB                          -0.0501  ∗∗∗ -0.0420  ∗∗∗  -0.0100   -0.0072      -0.0028     -0.0091     -0.0048
                                              (0.0088)     (0.0088)    (0.0073)  (0.0058)     (0.0061) (0.0064)       (0.0077)
                BTB * Black                   -0.0215∗      -0.0186    -0.0220∗ -0.0225∗∗     -0.0314∗     -0.0200     -0.0263
                                              (0.0126)     (0.0120)    (0.0114)  (0.0107)     (0.0173) (0.0166)       (0.0161)
                BTB * Hispanic                 0.0013       -0.0057     -0.0020   0.0026       -0.0206     -0.0136     -0.0148
                                              (0.0138 )    (0.0141)    (0.0146)  (0.0151)     (0.0154) (0.0144)       (0.0180)
                Total effect of BTB on:
                Black men                    -0.0716∗∗∗ -0.0606∗∗∗ -0.0320∗∗∗ -0.0322∗∗∗      -0.0342∗∗   -0.0291∗∗   -0.0311∗∗
                Hispanic men                -0.0488 ∗∗∗ -0.0477∗∗∗      -0.0120   -0.0038      -0.0234∗    -0.0227∗    -0.0196
                N                              503,419     503,419     503,419   503,419       503,419     336,641     231,933
                Pre-BTB baseline
                White                           0.8219       0.8219      0.8219   0.8219       0.8219      0.8226      0.8219




38
                Black                           0.6770       0.6770      0.6770   0.6770       0.6770      0.6770      0.6770
                Hispanic                        0.7994       0.7994      0.7994   0.7994       0.7994      0.7985      0.7994
                Controls:
                MSA FEs                            X            X           X        X           X           X           X
                Demographics                                    X           X        X           X           X           X
                Time * Region FEs                                           X        X           X           X           X
                MSA-specific trends                                                  X           X           X           X
                Fully-interacted with race                                                       X           X           X
                Sample:
                Full sample                        X            X           X        X           X
                MSAs only                                                                                    X
                BTB-adopting only                                                                                        X

     * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Data source: CPS 2004-2014. Coefficients show the effect (in percentage points) of BTB on the
                                                          probability of employment.
           Table 5: Effects on Employment for Men ages 25-34 with no college degree
                                             White     Black    Hispanic
                     Northeast
                     BTB                    -0.0163 -0.0476∗∗ -0.0266
                                           (0.0096) (0.0185) (0.0170)
                     N                       70,298     7,355     9,673
                     Pre-BTB baseline        0.8193    0.6447     0.7605
                     Midwest
                     BTB                     0.0140 -0.0492∗∗ -0.0464
                                           (0.0081) (0.0195) (0.0271)
                     N                     107,215     11,364      7,485
                     Pre-BTB baseline        0.8192    0.6390     0.8170
                     South
                     BTB                     0.0098   -0.0164    -0.0302
                                           (0.0144) (0.0302) (0.0368)
                     N                     108,565     35,423     20,974
                     Pre-BTB baseline        0.8328    0.7094     0.8357
                     West
                     BTB                    -0.0184 -0.0598∗∗ -0.0086
                                           (0.0104) (0.0245) (0.0243)
                     N                       87,159     5,730     32,178
                     Pre-BTB baseline        0.8171    0.6780     0.7978
                     Controls:
                     MSA FEs                   X          X          X
                     Demographics              X          X          X
                     Time FEs                  X          X          X
                     MSA-specific trends       X          X          X
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Data source: CPS 2004-2014. Coefficients show the effect
                (in percentage points) of BTB on the probability of employment.




                                              39
           Table 6: Effects on Employment for Men ages 25-34 with no college degree
                                      White                Black                   Hispanic
                                  (1)        (2)       (3)          (4)        (5)          (6)
   BTB                         0.0213      0.0456   -0.0170       0.1194     0.0054       0.3147∗
                              (0.0226) (0.0896) (0.0540) (0.2927) (0.0355) (0.1873)
   BTB * Unemp. Rate           -0.0031    -0.0100   -0.0022      -0.0407    -0.0036       -0.0934
                              (0.0030) (0.0268) (0.0064) (0.0831) (0.0043) (0.0562)
   BTB * (Unemp. Rate)2                    0.0005                 0.0026                  0.0061
                                         (0.0019)               (0.0056)                 (0.0039)
   Total effect of BTB:
   5% Unemployment             0.0058      0.0081   -0.0280      -0.0191    -0.0126       0.0002
   6% Unemployment             0.0027      0.0036   -0.0302      -0.0312    -0.0162       -0.0261
   7% Unemployment             -0.0004     0.0001  -0.0324∗      -0.0381    -0.0198      -0.0402∗
   8% Unemployment             -0.0035    -0.0024 -0.0346  ∗∗   -0.0398 ∗  -0.0234  ∗   -0.0421∗∗
   9% Unemployment             -0.0066    -0.0039 -0.0368  ∗∗  -0.0363  ∗∗ -0.0270  ∗   -0.0318∗∗
   N                          373,237 373,237        59,872       59,872     70,310       70,310
   Pre-BTB baseline             0.8219     0.8219    0.6770       0.6770     0.7994       0.7994
   Controls:
   MSA FEs                         X          X         X            X          X            X
   Demographics                    X          X         X            X          X            X
   Time * Region FEs               X          X         X            X          X            X
   MSA-specific trends             X          X         X            X          X            X
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Data source: CPS 2004-2014. Coefficients show the effect
                (in percentage points) of BTB on the probability of employment.




                                               40
                                              Table 7: Effects on employment for   other groups
                                                                  Men                                   Women
                                             Ages 25-34              Ages 35-64                        Ages 25-34
                                              College       No HS    No college    College     No HS No college College
                                                degree     diploma     degree        degree   diploma    degree    degree
                 BTB                            0.0044      0.0141     0.0003       0.0045      0.0115   0.0006    0.0005
                                              (0.0043)     (0.0140)   (0.0043)     (0.0032)   (0.0291)  (0.0092)  (0.0045)
                 BTB * Black                    0.0034      0.0287   0.0277∗∗∗      -0.0013    -0.0400   0.0011   0.0310∗
                                              (0.0166)     (0.0307)   (0.0095)     (0.0145)   (0.0382)  (0.0158)  (0.0171)
                 BTB * Hispanic                -0.0062    -0.0421 ∗∗   0.0145       0.0059     -0.0085   0.0186    0.0022
                                              (0.0165)     (0.0191)   (0.0090)     (0.0093)   (0.0507)  (0.0213)  (0.0198)
                 Total effect of BTB on:
                 Black men/women                0.0078      0.0428     0.0280***    0.0032    -0.0285      0.0017    0.0315∗∗
                 Hispanic men/women            -0.0018     -0.0280 ∗∗    0.0148     0.0104    0.0030       0.0192     0.0027




41
                 N                             352,353      243,267    1,667,573 1,205,609 60,110         477,531     458,692
                 Pre-BTB baseline:
                 White                          0.9052       0.6184      0.7875     0.8862    0.4438       0.6485     0.7921
                 Black                          0.8495       0.4552      0.6538     0.8235    0.4228       0.6226     0.8030
                 Hispanic                       0.8826       0.7126      0.7673     0.8726    0.4819       0.6273     0.7838
                 Controls:
                 MSA FEs                          X            X           X          X          X           X           X
                 Demographics                     X            X           X          X          X           X           X
                 Time * Region FEs                X            X           X          X          X           X           X
                 MSA-specific trends              X            X           X          X          X           X           X
                 Fully-interacted with race       X            X           X          X          X           X           X
                 Sample:
                 Full sample                      X            X           X          X          X           X           X
     * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Data source: CPS 2004-2014. Coefficients show the effect (in percentage points) of BTB on the
                                                          probability of employment.
           Table 8: Effects on Employment for Men ages 25-34 with no college degree
                                              White      Black    Hispanic
                      BTB – 0 to 1 year      -0.0079    -0.0265     -0.0161
                                            (0.0063) (0.0167)      (0.0144)
                      BTB – 1 to 2 years     0.0006 -0.0514∗∗∗ -0.0301∗
                                            (0.0088) (0.0182)      (0.0154)
                      BTB – 2 to 3 years     0.0089    -0.0406 ∗    -0.0257
                                            (0.0121) (0.0216)      (0.0176)
                      BTB – 3 to 4 years     0.0083 -0.0839∗∗∗ -0.0017
                                            (0.0150) (0.0261)      (0.0315)
                      BTB – 4+ years         -0.0004  -0.0772∗∗     -0.0039
                                            (0.0157) (0.0328)      (0.0352)
                      N                     373,237      59,872      70,310
                      Pre-BTB baseline       0.8219      0.6770      0.7994
                      Controls:
                      MSA FEs                   X          X           X
                      Demographics              X          X           X
                      Time FEs                  X          X           X
                      MSA-specific trends       X          X           X
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Data source: CPS 2004-2014. Coefficients show the effect
                (in percentage points) of BTB on the probability of employment.




                                              42
A     Appendix Figures and Tables

                     Figure A-1: Jurisdictions with BTB policies, 2004 to 2014




 Maps are by year, beginning with 2004 in the top left corner, 2005 at the top center, 2006 at the
top right, and continuing sequentially by row. Jurisdictions with BTB policies are represented by
yellow shading (state-level policies), orange shading (county-level policies), and red dots (city-level
                                               policies.)




                                                  43
                     Table A-1: Effect of state characteristics on BTB adoption
                                         (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)       (6)
Percent Urban                        0.0146∗∗∗                                                               0.0062
                                      (0.0039)                                                             (0.0067)
Percent Black                                    0.0146∗∗∗                                                 0.0175∗∗
                                                  (00053)                                                  (0.0073)
Percent Hispanic                                               0.0083                                        0.0063
                                                              (0.0075)                                     (0.0098)
Percent Poverty                                                            -0.0116                          -0.0296
                                                                          (0.0202)                         (0.0301)
Percent Bachelor’s Degree or More                                                     0.0327∗∗              -0.0073
                                                                                      (0.0133)             (0.0168)
Median FT Earnings (Male)                                                              0.0001∗∗∗             0.0000
                                                                                        (0.0000)           (0.0000)
N                                      51        51          51         51       51        51
         Notes: Outcome variable is whether any MSA in that state adopted BTB by December 2014.




         Table A-2: Effect of state characteristics on date of first BTB policy in the state
                                         (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)       (6)
Percent Urban                        -38.278∗∗                                                            -28.994
                                      (15.694)                                                           (26.417)
Percent Black                                    33.686∗∗                                                  36.493
                                                 (15.702)                                                (26.313)
Percent Hispanic                                              -24.210                                      5.5919
                                                             (21.671)                                    (31.106)
Percent Poverty                                                          98.132∗                          -23.346
                                                                         (56.339)                        (107.03)
Percent Bachelor’s Degree or More                                                     -65.698             -0.3367
                                                                                     (41.242)            (65.684)
Median FT Earnings (Male)                                                                     -0.1076∗∗   -0.0535
                                                                                               (0.0471)  (0.0816)
N                                        35         35         35         35          35          35
Notes: Outcome variable is the date of the first BTB policy adopted within the state, conditional on adopting at
                                   least one such policy by December 2014.




                                                      44
                          Table A-3: Effects on Employment for Men ages 25-34 with no high school diploma or GED
                                                 (1)           (2)          (3)        (4)      (5)          (6)         (7)
               BTB                          -0.0683  ∗∗∗ -0.0559   ∗∗∗   -0.0083    0.0073    0.0386       0.0261      0.0244
                                             (0.0187)      (0.0184)     (0.0163)   (0.0216)  (0.0262)     (0.0273)    (0.0296)
               BTB * Black                   -0.0605∗     -0.0671∗∗    -0.0773∗∗ -0.0994∗∗∗ -0.1874∗∗∗ -0.1607∗∗∗ -0.1610∗∗∗
                                             (0.0327)      (0.0317)     (0.0307)   (0.0331)  (0.0453)     (0.0475)    (0.0459)
               BTB * Hispanic                 -0.0263       -0.0314      -0.0243    -0.0385 -0.1335∗∗∗ -0.1338∗∗∗ -0.1190∗∗
                                             (0.0322)      (0.0326)     (0.0323)   (0.0312)  (0.0417)     (0.0465)    (0.0470)
               Total effect of BTB on:
               Black men                    -0.1288∗∗∗ -0.1230∗∗∗ -0.0856∗∗∗ -0.0921∗∗∗ -0.1488∗∗∗ -0.1346∗∗∗ -0.1366∗∗∗
               Hispanic men                 -0.0946∗∗∗ -0.0873∗∗∗        -0.0326    -0.0312 -0.0949∗∗∗ -0.1077∗∗∗ -0.0946∗∗∗
               N                               65,846        65,846       65,846     65,846   65,846       43,075      28,595
               Pre-BTB baseline
               White                           0.6844        0.6844       0.6844     0.6844   0.6844       0.6879      0.6844




45
               Black                           0.4541        0.4541       0.4541     0.4541   0.4541       0.4504      0.4541
               Hispanic                        0.7287        0.7287       0.7287     0.7287   0.7287       0.7219      0.7287
               Controls:
               MSA FEs                            X             X            X          X        X            X           X
               Demographics                                     X            X          X        X            X           X
               Time * Region FEs                                             X          X        X            X           X
               MSA-specific trends                                                      X        X            X           X
               Fully-interacted with race                                                        X            X           X
               Sample:
               Full sample                        X             X            X          X        X
               MSAs only                                                                                      X
               BTB-adopting only                                                                                          X
     * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Data source: CPS 2004-2014. Coefficients show the effect (in percentage points) of BTB on the
                                                            probability of employment.
Table A-4: Effects on employment for men ages 25-34 with no college degree (Dropping AL-NE)

                 Drop AL        Drop AK       Drop AZ      Drop AR       Drop CA      Drop CO       Drop CT
BTB                 -0.0025       -0.0026       -0.0028      -0.0025       -0.0016      -0.0014       -0.0030
                   (0.0061)      (0.0061)      (0.0061)     (0.0061)      (0.0067)     (0.0064)      (0.0063)
BTB * Black        -0.0314∗      -0.0307∗      -0.0320∗     -0.0325∗       -0.0290     -0.0309∗      -0.0306∗
                   (0.0174)      (0.0173)      (0.0174)     (0.0174)      (0.0184)     (0.0179)      (0.0179)
BTB * Hispanic      -0.0209       -0.0207       -0.0211      -0.0210       -0.0222    -0.0330∗∗       -0.0183
                  (0.0154 )      (0.0156)      (0.0158)     (0.0154)      (0.0150)     (0.0142)      (0.0164)
Total effect of BTB on:
Black men         -0.0339∗∗      -0.0333∗∗    -0.0348∗∗     -0.0350∗∗     -0.0306∗      -0.0323∗∗    -0.0336∗∗
Hispanic men       -0.0234∗       -0.0233∗     -0.0239∗      -0.0235∗     -0.0238∗     -0.0344∗∗∗     -0.0213
N                  496,481        496,711      496,576       495,676      467,052        492,347      495,400

                 Drop DE        Drop DC       Drop FL      Drop GA       Drop HI       Drop ID       Drop IL
BTB                 -0.0030       -0.0033       -0.0034      -0.0032      -0.0027       -0.0029       -0.0040
                   (0.0063)      (0.0061)      (0.0062)     (0.0063)     (0.0061)      (0.0061)      (0.0063)
BTB * Black        -0.0336∗       -0.0246     -0.0352∗∗     -0.0296∗     -0.0316∗      -0.0311∗       -0.0284
                   (0.0177)      (0.0157)      (0.0172)     (0.0177)     (0.0173)      (0.0174)      (0.1094)
BTB * Hispanic      -0.0226       -0.0195       -0.0195      -0.0224      -0.0225       -0.0204       -0.0204
                   (0.0158)      (0.0154)      (0.0156)     (0.0158)     (0.0161)      (0.0154)      (0.0166)
Total effect of BTB on:
Black men         -0.0366∗∗      -0.0279∗∗    -0.0386∗∗     -0.0328∗∗     -0.0343∗∗    -0.0340∗∗     -0.0324∗
Hispanic men       -0.0256∗       -0.0228∗     -0.0229∗      -0.0256∗      -0.0252∗     -0.0233∗     -0.0244∗
N                  495,456        499,741      485,197       492,170       501,213      496,261      488,433

                  Drop IN       Drop IA       Drop KS      Drop KY       Drop LA      Drop ME       Drop MD
BTB                 -0.0022      -0.0033        -0.0027      -0.0032       -0.0028      -0.0030       -0.0030
                   (0.0061)     (0.0061)       (0.0062)     (0.0061)      (0.0061)     (0.0061)      (0.0063)
BTB * Black        -0.0308∗     -0.0307∗       -0.0329∗     -0.0306∗      -0.0322∗     -0.0308∗      -0.0354∗
                   (0.0175)     (0.0173)       (0.0174)     (0.0175)      (0.0178)     (0.0173)      (0.0198)
BTB * Hispanic      -0.0205      -0.0205        -0.0192      -0.0199       -0.0196      -0.0204       -0.0212
                   (0.0154)     (0.0155)       (0.0154)     (0.0154)      (0.0153)     (0.0154)      (0.0158)
Total effect of BTB on:
Black men         -0.0330∗∗      -0.0340∗∗    -0.0356∗∗     -0.0338∗∗     -0.0350∗∗    -0.0338∗∗     -0.0384∗∗
Hispanic men       -0.0227∗       -0.0238∗     -0.0219∗      -0.0231∗      -0.0224∗     -0.0234∗      -0.0242∗
N                  493,901        493,365      495,607       494,402       497,026      493,945       494,161

                  Drop MA Drop MI Drop MN Drop MS Drop MO Drop MT Drop NE
BTB                  -0.0020       -0.0051       -0.0049      -0.0036       -0.0026      -0.0030        -0.0033
                    (0.0062)      (0.0056)      (0.0060)     (0.0060)      (0.0062)     (0.0061)       (0.0063)
BTB * Black         -0.0325∗       -0.0272       -0.0277      -0.0290      -0.0294∗     -0.0309∗       -0.0306∗
                    (0.0174)      (0.0177)      (0.0179)     (0.0174)      (0.0172)     (0.0173)       (0.0174)
BTB * Hispanic       -0.0218       -0.0187       -0.0179      -0.0196       -0.0205      -0.0192        -0.0194
                    (0.0161)      (0.0156)      (0.0154)     (0.0154)      (0.0155)     (0.0151)       (0.0157)
Total effect of BTB on:
Black men          -0.0345∗∗     -0.0323∗∗     -0.0326∗∗    -0.0326∗∗     -0.0320∗∗    -0.0339∗∗      -0.0339∗∗
Hispanic men        -0.0238∗      -0.0238∗      -0.0228∗     -0.0232∗      -0.0231∗     -0.0222∗       -0.0227∗
N                   497,858       490,480       492,456      497,803       492,912      497,540        495,664
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Data source: CPS 2004-2014. Coefficients show the effect (in percentage
                               points) of BTB on the probability of employment.




                                                     46
Table A-5: Effects on employment for men ages 25-34 with no college degree (Dropping NV-WY)

                 Drop NV        Drop NH       Drop NJ      Drop NM       Drop NY       Drop NC       Drop ND
BTB                 -0.0028       -0.0041       0.0009       -0.0021       -0.0013       -0.0031       -0.0030
                   (0.0061)      (0.0061)      (0.0059)     (0.0061)      (0.0062)      (0.0061)      (0.0062)
BTB * Black        -0.0307∗      -0.0294∗     -0.0350∗      -0.0322∗      -0.0337∗      -0.0315∗      -0.0312∗
                   (0.0175)      (0.0173)      (0.0195)     (0.0174)      (0.0191)      (0.0179)      (0.0174)
BTB * Hispanic      -0.0196       -0.0201     -0.0348∗       -0.0200       -0.0268       -0.0192       -0.0204
                   (0.0162)      (0.0155)      (0.0177)     (0.0156)      (0.0167)      (0.0153)      (0.0154)
Total effect of BTB on:
Black men         -0.0335∗∗      -0.0335∗∗     -0.0341∗∗    -0.0343∗∗     -0.0350∗∗     -0.0346∗∗     -0.0342∗∗
Hispanic men        -0.0224       -0.0242∗     -0.0339∗∗     -0.0221∗      -0.0281∗      -0.0223∗      -0.0234∗
N                  494,556        493,914       496,140      498,281       486,414       493,827       496,685

                 Drop OH        Drop OK       Drop OR       Drop PA       Drop RI      Drop SC       Drop SD
BTB                 -0.0024       -0.0029       -0.0009       -0.0007       -0.0031     -0.0033        -0.0028
                   (0.0065)      (0.0061)      (0.0060)      (0.0061)      (0.0064)    (0.0061)       (0.0061)
BTB * Black        -0.0335∗      -0.0312∗      -0.0337∗      -0.0318∗     -0.0343∗∗     -0.0257       -0.0311∗
                   (0.0179)      (0.0173)      (0.0174)      (0.0181)      (0.0176)    (0.0163)       (0.0173)
BTB * Hispanic      -0.0188       -0.0204       -0.0236      -0.0276∗       -0.0177     -0.0203        -0.0209
                   (0.0155)      (0.0154)      (0.0156)      (0.0151)      (0.0153)    (0.0154)       (0.0155)
Total effect of BTB on:
Black men         -0.0359∗∗      -0.0341∗∗     -0.0346∗∗    -0.0325∗∗     -0.0374∗∗     -0.0290∗∗     -0.0339∗∗
Hispanic men        -0.0212       -0.0233∗      -0.0245∗    -0.0283∗∗      -0.0208       -0.0236∗      -0.0237∗
N                  486,450        496,983       495,592      487,592       496,056       496,134       495,479

                 Drop TN        Drop TX       Drop UT       Drop VT      Drop VA       Drop WA      Drop WV
BTB                 -0.0028       -0.0020       -0.0025       -0.0027      -0.0009       -0.0039      -0.0033
                   (0.0061)      (0.0061)      (0.0061)      (0.0062)     (0.0060)      (0.0062)     (0.0061)
BTB * Black        -0.0325∗      -0.0347∗      -0.0315∗      -0.0314∗    -0.0417∗∗∗     -0.0311∗     -0.0313∗
                   (0.0176)      (0.0173)      (0.0174)      (0.0173)     (0.0148)      (0.0175)     (0.0173)
BTB * Hispanic      -0.0206       -0.0195       -0.0203       -0.0206      -0.0212       -0.0206      -0.0201
                   (0.0154)      (0.0155)      (0.0155)      (0.0156)     (0.0156)      (0.0160)     (0.0154)
Total effect of BTB on:
Black men         -0.0353∗∗      -0.0367∗∗     -0.0340∗∗    -0.0341∗∗     -0.0426∗∗∗    -0.0350∗∗     -0.0346∗∗
Hispanic men       -0.0234∗       -0.0215       -0.0228∗     -0.0233∗      -0.0221∗      -0.0245∗      -0.0234∗
N                  495,074        473,775       494,033      496,126       493,967       494,843       495,288

                  Drop WI Drop WY
BTB                  -0.0027       -0.0026
                    (0.0063)      (0.0062)
BTB * Black         -0.0329∗      -0.0319∗
                    (0.0175)      (0.0174)
BTB * Hispanic       -0.0187       -0.0185
                    (0.0153)      (0.0155)
Total effect of BTB on:
Black men          -0.0356∗∗     -0.0345∗∗
Hispanic men         -0.0214       -0.0211
N                   493,532       494,375
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Data source: CPS 2004-2014. Coefficients show the effect (in percentage
                               points) of BTB on the probability of employment.




                                                      47
