                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          BANKING THE UNBANKED? EVIDENCE FROM THREE COUNTRIES

                                        Pascaline Dupas
                                          Dean Karlan
                                       Jonathan Robinson
                                          Diego Ubfal

                                      Working Paper 22463
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22463


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2016




The protocols for this multi–site study were approved by the IRBs of UCLA, UC Santa Cruz, and
Stanford University. The multi–site trial is registered in the American Economic Association’s
registry for randomized controlled trials (ID AEARCTR–0000083). We thank Aaron Dibner-
Dunlap for outstanding research coordination, and Alejandra Aponte, Pia Basurto, Natalie
Greene, Rachel Levenson, Catlan Reardon, Michael Roscitt, and Andreas Tiemman for their
dedicated field research assistance. This study was implemented through IPA Uganda, IPA
Malawi and JPAL Latin America, and funded through a grant from the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation. Dupas gratefully acknowledges funding from the National Science Foundation. The
authors declare having no financial interests in the study results. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Pascaline Dupas, Dean Karlan, Jonathan Robinson, and Diego Ubfal. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Banking the Unbanked? Evidence From Three Countries
Pascaline Dupas, Dean Karlan, Jonathan Robinson, and Diego Ubfal
NBER Working Paper No. 22463
July 2016, Revised October 2016
JEL No. C93,D14,G21,O12,O16

                                         ABSTRACT

We experimentally test the impact of expanding access to basic bank accounts in Uganda,
Malawi, and Chile. Over two years, 17 percent, 10 percent, and 3 percent of treatment individuals
made five or more deposits, respectively. Average monthly deposits for them were at the 79th,
91st, and 96th percentiles of baseline savings. Survey data show no clearly discernible intention–
to–treat effects on savings or any downstream outcomes. This suggests that policies merely
focused on expanding access to basic accounts are unlikely to improve welfare noticeably since
impacts, even if present, are likely small and diverse.


Pascaline Dupas                                 Jonathan Robinson
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
Stanford University                             University of California, Santa Cruz
579 Serra Mall                                  457 Engineering 2
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                         Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER                                        and NBER
pdupas@stanford.edu                             jmrtwo@ucsc.edu

Dean Karlan                                     Diego Ubfal
Department of Economics                         Bocconi University
Yale University                                 and IGIER
P.O. Box 208269                                 diego.ubfal@unibocconi.it
New Haven, CT 06520-8629
and CEPR
and also NBER
dean.karlan@yale.edu
1    Introduction
Bank accounts are essential to daily economic life in developed countries, but are still far
from universal in developing countries: only 54 percent of adults in developing countries
report having a bank account, compared to 94 percent in OECD countries (Demirgüç-Kunt
et al. 2015). Instead of using banks, people save in more informal ways such as keeping cash
at home, which may be costly or risky and which may make many transactions inconvenient.
Many governments and donors believe that there are benefits to moving people into formal
banks: in recent years, groups such as the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund,
the United Nations, and the Alliance for Financial Inclusion, have put forward goals at the
country and institutional level for access to financial services.
    On a macro level, a vast literature has established the importance of the banking sector
on growth and development (for evidence, see Levine 2005, Beck et al. 2007, Black and
Strahan 2002, and Jayaratne and Strahan 1996). Yet a much scanter literature has success-
fully disentangled which functions of banks drive such a linkage. Two papers, for example,
estimate the impact of expanded banking on poverty (Bruhn and Love 2014 and Burgess
and Pande 2005), but both are asking the holistic question about expanded access to banks
and all that they offer, i.e. a full variety of both credit and savings products.
    We focus on a more narrow function: safekeeping. While the history of banking started
with safekeeping as the primary function, banks quickly expanded to include payments and
credit. He, Huang and Wright (2005 and 2008) describe this historical process, and put
forward general equilibrium models about the role of safekeeping as a catalyst for banking
sector development. He, Huan and Wright (2008, pp. 1013) observes: “While these points
[on safekeeping] may be obvious, this does not mean they are uninteresting or unimportant
for our understanding of money and banking. Yet they have been all but ignored in the liter-
ature.” By examining the impact of expansion of simple no-frill bank accounts which afford
arguably no further benefits beyond safekeeping, we tackle a micro-level partial-equilibrium
question about the importance of the safekeeping role for banks in developing countries.
Failure to observe an impact, naturally, is not a contradiction of the theory, but rather high-
lights the potential importance of the general equilibrium aspects of the model, rather than
the micro-level partial equilibrium benefits.
    There are several important factors which constrain bank account usage in developing
countries. First, bank accounts tend to be expensive. For example, in our study countries of
Malawi and Uganda, yearly maintenance fees have been reported as being over 20 percent of
GDP per capita (Beck et al. 2008).1 Accounts may have other non–pecuniary opening costs
as well, for instance if people do not know how to fill out the paperwork to open a bank
account or are intimidated to enter a formal financial institution. Second, bank accounts
may be of low quality on other dimensions, such as long transaction queues, far distance to
branches, and short or unpredictable operating hours (Dupas et al. 2012). Third, people
may not trust banks (e.g., Dupas et al. 2012; Bachas et al. 2016). Fourth, consumers
may be too poor to generate sufficient financial savings to warrant bearing the transaction
costs. Fifth, bank account product and marketing designs may lack tailoring to behavioral
constraints, such as planning fallacies, inattention, and time inconsistent preferences.2
    We examine the effect of removing the first barrier (financial costs and administrative
hassle) for unbanked households. A strength of this study is that the same experiment was
conducted simultaneously in three countries (Malawi, Uganda, and Chile), with approxi-
mately 2,000 respondents in each country. In each country, as is common in developing and
middle income countries,3 policymakers and donors expressed strong interest in expanding
access to basic savings accounts as a key component of a financial inclusion strategy. The
savings accounts offered in each country were similar: we facilitated the opening of basic,
“no frills” accounts, offering minimal interest. We covered all opening and maintenance fees,
so that the accounts were completely free to study participants.4 The three countries in our
study offer interesting contrasts because they are at starkly different stages of development
and banking access: GDP per capita in 2014 was $253 in Malawi, $677 in Uganda, and
$14,520 in Chile (World Bank 2014),5 while the percentage of households which had an ac-
count at a financial institution was estimated for 2014 at 16 percent in Malawi, 28 percent
in Uganda, and 63 percent in Chile (Demirgüç-Kunt et al. 2015).
    In each country, we selected study sites around the catchment area of existing banks.
Since we sought to work with initially unbanked households, we worked in rural areas in
which bank access was lower (the rural population makes up approximately 84 percent of
the population in Uganda and Malawi, and 11 percent in Chile). Any household that did not
already have an account at a bank or another financial institution at baseline was eligible
for the study. As would be expected, the percentage of people without accounts was starkly

   1
      These high fees may be due to several factors, including that banks find it hard to profitably lend
to creditors in countries where credit markets and credit bureaus are less developed, that overhead costs
are proportionally higher in developing country markets where balances held with banks are low, or that
competition among banks is limited.
    2
      See Karlan et al (2014) for a review of constraints to saving in developing countries.
    3
      See CGAP and IFC (2013).
    4
      These sorts of accounts have been advocated in many developing countries, for example as mandated
by the Reserve Bank of India.
    5
      The World Bank classifies Malawi and Uganda as low–income and Chile as high–income.
different in Chile than in the African sites: while 85 percent of people in Malawi and 77
percent of people in Uganda did not have accounts, the figure was only 26 percent in Chile.
Our study sample therefore consists of individuals who live close enough to existing banks
to potentially use them, but who had not chosen to open accounts on their own before the
program (presumably due to financial or other barriers).
    In Malawi and Uganda, we partnered with banks which offered basic savings accounts
with substantial account opening and maintenance fees. The experiment waived all these
fees for two years, and offered assistance with filling out the paperwork required to open
an account. In Chile, we partnered with a bank which already offered an account with no
opening or maintenance fees.6 Despite there being no financial barriers in Chile, qualitative
evidence collected for the study suggested that some people were not familiar with the
account opening and usage procedures; in that site, we therefore decided to facilitate account
opening by helping potential participants with paperwork. Nevertheless, we would expect
lower barriers to account opening in Chile.
    The rate of account opening among treatment households was 69 percent in Malawi and
54 percent in Uganda, but was only 17 percent in Chile where access to banks is higher.
A much smaller percentage actually used the accounts: within two years of follow–up, 10
percent of households made at least five deposits in Malawi, 17 percent in Uganda, and just
3 percent in Chile. Among these households, however, usage was substantial: the mean
total amount deposited by active users was $647 in Malawi, $528 in Uganda, and $1,858 in
Chile.7 Averaged across the entire treatment group, the amount deposited per household
was $3, $4, and $4 per month, respectively. These amounts are not trivial for Malawi and
Uganda (where average monthly individual expenditures are about $15 and $30 per month,
respectively), but they are tiny in Chile, where average monthly household expenditures are
about $250 per month.
    Even in Malawi and Uganda, as can be seen from the take–up figures, any effects would
have to be driven by the minority of active users – were there enough users to observe
treatment effects? Pooling the three waves of follow–up data, we find that monthly deposits
into formal financial institutions increase for the treatment group by about 0.5 percent of
monthly income in Malawi and 2.0 percent in Uganda, compared to the comparison group.
While these small average (intent–to–treat) effects are not surprising since the great majority
of people did not actively use the account, we note that under–reporting of bank savings
appears non–trivial in survey data, especially in Malawi, where average deposits in the last
month are about $0.55 in the survey data (for those with an account) compared to $1.77 in

   6
       The bank did charge withdrawal fees and also deposit fees after the 5th deposit in a given month.
   7
       All USD figures are provided in 2010 USD.
the administrative data (for Uganda these figures are $2.13 and $2.94, respectively).
    Where did the money saved in the bank account come from? One would expect that
some of the money put in the bank accounts was a reshuffling of money from other sources,
in particular money saved at home. Estimating crowd out of home savings is challenging,
since people are reluctant to reveal how much money they keep in cash to an enumerator,
especially in a face to face interview in the home. Consequently, many studies simply do
not ask about home savings (i.e. Dupas and Robinson 2013a). In this study, however, we
extensively pre–tested modules aimed in part to measure home savings. One key addition
is that we measured savings balances, in addition to flows. While balances have the major
disadvantage of missing much of the action, we found flows to be more problematic in such
settings, since transactions are few and far between and therefore occur outside the look–back
period of the survey.
    The balance data shows an increase in mean bank balances of $3.9 in Malawi and $8.8
in Uganda for the treatment group. About 50 percent of this increase appears to be crowd
out: informal savings (which we define as savings at home, in savings groups, and savings
with friends/family) declined by around $2.5 in Malawi and $4 in Uganda (with the bulk of
the decline in cash savings), leaving an overall treatment effect on total savings of $1.4 in
Malawi and $4.8 in Uganda. Compared to the control group mean for total savings of about
$14 in Malawi and $41 in Uganda, this amounts to an approximately 10 percent increase
in total savings balances in both countries, but this result is not statistically significant in
Malawi and only significant in Uganda when we trim outliers and control for the baseline
value. The results for savings flows show a similarly noisy picture. We expect that this sort
of crowd out of cash savings was also present in earlier studies but not measured. Overall
we find at best very weak evidence for an effect on total savings.
    Finally, we look at a host of downstream outcomes, such as business inventory, expendi-
tures, educational investments and health investments (we conducted follow–ups in Uganda
and Malawi only, since the 3 percent usage rate in Chile would make it nearly impossible to
observe any impacts). Unsurprisingly given the lack of a clearly discernible average treat-
ment effect on savings, we find no average effect on any of these outcomes. Effects for the
small minority of active users may be too small to generate an impact on average. Fur-
thermore, those who did use the accounts had a variety of reasons for saving, and therefore
the effects are diffuse across several channels and their corresponding downstream outcomes.
Nevertheless, our results highlight how the basic accounts offered did not produce beneficial
treatment effects on average for the representative unbanked household in any of the three
countries, whereas other studies, which we will discuss, have found that more specialized or
more targeted accounts can at times generate positive average treatment effects.
    What prevents more people from using basic accounts? Our evidence suggests different
explanations between the two poorer African sites and the more developed Chilean site. In
Malawi and Uganda, the constraint seems to be poverty: in follow–up surveys, 89 and 80
percent of households responded that they did not use the accounts because they did not
have enough money to save. This is consistent with the rest of our data, which suggests that
people are living well below the global poverty line and living essentially hand to mouth with
virtually no savings (respondents in the comparison group report holding a total of only $14
in Malawi and $41 in Uganda in cash savings). Indeed, we find that baseline wealth and
education predict usage, suggesting that people with more slack in their budgets save more.
In Chile, survey evidence shows that being unbanked (which is much more common among
the elderly) is primarily a choice: in that country, store credit is ubiquitous and the social
safety net is fairly generous in comparison to the African sites (particularly in the form of
pensions and health insurance), so there is relatively little need to save individually, and
people indeed report not needing to save.
    There are other important reasons for low usage. We find strong evidence that people
who live further from the bank branches used the accounts less, in both Malawi and Uganda.
Another issue is that the accounts offered virtually no interest, even though inflation was
high (14.0 percent in Malawi during the study period, and 10.7 percent in Uganda). In fact,
Malawi went through a major currency devaluation during this time period, in which the
Kwacha devalued by approximately one third. Nevertheless, while important, these were less
cited reasons for low usage, compared to the simple fact of low incomes.
    The pattern of usage we observe in our two African sites is similar to several previous
studies in rural Kenya (Dupas and Robinson 2013a, Dupas, Keats and Robinson 2015),
which both find that a majority of initially unbanked households never use accounts they
are offered but that usage among a subset of active users is substantial. A major difference
here, however, is that there was not enough usage among active users to generate statistically
significant treatment effects on any downstream outcomes. By contrast, the Chile results
suggest a much lower demand for bank accounts among currently unbanked households. To
take stock of these varied findings, we discuss (and include an extensive table) comparing the
target samples, features, usage and primary impacts found in 16 completed randomized trials
of savings products in 13 countries. There is too much heterogeneity in sampling and product
design, as well as what is meant in practice by each product design feature, to conduct a
formal meta–analysis. However, one pattern does emerge: few products appeal to more than
a small minority. Rather than simply expanding access to basic services, expanding access to
a wide variety of products catering to many different needs may thus be needed to generate
noticeable welfare impacts.
2       Background, Experimental Design and Data
2.1     Study sites
This study took place in two low–income African countries (Malawi and Uganda) and the
higher income Latin American country of Chile. These countries are at very different levels
of economic and financial sector development: GDP per capita is $253 in Malawi, $677
in Uganda, and $14,520 in Chile (World Bank 2014), while the percentage of adults with
an account at a financial institution remained stagnant at 16 percent in Malawi between
2011 and 2014, and increased from 20 to 28 percent in Uganda, and from 40 percent to 63
percent in Chile over that time period (Demirgüç–Kunt et al. 2015). In Malawi and Uganda,
censuses were conducted in 2010, accounts were opened in 2011, and follow–up surveys were
conducted until 2012–13. In Chile, the census and account opening were conducted in
parallel (in 2010–11), and no follow up was conducted. Web Appendix Figure WA1 presents
a timeline for study activities.
    Within each country, we partnered with banks in rural areas where we expected a large
share of the population to be unbanked. We worked in the Balaka and Machinga districts
in Southern Malawi; the Bukomansimbi and Kalungu districts in Central Uganda; and the
Temuco region in Southern Chile.8
    In each country, nominal interest rates on the bank accounts were low, so that real interest
rates were actually negative. Over the study period of 2010–13, the average annual inflation
rate was 3.7 percent in Chile, 10.7 percent in Uganda, and 14.0 percent in Malawi (World
Bank 2015). Also of importance is that during our sample period, the Malawian central
bank devalued the currency by 34 percent in May 2012 (Al Jazeera 2012).9


2.2     Partner banks
In each site, we partnered (through IPA / J–PAL) with a financial institution and selected
rural areas in which the partnering institution operated. Each site started with a listing
of households, from which households were randomly drawn for inclusion in the study, and
assignment to treatment and control. More details on the sampling and randomization

    8
      The specific choice of study site was made based partly on priors about banking access and partly for
logistical reasons. In Malawi, we chose to work in the Southern Region because a 2008 FinScope survey
highlighted the region as having the country’s lowest average savings rates. In Uganda, we chose the Masaka
region for convenience (it was not too far from IPA’s offices but was not part of the peri–urban area around
Kampala). Finally in Chile, we chose the Temuco region because it is one of the poorest regions in the
country.
    9
      Exchange rates at the start of the study in 2010 were 478 Chilean Pesos, 2,290 Ugandan shillings, and
150 Malawian Kwacha to US $1.
procedures are provided below, site by site.
    In Uganda, we were unable to find a formal banking institution without prohibitive fees
in rural areas,10 so we instead partnered with a Savings and Credit Cooperative (SACCO)
called MAMIDECOT (an acronym for the Masaka Microfinance & Development Cooper-
ative Trust). Originally founded in 1999, and incorporated with the Ugandan Ministry of
Tourism, Trade and Industry, MAMIDECOT is a local cooperative owned by its shareholder
“members.”11 We worked with three of the four branches, each located in a different trading
center. MAMIDECOT offers basic savings accounts which pay no interest unless balances
exceed $8.50, in which case the interest rate is 3 percent (as mentioned above, average in-
flation over this time period was about 10 percent per year). The total cost of opening
an account is high – about $15.12 The accounts also featured monthly maintenance fees of
approximately $0.20 per month, but had no withdrawal fees (this maintenance fee was later
doubled to $0.40 per month during our study period). These fees are all quite substantial
relative to monthly expenditures of around $30. Deposits and withdrawals can only be made
in person at the bank during standard bank hours (no ATM cards available).
    In Malawi, we partnered with NBS, one of Malawi’s 13 commercial banks. As of early
2013, it had branches or agencies in 37 locations and 73 ATM locations. We worked with
two branches of the bank, in Liwonde and Balaka.13 NBS offers basic savings accounts with
a 4.5 percent annual interest rate paid on balances of $33 or higher. There are no costs to
open an account. The minimum balance to keep the account open was $3.50 at the start
of the study but was raised to $8.2 within 2 years. Monthly maintenance fees started at
approximately $0.50 per month but were raised three times within our study period to a
total of $0.64 per month within 2 years. There are no withdrawal fees for withdrawals made
at the teller, but there is a $0.40 fee for withdrawals made using an ATM card (the ATM
card itself costs about $7 – both branches have 24 hour ATM access). Again, these fees are
quite sizeable compared to monthly expenditures of about $15 per month.
    Finally, in Chile, we partnered with BancoEstado, the only public commercial bank
and the third largest bank in Chile. BancoEstado offers an account with no opening or
maintenance fees called the “CuentaRUT” which every Chilean with a national Chilean
ID/tax number (the “RUT”) is eligible for. Despite the fact that CuentaRUT accounts

  10
      The only bank with branches in rural areas was the Post Office Bank, but requirements to open an
account were prohibitive.
   11
      At the onset of the study, it had over 11,500 members serviced by four branches.
   12
      This $15 fee includes $4.25 for a membership fee, $8.50 for two shares, and $2.25 for a passbook. In
addition, a minimum balance of $4.25 is required to keep the account open.
   13
      The Liwonde branch was opened in 2004 and in 2010 had 7,000 accounts; by 2013 it had a total of
12,000 accounts. The Balaka branch opened in March, 2010 and after 9 months of operation, it had 1,475
accounts. By February 2013, it had 4,322 accounts.
are free, their take–up is low among those who live in small towns or villages lacking a
bank branch. In 2010, to increase inclusion, BancoEstado facilitated access by allowing
account holders to make transactions at retailer stores, through a point of sale (POS) machine
(similar to a debit card machine) called Caja Vecina. Account holders can make deposits,
withdrawals, and pay bills through the Caja Vecina.14 However, people who do not have an
account must first visit the bank branch to fill out the necessary paperwork.


2.3     Sampling and Randomization
The details of the sampling procedure in each country are provided in the appendix. We
present a brief summary here.
   In Uganda and Malawi, a census exercise was conducted in the catchment areas of the
partner banks to identify unbanked households. In Malawi we additionally conducted a
census at six market centers to oversample households with at least one member involved in
an occupation other than farming.
   As expected most households were unbanked in these areas – 74 percent of households in
Uganda and 85 percent in Malawi were unbanked. Of the sample of unbanked households,
we applied several exclusion criteria. While these differed somewhat across sites, the most
important criteria were removing households in which both spouses were likely working for a
wage, households which were deemed too far away from the banks to use them regularly, and
households with no female head (see appendix for the full list of exclusion criteria and for
more details). Our study sample includes 2,160 households in Uganda and 2,107 households
in Malawi.
   In both countries, 50 percent of the households in the sample were randomly allocated
(only one individual per household) to receive the bank account subsidy. In Uganda, ran-
domization was stratified by gender, occupation15 and bank branch (recall there were 3
branches in the study). In Malawi, randomization was stratified by gender, occupation,16
marital status, literacy, bank branch, and whether the respondent was from the household
or market sample.
   Chile differed methodologically from the other sites in that the census exercise was not
representative of the entire region. Instead, enumerators went door–to–door until they
reached a sample size of nearly 2,000 eligible individuals. A door–to–door census exercise was

  14
      While deposits (up to 5 per month), purchases and payments are free of cost, withdrawals are charged
$0.62 per transaction. The same cost applies to deposits after the 5th deposit in a given month.
   15
      The occupation categories were classified as employee, self–employed: vendor, business owner, trader;
or farmer: including animal rearing, and housewife or unemployed.
   16
      The occupation categories were classified as employee, vendor, business owner, trader/farmer or animal
rearing, cash crop farmer, and housewife or unemployed.
conducted in 48 Comunas of Region IX in Southern Chile. During that census exercise, 9,985
respondents were interviewed, out of which 74 percent already had bank accounts (either the
respondent or spouse). Of the 2,472 respondents without a bank account, 1,975 were willing
to enroll and complete a baseline survey. Among those eligible and enrolled in the study,
half were selected to receive procedural assistance for the intervention. Treatment group was
assigned based on the last digit of the RUT: odd numbers were assigned to treatment, and
even numbers to the control group. Because this was done in the field at the end of the
baseline survey, treatment was not stratified on any characteristics.


2.4     Bank account subsidy offer
In all sites, respondents were given the opportunity to open accounts with no financial costs.
In Malawi and Uganda, account opening and maintenance fees were waived, and so was the
minimum balance requirement.17 Treatment respondents were given a voucher that could
be redeemed for the free account at the bank branch. To open an account, respondents
also needed three passport photos and needed to have their identity certified by the local
village council. To remove the cost of getting the photos and minimize the hassle of the
identity certification, account marketers facilitated this process by offering vouchers for free
passport pictures and by obtaining letters of certification from the local council for the
entire “treatment” sample. In Chile, where accounts were already free, households were
given assistance in filling out the necessary paperwork to open accounts. Below we provide
further details on the specifics of the bank account subsidy country by country.

Uganda Individuals in the treatment group were visited by agents of MAMIDECOT,
four to five months after the baseline.18 The agents gave some basic information about
MAMIDECOT and the accounts, and also explained that the accounts normally featured
various fees that would be waived for the study period. At the conclusion of the visit, the
agents gave respondents a voucher which could be brought to MAMIDECOT and redeemed
for a free account (these vouchers expired after 4 months). Beneficiaries of the free account
were informed that the monthly maintenance fees would be waived for a total of 21 months,
after which the promotion would end and account holders would be responsible for the fees.
In practice the promotion ended in March, 2013, 24 months after vouchers were distributed.


  17
     IPA compensated partner banks for the lost fees and balances.
  18
     These agents were employed jointly by IPA and MAMIDECOT, but they introduced themselves as
employees of MAMIDECOT when interacting with respondents at this visit (the visit was presented as part
of a campaign to attract new customers). This was done to minimize the risk of social desirability bias in
the follow–up surveys, which were carried out by IPA enumerators.
Out of the 1,080 individuals assigned to receive a voucher, 94 percent accepted the voucher19 ,
and 54 percent opened an account.

Malawi The procedure in Malawi was largely the same as in Uganda. Individuals in the
treatment group were visited by a NBS agent, were given some basic information about
NBS and the accounts, and were told that the accounts normally featured various fees
that would be waived for the study period.20 At the conclusion of the visit, the agents
gave respondents a voucher (which also expired after 4 months) which could be brought to
NBS and redeemed for a free account. Beneficiaries of the free account were informed that
the monthly maintenance fees would be waived for a total of 18 months, after which the
promotion would end and account holders would have to cover it on their own. In practice
voucher distribution happened in June/July 2011, and the promotion ended in June 2013,
24 months later. Out of the 1,053 assigned to the voucher, 89 percent accepted the voucher21
and 69 percent opened an account.22

Chile At the end of the baseline survey, individuals sampled for the treatment were in-
formed (by the JPAL enumerator conducting the survey) of the existence and of the main
features of the CuentaRUT account and were invited to open an account with BancoEstado.
Any respondent who was interested in an account received assistance with the account open-
ing process. In particular, the enumerator helped respondents fill the application form and
delivered the forms to BancoEstado. Participants were told that they would get an answer
from the bank in 20 days and that they would need to go in person to one branch of the
bank in order to activate the account. In total, 938 households were offered an account. Of
this group, only 17 percent signed up and activated their account within a few months.




  19
      Of the 68 people who did not accept the voucher, 51 were not interested in the program and 17 were never
found (12 people had moved outside the study region, 1 person had died, and 4 people were untraceable).
   20
      As in Uganda, the agents were jointly employed by IPA and NBS but introduced themselves as NBS
agents, conducting a new customer campaign. They did mention that the fee waiver was sponsored by a
non–profit (the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation), however. Follow–up surveys were conducted by IPA
enumerators.
   21
      Of those who did not accept the account offer, 69 were not interested and the rest could not be located.
   22
      In Uganda and Malawi, enumerators visited all households in the treatment group for a “study closure”
survey during which we reminded respondents that the fee waiver on the accounts was ending, so that
respondents who chose to keep their account open would have to start paying the fees. As discussed in more
detail below, usage of the accounts was quite low on average. Enumerators reminded them of the fees and
offered procedural assistance to close the account if they wanted to avoid fees.
2.5     Data
2.5.1    Baseline surveys

In Uganda and Malawi, the baseline surveys included modules on demographics and so-
cio–economic status, income, agricultural inputs and outputs, assets, expenditures, savings,
social transfers, cognitive ability, and time and risk preferences. In Chile, we used a shorter
baseline survey that focused on household demographics, participant’s socio–economic char-
acteristics, and sources of income, expenditures and credit.

2.5.2    Follow–up Surveys

In Uganda and Malawi, we conducted three rounds of follow–up surveys, administered ap-
proximately 6, 12, and 18 months after accounts were opened. The follow–up surveys were
similar across rounds, and to the baseline (which allows us to control for baseline values of
most dependent variables in the empirical analysis).
    Besides standard outcomes already examined in previous work, a special point of emphasis
in the surveys was the measurement of savings across multiple sources. In any savings study,
one would expect that at least part of the increase in bank savings would come from moving
cash from other places (i.e. crowd out). In our context, the most natural source of crowd out
would be from saving money at home, which is typically hard to measure (especially with
surveys conducted face–to–face, in the home or business where the money may be kept). We
extensively piloted modules to measure such savings, asking both about savings stocks and
flows. While there may still be under–reporting on this measure, we are better positioned
to quantify crowd out and to gauge impacts on total savings than previous work.
    Attrition in the follow–up surveys is fairly low and uncorrelated with treatment status.
Our regressions include all respondents who completed at least one follow–up survey (97
percent of sample). Attrition on this measure is uncorrelated with treatment (See Web Ap-
pendix Table WA1).23 In addition, the composition of those who completed at least one
follow–up survey is not different in treatment versus control (the p–value from an F–test for
compositional attrition difference is 0.71 in Uganda and 0.33 in Malawi.). Consequently, Web
Appendix Table WA2 shows that the respondents who remain in the sample post–attrition
have very similar characteristics as the pre–attrition sample, and are balanced between treat-
ment and control. Web Appendix Table WA3 examines attrition round–by–round, and also
finds similar attrition rates across treatment groups (of about 6–8 percentage points).

  23
     We note that all our results are robust to including only those households who answered all four rounds,
with the sole exception that the increase in total monetary savings in Uganda is only significant when using
the larger set of households.
    In Chile, given the low take–up rate of the bank accounts, we did not conduct full
follow–up surveys to measure impact. Instead, we conducted qualitative follow–ups with a
subsample to understand reasons why people chose not to open accounts.

2.5.3   Administrative account data

We also have administrative data from banks on account activity. However, in Chile, the
bank was not willing to release ID numbers for the bank data, so we are not able to merge
the data to our other surveys (and so instead have de–identified individual data). The data
covers 24 months in Uganda, 22 months in Malawi, and 17 months in Chile.


2.6     Sample Characteristics
Table 1 presents baseline characteristics for the follow–up sample, by treatment status and
for each study site, together with the p–values for the tests of equality between the treatment
and control means. As expected, the treatment and control groups are balanced along most
characteristics.
    The summary statistics also highlight key differences between the two East Africa sites
and the Chile site. The Uganda and Malawi sites are much poorer and younger, reflecting
differences in both the sampling strategy (we conducted door to door visits in Chile during
working hours, in a country in which many people have formal employment and were not
likely to be home) and in banking access (Chile has much higher bank account ownership
rates among working age adults). Panel A shows demographic and SES information. The
overall picture in Uganda and Malawi is one of serious poverty. Average years of schooling is
5.5 years in Uganda and 4.2 years in Malawi, both substantially lower than the minimum to
complete elementary schooling (seven years in Uganda and eight in Malawi). Literacy rates
are low: only 77 percent of people in Uganda and 61 percent in Malawi can read and write in
the local language. The main sources of income there are entrepreneurship and agriculture.
    Panel B shows access to savings. There are big differences across countries. The dominant
form of saving in this unbanked population is in cash at home – in Uganda, 97 percent of
people report keeping cash at home (to reduce reporting bias we asked about cash at home
or in a secret place), while interestingly in Malawi only 49 percent do (suggesting that a
large share of people may have close to no savings whatsoever). In Chile reported savings at
home is even lower, at 25 percent. While this is a surprisingly low figure given Chile’s level
of development, perhaps this is indicative of the ease of finding alternative sources of cash
for these households. We asked about many other sources, including ROSCAs, saving with
other people, and mobile money. In Uganda 23 percent save in ROSCAs, whereas in Malawi
the share is only 5 percent, both much smaller percentages than in Kenya (i.e. Dupas and
Robinson 2013a). While we excluded households with formal accounts, we did not exclude
those with mobile–money accounts, which encompass only 3 percent of our sample at baseline
in Uganda , and 0 percent in Malawi, where mobile money had yet to be introduced. All in
all, reported savings are very low: total reported savings stocks is only $32 in Uganda, $23
in Chile, and a really low $12 in Malawi. While we do not necessarily take these values at
face value as people may under–report savings at home to an enumerator, we view them as
indicative of extremely low financial savings.
    Panel C presents some basic statistics on income and expenditures. By both measures,
respondents in Uganda and Malawi are very poor, especially in Malawi: total expenditures
in the month before the baseline were only $18 in Malawi and $32 in Uganda (income was
$26 and $32). While we do not have a measure of total household expenditures (since we
only interviewed one respondent), these households are quite likely to be below the global
poverty line.24 In Chile, the income and expenditure questions were asked of the household
rather than the individual: reported values were $250 in expenditures and $270 in income,
much larger than in the two other countries.


3        Results
3.1      Take–up of the Accounts
Table 2 presents statistics on take–up of the accounts. As mentioned earlier, 54 percent
of respondents opened accounts in Uganda, 69 percent in Malawi, and 17 percent in Chile.
The majority of those opening accounts did not use them very much as shown in Figure 1,
where we present the distribution of the number of deposits over the study period. In the 3
countries, 42 percent, 41 percent, and 6 percent used the accounts at least once. We define
users as “active” if they made at least 5 deposits in the first 2 years after getting the account
offer. According to this definition, active usage rates were 17 percent in Uganda, 10 percent
in Malawi, and 3 percent in Chile.25
    Among active users, usage is quite high: active users made 13 deposits over the study
period in Uganda, 12 in Malawi, and 14 in Chile, and the average amount of total deposits

    24
      We did ask respondents to report the source of income of the spouse, but in many cases they did not
know this value with certainty, if we include those reports income is $41 in Uganda and $34 in Malawi.
   25
      This definition differs from Dupas and Robinson (2013a), which only had 6 months of bank usage data
and thus defined active usage as making at least 2 deposits over the first 6 months. Prina (2015) uses their
definition in her comparison of take–up across studies even if studies have a longer window (Table 3 in her
paper). With their definition, the figures in our study are 32 percent in Uganda, 25 percent in Malawi and
5 percent in Chile.
among active users was $528 in Uganda, $648 in Malawi, and $1,858 in Chile. These figures
imply average monthly deposits of about $22, $24, and $110 per month for active users, and
$4, $3, and $4 for the overall treatment group (total deposits were calculated over 22 months
in Malawi, 24 in Uganda and 17 in Chile due to data availability). These amounts are not
trivial for Malawi and Uganda (where average monthly individual expenditures are about
$15 and $30 per month, respectively), but they are tiny in Chile, where average monthly
household expenditures are about $250 per month. The pattern of usage we observe here is
similar to several previous studies in rural Kenya (Dupas and Robinson 2013a, Dupas, Keats
and Robinson 2015), which both find that a majority of households never use the accounts,
but usage among active users is high.
    Figure 2 plots the cumulative density function of the total amount deposited into the
account over the study period. On each graph, we also plot a line for the balance for which
the interest on deposits would cover the fees (so that the accounts would yield a positive
financial return). Given the interest rates, these would be very large balances: $702 in
Malawi and $348 in Uganda. Very few people save this much (just 13 percent in Uganda
and 3 percent in Malawi). This suggests that, absent the fee waiver offered for the study,
these accounts are unaffordable for the majority of unbanked households–and it is worth
noting that the fees charged by financial institutions chosen for this study are comparable
to those charged by most institutions throughout the African continent (Demirgüç–Kunt et
al. 2015).
    Figure 3 plots usage over time. Interestingly, while average usage is fairly modest, people
who do use the accounts continue to use them throughout the study period. As can also
be seen, people deposit and withdraw at similar rates over time. Consequently, account
balances do not increase very much over time, suggesting that the account balance is a poor
measure of usage in this context.


3.2    Determinants of Take–up
We next examine the correlates of take–up and active usage of the bank accounts in the
treatment group. We look at two primary outcomes: the “active usage” dummy defined
above, and total deposits (for which we use an inverse sine hyperbolic transformation to
approximate a log specification without dropping the zeroes, as is common in this literature
(see Prina 2015 and Callen et al. 2014). Since the Chilean bank did not give us access to
personal identifiers in the administrative account data, the only outcome we can examine
there is accepting our offer of assistance to open the account.
    Results are presented in Table 3. There are three important predictors of usage that are
statistically significant in both Uganda and Malawi: distance to the bank branch, years of
education and a proxy for wealth (the log value of agricultural and household assets). The
negative correlation between distance and usage is likely due to travel costs and is suggestive
that access to the branch is a constraint.26 The positive correlation between usage and years
of education and asset holdings is suggestive that better–off households have more income to
allocate to savings, though could also operate through other channels, such as human capital.
This correlation has also been found in previous work, such as Dupas and Robinson (2013a)
and Dupas, Keats, and Robinson (2015). We find some evidence that baseline savings are
correlated with usage, in particular savings at a ROSCA in Uganda, and home savings in
Malawi. In contrast to Dupas and Robinson (2013a), we find no differences in take–up
between genders or across occupations.
    Overall, we can’t predict very well who the active users are based on observables. The
R–squared in the regressions in Table 3 never goes beyond 0.11. Among other things, that
means that we cannot use a propensity score matching algorithm to identify who in the
control group would have been likely active users, in order to compare active users with
their proper counterfactual and increase statistical power compared to a standard “inten-
tion–to–treat” (ITT) estimation.


3.3     Comparing administrative to survey data
Our main results for treatment effects on total savings use the survey data from the fol-
low–ups, since these are the only measures we have for the control group. How accurate is
this data? Web Appendix Table WA4 shows figures on deposits in the month before the
date of each follow–up survey, from the survey and from the administrative data. Averaging
across rounds, average deposits in the survey data were $2.13 in Uganda and $0.55 in Malawi,
substantially lower than the average of $2.94 and $1.77 from the administrative data. The
table shows that the survey data has fewer large transactions: the standard deviation of
deposits is at most half as large compared to the administrative records in both countries,
and there is a wide discrepancy in the highest percentiles of the deposit distribution. The
balance data is closer to the truth, and even possibly overstated (average reported balances
were $21 in Uganda and $9 in Malawi, compared to true values of $12.5 and $8 recorded
by the banks). To deal with this misreporting, in the main specifications we winsorize at 1
percent, which brings the two measures much closer together (but for completeness we also
show non–winsorized results in appendix). While this type of measurement error is unlikely

  26
     Alternatively, this correlation could certainly be due to other differences between households that live
close to towns and households that live further away. Note however that the correlation is conditional on
most obvious covariates.
to be unique to our case and has been an issue in any study of this type, its presence suggests
that effects on savings balances will tend to be understated.
    Another note of interest concerning the administrative data shown in Table WA4 is that
the 30 days before the surveys (the periods over which deposits were self–reported) had
lower bank usage than the average month in the period: while administrative data suggests
average monthly deposits over the entire study period was $4 in Uganda and $3 in Malawi,
for the months covered by the surveys the same administrative records show averages of only
$3 in Uganda and $1.8 in Malawi. This means that the snapshot obtained from surveys may
further dampen observed impacts on total savings.


3.4     Impact on savings and other downstream outcomes
In Uganda and Malawi, we examine the effects of the accounts on a number of outcomes from
the follow–up data (in Chile, as discussed above, we did not collect follow–up data because
the take–up of the account was so low). We use the experimental variation to examine
differences in outcomes between the treatment and control groups. Since the experiment was
randomized and we have baseline measures of most outcomes, regressions are very simple.
For a given outcome Yhst for household h in strata s in wave t (see Section 2.3 for details on
the strata), we run the following ANCOVA regression

                             Yhst = αThs + βYhs1 + µs + θt + εhb                           (1)

where we control for the baseline value of the outcome (Yhs1 ), stratification dummies (µs )
and wave dummies (θt ). All monetary values are winsorized at the 99th percentile to reduce
the prevalence of outliers. Whether winsorizing is the correct thing to do when usage is so
skewed is unclear however – we therefore show non–winsorized results in Table WA5 and
WA6. The coefficient α represents the Intent–to–Treat effect.

3.4.1   Savings

Results for savings are reported in Tables 4 (deposits over the 30 days prior to the survey)
and 5 (savings balances). Table 4 shows a treatment effect on monthly deposits in financial
institutions (commercial banks, microfinance banks, and Savings and Credit Cooperatives,
including the partner bank) of just $0.74 in Uganda and $0.13 in Malawi. These are fairly
small figures, amounting to about 2 percent of individual labor income in Uganda and 0.5
percent in Malawi. Table 4 also shows substantial crowd out – in fact, the effect on overall
deposits is not significant. We take this as at best suggestive since there is a lot of error
in measuring these flows, and we prefer to rely on the saving stock data to quantify crowd
out.27
    Table 5 (savings balances) is our preferred specification to explore crowd out since, as
mentioned earlier, the limited window over which savings flows was measured missed most
of the activity. Column 1 shows that the stocks of savings went up by $8.8 in Uganda and
$3.9 in Malawi. Both effects are statistically significant, but are again quite small.28 We
find evidence of crowd out: in Uganda, savings in other sources declined, most notably home
savings which declined by $2.7; in Malawi, home savings declined by $2. Thus, the overall
increase in monetary savings amounted to $5 in Uganda (statistically significant in Table 5,
but this is not robust to not winsorizing the top 1 percent as can be seen in Table WA6)
and $1.4 in Malawi (not significant). As percentages, these are about 10 percent of control
group savings (which are $41 in Uganda and only $14 in Malawi), and about 1 percent
of annual expenditures (which are $350 in Uganda and $180 in Malawi, calculated from
Table 6). When we pool the two countries together the treatment effect on total savings is
significant at the 5 percent level, but again the magnitude of the effect is very low. We also
note that in Uganda the baseline level of total monetary savings was about USD 5 smaller
in the treatment group, thus the effect estimated in the ANCOVA regression could be due
to reversion to the mean (if we do not control for the baseline value, the treatment effect is
positive but not significant (not shown)).
    Overall, our reading of these results is that the average treatment effect on total savings
was at best very modest, and not clearly differentiable from zero.29

3.4.2    Other downstream outcomes

For completeness, Table 6 reports results of the bank account offer on a host of important
downstream outcomes, including business investment, expenditures, transfers to and from
others, health, and education. We find no statistically significant effects on any outcome.
Table 7 shows effects on a set of attitudes and beliefs. Here again we find no effect on
any outcome, with the one exception of trust in banks. Ultimately, we conclude that if
  27
       Columns 1 and 2 in Web Appendix Table WA7 replicate Table 4 by using the administrative data on
deposits at SACCOs (Uganda) or Banks (Malawi) instead of the reported data for people with at least one
deposit. Results are very similar to those presented in Table 4, though the effect in formal deposits increases
(but it is still quite low in absolute terms), and the total deposits becomes statistically significant.
    28
       Another reason balances are modest can be seen in Figure 3, which shows that withdrawals and deposits
were roughly of the same order of magnitude among users – users were taking out what they were putting
in.
    29
       Columns 3 and 4 in Web Appendix Table WA7 replicate Table 5 by using administrative data on
balances at the moment of the survey instead of reported savings at SACCOs (Uganda) and Banks (Malawi)
for those with positive balance data. The effect size in Uganda is here again smaller and the effect on total
savings becomes not statistically significant.
the accounts did benefit the subset of active users, there are evidently too few of them to
meaningfully affect these average treatment effects.30


4        Understanding Low Take–up
4.1      Uganda and Malawi: Poverty, Inflation and Transaction Costs
The take–up analysis in Table 2 shows a correlation between usage and baseline wealth,
and between usage and distance from the branch, suggesting that baseline poverty as well
as transaction costs might be important impediments to usage. To further explore this,
at endline we asked respondents why they did not use the accounts more. These results
are reported in Table 8. In Panel A, we asked treatment group non–users what barriers
prevented them from saving. The dominant answer was simply that people were too poor
to save: 80 percent of respondents in Uganda and 89 percent in Malawi gave this answer.
    In Uganda we further asked people why they find it hard to save in any source (not
necessarily the bank) – shown in Panel C, 90 percent of respondents mention having low
income as one of their top 2 reasons. Other main factors mentioned as main reasons are
related to expenditures: 73 percent state that expenses are too high and 82 percent answered
that unexpected emergencies make it difficult to save. These all refer to the same basic
problem that income is not enough to generate savings once subsistence expenditures have
been taken care of. These poverty–related, self–reported barriers to bank usage are broadly
consistent with the poverty levels observed in our surveys. Self–reported expenditures in
Malawi are just $15 per month and total savings stocks are just $12 total. In Uganda,
these figures are $30 per month and $30 savings total. These are much lower than in other
studies such as Dupas and Robinson (2013), Prina (2015) and Callen et al. (2014). We
provide additional summary statistics on the economic lives of individuals in the Uganda
and Malawi sample in Table WA8. The overall picture that emerges is one of subsistence
living, with over 85 percent of farm produce being self–consumed, very low levels of cash

    30
      In Malawi and Uganda, we had stratified the randomization of the bank account offer by gender and
occupation in order to test for heterogeneity in the effects across subgroups. We do not report this analysis
in the paper for brevity, but we have run this regression as pre–specified and found no systematic evidence
that some subgroup saw impacts from the treatment. In particular, we do not see effects among vendors, in
contrast with Dupas and Robinson (2013a). A major difference between the vendors in this sample and those
in Dupas and Robinson (2013a) appears to be in their average income – vendors in Dupas and Robinson
(2013) report earning more money and may thus have had a higher ability to save. Another important
difference between the two settings is that inflation was larger in Uganda and especially in Malawi over the
study period than it was in Kenya at the time of the Dupas and Robinson (2013) study five years earlier. In
the next section, we discuss in more detail these potential explanations, and others, for the lack of take–up
and impacts.
income, and very low levels of remittances being received from outside the village.
     Poverty is not the only reason people did not use the accounts, however – in particular,
while we have shown that people hold very little financial savings, they do have some savings.
In both countries, we tried to shed light on this by asking people who saved in a source other
than the bank why they chose not to use the bank (i.e. these are people that have some
savings but chose not to hold it at the bank), the results of which can be found in Panel
B. This encompasses nearly all respondents – 96 percent of respondents in Uganda and
94 percent in Malawi say that, at least sometimes, they save money in some other source.
Around 33 percent in Uganda claim that it is because they do not have enough money to save
in a bank account. Relatedly, in Malawi 33 percent report that depositing on the account
is not worth it since they would need to withdraw it shortly to finance consumption, and
37 percent report not being able to accumulate enough of a sum to warrant a trip to the
bank. Other factors that were commonly reported are liquidity: the money at the bank is
not available when needed (30 percent in Uganda) and distance to the bank (17 percent
on average in the two countries).31 These results suggest that, in addition to poverty, the
illiquidity of the bank account was a deterrent (which is corroborated by the take–up analysis,
which showed that distance negatively predicted usage).
     A final issue is that both Uganda and Malawi experienced high rates of inflation during
the study period. Figure WA1 shows how the peak inflation periods coincided with our
study phases. In Uganda, inflation spiked shortly after the bank account offer. In Malawi,
the particularly spectacular inflation, driven by the 34 percent devaluation of the Malawian
currency by the central bank in May 2012, started almost a year after the intervention. There
is no clear break in bank usage around the time of the devaluation among the few study
participants that used the accounts however – in particular, no increase in withdrawals just
before the devaluation (see Figure 3).


4.2     Chile: Widespread insurance and credit access
Understanding the reasons for the modest take–up became the primary question of interest
for the Chile site. A qualitative survey was administered to 639 individuals from our treat-
ment group in May 2012 in order to gauge their relative importance. We find evidence for
several important factors.

   31
     These results do not appear specific to our study sites. In 2011, a multi–country nationally representative
survey conducted by the World Bank (FINDEX) found that “lack of money” was the primary reason given
for not owing an account, at 83 percent in Uganda and 88 percent in Malawi, followed by the costs of the
accounts (52 percent in Uganda and 24 percent in Malawi), distance (41 percent in Uganda and 12 percent
in Malawi), lack of required documentation (38 percent in Uganda and 18 percent in Malawi) and lack of
trust (24 percent in Uganda and 9 percent in Malawi).
    First, recall that bank account ownership is much higher in Chile than the other two sites,
with 74 percent of respondents we interviewed in our door–to–door census exercise reporting
already having accounts (despite the fact that we focused our study in the poorest region of
Chile and in communities with the lowest bank account penetration according to our partner
bank BancoEstado). In addition, bank accounts were readily available at no financial cost.
This is a very different context from the Uganda and Malawi sites, and strongly suggests that
people without accounts in Chile chose not to open them because they did not want them.
As shown in Table 1, unbanked respondents in Chile were predominantly older women who
were out of the labor market and relied on others for financial support (26 percent report
that their main source of income is the wage of other household members, and another 35
percent report that it is their pension or other government assistance).
    Second, Chile is a much more developed economy than Malawi and Uganda and offers
various support programs for poor people. Panel A of Table 9 presents evidence on govern-
ment support. 73 percent of households receive government assistance (50 percent of them
receive a family subsidy that includes free medical care and dental treatment), 32 percent
receive some type of pension, and 85 percent receive either government assistance, a pension,
or both. Among those who do not receive a pension, 76 percent expect to receive one in the
future. Government assistance and pensions are distributed monthly, constituting a reliable
income stream for a majority of the sample. Our follow–up data shows that the vast major-
ity (96 percent) of government transfer recipients receive them without a bank account, and
only 23 percent of current transfer recipients see a benefit to having the transfer deposited
directly into a bank account. In all, the system of government transfers is highly utilized
and perceived to be highly effective, likely attenuating the demand for savings accounts.
    Healthcare also seems to be comprehensive for the sample as shown in Panel B of Table
9. 86 percent of the sample believes that the cost for a major medical procedure like surgery
would be mostly or completely covered by government programs. The share the household
would expect to pay for a surgery is low: it is 0 for 62 percent of the sample and 25 percent
for another 19 percent. Healthcare that is expected to be comprehensive further mitigates
the need to privately store funds to respond to health shocks.
    Third, the Chile population enjoys easy access to low–cost credit, reducing the need to
privately save for a specific purpose or an emergency. Using baseline data, Panel C of Table
9 shows that 30 percent of respondents reported having obtained a loan or credit card from a
formal institution, and 11 percent had an active credit line or credit card. In addition, in our
follow–up survey, 48 percent report having bought an item on installment payments in the
previous year. Moreover, when respondents are asked how they would get money to cover an
emergency that requires around $600, only 1 percent reported that they would use savings,
while 17 percent reported they would get a loan from a bank or formal institution, 5 percent
would get a loan from other sources, and 23 percent from family or friends. While many of
these respondents also mention that the interest rates on these loans are high, nevertheless
these figures suggests that credit from multiple formal and informal sources is both accessible
and widely used.


5    Comparison with other savings studies
Table 10 provides a detailed meta–comparison of 16 recent studies including randomized
trials of savings products. The most similar (i.e., closest to a “basic” savings account) papers
are Dupas and Robinson (2013a) with Kenyan vendors and bicycle taxis, Prina (2015) with
women living in slums in Nepal, and Dupas, Keats and Robinson (2015) with unbanked
households in rural Kenya. Each of these prior studies observed some effect on at least one
downstream outcome for at least a subsample, such as business investment/expenditures
for female vendors (Dupas and Robinson 2013a), perception of financial well–being among
poor women (Prina 2015), or dependence on remittances and financial support to others
for dual–headed households (Dupas, Keats and Robinson 2015). As discussed earlier, we
checked for the presence of impacts on such sub–samples in our data but did not find any
significant patterns. What explains this difference?
    As it turns out, the take–up pattern we observe is not that far from these other studies.
The two closest papers conducted in East Africa are Dupas and Robinson (2013a) in which
only 35 percent of people ever used the account, and Dupas, Keats and Robinson (2015)
in which only 28 percent did. As here, the people who used the accounts saved fairly large
sums, however, and so the positive treatment effects were driven by a minority of users
who benefited greatly. The pattern in the closely related study of Prina (2015) in Nepal is
somewhat different : 80 percent of people took up accounts in that study and most users
made many deposits.
    We postulate that the main reason that usage was lower in our study sites is that people
in Chile did not have much use for accounts, and that people in Uganda and Malawi did
not use the accounts much because they were poorer than in previous studies. In addition,
we find strong evidence that people who lived further from the bank used the accounts
less, suggesting that travel costs were an impediment. The discrepancy in the emergence
of downstream outcomes among users may come from the fact that the impacts were more
diverse and thus harder to observe in Uganda and Malawi.
    However, there are also other features of the interventions that might explain the dif-
ferences. Prina (2015) worked with an NGO which operated local banking locations in the
slums where people lived, for 3 hours per day twice per week. These mobile branches re-
duced transaction costs substantially; in addition, the pre–arranged schedule of visits may
have served as a reminder or coordination device for people. The respondents in Dupas and
Robinson (2013a) were all entrepreneurs working in a market where the bank was located, so
transaction costs were most likely smaller. In addition, the collection of logbooks from partic-
ipants could have produced a behavioral attention–increasing “nudge” that, when interacted
with the treatment of a bank account, led to higher savings for a subset of the treatment
group. Another possible difference is that the accounts in Dupas and Robinson (2013a)
and Dupas, Keats and Robinson (2015) had withdrawal fees, which might have acted as a
(weak) commitment device (note, however, that Chile had withdrawal fees as well, so this
explanation is not relevant to explain lower usage there). A final possibility is that several
of these studies were operated by NGOs (Prina 2015) or marketed by NGOs at the outset
(Dupas and Robinson 2013a and Dupas, Keats and Robinson 2015). The NGO may have
implicitly signaled that it was in people’s best interest to save more (compared to a bank
which is trying to maximize its own profits) or may have induced people to expect benefits
from the NGO from complying (i.e., individuals may perceive that satisfying the guidance of
an NGO could lead to future benefits). This is unlikely to be the main explanation though:
while accounts were not endorsed in Uganda or Chile, they were endorsed by the NGO in
Malawi and yet take–up was still low.
    Extending past the “basic” savings accounts, Panel C in Table 10 shows usage and treat-
ment effects for more “behavioral” savings accounts and features, including commitments
(commitments to deposit, commitments to no withdraw), reminders, labeling of accounts,
peer effects or financial literacy training. For most studies the sample was narrowly selected
(the sample is often composed of previously banked households; Dupas and Robinson 2013b
focused on those self–selected into participating in a ROSCA) and therefore comparisons
with our representative sample of unbanked households are difficult. Overall, the pattern
that emerges, if any, is that different features matter for different segments of the population,
with no “one size fits all”.


6     Conclusion
Bank accounts as currently offered appear unappealing to the majority of individuals in our
three samples of unbanked, rural households – even when these accounts are completely
subsidized. While we do observe substantial usage among a subset of active users, we are
unable to pick up any statistically significant effects on downstream outcomes. This is not
surprising since the average impact on total savings is itself relatively modest at best, and
noisily estimated. If any, treatment effects on downstream outcomes are likely diffuse since
savings purposes are heterogeneous, thus difficult to detect, because of little ability to predict
how user households would use the savings.
    One important question is whether the approximately 80 percent of individuals in our
Malawi and Uganda samples who did not make much use of their account are simply too
poor to save at all, or whether the bank accounts were simply not well tailored to their
needs or habits. We provide suggestive evidence that poverty is the main limiting factor.
In both sites, but especially in Malawi, households hold limited savings in any source. We
find that assets are predictors of usage in both sites. However, we find some suggestive
evidence that barriers such as transaction costs limit usage too: distance to the bank is a
predictor of usage in both sites. Overall, our results suggest that while there may be an
unmet demand for formal savings instruments in rural Africa, bare–bones bank accounts are
not appealing. Therefore, pushing for existing formal institutions to expand their services to
rural areas, even with one–time account opening subsidies, may not be enough to broaden
financial access and definitely will not yield the hoped for poverty alleviation results.
References
 [1] Al Jazeera (2012). “Malawi devalues currency by a third.” May 8, 2012. Accessed online
        at: http://www.aljazeera.com/news/africa/2012/05/20125863922498538.html.
 [2] Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin (2006a). “Tying Odysseus to the mast:
        evidence from a commitment savings product in the Philippines.” Quarterly Journal
        of Economics 121 (2): 635–672.
 [3] Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin (2006b). “Deposit collectors.” Advances in
        Economic Analysis & Policy 6 (2): 1–22.
 [4] Bachas, Pierre, Paul Gertler, and Sean Higgins (2016). “Banking on Trust: How Debit
        Cards Help the Poor to Save More.” Working Paper.
 [5] Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç–Kunt, and Ross Levine (2007). “Finance, Inequality and
        the Poor” Journal of Economic Growth 12 (1): 27–49.
 [6] Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç–Kunt, and Maria Soledad Martinez Peria (2008). "Bank-
        ing services for everyone? Barriers to bank access and use around the world." World
        Bank Economic Review 22 (3): 397–430.
 [7] Black, Sandra and Philip Strahan (2002). “Entrepreneurship and Bank Credit Avail-
        ability.” Journal of Finance 57 (6): 2807–2833.
 [8] Bruhn, Miriam and Inessa Love (2014). “The Real Impact of Improved Access to Fi-
        nance: Evidence from Mexico.” Journal of Finance 59 (3): 2807–2833.
 [9] Burgess, Robin and Rohini Pande (2005). “Do Rural Banks Matter? Evidence from the
        Indian Social Banking Experiment.” American Economic Review 95 (3), 780–795.
[10] Brune, Lasse, Xavier Giné, Jessica Goldberg, and Dean Yang (2015). “Facilitating Sav-
        ings for Agriculture: Field Experimental Evidence from Malawi.” Economic Devel-
        opment and Cultural Change 64 (2): 187–220.
[11] Callen, Michael, Suresh de Mel, Craig McIntosh, and Christopher Woodruff (2014).
        “What are the Headwaters of Formal Savings? Experimental Evidence from Sri
        Lanka.” BREAD Working Paper No. 431.
[12] Chin, Aimee, Léonie Karkoviata, and Nathaniel Wilcox (2015). “Impact of Bank Ac-
        counts on Migrant Savings and Remittances: Evidence from a Field Experiment.”
        Working Paper.
[13] Cole, Shawn, Thomas Sampson, and Bilal Zia (2011). “Prices or Knowledge? What
        Drives Demand for Financial Services in Emerging Markets?” The Journal of Fi-
        nance 66 (6): 1933–1967.
[14] Demirgüç–Kunt, Asli, Leora Klapper, and Dorothe Singer (2015). “The Global Findex
       Database 2014: Measuring Financial Inclusion around the World.” World Bank Pol-
       icy Research Working Paper #7255.
[15] Dupas, Pascaline, Sarah Green, Anthony Keats and Jonathan Robinson (2012). “Chal-
       lenges in Banking the Rural Poor: Evidence from Kenya’s Western Province.” Forth-
       coming, NBER Africa Volume.
[16] Dupas, Pascaline and Jonathan Robinson (2013a). “Savings Constraints and Microen-
       terprise Development: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Kenya.” American Eco-
       nomic Journal: Applied Economics 5 (1): 163–192.
[17] Dupas, Pascaline and Jonathan Robinson (2013b). “Why Don’t the Poor Save More?
       Evidence from Health Savings Experiments.” American Economic Review 103 (4):
       1138–1171.
[18] Dupas, Pascaline, Anthony Keats and Jonathan Robinson (2015). “The Effect of Savings
       Accounts on Interpersonal Financial Relationships: Evidence from a Field Experi-
       ment in Rural Kenya.” NBER Working Paper No. 21339.
[19] CGAP and IFC (2013). “Financial Inclusion Targets and Goals: Landscape and GPFI
       View.” Accessed online at http://www.gpfi.org/sites/default/files/documents
[20] He, Ping, Lixin Huang, and Randall Wright (2005). “Money and Banking in Search
        Equilibrium.” International Economic Review 46 (2): 637–670.
[21] He, Ping, Lixin Huang, and Randall Wright (2008). “Money, Banking, and Monetary
        Policy.” Journal of Monetary Economics 55: 1013–1024.
[22] Jayaratne, Jith and Philip Strahan (1996). “The Finance-Growth Nexus: Evidence from
        Bank Branch Deregulation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (3): 639–670.
[23] Karlan, Dean, Aishwarya Lakshmi Ratan, and Jonathan Zinman (2014). “Savings by
        and for the Poor: A Research Review and Agenda.” Review of Income and Wealth
        60 (1): 36–78.
[24] Karlan, Dean and Leigh Linden (2016). “Loose Knots: Strong versus Weak Commit-
        ments to Save for Education in Uganda.” Working Paper.
[25] Karlan, Dean, Margaret McConnell, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Jonathan Zinman
        (2016). “Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving.” Manage-
        ment Science Articles in Advance: 1–19.
[26] Karlan, Dean and Jonathan Zinman (2014). “Price and Control Elasticities of Demand
        for Savings.” Working Paper.
[27] Kast, Felipe and Dina Pomeranz (2014). "Saving More to Borrow Less: Experimental
        Evidence from Access to Formal Savings Accounts in Chile." NBER Working Paper
        Series, No. 20239.
[28] Levine, Ross (2005) “Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence.” In Philippe Aghion
        and Steven Durlauf, eds.: Handbook of Economic Growth (Elsevier Science, Oxford,
        UK).
[29] Prina, Silvia (2015). “Banking the Poor via Savings Accounts: Evidence from a Field
        Experiment.” Journal of Development Economics 115: 16–31.
[30] Schaner, Simone (2016). “The Persistent Power of Behavioral Change: Long–Run Im-
        pacts of Temporary Savings Subsidies for the Poor.” Working Paper.
[31] Somville, Vincent and Lore Vandewalle (2015) “Saving by Default: Evidence from a
        Field Experiment in India.” Working Paper.
[32] World Bank (2015). World Bank Development Indicators Database. Accessed July 29,
       2015 at http://data.worldbank.org/data–catalog/world–development–indicators.
                                              Figure 1. Distribution of Number of Deposits


   Share among assigned to treatment




                                                                                  Share among assigned to treatment
                                                     Uganda                                                                         Malawi
                              1




                                                                                                             1
          .2 .4 .6 .8




                                                                                         .2 .4 .6 .8
                                       0.58                                                                           0.59




                                                      0.15                                                                   0.16   0.15
                                              0.10           0.10
                                                                    0.04   0.03                                                            0.06   0.03   0.01
      0




                                                                                     0
                                        0     1   2-4    5-9 10-19 20+                                                 0     1   2-4 5-9 10-19 20+
                                              Number of Deposits                                                             Number of Deposits
   Share among assigned to treatment




                                                      Chile
                                       0.94
          .2 .4 .6 .8         1




                                              0.01    0.02   0.01   0.01   0.01
      0




                                        0     1   2-4    5-9 10-19 20+
                                              Number of Deposits



Notes: This plots the distribution of number of deposits onto sponsored bank accounts among
individuals who were offered an account. Number of deposits is calculated over 24 months in
Uganda, 22 months in Malawi and 17 months in Chile.
                                                 Figure 2. Deposits and Fees

                                      Uganda                                                      Malawi
                                                                         Monthly fees

      1




                                                                    1
           Monthly fees
      .8




                                                                    .8
                          Interest covers fees                                                                         Interest covers fees
      .6




                                                                    .6
      .4




                                                                    .4
      .2




                                                                    .2
      0




                                                                    0




           10.4    200     348 500             800    1000   1350        31.6 100       200                  500           702    800
                             Total Deposits in 2010 USD                                   Total Deposits in 2010 USD




Notes: This plots the CDF of total deposits onto sponsored bank accounts among individuals in the
treatment group who opened an account, in the first two years after accounts were offered. The
dashed vertical line shows the total value of monthly fees that would have been owed onto the
account over the two year period had the account not been sponsored. The solid vertical line shows
the threshold total deposit amount needed for the interest rate paid on the accounts to equalize the
fees. Thus only those with a total deposit amount above that threshold would face a non-negative
interest rate, absent a fee waiver.
    Figure 3. Evolution of Usage Over Time, from Administrative Data
                                                                       Uganda




                     400   300
         Thousand Shillings
               200

                                 50 USD                                                                     50 USD
                     100
                     0




                                 1   2       3   4   5      6     7   8   9 10 11 12 13     14   15    16    17   18
                                                                Months Since Account Open

                                                                        Malawi                               50 USD
                   15000




                                                                                  Currency Devaluation
                   10000
        Kwacha




                                 50 USD
                   5000
                   0




                                 1   2       3   4   5      6     7   8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
                                                                Months Since Account Open

                                                                         Chile
            100000150000
       Pesos
                  50000




                                 50 USD                                                                     50 USD
                  0




                                 1       2       3    4          5    6     7    8     9    10    11        12    13
                                                                Months Since Account Open

                                                 Deposits                Withdrawals             Net Deposits



Notes: Plots show evolution of total deposited and total withdrawn to date over time, as well as their
difference. The y-axis are in local currencies as the exchange rate changed over the study period in Malawi
hence making comparisons over time in USD somewhat difficult. The "50 USD" text boxes at placed to show
the exchange rate at the beginning and end of the study period.
Table 1. Baseline Summary Statistics
                                                                      (1)            (2)         (3)            (4)         (5)              (6)
                                                                            Uganda                     Malawi                      Chile
                                                                   Control     Treatment      Control     Treatment      Control      Treatment
                                                                    Mean       difference      Mean       Difference      Mean        Difference
                                                                    (S.D.)     (Std. Err.)     (S.D.)     (Std. Err.)     (S.D.)      (Std. Err.)
Panel A. Demographics and SES
Female                                                               0.72          0.00         0.68          0.00         0.78            -0.02
                                                                    (0.45)        (0.02)       (0.47)        (0.02)       (0.41)           (0.02)
Main Occupation
 Entrepreneur                                                         0.46         0.01          0.37         0.00         0.10            -0.01
                                                                     (0.50)       (0.02)        (0.48)       (0.02)       (0.30)           (0.01)
  Farmer                                                              0.32         -0.01         0.23         0.00         0.03             0.00
                                                                     (0.47)       (0.02)        (0.42)       (0.02)       (0.18)           (0.01)
  Employee                                                            0.17         0.00          0.29         0.00         0.17             0.00
                                                                     (0.38)       (0.02)        (0.45)       (0.02)       (0.37)           (0.02)
  Housewife/Unemployed                                                0.05         0.00          0.11         0.00         0.70             0.01
                                                                     (0.21)       (0.01)        (0.31)       (0.01)       (0.46)           (0.02)
Age                                                                  36.23         0.11         39.79        -0.33        51.54            -0.05
                                                                    (11.90)       (0.52)       (17.00)       (0.73)      (16.74)           (0.75)
Married                                                               0.71         0.00          0.72         0.00         0.46             0.01
                                                                     (0.45)       (0.02)        (0.45)       (0.02)       (0.50)           (0.02)
Household size                                                        5.15        -0.04          4.60        -0.07         3.80             0.01
                                                                     (2.39)       (0.10)        (1.99)       (0.09)       (1.95)           (0.08)
Years of education                                                    5.49         0.01          4.21        -0.15
                                                                     (2.95)       (0.13)        (3.44)       (0.15)
Acres of Land Owned by household                                      1.51         0.07          2.19         0.06
                                                                     (2.17)       (0.11)        (1.88)       (0.08)
Value of Household and Agricultural Assets                          373.66        32.91        144.26         6.12
                                                                   (694.09)      (65.66)      (270.67)      (16.45)
Distance to bank branch in km                                         2.68        -0.09          6.03        -0.32
                                                                     (2.03)       (0.09)        (3.22)       (0.14)
Panel B. Savings
Participates in ROSCA                                                0.23          0.00         0.05         -0.01
                                                                    (0.42)        (0.02)       (0.22)        (0.01)
Holds savings in cash at home                                        0.97         -0.02         0.49          0.00         0.25            -0.02
                                                                    (0.18)        (0.01)**     (0.50)        (0.02)       (0.44)           (0.02)
Holds savings with friends/family                                    0.11          0.00         0.07          0.01         0.02            -0.01
                                                                    (0.31)        (0.01)       (0.25)        (0.01)       (0.15)           (0.01)
Holds savings in mobile money account1                               0.03         -0.01         0.00            0.00
                                                                    (0.18)        (0.01)        0.00            0.00
Holds other cash savings2                                   0.02         0.00         0.00                    0.00
                                                           (0.15)       (0.01)       (0.07)                  0.00
Total Monetary Savings                                     31.80         -5.35       11.82                    0.60         23.22           -4.52
                                                         (111.87)       (4.33)      (45.00)                  (2.08)      (148.94)          (5.40)
If you needed USD 25 urgently, how would you get the money? (For Chile, asked about USD 60)
  Would use (only) savings                                  0.05         -0.02        0.02                     0.00        0.03             0.00
                                                           (0.22)       (0.01)**     (0.13)                  (0.01)       (0.16)           (0.01)
  Would use savings and other method                        0.27         0.02         0.04                    0.00         0.03             0.00
                                                           (0.44)       (0.02)       (0.20)                  (0.01)       (0.16)           (0.01)
  Would borrow/ask from friends/family                      0.78         0.02         0.38                   -0.01         0.61             0.00
                                                           (0.82)       (0.04)       (0.62)                  (0.03)       (0.49)           (0.02)
  Would sell animals (Chile: sell something)                0.35         0.04         0.07                     0.03        0.02             0.00
                                                           (0.88)       (0.04)       (0.34)                   (0.02)*     (0.15)           (0.01)
  Would be impossible to get it                             0.16         0.00         0.41                   -0.02         0.19            -0.02
                                                           (0.40)       (0.02)       (0.49)                  (0.02)       (0.39)           (0.02)
Panel C. Income and Expenditures
Total expenditures(last month)3                            32.06        -0.59        17.80                   -1.35       250.05            -13.16
                                                          (51.08)       (2.43)      (45.74)                  (1.60)      (216.78)          (9.17)
Labor income (last month)3                                 32.48        -5.88        25.72                    2.79       270.56             13.50
                                                          (95.45)       (4.38)      (67.27)                  (3.77)      (426.39)          (17.64)
P-value (Joint F-test)                                                   0.33                                 0.79                          0.46
Observations                                                            2159                                 2107                           1967
Notes: Randomization in Uganda was stratified on occupation, gender and bank branch, while in Malawi it was based on occupation, gender,
marital status, literacy, and whether the respondent was from the household or market sample. The table uses values of the variables collected in
Round 1 Survey (Oct-Nov 2010 in Uganda, Feb-Mar 2011 in Malawi and Dec 2010-Mar 2011 in Chile). All monetary values are expressed in June-
2010 US dollars. Columns 2, 4, 6 and 8: means for the treatment-control difference and robust standard errors in parentheses obtained from a
regression of each variable on treatment.
1 The question was introduced later in the baseline survey and was only asked of 1,661 households in Uganda.
2 Other cash savings: savings with shopkeeper or employer, farmer groups and village leader.
3 The question asks about total expenditures and income of the respondent in Uganda and Malawi and of the household in Chile.
Table 2. Take-up of Sponsored Bank Account among Assigned to Treatment
                                                                (1)        (2)            (3)         (4)             (5)           (6)
                                                                    Uganda                    Malawi                         Chile
                                                                      Active Users              Active Users                  Active Users
                                                                All                       All                         All
                                                                          Only                       Only                          Only


Opened account                                                  0.54      1.00            0.69         1.00          0.17         1.00
Ever used account (at least 1 deposit)                          0.42      1.00            0.41         1.00          0.06         1.00
Made at least 2 deposits within first 2 years                   0.32      1.00            0.25         1.00          0.05         1.00
Active user (Made at least 5 desposits within first 2 years)    0.17      1.00            0.10         1.00          0.03         1.00

Total number of deposits                                        2.67     12.83            1.78        12.06           0.49       14.24
Total number of withdrawals                                     1.44      6.87            1.42        10.95           0.56       15.07
Total value of deposits                                        106.54    528.59          74.56       647.64          66.01      1858.11
Total value of withdrawals                                      90.01    446.47          70.47       623.80          58.17      1494.89
If ever deposited, median deposit size                          13.10    29.37           11.44        29.23           5.68       82.64
If ever withdrew, median withdrawal size                        19.97    54.56           10.29        33.57           8.67      104.86
Total Savings at baseline from Survey Data                      26.45    29.26           12.42        34.28          18.70       N/A

Number of observations                                          1079          180             1053         106              938          29
Notes: Samples restricted to those offered a sponsored account. The sponsored account offer was made in March-April 2011 in Uganda and in
June-July 2011 in Malawi. "Active user" is defined as making at least 5 deposits within 2 years. Monetary values are deflated to June 2010
values and converted to nominal USD. Total deposits are calculated over 24 months in Uganda, 22 months in Malawi and 17 months in Chile
due to data availability.
In Chile, opened account is defined as within 5 months of the baseline due to bank data availability.
Table 3. Correlates of Take-up among those in Treatment Group: Regression Analysis
                                                                      (1)              (2)            (3)               (4)              (5)            (6)               (7)
                                                                                   Uganda                                            Malawi                              Chile

                                                                                       Deposits (inverse
                                                                             1                                                     Deposits (inverse hyperbolic       Accepted
                                                                    Active              hyperbolic sine               Active1         sine transformation)            Assistance
                                                                                       transformation)

Demographics
Female                                                                0.048          -0.200         -0.244             -0.004           0.305           0.343            -0.086
                                                                     (0.029)         (0.209)        (0.212)           (0.024)         (0.179)*        (0.178)*          (0.048)*
Not Married                                                           0.099           0.464          0.538             0.006           -0.313          -0.307            -0.026
                                                                     (0.106)         (0.693)        (0.696)           (0.128)          (0.788)         (0.794)           (0.054)
Female x Not Married                                                 -0.096          -0.470         -0.540             0.016            0.543           0.508             0.089
                                                                     (0.108)         (0.711)        (0.715)           (0.130)          (0.804)         (0.809)           (0.061)
Household Size                                                        0.010           0.097          0.102            -0.001            0.054           0.054            -0.086
                                                                    (0.006)*       (0.038)**      (0.038)***          (0.006)          (0.042)         (0.042)          (0.051)*
Age (1/10s of years)                                                  0.070           0.729          0.681             0.092            0.757           0.770             0.004
                                                                     (0.064)         (0.457)        (0.458)         (0.031)***       (0.230)***      (0.227)***          (0.005)
Age Squared                                                          -0.003          -0.049         -0.043             -0.009          -0.066          -0.067             0.132
                                                                     (0.008)         (0.056)        (0.056)         (0.003)***       (0.024)***      (0.023)***        (0.055)**
Entrepreneur                                                          0.058           0.577          0.493             0.029            0.348           0.288            -0.098
                                                                     (0.049)        (0.333)*        (0.336)           (0.033)          (0.241)         (0.241)           (0.066)
Farmer                                                               -0.016           0.215          0.166             0.007            0.276           0.287            -0.024
                                                                     (0.050)         (0.339)        (0.340)           (0.030)          (0.237)         (0.237)           (0.040)
Employee                                                              0.068           0.390          0.285             0.000            0.063           0.068             0.037
                                                                     (0.055)         (0.370)        (0.373)           (0.029)          (0.223)         (0.222)           (0.031)
Access to bank
Distance to closest branch in km                                     -0.016          -0.127         -0.121             -0.005          -0.072          -0.066
                                                                   (0.005)***      (0.038)***     (0.038)***          (0.004)        (0.027)***      (0.027)**
Asset Holdings and Education
Log Value of Household and Agricultural Assets                       0.021           0.165           0.134             0.019            0.201           0.166
                                                                    (0.013)*        (0.090)*        (0.091)          (0.009)**       (0.063)***      (0.062)***
Years of education (dummy for more than primary in Chile)            0.008           0.068           0.064             0.010            0.115           0.114            0.018
                                                                   (0.004)**       (0.027)**       (0.027)**         (0.004)**       (0.027)***      (0.027)***        (0.008)**
Cognitive Ability/Financial Literacy
Raven's score (standardized)                                         0.011            0.140          0.140             0.006            0.035           0.031
                                                                    (0.012)         (0.083)*       (0.082)*           (0.010)          (0.076)         (0.076)
                                                  2
Financial Literacy/Numeracy Index (standarized)                     -0.009           -0.028         -0.031             -0.009           0.110           0.112
                                                                    (0.012)          (0.080)        (0.079)           (0.009)         (0.062)*        (0.062)*
Baseline Savings Activity
Stock saved in cash at home (2010 USD)                                                              -0.001                                              0.005            -0.003
                                                                                                   (0.001)                                           (0.001)***          (0.012)
Stock saved at Rosca (2010 USD)                                                                      0.013                                              0.024
                                                                                                  (0.006)**                                            (0.017)
Stock saved with friends/family (2010 USD, 1/100 USD for Chile)                                      0.000                                              0.003             0.470
                                                                                                   (0.003)                                             (0.004)         (0.146)***
R-squared                                                              0.054        0.085           0.094            0.047            0.099             0.110             0.048
Observations                                                            1079         1079            1079             1049             1049              1049              917
Mean of Dependent Variable                                             0.167        1.588           1.588            0.100            1.476             1.476             0.192
Notes: OLS regressions, also include branch dummies for Uganda and Malawi. Some variables have missing data; to avoid dropping these observations, we set these values to
zero, create dummies for having missing data and include these in the regressions (coefficients not reported). Standard errors in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote significance at
10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.
1
  Active is defined as making at least 5 deposits over the length of the study.
2
 Financial Literacy, was asked of a random half of the sample at baseline and for which we impute the mean of the financial literacy index. The index was composed of 5
questions about investments involving multiplication, averages and percentages.
Table 4. Impacts on Flows: Deposits Last 30 days in 2010 USD
                                               (1)               (2)                   (3)                 (4)              (5)

                                          Deposits at                     Deposits in other sources
                                             formal
                                                                                                                      Total Deposits
                                            financial
                                                                               Cash at home or in
                                          institutions1    Mobile Money                               ROSCA/VSLA
                                                                                  secret place
Panel A: Uganda
 Treatment                                   0.741             -0.089                -0.352               0.095            0.426
                                           (0.152)***         (0.047)*                (0.44)              (0.20)          (0.56)

Dep. Var. Mean in Control Group               0.42               0.24                  5.51                2.29             8.46
Std. Dev.                                    3.75                1.91                 16.67               6.35             19.45
Obs.                                         6,026              6,023                 6,015               6,013            5,993
Number of Households                         2085               2083                  2081                2081             2077

Panel B: Malawi
 Treatment                                    0.132                                  -0.088              -0.039           0.005
                                           (0.040)***                                (0.14)              (0.06)           (0.16)

Dep. Var. Mean in Control Group               0.12                                     1.36                0.55             2.03
Std. Dev.                                     1.19                                     5.47               1.99             6.06
Obs.                                         5,903                                    5,902               5,903            5,902
Number of Households                         2,046                                    2,046               2,046            2,046

Panel C: Pooled Treatment                       0.44                                     -0.237               0.028            0.193
                                             (0.080)***                                  (0.24)               (0.11)           (0.30)
Notes: Pooled regression including three waves of follow-up data 12, 18 and 24 months after baseline. Panel C pools data from Uganda
and Malawi. We control for the baseline value of dependent variable (it is 0 in column 1 and not available in Malawi for column 4),
stratification dummies and wave dummies. Standard errors are clustered at the respondent level. All dependent variables are top
winsorized at the 99th percentile. For Malawi, data for savings in VSLA are only available for the second and third follow-up.
1
  Formal financial institutions include commercial banks, microfinance banks, and savings and credit cooperatives (SACCOs).
Table 5. Impacts on Savings Stocks in 2010 USD
                                             (1)              (2)             (3)           (4)        (5)         (6)           (7)              (8)              (9)
                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                          Loans
                                           Formal                    Cash at home                                               Total
                                                                                  ROSCA/ Friends/ Other cash                                   Received       Received
                                          Financial     Mobile money or in Secret                                             Monetary
                                                    1                              VSLA2  Family   savings
                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                                                               Informal        Formal
                                        Institutions                     place                                                 Savings
                                                                                                                                                 Loan           Loan
Panel A: Uganda
 Treatment                                  8.780           -0.387           -2.743       -0.349     -0.813      0.003           4.98            0.001            0.007
                                         (1.270)***        (0.188)**        (1.544)*      (0.79)     (0.65)      (0.01)       (2.440)**          (0.01)           (0.01)

Dep. Var. Mean in Control Group             5.03             1.10            21.61        8.54       4.63         0.02          40.94            0.08             0.04
Std. Dev.                                   31.60            6.97            55.40        25.00      22.67        0.26          80.26            0.28             0.19
Obs.                                        6007             6027            6022         6028       6030         6017          5978             6033             6033
Number of Households                        2085             2085            2085         2085       2085         2085          2085             2085             2085

Panel B: Malawi
 Treatment                                  3.883              -            -1.951        -0.438     -0.034         -           1.391            -0.006           0.005
                                         (0.605)***            -          (0.671)***     (0.236)*   (0.019)*        -           (0.98)           (0.01)           (0.00)

Dep. Var. Mean in Control Group             2.15               -             9.20          2.45       0.10          -           13.87            0.04             0.02
Std. Dev.                                   15.08              -             26.15         8.63       0.82          -           32.57            0.20             0.14
Obs.                                        5900               -             5905          5906       5907          -           5898             5889             5889
Number of Households                        2046               -             2046          2046       2046          -           2046             2040             2040

Panel C: Pooled Treatment                   6.359              -            -2.484        -0.400     -0.447         -           3.052            -0.002           0.006
                                         (0.709)***                       (0.862)***      (0.41)     (0.33)                   (1.334)**          (0.01)           (0.00)
Notes: Pooled regression including three waves of follow-up data 12, 18 and 24 months after baseline. We control for the baseline value of dependent variable (we
replace missing values of dependent variables at baseline by 0 and include dummies for missing observations), dummies for stratification variables and wave dummies.
Standard errors are clustered at the respondent level. All dependent variables are top winsorized at the 99th percentile.
1
  Formal financial institutions include commercial banks, microfinance banks, and savings and credit cooperatives (SACCOs).
2
  For Malawi, data for savings in VSLA are only available for the second and third follow-up.
3
  Other cash savings: savings with shopkeeper or employer, farmer groups and village leader.
4
  In Uganda, data for having "ever" received a loan; in Malawi: data on having received a loan in the last 6 months, and we control at baseline with a varible on having
"ever" received a loan. Informal Loan: from Rosca or Community Group (Uganda), Rosca, Village Bank or Moneylender (Malawi). Formal Loan: Bank, SACCO or
MFI.
Table 6. Impacts on Downstream Outcomes in 2010 USD
                                           (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)            (5)       (6)           (7)        (8)           (9)         (10)                            (11)           (12)          (13)
                                                                                                           Lumpy
                                                   Main or                                                                        Expenditures
                                      Total Labor                Business Self Reported                Expenditures:                                            Net                                                         Assets
                                                  Secondary                                  Food                       Health        on         "Regret"                                     Health        Education
                                       Income                   Inventory      Total                     Durables,                                          Transfers to                                                    (house
                                                  Economic                              Expenditures                 Expenditures Agricultural Expenditures                                  Outcomes       Outcomes
                                        (last 3                 (Monetary Expenditures                 Education and                                         Friends or                                                   items and
                                                  Activity is a                          (last 7 days)               (last month) Inputs (last    Index                                       Index          Index
                                       months)                    Value) (Last Month)                  Home Repair                                            Relatives                                                    animals)
                                                   Business                                                                         month)
                                                                                                         (last year)
Panel A: Uganda
 Treatment                               0.502         0.000         -5.153        0.273          0.302           4.331           0.414           0.002          -0.008         -0.249         0.003          0.001         6.112
                                         (3.68)        (0.01)        (5.11)        (1.20)         (0.21)          (4.75)          (0.37)          (0.10)         (0.02)         (1.39)         (0.02)         (0.02)       (12.89)

Baseline Mean in Control Group            75.76         0.68         57.01         29.97          4.91            120.80           9.52           1.58            -0.01          -8.62          0.00          0.06         335.00
Std. Dev.                                145.20         0.47        104.80         35.64          5.82            179.90          22.16           4.55             0.80          25.46          0.68          0.91         415.60
Dep. Var. Mean in Control Group           82.32         0.73         90.84         33.26          5.74            89.49            6.53           0.78            0.00          -18.67          0.00          0.00         313.40
Std. Dev.                                132.40         0.44        175.40         43.71          7.08            164.70          12.58           3.61             0.89          46.91          0.66          0.67         505.90
Obs.                                      6032          6033         6025          5994           6021             6031           6030            6027            6031           6033           6033          5519          6033
Number of Households                      2085          2085         2082          2073           2084             2085           2085            2084            2084           2085           2085          2000          2085

Panel B: Malawi
 Treatment                               2.207         -0.004        0.585         0.416          0.193           0.015           -0.023         -0.018          0.047          0.071          -0.009         0.017         -6.309
                                         (1.97)        (0.01)        (0.39)        (0.84)         (0.19)          (0.61)          (0.05)         (0.03)         (0.024)*        (0.64)         (0.02)         (0.02)       (3.331)*

Baseline Mean in Control Group            69.09         0.37         5.89          15.75          3.98             6.46           0.26            0.02            -0.01          -3.98          0.00          0.05         129.70
Std. Dev.                                124.50         0.48         15.95         20.55          5.02            17.85           0.96            0.11             0.82          13.18          0.74          0.94         165.10
Dep. Var. Mean in Control Group           40.30         0.34         4.97          21.11          5.23             7.32           0.66            0.30            -0.03          -8.77          0.00          0.01         92.38
Std. Dev.                                 70.69         0.47         14.61         27.93          6.85            22.30           1.88            1.35             0.85          21.78          0.67          0.63         153.80
Obs.                                      5906          5907         5877          4676           5903            5902            5900            5902            5900           5907           5907          5419          5907
Number of Households                      2046          2046         2036          2025           2046            2046            2045            2046            2045           2046           2046          1967          2046

Panel C: Pooled Treatment                1.139         -0.002        -2.417        0.365          0.242           2.057           0.197          -0.009          0.019          -0.112         -0.003         0.008         -0.197
                                         (2.12)        (0.01)        (2.60)        (0.77)        (0.139)*         (2.43)          (0.19)         (0.05)          (0.02)         (0.77)         (0.02)         (0.02)        (6.79)

Notes: Pooled regression including three waves of follow-up data 12, 18 and 24 months after baseline. We control for the baseline value of dependent variable, dummies for stratification variables and wave dummies.
Standard errors are clustered at the respondent level. All dependent variables are top winsorized at the 99th percentile. Total Labor Income: includes income from formal work, casual work, business, selling animals or animal
produce and selling crops; at baseline it was asked for "last month" and multiplied by 3. Business Inventory: winsorized at the 95th percentile to avoid the influence of large outliers. Food Expenditures: include staples, grains,
vegetables, fruits, meat, milk, eggs and salt. Lumpy Expenditures: Education expenditures include fees, uniforms and supplies, asked for the last 6 months at second monitoring in Malawi and multiplied by 2; Home Repair
asked for last 6 months at second monitoring and endline in Malawi, multiplied by 2; Durable Expenditures asked only at baseline and first round in Malawi, include house and electronic equipment, vehicles, jewelry and
furniture. Health Expenditures include medicines, fees, and other costs, asked for the last week at baseline in Uganda, multiplied by 4.3. Agricultural expenditures: asked for last year at baseline in Malawi, divided by 12.
Indexes: defined to be the equally weighted average of z-scores of the components, with the sign of each measure oriented so that more beneficial outcomes have higher scores. The z-scores are calculated by subtracting the
control group mean and dividing by the control group standard deviation of the respective variable in the same period. If an individual has a valid response to at least one component measure of an index, then the index is
computed using the non-missing components. Regret Expenditure Index: includes four variables measuring expenditures on goods for which respondent reports at baseline that "it was a bad idea to purchase", or "wants to
spend less in the future given constant income" using expenditure data collected in different modules. Net Transfers difference between transfer to friends/family minus transfer from friends/family including the self-reported
value of both loans and gifts given to/received from friends or family members (excluding partner). Health Index: dummy for no member of household sick last month, percentage of sick members treated (imputed 100% if
no member sick) and dummy for no member missed school or work because of illness last month. Education Index: percentage of school-age children enrolled, average number of school days attended last month by school-
aged children (imputed 0 if not enrolled), percentage of school-aged children enrolled in private schools, dummy for no school-aged child lacks a backpack, dummy for no school-aged child lacks full uniform. Assets: self-
reported total value of cattle (only for Uganda), other animals and household assets.
Table 7. Impacts on Savings Attitudes and Beliefs, Female Decision-making and Locus of Control
                                               (1)                (2)               (3)              (4)              (5)               (6)                (7)

                                                                                                           Has lost or
                                       Thinks that saving                   Thinks other
                                                                                                         knows someone
                                        for the future is   Thinks that       people in                                  Decision Making Internal Locus
                                                                                          Has very high who has lost
                                        more important     saving is only    household                                   Index (only for   of Control
                                                                                          trust in banks     money
                                         than giving to   for rich people would get angry                                   Women)           Index
                                                                                                          deposited in a
                                         friends/family                    if saved alone
                                                                                                              bank

                                               (1)                (2)               (3)              (4)              (5)               (6)                (7)
Panel A: Uganda
 Treatment                                    0.000              -0.015           -0.001            0.104           -0.035             0.020             0.000
                                              (0.01)             (0.01)           (0.01)         (0.022)***        (0.015)**           (0.05)            (0.02)

Dep. Var. Mean in Control Group               0.90               0.10              0.06             0.40             0.16               0.00              0.00
Obs.                                          1990               1990              1990             1990             1990               662               1974

Panel B: Malawi
 Treatment                                    0.015              0.006            -0.001           0.007             0.006             0.019             -0.015
                                              (0.02)             (0.01)           (0.01)           (0.02)            (0.01)            (0.05)            (0.02)

Dep. Var. Mean in Control Group               0.62               0.02              0.04             0.84             0.05               0.00              0.00
Obs.                                          2046               2046              2046             2046             2046               750               1949

Panel C: Pooled Treatment                      0.008              -0.004            -0.001            0.055         -0.014              0.021            -0.007
                                               (0.01)             (0.01)            (0.01)         (0.013)***       (0.01)             (0.03)            (0.01)
Notes: OLS regression using follow-up III data, 24 months after baseline. We control for the baseline value of dependent variable when available and dummies
for stratification variables. Standard errors are clustered at the respondent level. Indices: defined to be the equally weighted average of z-scores of its
components, with the sign of each measure oriented so that more beneficial outcomes have higher scores. The z-scores are calculated by subtracting the control
group mean and dividing by the control group standard deviation. If an individual has a valid response to at least one component measure of an index, then the
index is computed using the non-missing components. Locus of Control Index: based on 8 questions with two options each, one reflecting internal control
(value 1) and the others external control (value 0), the index measures internal locus of control. Decision Making Index: based on seven questions asking who in
the household makes the decision about food, large items, children's schooling, children's health, personal health, social visits and business or work activities. We
created a dummy equal to 1 for each decision if respondent reports taking part in the decision alone or with someone else, and 0 if reports not taking part in the
decision. At baseline the questions were asked only of a random subsample, we impute mean values to missing observations and include a dummy for missing
data at baseline. Believes Saving is only for Rich People: in Malawi the question was whether they believe saving in a bank is only for rich people. Has Very
High Trust in Banks: omitted category includes two options: little or no trust in banks.
Table 8. Self-Reported Reasons for Non-Use of an Account
                                                                              (1)        (2)          (3)
                                                                           Uganda      Malawi        Chile
Panel A. Why didn't you use accounts? (treatment group non-users only)
No money to save                                                     0.80               0.89         0.07
Lack of trust in banks / formal institutions                         0.03               0.00         0.11
Distance                                                             0.01               0.01         0.00
Fees too high                                                        0.01               0.02         0.03
Cannot provide minimum balance                                       0.05               0.15         0.00
Bureaucracy                                                          0.03               0.03         0.00
Low interest rate                                                    0.01               0.01         0.00
Not enough information                                               0.06               0.06         0.09
Cannot access money when needed                                      0.01               0.00         0.00
Not useful                                                                                           0.09
Did not remember reason why did not open account                                                     0.50
Number of respondents                                                377                 554         430



Panel B. Reasons why bank account is not preferred savings vehicle (all treatment group individuals)
Not enough money to save in bank                                       0.33       0.17
Cash on hand needed soon, not worth depositing it for short while                 0.33
At bank, money not available when needed                               0.30       0.08
Distance from bank                                                     0.18       0.16
Would need to save more before it’s worth the trip                                0.37
Lack of trust in banks / formal institutions                           0.06       0.02
Interest Rates/Returns                                                 0.06       0.05
Too much bureaucracy/paperwork involved with bank                      0.05
Lack of information about the account                                  0.03

Number of respondents                                                        999        1025


Panel C. Self-reported reasons why it is difficult to save (Uganda only, endline survey)
                                                                            First Reason             1st or 2nd Reason
                                                                         Control Treatment          Control     Treatment
N/A, it is always easy to save                                            0.08        0.07           0.08         0.07
Low Income                                                                0.68        0.69           0.90         0.90
Expenses are too high                                                     0.34        0.34           0.73         0.71
Unexpected emergencies always come up                                     0.36        0.41           0.82         0.83
Spend money easily before saving enough                                   0.13        0.15           0.60         0.63
Spouse would use the money for something else                             0.01        0.00           0.08         0.09
Requests from neighbors/friends                                           0.00        0.01           0.05         0.07
Requests from relatives                                                   0.01        0.01           0.09         0.11
Too many debts                                                            0.02        0.01           0.19         0.18
No safe place to save                                                     0.02        0.02           0.10         0.09

Number of respondents                                                         991         999          991          999
Notes:
Panel A: The question asked was: "What are the reasons you are not using a bank account at this time?" It was asked only of
those reporting not using an account. The Non-user category was self-reported during the survey. In Chile, the question at
endline was about the reasons on rejecting assistance for opening a bank account and was asked only of those who
remembered having received and rejected the offer.
Panel B: Other instruments - Uganda: home, ROSCA, animals, mobile money; Malawi: home, ROSCA, animals, VSLA. The
question asked in Uganda and Malawi was, Option A: "Why did you put your money into [SOURCE] rather than into the
bank/MFI/SACCO account?" Option B: "Why did you put your money into [SOURCE] rather than opening and using a
bank/MFI/SACCO account?" No option was read aloud.
Panel C: for the First Reason, the question asked was: "What makes it sometimes difficult for you to save money?" No
option was read aloud. For the second reason each option was read aloud.
Table 9. Factors Related to Low Take-up in Chile
                                                                                    (1)        (2)
                                                                                   Mean       Obs.
Panel A. Government Assistance
Receives some type of government assistance                                        0.73        622
Receives a pension                                                                 0.32        624
Receives either government assistance, a pension or both                           0.85        623
Expects to receive a pension if does not currently receive one                     0.76        395
Receives government transfer without a bank account                                0.96        485
Thinks would be beneficial to have transfer deposited into a bank account          0.23        471

Panel B. Cost of Health Care
Believes governmental programs would cover cost of a major surgery                 0.86        622
If needed major surgery, co-pay would be 0%                                        0.62        639
If needed major surgery, co-pay would be 25%                                       0.19        639

Panel C. Access to Credit
Ever got a loan or credit card from formal institution                             0.30       1967
Has an active credit line or credit card                                           0.11       1927
Has bought an intem on installment payments last year 1                            0.48        638
If you had an emergency that required [USD 600], how would you get the money?
  Savings                                                                            0.01      1958
  Reduce Expenses                                                                    0.04      1958
  Loan from Bank or Financial Institution                                            0.17      1958
  Loan from other source                                                             0.05      1958
  Family or Friends                                                                  0.23      1958
  Does Not Know                                                                      0.27      1958
  Would not be able to get the money                                                 0.19      1958
Notes:
Panel A and B present data from the follow-up survey conducted with a subsample of 639 respondents in May 2012.
Panel C present data from the baseline survey conducted with 1,967 respondents between December 2010 and March
2011.
1
  Question asked in the follow-up survey.
Table 10. Comparison with Other Studies
                                                                                                                                                       Detailed Features of Intervention                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Data




                                                                                                                  Low Distance to Bank (branch < 2km
                                                                            No Fees (open, min. balance, monthl




                                                                                                                                                                                 NGO Involved in Account Marketing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   High Frequency Data Collection
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Deposits Automat. w Transfers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Usage




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Financial Literacy Training
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Text Message Reminders
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Measure*:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (including on financials)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Withdrawals Restricted
                                                                                                                                                       Interest Rate Subsidies
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      monthly      Usage




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Peer Group Feature
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      average     Measure:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Framing/Labeling




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Deposit Collector
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Withdrawal Fees
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   deposits over   Period     Individual Household                  Stat. sig.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       sample     used for      Income      Income     Stat. sig   treatment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    assigned to   monthly      (monthly    (monthly   treatment     effect on                                                                 Inflation
Study, Country                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       treatment    average     equivalent) equivalent)  effect on      total       Impact on Other          Statistically significant Nominal rate over
(published studies are                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Account        Account          (2015 USD    (See notes   (2015 USD (2015 USD (admin) bank     (reported)         Savings                treatment effect on     Interest   study
underlined)                Sample               Treatment/Intervention                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Take-up         Usage             dollars)   at bottom)     dollars)    dollars)   savings?     savings?       Instruments?                other outcomes?        Rate     period
Panel A. This Paper

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (-) sig.: on mobile
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 money and cash at
                           2159 unbanked        Cover Fees /Inform/Help                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       32% (> 1 deposit),
Uganda                                                                  X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            54%                               8.20       6 months       32          45          Yes          Yes        home, (-) not sig.                   No                 3%     10.7%
                           individuals          Opening                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       17% (> 4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 friends/family and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Roscas


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (-) sig. cash at home,
                           2107 unbanked        Cover Fees /Inform/Help                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       25% (> 1 deposit),
Malawi                                                                  X                                                                                                               X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            69%                               3.07       6 months       29          37          Yes          No         friends/family and                   No                1.50%    14%
                           individuals          Opening                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10% (> 4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Roscas

                           1967 unbanked                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5% (> 1 deposits),
Chile                                           Inform/Help Opening                 X                                     X                                                             X                                                                                  X                                                                                                                                                                         17%                               2.54       6 months      N/A         347         N/A          N/A                  N/A                        N/A                 0%      3.7%
                           individuals                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3% (> 4)
Panel B. Other Basic Savings Account Studies

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Increase in income and
                                              Assistance to get I.D. card                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 decrease of share
                           215 male unbanked required to open bank                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (-) not sig.: any        remittances to income by
Chin et al. (2015), U.S.                                                           X                                    X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            43%             N/A               N/A                       838        N/A         N/A           Yes                                                               N/A
                           Mexican immigrants account (and paid for                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              savings in Mexico        those who lacked control
                                              application fee)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            over how remittances
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          were spent

                           170 female vendors,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Yes (business investments,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (+) sig.: animal
Dupas and Robinson         and 80 male bicycle Cover Opening Fees                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             35% (> 1 deposit),                                                                                                        food and private
                                                                                    X                                     X                                                             X                                                                                  X                                                                                                                                                  X                      87%                               8.22       6 months       66         N/A          Yes         N/A         savings, (+) not sig.:                                  0%     10-14%
(2013a), Kenya             taxi drivers, all   /Inform/Help Opening                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           17% (> 4 )                                                                                                                expenditures, mainly for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 rosca contributions
                           unbanked                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     female vendors)

                                                Cover Fees /Inform/                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Yes (dual-   Yes (dual-    (+) not sig.: Rosca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Yes (increase in transfers
Dupas, Keats and                                Help Opening, account                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         28% (> 1 deposit),                                                       headed       headed       contrib., money at
                           885 households                                 X                                                                                                             X                                                                                  X                                                                                                                                                                         69%                               3.33       6 months       18          26                                                           out, decreases in transfers    0%     10-14%
Robinson (2015), Kenya                          offered to female or male                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15% (> 4)                                                               household    household     home (+) sig.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          in)
                                                head or both (randomized)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               only)        only)       transfers to others,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (+) not sig.: non-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Yes (increase in index of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 monetary assets
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          reported financial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (durables, livestock,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          situation, educational
                           1118 women living Cover Fees /Inform/Help                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             gold), monetary
Prina (2015), Nepal                                                  X                                                    X                                                             X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            84%      80% (> 1 deposit)        6.81       6 months      N/A         112         N/A           No                                  expenditures, fish and         6%     10.5%
                           in slums          Opening                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             assets (rosca, cash at
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          meat expenditures, higher
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 home,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ability to cope with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 friend/family), not
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          shocks)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 reported separately

* Notes for Usage Measure. Dupas and Robinson (2013a): calculated from publicly available dataset. Dupas, Keats and Robinson (2015): provided by authors. Prina (2015): calculated from publicly available dataset. Ashraf et al. (2006b), Calculated from Table 1 Panel C. Brune et al. (2015): Calculated based on treatment effects
(treatment coefficient + control group mean) in Table 4, it includes direct deposits. Callen et al. (2014): Calculated from Table 2 and email from authors, top 1% truncated. Dupas and Robinson (2013b): For the safebox we report total balance after 6 months divided by 6, this is a lower bound for average monthly deposits, we
impute 0 for non-users from Table 2. Karlan and Linden (2014): Calculated based on Table 3, with parental outreach. Karlan and Zinman (2014): Monthly balance in the account including those making 0 deposits, calculated based on data reported in page 9. Karlan et al. (2016): amount saved at goal date from Table 3. Kast and
Pomeranz (2014): calculated based on Table 2, email from authors. Schaner (2016): First panel includes deposits in individual accounts, second panel deposits in any account, short term results, email from author. Somville and Vandewalle (2014): Does not include rewards directly deposited, provided by email from authors.

(continued next page)
Table 10 (continued). Comparison with Other Studies
                                                                                                                                                                           Detailed Features of Intervention                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Data




                                                                                             No Fees (open, min. balance, monthly)
                                                                                                                                     Low Distance to Bank (branch < 2km)


                                                                                                                                                                                                     NGO Involved in Account Marketing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       High Frequency Data Collection
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Deposits Automat. w Transfers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Usage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Usage Measure*:               Individual Household                  Stat. sig.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Financial Literacy Training
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Measure:                             Stat. sig




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Text Message Reminders
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          monthly average                 Income      Income                 treatment Impact on                                                                        Inflation




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (including on financials)
Study, Country                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Period used                           treatment                                                    Statistically significant       Nominal




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Withdrawals Restricted
                                                                                                                                                                           Interest Rate Subsidies
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Account               deposits over                (monthly    (monthly                 effect on     Other                                                                       rate over
(published studies are   Sample                Treatment                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Account Take-up                                                    for monthly                            effect on                                                  treatment effect on other        Interest




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Peer Group Feature
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Usage             sample assigned to             equivalent) equivalent)                 total      Savings                                                                        study




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Framing/Labeling
underlined)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   average                           (admin) bank                                                          outcomes?                 Rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Deposit Collector
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Withdrawal Fees
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             treatment                  (2015 USD (2015 USD                  (reported) Instruments?                                                                     period
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (See notes                            savings?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (2015 USD dollars)               dollars)    dollars)                savings?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             at bottom)




Panel C. Other Studies
Ashraf et al. (2006a),   1777 current and    Commitment Account with lockbox,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            28% (0% for autom.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            X                                                                     X                                                                                                                                                                         14% (> 1 deposit)                     N/A                                  N/A         381        Yes             N/A            N/A                         N/A                        4%        3.4%
Philippines              former bank clients offered automated transfers                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       transf.)
Ashraf et al. (2006b),   346 current and
                                             Deposit collectors                                                                                                                                                                             X                                                                      X                                           X                                                                                                        28% accepted service 15% (> 1 deposit)                    0.66              10 months          N/A         279        Yes             N/A            N/A                         N/A                        4%        3.4%
Philippines              former bank clients
                                               Basic Savings Account, direct deposit of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        85% accepted account 18% (> 0 direct
                                               crop proceeds, raffles (prizes privately or                                                                                                                 X                                                                                                                                                                                                  X                                                                                                                   18.8                                                        Yes                                                         No
                         3150 cash crop                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 opening assistance   deposits)                                                        22 (tobacco
Brune et al. (2015),                           publicly paid), financial education
                         farmers in farmer                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          8 months farmers in the        N/A                        N/A            N/A                                                 2.5%         7.7%
Malawi
                         clubs.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Accepted assistance:                                                                   region)                                                                      Increases in land cultivation,
                                               As above + Commitment savings                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   21% (> 0 direct           19.2 (basic acct) + 1.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                           X                                                                                                      X                                                                                           X                                                         82% (basic acct.), 90%                                                                                                Yes                                           agricultural inputs and outputs,
                                               account                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         deposits)                  (commitment acct)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (commitment act.)                                                                                                                                                  and household expenditures
                         795 weekly income                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Increases in income and
Callen et al. (2014),
                         earners, no deposit Account Opening, Deposit Collectors                     X                                                                                                      X                                                                                                                                                  X                                                                                  X                             89%              89% (> 0 deposits)               11.19             24 months          208         N/A        Yes             Yes            N/A            expenditures, increase working       N/A
Sri Lanka
                         last month                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           hours on the wage market
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4% low incentive, 8% of high incentives                                                                                                                             Increase in the probability of   If balance
Cole et al (2011),                             Financial incentives to open account
                         564 unbanked                                                                                                                                           X                                                                                                                                                                                                                              X                                                         9% med. incentive, group used account last               N/A                                  N/A         121       N/A              N/A            N/A             having any savings for highest     > $1.06,      13%
Indonesia                                      and financial training
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        13% highest incentive 12 months                                                                                                                                             incentive group             variable
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Increase in preventative health
                                               Safe Box                                             X                                       X                                                                                               X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   71%                                               1.15              6 months                                                                                investments and reached health          0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           goal
Dupas and Robinson       771 members of 113 Lockbox                                                 X                                       X                                                                                               X                                                                     X                                                                                                                                                             66%                                               0.51              6 months                                                                                              No                        0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        N/A                                                             38         N/A       N/A              N/A            N/A
(2013b), Kenya           ROSCAs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Increase in preventative health
                                               Health Pot                                           X                                       X                                                                                               X                                                                     X                       X                                                                                                                                     72%                                               N/A                                                                                                                                               0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           investments, reached health goal
                                               Health savings Account                               X                                       X                                                                                               X                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   97%                                               0.36              6 months                                                                                              No                     N/A
                         Peru: 2,775 bank                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       69% (met committed                                 At goal date,
                                                                                                     X                                                                                                                                      X                                                                      X                                                                 X                                                                                          N/A                                                105                                 N/A         N/A        No              N/A            N/A                          No
                         clients                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               min. deposit per month)                               balance
Karlan et al. (2016),
Peru, Bolivia,           Bolivia: 9,376 bank Reminders for people with recently                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 56% (met committed                                 At goal date,                                                                           Increased likelihood to reach       1 to 3%        2.6%
                                             opened commitment accounts                              X                                                                                                                                      X                                                                      X                                                                 X                                                                                          N/A                                                89                                  N/A         N/A        No              N/A            N/A
Philippines              clients                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               min. deposit per month)                               balance                                                                               commitment goal

                         Philippines: 1,409                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      21% (met commited                                 At goal date,
                                                                                                     X                                                                                                                                      X                                                                      X                                                                 X                                                                                          23%                                                26                                  169         N/A        No              N/A            N/A                          No
                         bank clients                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              amount saved)                                     balance
                                               School-based commitment device for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5.33 (total           Increased
                                               education savings with parental
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               39% (saved with            0.03 (per student),                      income from           savings in the                                         Higher expenditures on
                                               outreach. Strong commitment:                         X                                       X                                                              X                                X                                                                     X                       X                                                                                                                                     N/A                                                                                                                           No
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               program)                    8.22 (per school)                            work                program                                              educational supplies
                                               withdrawals restricted via voucher for
Karlan and Linden        Students in 136                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            winsorized)            accounts
                                               educational expenses only.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          24 months                       N/A                                       N/A                                               0%             10%
(2016), Uganda           elementary schools
                                               As above, but weaker commitment:
                                               withdrawals in cash with strong                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 42% (saved with             0.02 (per student),
                                                                                                    X                                       X                                                              X                                X                                                                     X                       X                                                                                                                                     N/A                                                                                    No                     No               No                                         No
                                               encouragement to spend on educational                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           program)                    4.15 (per school)
                                               expenses
                                               Commitment account, lockbox,
Karlan and Zinman
                         9992 unbanked         randomly allocated interest rate,                                                                                                                                                            X                                                                     X                                                                                                                                                             23%            9% (> 1 deposit)                   0.71              12 months           80         N/A       N/A              N/A            N/A                                                2 to 3%       2.5%
(2014), Philippines
                                               individual vs. joint account
                         3560 informal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Reduced short term borrowing,        0.3%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     116 (per
                         business owners,      Ordinary Account plus self-help group                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          particularly to relatives and    (75% of
Kast and Pomeranz                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              16% (> 1 deposit),                                                     capita
                         borrowers from        for half of treatment group, plus higher              X                                                                          X                                                                                                                                                          X                                                                                                                                    53%                                                2.7             12 months                       N/A        Yes              No            N/A             friends, improved subjective      accts.) or      7%
(2014), Chile                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  8% (> 4 )                                                            household
                         credit institution,   interest rate for a quarter of treatment                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         welfare, less likely to cut    5% real
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     income)
                         90% females                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             consumption if shock             rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Long run
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Reallocation                     Increase in income and assets
                                               Individual ordinary savings accounts for                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.56 (individual                                               impact on                     Invidual/spou
                                                                                                    X                                                                                                                                                                                          X                                                                                                                                                                                31%            6% (> 1 deposit)                                                                                              of total                    after 30 months for participants           0%        3.4%
                                               husband and/or wife                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             accounts)                                                  average daily                     se: (-) sig:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          assets to the                      receiving higher individual                    (during 6
Schaner (2016),          749 unbanked                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    bank balances                   SACCOs, (+)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6 months            64         N/A                     subsidized                    interest rates. Individual interest                months of
Kenya                    couples                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             only for                       sig. home
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         48% (individual r)-   15% (individual r), 34%     7.46 (individual r)                                                               spouse                       rates increase entrepreneurship                    account
                                               Individual or joint ordinary savings                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        individual                     savings, not                                          4, 12 or
                                                                                                    X                                                                          X                                                                                                               X                                                                                                                                                                         78% (joint r), with   (joint r) (>1 deposit),     8.28 (joint r), with                                                               (20%                        rates, joint rates increase public                  usage)
                                               accounts + Interest rate subsidies                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        account with                      sig.: Rosca,                                           20%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20% subsidy         with 20% subsidy               20% subsidy                                                                 interest rate)                          goods investment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            subsidies                         mobile
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (+) not sig.:
Somville and                                   Weekly interviews with tasks paid either
                         442 individuals                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                post office. (-)        Reduction in frequently
Vandewalle (2015),                             in cash or into accounts. Opened                                                             X                                                               X                                                     X                                                                                                                                                                                                             100%           46% (> 0 deposits)                 1.13              3 months           N/A         N/A        Yes             Yes                                                                   4%         5%
                         (46% unbanked)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  not sig.: cash            consumed items
India                                          accounts for all participants
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            home
Usage Measure: See notes in previous page
                   Web Appendix A: Sampling Details


                                        September 29, 2016


Uganda
In Uganda, we first performed a census of all households living within a 12–km radius of
one of the three MAMIDECOT branches in the sampled districts of Bukomansimbi and
Kalungu. The census identified 9,287 households. Since the focus of our study was on
unbanked households, we removed the 26 percent of the sample (2,415 households) who had
bank accounts, and the additional 2 percent of the unbanked who had loans from banks
or MFIs (152 households), leaving 6,720 unbanked households. We further excluded 775
households with no head in farming, services or vendor (these are households where both
heads are civil servants, work in transportation, fishing or are unemployed), 86 households
with a civil servant head, 828 households who were deemed to live too far away from the
partner bank to benefit from an account (since they had not visited the market center of
the nearest MAMIDECOT branch in more than a month), 701 households with no female
head, 26 households with two female heads (polygamous households), 91 households with
female heads older than 60 and 18 households not willing to participate in a new survey.
These exclusion criteria reduced the sample to 4,195 households. Of this sample of 4,195
households, we then selected 3,000 for inclusion in the study, oversampling those receiving
non–agricultural income since this was a less common occupation than agriculture, but which
was the primary focus of previous studies such as Dupas and Robinson (2013a).1
    A few months after the census, a detailed baseline survey was administered. The project
targeted a specific individual within the household, not the household as a whole. The
following rule was used to select respondents: if there are two heads, and they are both
non–farmers or both farmers, pick randomly among the two heads; if there are two heads,
and one is farmer and the other is not, pick the non–farmer.2
   1
      The probability of being included in the sample was: (1) 100 percent for households in which at least
one spouse was primarily employed in self–employment outside of agriculture (vending or services); and (2)
54 percent for households employed only in agriculture.
    2
      We were not always able to enroll the selected household head in the study, especially if the male head

                                                     1
    Out of the 3,000 households sampled, 2,442 answered the survey.3 For treatment assign-
ment we excluded an additional 282 households who reported in the baseline survey having
an account at a formal institution, leaving us a sample of 2,160 eligible households.4
    Out of the final 2,160 eligible households, 50 percent were randomly allocated to re-
ceive the vouchers. Randomization was stratified by gender, occupation5 and bank branch
(recall there were 3 branches in the study). For treatment households, account opening oc-
curred 4–5 months after the baseline. Individuals in the treatment group were visited by a
MAMIDECOT agent.6
    The agents gave some basic information about MAMIDECOT and the accounts, and
also explained that the accounts normally featured various fees that would be waived for
the study period. At the conclusion of the visit, the agents gave respondents a voucher
which could be brought to MAMIDECOT and redeemed for a free account (these vouchers
expired after 4 months). Beneficiaries of the free account were informed that the monthly
maintenance fees would be waived for a total of 21 months, after which the promotion would
end and account holders would have to cover it on their own, in practice the promotion
ended in March, 2013, 24 months after vouchers were distributed.


Malawi
In Malawi, we conducted a census of all households from 65 villages within a 30–km radius
of one of the two selected NBS branches (Balaka and Liwonde). This census identified
7,266 households. As in Uganda, we sought to enroll a sufficient sample of self–employed
individuals. To this end, we performed an additional census of small business owners at
6 markets within the catchment area of the bank branches, which identified an additional
2,031 respondents. The total identified sample was thus 9,297 households; we have data for
9,268 of them. We first dropped 1,415 households (15 percent) with an account at a formal
financial institution.
    Similar to Uganda, we consecutively excluded 41 households with no head in farming,

of household was selected. In such cases, the respondent was replaced with his or her spouse. In total, 30
percent of men sampled for the study could not be surveyed at baseline and so were replaced by their wife
(for that survey as well as the rest of the study), while only 3 percent of female respondents were replaced by
their husbands. For this reason, our sample is predominantly composed of women (even among dual–headed
households). We therefore do not emphasize gender differences in outcomes.
    3
      We were not able to locate 241 households listed in the census and the rest who did not respond mainly
moved outside the area of the study.
    4
      Some of them just opened the accounts between the census and the baseline survey, while others had
not reported the accounts in the census.
    5
      Households occupations in our final sample were: employee, self–employed: vendor, business owner,
trader; or farmer: including animal rearing, housewife or unemployed.
    6
      See footnote 17 in the text.

                                                      2
services or vendor (these are households where both heads are civil servants or are unem-
ployed), 79 households with a civil servant head, 133 households that were inadvertently
included in the sample but report not being within 30km of the location of the branch for
most of the year, 513 households with no female head and 477 polygamous households. These
exclusion criteria reduced the sample to 6,610 households. Unlike Uganda, we did not screen
on having an older female head or on being employed in fishing/transport. We also dropped
78 households for which we do not know if they were interviewed at home or at the market.
This final sample included 5,531 households from the household census and 1,001 households
from the market census.
    We then randomly sampled 2,185 (65 percent) of the 5,531 eligible households from the
household census and 371 (50 percent) of the 742 households from the market census that
also satisfied the condition that the respondent was in either in vending or other business
owner (e.g. we dropped an additional number of 259 respondents in other occupations). This
resulted in our final sample of 2,556 households. To select the individual to be interviewed,
the selection process was identical to the one used in Uganda: if there are two heads, and
they are both non–farmers or both farmers, pick randomly among the two heads; if there
are two heads, and one is farmer and the other is not, pick the non–farmer.7
    A detailed baseline survey similar to the one used in Uganda was conducted a few months
after the census. Out of the 2,556 individuals sampled, 2,208 answered the survey.8 For
treatment assignment we excluded an additional 101 individuals who reported in the baseline
survey having an account at a formal institution.9 Out of the final 2,107 eligible individuals,
50 percent (1,053) were randomly selected to receive the vouchers.
    Randomization stratification was similar, but slightly different from Uganda: random-
ization was stratified by: occupation,10 gender, marital status, literacy, and whether the
respondent was from the household or market sample.
    As in Uganda, account opening occurred 4–5 months after the baseline. Individuals in
the treatment group were visited by a NBS agent.11 The agents gave some basic information

   7
      We sampled 1,454 female and 1,102 male respondents. However, as in Uganda, we were not always
able to enroll the selected household head in the study and it was more common for men to be absent than
women. 27 percent of men sampled for the study could not be surveyed at baseline and were replaced by
their wife for that survey and the rest of the study. 2.5 percent of female respondents were replaced by their
husbands. Here again, this means that the men in our sample are a somewhat selected set.
    8
      We were not able to locate 130 individuals listed in the census, 81 denied consent to conduct the survey,
and the rest who did not respond mainly moved outside the area of the study.
    9
      Some of them just opened the accounts between the census and the baseline survey, while others had
not reported the accounts in the census.
   10
      Occupations were: employee, vendor, business owner, trader/farmer or animal rearing, cash crop farmer,
and housewife or unemployed
   11
      See footnote 19 in the text.

                                                      3
about NBS and the accounts, and also explained that the accounts normally featured various
fees that would be waived for the study period. At the conclusion of the visit, the agents
gave respondents a voucher which could be brought to NBS and redeemed for a free account
(these vouchers expired after 4 months). Beneficiaries of the free account were informed that
the monthly maintenance fees would be waived for a total of 18 months, after which the
promotion would end and account holders would have to cover it on their own. In practice
voucher distribution happened in June/July 2011, and the promotion ended in June 2013,
24 months later.


Chile
While the experimental design was very similar in Malawi and Uganda, it was quite different
in Chile. In Chile we partnered with BancoEstado, the only public commercial bank and
the third largest bank in Chile. BancoEstado offers an account, called “CuentaRUT”, that
every Chilean with a national Chilean ID/tax number (the “RUT”) is eligible to open free
of charge. Despite the fact that CuentaRUT accounts are free, their take–up is low among
those who live in small towns or villages lacking a bank branch. To increase inclusion,
BancoEstado recently developed a network of point of sales in local stores (POS, or Cajas
Vecina), through which BancoEstado account holders can make deposits, withdrawals and
bill payments. CuentaRUT accounts can be opened online, but still require one visit to a
branch for activating the ATM card, signing a contract and registering a signature. Besides
deposits and withdrawals from a BancoEstado account, several other transactions can be
made through a CajaVecina, such as utility payment or cell phone minutes purchases. While
deposits (up to 5 per month), purchases and payments are free of cost, withdrawals are
charged $0.62 per transaction if made at the CajaVecina or ATM, and $1.24 if made at a
branch of the bank (these fees were not covered by the study). The same cost applies to
deposits after the 5th deposit in a given month. Moreover, the maximum balance allowed
in the account is around $6,300, and monthly deposits have a limit of around $4,000. The
account is equivalent to a transaction account and does not pay interest rate.
    Chile differed methodologically from the other sites in that the census exercise was not
representative of the entire region, enumerators went door–to–door until they reached a
sample size of nearly 2,000 eligible households, whereas in Uganda and Malawi the whole
targeted areas were censused and a sample was taken for the baseline. A door–to–door
census exercise was conducted in 48 Comunas of Region IX in Southern Chile. During that
census exercise 9,985 respondents were interviewed, out of which 74 percent already had
bank accounts (either the respondent or spouse). Of the 2,472 respondents without a bank


                                             4
account, 1,975 were willing to enroll and complete a baseline survey, the others refused to
provide their RUT and so were not considered for the study. Among those who were eligible
and enrolled in the study, half were selected to receive procedural assistance to open one of
BancoEstado’s free bank accounts, the CuentaRut. Treatment was assigned based on the
last digit of the RUT: odd numbers were assigned to treatment, and even numbers to the
control group. Treatment was not stratified on any characteristics.
    Households were informed of the existence of the CuentaRUT account, invited to open
an account with BancoEstado, and if interested received assistance with the account opening
process. In particular, we provided an internet–connected computer for the online application
and reminded people of the necessary steps to take for account activation.
    In total, 938 households were offered an account. Of this group, only 17 percent signed
up and activated their account within a few months.




                                             5
                      Web Appendix B


Banking the Unbanked? Evidence from three countries

 Pascaline Dupas, Dean Karlan, Jonathan Robinson and Diego Ubfal
                                          Web Appendix B
Figure WA1. Timeline
       Year                  2010                   2011                       2012                 2013
     Month           4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 2 3 4 5 6
Census
 Web Appendix B
           Malawi
              Chile
Baseline Survey
          Uganda
           Malawi
              Chile
Account Voucher distribution
          Uganda
           Malawi
              Chile
Follow‐up I
          Uganda
           Malawi
Follow‐up II
          Uganda
           Malawi
Follow‐up III (endline)
          Uganda
           Malawi
                              40
                                                                   Malawi
                              35
                                                                   Uganda
                              30
         Inflation rate (%)




                              25

                              20

                              15

                              10

                              5

                              0
                                                                    Mar‐12
                                                                    Apr‐12
                                                                    May‐12
                                                                    Jun‐12
                                                                      Jul‐12
                                                                    Aug‐12

                                                                    Oct‐12

                                                                    Dec‐12
                                                                     Jan‐13
                                                        Oct‐11

                                                        Dec‐11
                                                        Jan‐12
                                    Jan‐11

                                   Mar‐11
                                   Apr‐11
                                   May‐11
                                   Jun‐11
                                     Jul‐11
                                   Aug‐11
                                   Apr‐10
                                   May‐10
                                   Jun‐10
                                     Jul‐10
                                   Aug‐10

                                   Oct‐10

                                   Dec‐10




                                                                    Mar‐13
                                                                    Apr‐13
                                                                    May‐13
                                                                    Jun‐13
                                                                    Feb‐13
                                                                    Sep‐12

                                                                    Nov‐12
                                                        Nov‐11



                                                        Feb‐12
                                   Feb‐11




                                   Sep‐11
                                   Sep‐10

                                   Nov‐10
Table WA1. Analysis of Attrition in follow-up surveys
                                                                    Uganda                                 Malawi
                                                             Binary=1 if respondent was not interviewed in any of the three
Dependent Variable                                                                follow-up surveys
                                                                 (1)            (2)                      (3)           (4)
Web Appendix B                                                  0.00           0.02                     -0.01         0.02
                                                                (0.01)        (0.10)                   (0.01)         (0.06)
Interactions Between Treatment and Covariate:
Female                                                                         0.03                                   0.00
                                                                              (0.02)                                  (0.02)
Not Married                                                                    -0.01                                  0.01
                                                                              (0.02)                                  (0.03)
Female x Not Married                                                           -0.03                                  -0.02
                                                                              (0.03)                                  (0.03)
Household Size                                                                 0.00                                   0.00
                                                                              (0.00)                                  (0.00)
Age (1/10s of years)                                                           -0.01                                  -0.05
                                                                              (0.04)                                (0.025)**
Age Squared                                                                    0.00                                   0.01
                                                                              (0.01)                                (0.003)**
Entrepreneur                                                                   -0.03                                  -0.01
                                                                              (0.04)                                  (0.03)
Farmer                                                                         -0.01                                  0.00
                                                                              (0.04)                                  (0.03)
Employee                                                                       -0.01                                  0.04
                                                                              (0.05)                                  (0.03)
Distance to closest branch in km                                               0.00                                   0.00
                                                                              (0.00)                                  (0.00)
Log Value of Household and Agricultural Assets                                 0.00                                   0.01
                                                                              (0.01)                                  (0.01)
Years of education                                                             0.00                                   0.00
                                                                              (0.00)                                  (0.00)

Adjusted R-squared                                             0.00            0.00                    0.00          0.01
Observations                                                   2159           2159                     2107          2106
F-test p-value for joint significance of
interaction terms                                                             0.71                                    0.33
Mean of Dependent Variable                                      0.03          0.03                     0.03           0.03
Notes: OLS regressions with robust standard errors in parentheses. All explanatory variables are measured at baseline.
Regressions include the level of all covariates used in the interactions with treatment. Binary control variables were included
for missing observations of a covariate, and then missing covariates were replace by zero. We also included two branch
dummies for Uganda and one for Malawi. Significance levels: *10 percent, **5 percent, *** 1 percent.
Table WA2. Summary Statistics, Restricted to respondents who answered at least one follow-up
                                                           (1)             (2)       (3)               (4)
                                                                  Uganda                     Malawi
                                                         Control     Treatment     Control      Treatment
                                                          Mean       difference     Mean        Difference
                                                          (S.D.)     (Std. Err.)    (S.D.)      (Std. Err.)
Panel A. Demographics and SES
Female                                                     0.72         0.00         0.68          0.00
                                                          (0.45)       (0.02)       (0.47)        (0.02)
Main Occupation
 Entrepreneur                                               0.45         0.01         0.37          0.00
                                                           (0.50)       (0.02)       (0.48)        (0.02)
  Farmer                                                    0.33        -0.01         0.23          0.00
                                                           (0.47)       (0.02)       (0.42)        (0.02)
  Employee                                                  0.17         0.00         0.29         -0.01
                                                           (0.38)       (0.02)       (0.45)        (0.02)
  Housewife/Unemployed                                      0.05         0.00         0.11          0.00
                                                           (0.22)       (0.01)       (0.31)        (0.01)
Age                                                        36.27         0.17        39.86         -0.36
                                                          (11.90)       (0.53)      (17.09)        (0.74)
Married                                                     0.71         0.00         0.72          0.00
                                                           (0.45)       (0.02)       (0.45)        (0.02)
Household size                                              5.15        -0.03         4.62         -0.07
                                                           (2.38)       (0.10)       (2.00)        (0.09)
Years of education                                          5.49         0.00         4.20         -0.16
                                                           (2.95)       (0.13)       (3.45)        (0.15)
Acres of Land Owned by household                            1.53         0.05         2.19          0.07
                                                           (2.19)       (0.11)       (1.88)        (0.09)
Value of Household and Agricultural Assets                372.78        35.80       145.00          3.92
                                                         (697.99)      (67.96)     (274.00)       (16.87)
Distance to bank branch in km                               2.71        -0.10         6.00         -0.29
                                                           (2.03)       (0.09)       (3.20)        (0.14)
Panel B. Savings
Participates in ROSCA                                      0.23         0.00         0.05         -0.01
                                                          (0.42)       (0.02)       (0.22)        (0.01)
Holds savings in cash at home                              0.97        -0.02         0.49          0.00
                                                          (0.18)       (0.01)**     (0.50)        (0.02)
Holds savings with friends/family                          0.11         0.00         0.07          0.01
                                                          (0.31)       (0.01)       (0.25)        (0.01)
Holds savings in mobile money account1                     0.03        -0.01         0.00          0.00
                                                          (0.18)       (0.01)        0.00          0.00
Holds other cash savings2                                  0.02         0.00         0.00          0.00
                                                          (0.15)       (0.01)       (0.07)         0.00
Total Monetary Savings                                    30.26            -3.16    11.98             0.49
                                                         (105.12)      (4.28)      (45.60)            (2.13)
If you needed USD 22 / 26 urgently, how would you get the money?
  Would use (only) savings                                 0.05            -0.02     0.02             0.00
                                                          (0.21)       (0.01)**     (0.13)            (0.01)
  Would use savings and other method                       0.27            0.02      0.04             0.00
                                                          (0.44)       (0.02)       (0.20)            (0.01)
  Would borrow/ask from friends/family                     0.78            0.02      0.38             -0.01
                                                          (0.81)       (0.04)       (0.63)            (0.03)
  Would sell animals                                       0.36            0.03      0.07             0.03
                                                          (0.90)       (0.04)       (0.33)        (0.02)*
  Would be impossible to get it                            0.16            0.00      0.41             -0.03
                                                          (0.40)       (0.02)       (0.49)            (0.02)
Panel C. Income and Expenditures
Total Expenditures (last month)                           31.63        -1.47        17.58         -1.18
                                                         (51.05)       (2.00)      (46.11)        (1.64)
Labor Income (last month)                                 32.99        -6.02        25.69          2.72
                                                         (96.84)       (4.53)      (67.85)        (3.84)
P-value (Joint F-test)                                                  0.74                       0.40
Observations                                                           2085                       2046
Notes: See Table 1
Table WA3. Analysis of Attrition in follow-up surveys by round
                                            (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)      (5)        (6)         (7)       (8)       (9)       (10)     (11)     (12)
                                                              Uganda                                                         Malawi
                                         Attriter Follow- Attriter Follow- Attriter Follow-            Attriter Follow- Attriter Follow- Attriter Follow-
Dependent Variable                             up I             up II           up III                       up I             up II           up III
Web Appendix B                             0.01                0.00              -0.01                  -0.01               -0.01               0.00
                                          (0.01)               (0.01)            (0.01)                (0.01)               (0.01)              (0.01)
Interactions Between Treatment and Covariate:
Female                                 0.01                             0.03                0.08                  -0.03               0.03               0.01
                                                    (0.03)              (0.03)            (0.031)***             (0.03)               (0.03)             (0.03)
Not Married                                          -0.11              -0.11               0.03                  0.03                0.00               0.12
                                                    (0.09)              (0.09)              (0.04)               (0.04)               (0.17)             (0.20)
Female x Not Married                                 0.08               0.07                -0.07                 -0.01               -0.05              -0.16
                                                    (0.10)              (0.09)              (0.05)               (0.04)               (0.17)             (0.20)
Household Size                                       0.00               -0.01               0.00                  0.00                0.00               0.00
                                                    (0.01)              (0.01)              (0.01)               (0.01)               (0.01)             (0.01)
Age (1/10s of years)                                 -0.08              -0.07               -0.02                 -0.02               -0.06              -0.06
                                                    (0.05)              (0.06)              (0.06)               (0.03)               (0.04)             (0.04)
Age Squared                                          0.01               0.01                0.00                  0.00                0.01               0.01
                                                    (0.01)              (0.01)              (0.01)               (0.00)              (0.004)*            (0.01)
Entrepreneur                                         -0.10              -0.08               -0.08                 -0.09               -0.02              -0.04
                                                   (0.056)*             (0.06)              (0.06)              (0.040)**             (0.04)             (0.04)
Farmer                                               -0.12              -0.07               -0.04                 -0.06               -0.02              -0.03
                                                   (0.057)**            (0.06)              (0.06)               (0.04)               (0.04)             (0.04)
Employee                                             -0.10              -0.06               -0.01                 -0.05               0.00               0.02
                                                   (0.062)*             (0.06)              (0.07)               (0.04)               (0.04)             (0.04)
Distance to closest branch in km                     0.00               0.00                0.00                  0.00                -0.01              0.00
                                                    (0.01)              (0.01)              (0.01)               (0.00)               (0.00)             (0.00)
Log Value of Household and                           0.00               0.02                0.02                  0.01                0.01               0.01
 Agricultural Assets                                (0.01)              (0.01)              (0.01)               (0.01)               (0.01)             (0.01)
Years of education                                   0.00               0.00                0.00                  0.00                0.01               0.00
                                                    (0.00)              (0.00)              (0.00)               (0.00)               (0.00)             (0.00)

Adjusted R-squared                         0.00      0.01      0.00     0.01     0.00       0.01        0.00      0.01      0.00      0.00      0.00     0.01
Observations                              2159      2159       2159     2159     2159       2159       2107      2106       2107      2106      2107     2106
F-test p-value for joint significance
of interaction terms                                 0.57               0.56                0.36                  0.21                0.26               0.30

Mean of Dependent Variable                    0.06     0.06   0.07     0.07     0.08     0.08       0.06    0.06     0.06    0.06     0.07     0.07
Notes: OLS regressions with robust standard errors in parentheses. All explanatory variables are measured at baseline. Regressions include the
level of all covariates used in the interactions with treatment. Binary control variables were included for missing observations of a covariate, and
then missing covariates were replace by zero. We also included two branch dummies for Uganda and one for Malawi. Significance levels: *10
percent, **5 percent, *** 1 percent.
Table WA4. Reported vs. Administrative Data
                                         Survey Data                                                          Admin Data

 Panel A. Uganda
Total Amount Deposited in Partner Institution Month Before Survey
                                                           Share   Mean                                                 Share   Mean
Web Appendix B        Mean      sd      p95      p99        >0     win      N         Mean      sd     p95       p99     >0     win        N

Follow-up I           1.54    13.94    3.68     40.50      0.06    0.79    1014        4.37   49.12    3.68     77.68   0.06     1.26    1014
Follow-up II          2.48    15.38    3.79     75.70      0.06    1.67    1002        3.34   23.69    0.00    102.20   0.05     1.53    1002
Follow-up III         2.47    20.61    2.57     53.17      0.05    1.05    999         1.39   15.76    0.00     36.67   0.03     0.20     999
Average               2.13    11.24    12.22    50.47      0.13    1.15    1041        2.94   22.54   12.27     63.09   0.10     0.97    1041
Average no missing    2.18    11.42    12.25    50.47      0.13    1.17    943         3.22   23.67   13.44     64.35   0.10     1.05     943
Balance in Partner Institution at the time of the survey
Follow-up I           16.48   67.91    73.63   276.13      0.42    13.11   1010       15.92   83.75   59.05    301.99   0.36    12.55    1010
Follow-up II          18.40   109.27   88.95   272.53      0.37    14.35   997        12.91   64.51   51.35    250.13   0.37    10.22     997
Follow-up III         23.86   186.55   91.67   315.33      0.28    14.46   997        10.02   60.65   35.25    195.69   0.38     6.96     997
Average               21.02   139.92   85.87   247.93      0.49    13.91   1041       12.53   57.89   56.40    226.04   0.39     9.60    1041
Average no missing    15.94   44.37    84.34   212.37      0.51    13.79   945        13.63   60.62   64.51    235.75   0.40    10.40     945


Panel B. Malawi
Total Amount Deposited in Partner Institution Month Before Survey
Follow-up I           1.00     7.12    2.07     47.42      0.06    0.50    994         2.62   22.26    2.96     65.21   0.06     0.90     994
Follow-up II          0.23     1.91    0.00     10.56      0.03    0.13    988         2.45   17.11    1.23     70.43   0.05     1.19     988
Follow-up III         0.35     3.76    0.00     11.81      0.03    0.14    976         0.43    6.62    0.00     11.81   0.01     0.00     976
Average               0.55     3.38    1.76     17.78      0.10    0.27    1025        1.77   10.61    6.89     40.40   0.08     0.68    1025
Average no missing    0.49     2.72    1.58     17.72      0.10    0.25    941         1.92   11.06    8.22     48.97   0.09     0.73     941
Balance in Partner Institution at the time of the survey
Follow-up I           10.60   53.99    41.50   231.20      0.35    7.86    993         8.57   45.49   49.29    207.48   0.37     7.14     993
Follow-up II          9.31    109.22   31.69   144.38      0.23    5.17    987         6.72   29.61   34.91    140.55   0.37     5.90     987
Follow-up III         6.51    31.49    29.53   150.59      0.19    5.19    975         7.59   51.45   38.13    117.86   0.38     5.14     975
Average               9.23    46.05    39.52   155.85      0.41    6.32    1025        8.14   42.15   43.12    143.68   0.38     6.15    1025
Average no missing 8.76        44.68 39.52 143.92           0.42     6.03    938         7.34 30.76 44.49 121.62 0.39            6.03     938
Notes: Mean win: mean after winsorizing the top 1% of all observations in our sample (including 0s and the control group observations). Average
no missing: average for observations with no missing values in any round for both survey and administrative data.
Table WA5. Impacts on Flows: Deposits Last 30 days in 2010 USD. Non Winsorized
                                                                (1)                   (2)                    (3)                  (4)                  (5)

                                                                                                Deposits in other sources
                                                        Deposits at formal
                                                                                                                                                 Total Deposits
                                                       financial institutions
                                                                                                     Cash at home or in
                                                                                 Mobile Money                               ROSCA/VSLA
                                                                                                        Secret place
Web Appendix B
 Treatment                                                     0.239                 -0.133                 1.144                0.158                1.26
                                                               (0.71)                (0.29)                 (2.30)               (0.29)              (2.48)

Dep. Var. Mean in Control Group                                 2.04                  0.74                   6.94                 2.54                12.28
Std. Dev.                                                      29.60                 11.26                  36.06                8.90                 50.35
Obs.                                                           6,026                 6,023                  6,015                6,013                5,993
Number of Households                                           2085                  2083                   2081                 2081                 2077

Panel B: Malawi
 Treatment                                                     0.153                                        -0.224              -0.041               -0.162
                                                               (0.13)                                       (0.30)              (0.10)               (0.36)

Dep. Var. Mean in Control Group                                 0.40                                         1.82                 0.69                 2.95
Std. Dev.                                                       5.07                                        12.98                3.36                 14.92
Obs.                                                           5,903                                        5,902                5,903                5,902
Number of Households                                           2,046                                        2,046                2,046                2,046

Panel C: Pooled Treatment                                    0.196                                          0.453                0.06                 0.51
                                                             (0.36)                                        (1.18)               (0.15)               (1.27)
Notes: Pooled regression including three waves of follow-up data 12, 18 and 24 months after baseline. We control for the baseline value of dependent variable if
available, stratification dummies and wave dummies. Standard errors are clustered at the respondent level. For Malawi, data for savings in VSLA are only
available for the second and third follow-up.
Table WA6. Impacts on Savings Stocks in 2010 USD. Non winsorized
                                              (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)        (5)         (6)           (7)              (8)              (9)
                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                          Loans
                                            Formal                    Cash at home                                             Total
                                                                                   ROSCA/ Friends/F Other cash                                 Received       Received
                                           Financial     Mobile money or in Secret                                            Monetary
                                                                                    VSLA2   amily    savings3                                  Informal        Formal
                                         Institutions1                    place                                               Savings
                                                                                                                                                 Loan           Loan
Web Appendix B
 Treatment                                  6.478           -2.136           0.167        -0.864     4.147       -1.249         7.267            0.001            0.007
                                            (4.62)         (1.205)*          (3.71)       (0.98)     (4.57)      (0.93)         (7.83)           (0.01)           (0.01)

Dep. Var. Mean in Control Group             14.32            3.53           26.59          9.65       7.38        2.18         63.47             0.08             0.04
Std. Dev.                                   126.40          62.74           108.60         35.71     56.35        39.06        216.30            0.28             0.19
Obs.                                         6007           6027             6022          6028      6030         6017          5978             6033             6033
Number of Households                         2085           2085             2085          2085      2085         2085          2085             2085             2085

Panel B: Malawi
 Treatment                                   5.148             -             -5.236       -0.589     -0.399         -           -1.182           -0.006           0.005
                                          (1.604)***           -           (2.561)**      (0.37)     (0.28)         -           (2.98)           (0.01)           (0.00)

Dep. Var. Mean in Control Group              3.78              -            13.47          3.12       0.77          -          21.25             0.04             0.02
Std. Dev.                                   38.29              -            126.00         13.58     12.32          -          136.10            0.20             0.14
Obs.                                        5900               -             5905          5906      5907           -           5898             5889             5889
Number of Households                        2046               -             2046          2046      2046           -           2046             2040             2040

Panel C: Pooled Treatment                   5.848              -             -2.615       -0.724     1.814          -           3.060            -0.002           0.006
                                          (2.471)**                          (2.27)       (0.53)     (2.32)                     (4.23)           (0.01)           (0.00)
Notes: Pooled regression including three waves of follow-up data 12, 18 and 24 months after baseline. We control for the baseline value of dependent variable (we
replace missing values of dependent variables at baseline by 0 and include dummies for missing observations), dummies for stratification variables and wave dummies.
Standard errors are clustered at the respondent level.
1
  Formal financial institutions include commercial banks, microfinance banks, and savings and credit cooperatives (SACCOs).
2
  For Malawi, data for savings in VSLA are only available for the second and third follow-up.
3
  Other cash savings: savings with shopkeeper or employer, farmer groups and village leader.
4
  In Uganda, data for having "ever" received a loan; in Malawi: data on having received a loan in the last 6 months, and we control at baseline with a varible on having
"ever" received a loan. Informal Loan: from Rosca or Community Group (Uganda), Rosca, Village Bank or Moneylender (Malawi). Formal Loan: Bank, SACCO or MFI.
Table WA7. Impacts on Savings using Administrative Data instead of Reported Data
                                             (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)

                                                        Total Deposits
                                        Deposits at                    Saving Stock at
                                                          (including                       Total
                                           formal                          Formal
                                                          ROSCAs,                        Monetary
                                          financial                       Financial
                                                        home savings,                  Savings Stock
                                        institutions1                   Institutions1
                                                             etc.)

Web Appendix B
 Treatment                                 1.241            0.926          7.124           3.091
                                         (0.172)***        (0.559)*      (1.427)***        (2.46)

Dep. Var. Mean in Control Group             0.42             8.46           5.03           40.94
Std. Dev.                                   3.75            19.45          31.60           80.26
Obs.                                       6,027            5,994          6021            5991
Number of Households                       2085             2077           2085            2085

Panel b: Malawi
 Treatment                                  0.73             0.603          3.963          1.463
                                         (0.092)***       (0.189)***     (0.739)***        (1.06)

Dep. Var. Mean in Control Group             0.12             2.03           2.15           13.87
Std. Dev.                                   1.19             6.06          15.08           32.57
Obs.                                       5,903            5,902          5904            5902
Number of Households                       2,046            2,046          2046            2046

Notes: Pooled regression including three waves of follow-up data 12, 18 and 24 months after baseline. We
control for the baseline value of dependent variable if available (we replace missing values of dependent
variables at baseline by 0 and include dummies for missing observations), dummies for stratification
variables and wave dummies. Standard errors are clustered at the respondent level. All dependent variables
are top winsorized at the 99th percentile.
1
  Formal financial institutions include commercial banks, microfinance banks, and savings and credit
cooperatives (SACCOs). For respondents that report at least one deposit in the financial institution we
worked with, we replace reported balance by administrative data at the moment of the survey (in Uganda we
replace balance in SACCOs by administrative balance and in Malawi we replace balance in commercial
banks by administrative balance, without changing the other self-reported categories).
Table WA8. Additional Summary Statistics for Uganda and Malawi samples
                                                                       Uganda                                    Malawi
                                                                                  Monthly                                    Monthly
                                                                                 Equivalent                               Equivalent Share
                                                                   Standard     Share of Total              Standard         of Total
                                                         Mean      Deviation     Expenditure      Mean      Deviation      Expenditure
                                                          (1)         (2)             (3)          (4)         (5)              (6)
Web Appendix B
Total Self-Reported, last 30 days                         30.09       35.93         100%          16.12        21.64           100%
Food, last 7 days                                         4.98        5.89          71%           4.28         5.29            114%
Durables, last year                                       14.21      46.48           4%           1.92         8.52             1%
Home Construction, last year                              10.67      57.13           3%           0.19         1.19             0%
Education, last year                                      90.40      151.39         25%           4.83         15.69            2%
Health, last 30 days (monthly equivalent for Uganda)       9.44       21.87         31%           0.31          1.10            2%
Agricultural Inputs, last 30 days                         1.55        4.50           5%           0.02         0.10             0%
Regrets*, last 30 days                                    2.39        5.15           8%           5.21         13.87           32%
Panel B. How they earn their money: Income by source (in 2010 USD)
Calculated Total Labor Income, last 30 days         23.33      44.24                100%          21.10        39.14           100%
Selling Animals                                     3.13       13.82                13%           2.38         9.83            11%
Selling Animal Produce                              0.29        1.98                 1%           0.00         0.00             0%
Selling Crops                                       1.60        6.13                 7%           0.34         2.00             2%
Selling Other Products                              0.05        0.47                 0%           0.20         1.21             1%
Business                                            15.24      34.34                65%           14.03        37.09           66%
Casual Work                                         2.89        8.06                12%           3.37         7.10            16%
Formal Work                                         0.14        1.15                 1%           0.84         4.68             4%
Details on Farming Last Harvest
Farmed at least 1 crop                                    0.87        0.33                        0.96         0.19
Sold at least 1 crop                                      0.66        0.47                        0.50         0.50
Value (in 2010 USD) of crops sold                         48.66      100.80                       85.87       133.83
Percentage of the harvest consumed                        84.21       18.37                       86.81        20.17
Panel C. Monetary Transfers (in 2010 USD)
Total Received (excluding from spouse), last 90 days      12.42       27.51                       4.58         12.16
Total Given (excluding to spouse), last 90 days           3.14        9.53                        0.74         3.67
Total Received From spouse, last 30 days                  3.20        8.97                        0.00         0.00
Total Given to Spouse, last 30 days                       2.07        6.83                        0.00         0.00
Panel D. Shocks
Any household member sick, last month                     0.82        0.38                        0.74         0.44
Affected by Shock, last month                             0.38        0.49                        0.18         0.38
Panel E. Savings (in 2010 USD)
Rosca deposits, last month                                2.06        6.14                        0.00         0.00
Adding to Home Savings, last month                        2.40        7.03                        2.15         6.98
Saving Stocks
Home Savings                                              13.35       33.13                       7.73         23.46
Roscas                                                    4.50        13.77                       0.20         1.41
Friends/Family                                            3.47        17.29                       0.90         5.04

Panel F. Other Inflows of Money Last 30 days
Witdrawals from Bank or Mobile Money                      0.12        1.12                        0.00         0.00
Formal Loans                                              0.00        0.00                        0.00         0.00
Rents                                                     0.14        1.03                        0.06         0.50
Remittances                                                                                       0.70         3.21
Pension                                                                                           0.00         0.00

Observations                                               2159                                 2107
Notes: Values of the variables collected in Round 1 Survey (Oct-Nov 2010 in Uganda, Feb-Mar 2011 in Malawi ). All continuous variables are
top winsorized at the 99% and expressed in June 2010 US dollars.
*Regrets= total expenditures on goods people report it was a "bad idea" to purchase.
