NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAKING ORDERS AND TAKING NOTES:
DEALER INFORMATION SHARING IN TREASURY MARKETS
Nina Boyarchenko
David O. Lucca
Laura Veldkamp
Working Paper 22461
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22461

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2016

The views expressed here are the authors' and are not representative of the views of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York or of the Federal Reserve System. We thank Bruno Biais, Giovanni
Cespa, John Cochrane (through his blog), Darrell Duffie, Ken Garbade, Luis Gonzalez, Robin
Greenwood, Zhiguo He, Pablo Kurlat, Richard Tang, Hongjun Yan, Haoxiang Zhu and
participants at the NBER AP meetings, Chicago Booth Asset Pricing Conference, Duke, Miami,
U.S. Treasury Roundtable on Treasury Markets, NYU, the Spring 2015 Macro Finance Society
Meetings, SED 2015, Gerzensee Summer Institute 2015, EFA 2015, EEA 2015, FIRS 2016, Bank
of Canada and SFI Lausanne for comments. Nic Kozeniauskas, Karen Shen, Arnav Sood and
Peifan Wu provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22461.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Nina Boyarchenko, David O. Lucca, and Laura Veldkamp. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Taking Orders and Taking Notes: Dealer Information Sharing in Treasury Markets
Nina Boyarchenko, David O. Lucca, and Laura Veldkamp
NBER Working Paper No. 22461
July 2016
JEL No. D44,G1,G14
ABSTRACT
The use of order flow information by financial firms has come to the forefront of the regulatory
debate. A central question is: Should a dealer who acquires information by taking client orders be
allowed to use or share that information? We explore how information sharing affects dealers,
clients and issuer revenues in U.S. Treasury auctions. Because one cannot observe alternative
information regimes, we build a model, calibrate it to auction results data, and use it to quantify
counter-factuals. We estimate that yearly auction revenues with full-information sharing (with
clients and between dealers) would be $5 billion higher than in a "Chinese Wall" regime in which
no information is shared. When information sharing enables collusion, the collusion costs
revenue, but prohibiting information sharing costs more. For investors, the welfare effects of
information sharing depend on how information is shared. Surprisingly, investors benefit when
dealers share information with each other, not when they share more with clients. For the market,
when investors can bid directly, information sharing creates a new financial accelerator: Only
investors with bad news bid through intermediaries, who then share that information with others.
Thus, sharing amplifies the effect of negative news. Tests of two model predictions support its
key features.
Nina Boyarchenko
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
Nina.boyarchenko@ny.frb.org
David O. Lucca
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
david.lucca@ny.frb.org

Laura Veldkamp
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 W Fourth Street,Suite 7-77
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
lveldkam@stern.nyu.edu

“[B]efore the Treasury holds an auction, salespeople at 22 primary dealers field billions of dollars in bids
for government debt. Traders working at some of these financial institutions have the opportunity to learn
specifics of those bids hours ahead of the auctions [and] also have talked with counterparts at other banks via
online chatrooms [...]. Such conversations, both inside banks and among them, could give traders information
useful for making bets on one of the most powerful drivers of global markets [...].” — Bloomberg (2015),
“As U.S. Probes $12.7 Trillion Treasury Market, Trader Talk Is a Good Place to Start.”

Recent financial market misconduct, involving misuse of information about clients’ orders,
cost the firms involved record fines and lost reputation. It also prompted investigations
and calls for curbing dissemination of order flow information, between and within dealers.
Recent investigations reportedly involve U.S. Treasury auctions (Bloomberg, 2015 above).
But the use of order flow information has been central to our understanding of Treasury
auctions (Hortaçsu and Kastl, 2012), to market making theory generally (Kyle, 1985) and
to market practice for decades. In describing Treasury market pre-auction activities in the
1950s, Robert Roosa (1956) noted that “Dealers sometime talk to each other; and they all
talk to their banks and customers; the banks talk to each other.” Furthermore, sharing
order-flow information–or, colloquially, “market color”–with issuers is even mandatory for
primary dealers both in the U.S. and abroad. Of course, if information sharing leads to
collusion, that has well-known welfare costs. But if collusion could be prevented with
separate remedies, is information sharing by itself problematic? The strong conflicting
views on a seemingly long-established practice raise the question of who gains or loses
when order-flow information is shared.1
Measuring the revenue and welfare effects of information sharing directly would require
data with and without sharing. In the absence of such data, we use a calibrated model.
Our setting is an institutionally-detailed model of U.S. Treasury auctions, which we select
because of the available data, the absence of other dealer functions,2 and their enormous
economic importance. In the model, dealers observe client orders and may use that in1

Thus far actions for misconduct have been successfully brought against participants in the interbank
lending (Libor) and foreign exchange markets. Regulations on information sharing in sovereign auctions
vary and are evolving. As of 2011, the UK Debt Management Office sanctioned that UK primary dealers,
or Gilt-edged Market Makers, “whilst not permitted to charge a fee for this service, may use the information content of that bid to its own benefit” (GEMM Guidebook, 2011). The 2015 GEMM Guidebook,
instead, states that “information about trading interests, bids/offers or transactions may be subject to
confidentiality obligations or other legal restrictions on disclosure (including pursuant to competition law).
Improper disclosure or collusive behaviour will fall below the standards expected of GEMMs, and evidence
or allegations of such behaviour will be escalated to the appropriate authority(ies).” We are not aware
of analogous rules in the context of U.S. Treasury auctions. In practice, a financial intermediary’s use of
client information, including sharing such information with other clients or using the information for other
benefit to such intermediary, may violate legal requirements, be they statutory, regulatory or contractual,
market best practices or standards. This paper does not take a view as to whether the described use of
client information with respect to Treasury auction activity is legal or proper. The objective of the paper
is to study the economic effects of alternative information sharing arrangements.
2
Dealers in Treasury auctions do not diversify or transform risks, do not locate trading counterparties
and cannot monitor issuers because they cannot influence fiscal policy.

1

formation to inform their own strategy, share some of the information with clients, or
exchange information with other dealers. Then all agents submit menu bids to a uniformprice, common-value auction. To quantify the effects of order flow information sharing and
sign welfare results, we calibrate the model to auction results and allotment data as well as
market pricing information and on-the-run premia. Then we compare the model’s revenue
and utility predictions with varying degrees and types of information sharing. Finally,
we derive two testable predictions from our model and show that both are supported by
auction data.
The model teaches us that the primary beneficiary of information sharing is the U.S. Treasury, who benefits from the higher bids of better-informed buyers. We estimate that moving
from full information sharing benchmark to a “Chinese wall” policy of no informationsharing between or within dealers would lower Treasury auction revenues by $4.8 billion
annually. While the idea that better-informed investors bid more is not a new finding, the
issue is rarely raised in policy debates, presumably because the magnitude of the effect is
not known.
Our second finding is that dealer information sharing with other dealers and sharing with
clients have opposite effects on investor utility. When all dealers share information with
their clients, it typically makes the clients worse off. This is a form of the well-known
Hirshleifer (1971) effect, which arises here because better-informed clients have more heterogeneous beliefs and therefore share risk less efficiently. But surprisingly, when dealers
share information with each other and then transmit the same amount of information to
their clients, investor welfare improves. Our model shows how inter-dealer information
sharing makes beliefs more common, and thereby improves risk-sharing and welfare. In
essence, information sharing with clients is similar to providing more private information,
while inter-dealer sharing functions effectively makes information more public.
Third, since information sharing has been associated with coordinated trades in foreignexchange misconduct (for example, to manipulate benchmark rates), we consider a setting
in which dealers who share information also collude. In a collusive equilibrium, dealers
who share information also bid as a group, or coalition, that considers price impact of
the coalition as a whole. We find that dealer information sharing and collusion jointly
suppress auction prices and reduce Treasury revenue. However, if the dealers share enough
information with clients, the revenue costs may disappear.
Fourth, we uncover a new financial accelerator: Only investors with bad news employ
intermediaries, who then share that information with others. Thus the combination of
information sharing and intermediation choice can amplify the effect of negative news and
raise the probability of auction failure.

2

These findings are not meant to imply that dealers should have carte blanche in using
information in any way they choose. The model assumes that clients know how dealers use
their information, and that order flow information is aggregated. While we consider the
case of collusive bids by dealers, our setting does not clearly span the range of malpractices
that may have been undertaken. In effect, we ask: If dealers disclose how information is
used, what are the costs and benefits of limiting information sharing?
Treasury auctions are unique in their importance and their complexity. Our model balances
a detailed description with a tractable and transparent model which highlights insights that
are broadly applicable. The basis for the model is a standard, common-value, uniformprice auction with heterogeneous information, limit orders and market orders. On top
of this foundation, we add five features that distinguish Treasury auctions from other
settings.
Feature 1: Dealers learn and share order flow information. The assumption that
bidders have private signals about future Treasury values and that dealers learn from
observing their order flow is supported by Hortaçsu and Kastl (2012). Using data from
Canadian Treasury auctions, they find that order flow is informative about demand and
asset values. They further show that information about order flow accounts for a significant
fraction of dealers’ surplus. In our setting, dealers not only collect this information but
also share it.
Feature 2: Strategic bidding Bikhchandani and Huang (1993) present evidence that
Treasury auctions are imperfectly competitive (see also Song and Zhu, 2016). Because of
their bidding volume (40 percent of the total), primary dealers, which currently are only 22,
bid strategically by taking into account the price impact of their bids. As in Kyle (1989),
the strategic aspect of primary dealers’ bids is a central feature of our model. Without it,
for example, the choice of intermediated or direct bidding that we discuss below would be
trivial. By including the various types of bidders, our model predicts not only average postauction appreciation (as in Lou, Yan, and Zhang, 2013), but also a relationship between
post-auction price appreciation and auction allocations by investor types.
Feature 3: Non-competitive bidding In every auction, a group of bidders, labelled
“non-competitive,” place market orders that are not conditional on the market-clearing
price. Such bidders are an important feature of the model, because they prevent the price
from perfectly aggregating all private information. We assume that competitive bidders
are different in that they submit limit orders (quantity schedules that are conditional on
realized prices). We show in the data that competitive bids incorporate information in
realized prices, just as they do in our model.
Feature 4: Minimum bidding requirements Primary dealers are expected to bid at
3

all auctions an amount equal to the pro-rata share of the offered amount, with bids that
are “reasonable” compared to the market. A dealer that consistently fails to bid for a large
enough quantity at a high enough price could lose his primary dealer status.3 We model
this requirement as a shadow cost for low bids.
Feature 5: Direct and indirect bidding U.S. Treasury auctions are mixed auctions,
meaning that investors can choose to bid indirectly, through a dealer, or directly, without
any intermediary. Section 5 examines a large, strategic bidder’s choice of how to bid.
Each of these model features contributes to our understanding of the symbiotic relationship
between investors and intermediaries: it is the process of intermediating trades that reveals
information to dealers and thus empowers them. Information sharing is what induces clients
to use intermediaries and induces large investors to intermediate.
Contribution to the existing literature. Our paper contributes to several strands of
literature. First, it is connected to work in the microstructure literature that studies how
order flow information contributes to price formation. For example, dealers learn from
sequential order flow in Easley, Kiefer, O’Hara, and Paperman (1996) and leverage asymmetric information and market power in Kyle (1985) and Medrano and Vives (2004). In
Babus and Parlatore (2015), dealers fragment a market. They consider how fragmentation
inhibits risk-sharing, while we consider the effect on information-sharing. What distinguishes our model most from previous work is its analysis of information-sharing and its
attention to the institutional features of Treasury auctions. While, as in most models with
exponential utility, the equilibrium price is a linear function of the signals in the economy,
the information sharing changes the linear weights placed on each signal. The institutional
detail we add is not just window-dressing on a standard model. Intermediation choice
and minimum bidding requirements are what make information sharing necessary. When
bidders can choose to bid directly, dealers must share some of their information in order to
attract clients. Conversely, allowing dealers to extract information from order flow is what
induces them to be primary dealers and subject themselves to costly minimum bidding
(underwriting) requirements. Without this both types of information sharing, the primary
dealer system as we know it could not operate.
Primary dealers perform underwriting services, as they do in the initial public offering
(IPO) literature. This literature typically finds that intermediaries lower issuers’ revenues
but also revenue variance (Ritter and Welch, 2002). We show, instead, that when deal3

Prior to 1992, an active primary dealer had to be a “consistent and meaningful participant” in Treasury
auctions by submitting bids roughly commensurate with the dealer’s capacity. See appendix E in Brady,
Breeden, and Greenspan (1992). In 1997, the New York Fed instituted an explicit counterparty performance
scorecard and dealers were evaluated based on the volume of allotted securities. In 2010 the NY Fed clarified
their primary dealer operating policies and strengthened the requirements. See New York Fed website for
the most recent rules.

4

ers share information, the conventional wisdom of underwriting is reversed: information
intermediaries raise expected revenue but also revenue variance.
Work by Hortaçsu and McAdams (2010) and others, who study how auction design affects revenues,4 complements our project. Similarly, He, Krishnamurthy, and Milbradt
(2016) explore why US Treasuries are safe. We fix the auction format to a uniform-price
menu auction, fix the distribution of future Treasury values, and instead focus on how
intermediation and information sharing affect revenue and surplus.
The emergent literature on intermediary asset pricing also explores the idea that intermediaries are central to determining the equilibrium price of an asset. In He and Krishnamurthy (2013) and Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014), capital-constrained intermediaries
provide households with access to risky asset markets and thus improve economy-wide risk
sharing. In contrast, agents in our model choose optimally whether to invest through an
intermediary, whose role is to improve information sharing among investors. This new
information-sharing role for financial intermediaries helps explain why agents that are not
precluded from accessing markets directly might choose intermediation nonetheless.

1

Baseline Auction Model with Primary Dealers

The auction setting is a simple and familiar one, with a structure similar to Kyle (1989).
The novel feature of the model lies in its rich information structure as determined by how
information is shared between the agents. Figure 1 summarizes the alternative sharing
arrangements that we consider, for a simplified setting with no signal noise and only a
few market participants. Dealers are denoted with the letter “D,” while investors with
the letter “I.” Panel a) shows the case of no information sharing (“Chinese walls”), where
each auction participant only observes his private information si . Competitive bidders can
submit a menu of price-contingent quantities. Auction theory teaches us that each bidder
should avoid the winner’s curse by choosing a quantity for each price that would be optimal
if he observed that market-clearing price and included it in his information set. Thus, the
information set of investor i is effectively {si , p}.
When information is shared between dealers and customers (panel b), an investor’s information set now not only includes her private signal but also the dealer’s, and the dealer
4

Theoretical work by Chari and Weber (1992), Bikhchandani and Huang (1989), Back and Zender
(1993), and Wilson (1979) considers the merits of uniform-price auctions versus other possible alternatives.
Empirical work by Nyborg and Sundaresan (1996), Malvey, Archibald, and Flynn (1995) and Malvey
and Archibald (1998) compares revenues from 1992-1998 when the U.S. Treasury used both uniform and
discriminatory price auctions. Armantier and Sbaı̈ (2006) use French Treasury auction bids to structurally
estimate the benefits of uniform price auctions.

5

Figure 1: Information sets with alternative sharing assumptions. Letter D denotes dealers; letters I denotes investors (either large or small) bidding through a dealer or
not (direct bidding); p is the equilibrium price. Dashed lines indicate common information
sets.
(a) No sharing with
customers or dealers
(Chinese Walls)

D1

(b) Sharing with customers, not with other
dealers

D2

D1

p
I1

p
I2

I1

D2

D1

p
I1

I2

(d) Sharing with customers only; one direct bidder

(c) Sharing with customers and dealers

D1

D2

I1
p

I2

I2

I3

also observes an extended information set. This information set is further increased in the
case of cross-dealer information sharing (panel c). In this case, each investor observes the
information set pertaining to its dealer, and also that of the other dealer. Common to case
b) and c) is the fact that information sharing with dealers and customers leads to more
signal pooling. Investors who bid independently from the intermediary keep their signal
private (panel d) resulting in a more dispersed information set both for the direct bidder
and other bidders.
While this simplified setting conveys the essence of information sharing, our model is
richer along many dimensions. We consider four type of bidders to match key features
of Treasury auction participation: small and large limit-order bidders, intermediaries (or
dealers) and non-price contingent bidders. Limit-order bidders and intermediaries place
price-contingent bids, which specify for each clearing price p, a price-quantity pair. Limitorder bidders can be small (price takers) or large (strategic bidders). We refer to large and

6

small limit-order bidders as the investors. Dealers are just like large limit-order bidders
but they also intermediate bids from other limit-order bidders and face minimum bidding
requirements. Dealers place bids directly in the auction while small and other large limitorder bidders bid indirectly through the dealers. (Section 5 allows direct bidding as well.)
Non-price-contingent bidders are the fourth type of agent that places bids. In contrast to
other investors and dealers, these bidders place market orders that only specify a quantity
but not a price (called noncompetitive bids). In practice, noncompetitive bidders are
small retail investors or foreign central banks who participate at auctions to invest dollardenominated foreign reserve balances, for example by rolling expiring securities into newly
issued ones. As opposed to other investors, this foreign official auction demand is not
driven by the security fundamentals but by exchange rate policies, simply placing bids for
a given amount of securities, and injecting noise in auction prices.

Agents, assets and preferences The model economy lasts for one period and agents
can invest in a risky asset (the newly issued Treasury security) and a riskless storage
technology with zero net return. The risky asset is auctioned by Treasury in a fixed
number of shares (normalized to 1) using a uniform-price auction with a market-clearing
price p. The fundamental value of the newly issued asset is unknown to the agents and
normally distributed: f ∼ N (µ, τf−1 ). By assuming that there is one final value of the asset,
we are describing a common value auction. But this is purely for convenience. Appendix
C describes a private value setup that delivers the same results.
We index investors (small and large) and dealers with i = 1, . . . , N , where N ≡ NL +
NI + ND , NL , NI and ND denote respectively the total number of large investors, small
investors and dealers. Each small investor has initial wealth Wi , and chooses the quantity
of the asset to hold, qi (which can in principle be negative) at price p per share, in order
to maximize his expected utility,5
E[− exp(−ρi Wi )],

(1)

where ρi denotes agent i’s coefficient of absolute risk aversion. In our data, investors
with larger balance sheets hold larger positions of risky assets. To allow our model to
match these wealth effects, we assign large investors and dealers a smaller absolute risk
aversion. The budget constraint for small and large investors dictates that final wealth is
Wi = W0 + qi (f − p).
Dealer and large investors solve the same problem of small investors but they also internalize
5

Technically, the price of each Treasury is fixed at par and auction participants bid coupon payments.
We interpret p as the price per present value dollar of coupons.

7

the effect they have on market prices. They maximize their final utility with risk aversion
ρi subject to the same constraints as well as the market clearing condition. We assume that
all large investors and dealers share the same risk aversion and signal precision, or ρi = ρl
and τε,i = τε,l for i ∈ {NL , ND }, where Nj is the set of agents of type j. Similarly, all small
investors are symmetric: ρi = ρI and τε,i = τε,s for i ∈ NI . The net quantity of market
orders, x, is unknown to other investors and normally distributed x ∼ N (x̄, τx−1 ).
Minimum Bidding Requirements

In the current design of the primary dealer system,

dealers are expected to bid for a pro-rata share of the auction at “reasonable” prices
compared to the market. A dealer may violate the minimum bidding requirement in any
given auction. But over time, if a dealer is consistently allotted an insufficient share, his
primary dealer status could be revoked. To capture the essence of this dynamic requirement
in a static model, we model the bidding requirement as a cost levied on a dealer who
purchases too little. This cost is a stand-in for the shadow cost of a dynamic constraint.
Conversely, a dealer who purchases a large dollar amount of Treasuries faces a relaxed
bidding constraint in the future. We model this benefit as a current transfer. Thus, for a
dealer who purchases a dollar amount qp of Treasuries through the auction, we assume a
low-bid penalty of χ0 − χqp. Thus, a dealer d’s budget constraint is
Wd = W0,d + qd (f − p) − (χ0 − χqd p).

(2)

Describing Information Sets and Updating Beliefs with Correlated Signals Depending on the information structure, investors and dealers observe three pieces of information: 1) their own private signal, 2) signals from others who may share information with
them and 3) the equilibrium price of the asset. We explain each in turn. Before trading,
each investor and dealer gets a signal about the payoff of the asset. These signals are
unbiased, normally distributed and have private noise:
s i = f + εi ,
−1
where εi ∼ N (0, τε,i
). In practice, the fundamental value of a newly-issued Treasury

security depends on the term structure of interest rates, as implied by market prices of
other Treasury securities, and the specific liquidity value of the newly auctioned security
relative to older securities. In the model calibration, we focus on how information sharing
affects the specific liquidity value taking as given the term structure, which is largely driven
by monetary policy as opposed to information sharing at the auction.
Second, by placing orders through dealers, customers reveal their order flow to their dealer,

8

which in the model is equivalent to sharing their private signal. Each dealer d receives
orders from an equal number of investors. He observes the orders of νI ≡ NI /ND small
and νl ≡ NL /ND large investors. Since bids will turn out to be linear functions of beliefs,
observing average bids and observing average signals is equivalent. The dealer can construct
s̄d , which is an optimal signal-precision-weighted average of his and his clients’ private
signals as:
P

i∈I
s̄d = P d

i∈Id

τi si
τi

τε,s
=

P

k∈Ids

sk + τε,l

P

j∈Idl

νI τε,s + (1 + νl )τε,l

sj + sd


,

(3)

where the second equality follows from the fact that signal precision is common within
each bidder type. Dealers, in turn, can share some of this order flow information with
their clients. Dealer information sharing takes the form of a noisy signal about s̄d , which
is the summary statistic for everything the dealer knows about the asset fundamental f .
That noisy signal is s̄ξd = s̄d + ξd where ξd ∼ N (0, τξ−1 ) is the noise in the dealers’ advice,
which is iid across dealers d. Our model captures noisy dealer advice, as well as two
extreme cases: perfect information-sharing between dealers and clients (τξ = ∞) and no
information-sharing (τξ = 0). For now, we assume that each dealer discloses s̄ξd to each of
his clients, but not to other dealers (Figure 1, case b). We return to inter-dealer sharing
later.
The final piece of information that all agents observe is the auction-clearing price p. Of
course, the agent does not know this price at the time he bids. However, the agent conditions his bid q(p) on the realized auction price p. Thus, each quantity q demanded at
each price p conditions on the information that would be conveyed if p were the realized
price. Since p contains information about the signals that other investors received, an
investor uses a signal derived from p to form his posterior beliefs about the asset payoff.
Let s(p) denote the unbiased signal constructed from auction-clearing price. We guess and
verify that (s(p) − f ) ∼ N (0, τp−1 ), where τp is a measure of the informativeness of the
auction-clearing settle price.
Thus the vector of signals observed by an investor j assigned to dealer d(j) is Sj =
[sj , s̄ξd(j) , s(p)]. This is the same vector for large and small investors. The only difference for the two investors is that large investors’ private signals sj are more precise and
have a different (higher) covariance with price information. A dealer observes the same
signals, except that he sees the exact order flows, instead of a noisy signal of them. For
dealer d, Sd = [sd , s̄d , s(p)]. For every agent, we use Bayes’ law to update beliefs about
f . Bayesian updating is complicated by correlation in the signal errors. To adjust for this

9

correlation, we use the following optimal linear projection formulas:
E [f |Sj ] = (1 − β 0 1m )µ + β 0 Sj
βj ≡ V (Xj S)

−1

where

(4)

Cov (f, Sj )
0

(5)

V [f |Sj ] = V (f ) − Cov (f, Sj ) V (Sj )

−1

Cov (f, Sj ) ≡

τ̂j−1 ,

(6)

where m is the number of signals in the vector Sj , the covariance vector is Cov (f, Sj ) =
1m τf−1 and the signal variance-covariance V (Sj ), is worked out in the appendix. The vector
βj = [βsj , βξj , βpj ] dictates how much weight an agents puts on his signals [sj , sξd(j) , s(p)]
in his posterior expectation. In a Kalman filtering problem, β is like the Kalman gain. In an
econometric forecasting problem, βs are the OLS coefficients that multiply the independent
variables to forecast the dependent variable – in this case, the payoff f .6 We define an
equilibrium in the auction as

Equilibrium.

A Nash equilibrium is

1. A menu of price-quantity pairs bid by each small investor i that solves
max E[− exp(−ρWi )|Si ]
qi (p)

s.t. Wi = W0i + qi (f − p).
The optimal bid function is the inverse function: p(qi ).
2. A menu of price-quantity pairs bid by each large investor that maximizes
max E[− exp(−ρl Wj )|Sj ]

(7)

qj ,p

s.t. Wj = W0,j + qj (f − p),
x+

NI
X

qi +

i=1

ND
X
j=1

qj +

NL
X

(8)
qk = 1.

(9)

k=1

The second constraint is the market clearing condition and reflects that the strategic
players must choose their quantity taking into account the effect their demand has
on market clearing, and, hence, the realized price.
3. A menu of price-quantity pairs bid by each dealer (dealer and large investor) that
6
More precisely, the OLS formulas with known means, variances and covariances. The OLS additive
constant α is (1N − β)0 1N µ. β is the infinite sample version of (X 0 X)−1 X 0 y. The conditional mean
here is analogous to the optimal linear estimate in the OLS problem. This equivalence holds because in
linear-normal systems, both OLS and Bayesian estimators are consistent.

10

maximizes
max E[− exp(−ρl Wd )|Sd ]

(10)

qd ,p

s.t. Wd = W0,d + qd (f − p) − χ0 + χqd p,
x+

NI
X

qi +

i=1

ND
X

qj +

j=1

NL
X

(11)

qk = 1.

(12)

k=1

The dealer’s budget constraint reflects the minimum bidding requirement faced by
the dealers.
4. An auction-clearing (settle) price that equates demand and supply: x +
PND
PNL
j=1 qj +
k=1 qk = 1.

2

PNI

i=1 qi

+

Solving the Model

We first solve for optimal bid schedules of large, small investors and dealers. Then, we
work out the auction equilibrium and vary the amount of information being shared either
between investors and dealers or between dealers. We consider three cases as illustrated
in Figure 1: 1) dealers and customers share information; 2) dealers also share information
with other dealers; and 3) no information is shared either with customers or between
dealers.
Since all investors’ posterior beliefs about f are normally distributed, we can use the
properties of a log-normal random variable to evaluate the expectation of each agent’s
objective function. It then follows that the FOC of the small investors’ problem is to
bid
qi (p) =

E[f |Si ] − p
,
ρV[f |Si ]

(13)

which is a standard portfolio expression in an exponential-normal portfolio problem. The
fact that it is an auction setting rather than a financial market doesn’t change how choices
are made. The novelty of the model is in how dealers’ information sharing affects the
conditional mean and variance of the asset payoff.
For large strategic bidders, we substitute the budget constraint in the objective function,
evaluate the expectation and take the log. The strategic investor maximization problem
then simplifies to maxqj ,p qj (E[f |Sj ] − p) − 12 ρl qj2 V[f |Sj ] subject to the market clearing
condition (9), where the price is not taken as given.7 The first order condition with respect
7

In the baseline model we rule out collusion, and relax this assumption in Section 4.3.

11

to qj reveals that dealers and large investors bid
qj (p) =

E[f |Sj ] − p
.
ρl V[f |Sj ] + dp/dqj

(14)

Importantly, this expression differs from equation (13) by the term dp/dqj , which measures
the price impact of a strategic investor bid. As the price impact increases, the dealer’s
demand becomes less sensitive to his beliefs about the value of the security.
Dealers are just like large investors, except that in addition to strategic price impact, they
also face minimum bidding requirements. We substitute the dealer’s budget constraint (2)
and the market -clearing expression for equilibrium price (9) in the objective (1), take the
expectation and the first order condition with respect to qD , to obtain
qD (p) =

E[f |XD S] − p(1 − χ)
.
ρl V[f |XD S] + (1 − χ)dp/dqD

(15)

Note that the bidding requirement shows up like a dealer price subsidy, encouraging the
dealer to purchase more of the asset. It also mitigates the effect of dealer market power by
multiplying the dp/dqD term by a number less than one.

2.1

Equilibrium auction-clearing price: 3 cases

In order to understand the effect of client information sharing, dealer information sharing
and no information sharing, we solve for the equilibrium auction outcomes in each of these
three cases.
The no-information-sharing world we consider is one with “Chinese walls,” where dealers
cannot use client information to inform neither their own nor their clients’ purchases. In
recent years, a number of financial firms have implemented such a separation of brokerage
activities and transactions for their own account. Regulators have also recommended that
banks establish and enforce such internal controls to address potential conflicts of interest.8
In our Chinese wall model, each agent sees only their own private signal si and the price
information s(p) which they can condition their bid on, but not any signal from the dealer:
Si = [si , s(p)].
In every version of the model, adding up all investors’ and dealers’ asset demands as
well as the volume of market orders x and equating them with total supply delivers the
equilibrium auction price. As in most models with exponential utility (e.g. Kyle (1989)),
the price turns out to be a linear function of each signal. The innovation in this model is
8

For example, the Financial Stability Board (FSB) 2014 report on “Foreign Exchange Benchmarks”

12

that information sharing changes the linear weights. To the extent that signals are shared
with more investors, that signal will influence the demand of more investors, and the weight
on those signals in the price function will be greater. In this model, the signals are the
investor’s private signal si or sj (for large investors), in each dealer’s average order flow
signal sd , the volume of market orders x, and the signal noise in each dealer’s signal to his
clients ξd :
Result 1. Suppose all investors bid through dealers. Consider the following three informationsharing regimes.
1. Dealers share information imperfectly with clients, but not with other dealers.
2. Dealers share information with clients and ψ other dealers.
3. There is no information sharing at all. Dealers cannot use client trades as information on which to condition their own bid (Chinese walls).
In all three cases, the auction revenue is a linear function of signals si , market orders x,
and dealer signal noise ξd :
p = A + BI s̄I + BL s̄N L + BD s̄N D + Cx + D ξ¯d
where s̄N z ≡ Nz−1

(16)

PNz

i=1 si

are the average signals of individuals (z = I), large investors
PNd
(z = L) and dealers (z = D); ξ¯d ≡
d=1 ξd is the average dealer’s signal noise. The
equilibrium pricing coefficients A, BI , BL , BD , C and D that solve each model differ by

model and are reported in appendix A.
Standard competitive market models often have simple solutions for the price coefficients.
The complication here is two-fold: 1) there are large strategic agents whose demand is not
linear in the coefficients of the price function and 2) shared signals are correlated with price
information. Both sources of extra complexity are essential to understand how the number
of dealers and their information sharing affects auction revenue.
A primary effect of information sharing in this model is higher auction revenue. The reason
is that sharing information leaves all investors better informed. Investors who perceive an
asset to be less risky will hold it at a lower risk premium, or at a higher price. A lower
risk premium is a less negative A. We see in the solution that this risk premium (−A)
decreases when information is shared and uncertainty is lower. While this type of effect
shows up in many imperfect information asset pricing models, it offers a new perspective
on how restricting sharing of information affects auction revenues. This effect is largely
neglected in the policy discourse on information regulation.
With Chinese walls, when dealers can no longer use the information in their clients’ orders,

13

the functional difference between dealers and large investors disappears. The difference
between direct bidding and indirect bidding is similarly eviscerated. In other words, eliminating all information sharing effectively eliminates intermediation as well. The finding
that there is no longer any meaningful distinction between a dealer and a non-dealer large
investor is reflected in the fact that in the price formula, if the number of dealers and large
investors is equal and the dealers do not face a minimum bidding requirement, then the
coefficients on the signals of dealers sd and the signal of large investors sj are equal as
well.

Auction Revenue

Since we normalized Treasury asset supply to one, price and auction

revenue in this model are the same. Our objective is to determine what the expected
revenue is, what the variance of that revenue is, and how this mean and variance vary with
information sharing. The unconditional expected revenue will be a linear function of the
unconditional mean of the asset payoffs µ and the unconditional mean quantity of market
orders x̄: A + Btotal µ + C x̄, where Btotal = BI = BL + BD . Unconditional revenue variance
−1
−1
2 τ −1 /N + C 2 τ −1 + D 2 τ −1 /N .
/NL + BD
/NI + BL2 τL
will be BI2 τI
D
D
x
D
ξ

3

Mapping the Model to the Data

To measure the impact of information sharing on auction revenue and bidders’ welfare, we
calibrate the model parameters using data from two main data sources: Treasury auction
results and market prices. In 2013 alone, Treasury issued nearly $8 trillion direct obligations
in the form of marketable debt as bills, notes, bonds and inflation protected securities
(TIPS), in about 270 separate auctions.9 Our sample starts in September 2004 and ends in
June 2014. To study a comparable sample and estimate yield curves, we restrict attention
to 2-, 3-, 5-, 7- and 10-year notes and exclude bills, bonds and TIPS.
In each auction, competitive bids specify a quantity and a rate, or the nominal yield for note
securities. Non-competitive bids specify a total amount to purchase at the market-clearing
rate. Each bidder can only place a single non-competitive bid with a maximum size of $5
million. Competitive bids can be direct or indirect. To place a direct bid, investors submit
electronic bids to Treasury’s Department of the Public Debt or the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York. Indirect bids are placed on behalf of their clients by depository institutions
(banks that accept demand deposits), or brokers and dealers, which include all institutions
9

Treasury bills are auctioned at a discount from par, do not carry a coupon and have terms of not more
than one year. Bonds and notes, instead, pay interest in the form of semi-annual coupons. The maturity
of notes range between 1 and 10 years, while the term of bonds is above 10 year. For TIPS, the coupon is
applied to an inflation-adjusted principal, which also determines the maturity redeemable principal. TIPS
maturities range between 1 and 30 years.

14

registered according to Section 15C(a)(1) of the Securities Exchange Act. Though most
indirect bids are placed through primary dealers, indirects bids also include those placed by
the New York Fed on behalf foreign and international monetary authorities (FIMA) that
hold securities in custody at the Fed. We return to these types of indirect bids below.
On the auction day, bids are received prior to the auction close. The auction clears at a
uniform price, which is determined by first accepting all non-competitive bids, and then
competitive bids in ascending yield or discount rate order. The rate at the auction (or
stop-out rate) is then equal to the interest rate that produces the price closest to, but not
above, par when evaluated at the highest accepted discount rate or yield at which bids
were accepted.
We first discuss the calibration of auction participation by types of bidders using auction
results data, which are made publicly available by the U.S. Treasury. For each maturity,
we compute the mean share of securities allotted to primary dealers, direct and indirect
bidders, after excluding amounts allotted to the Fed’s own portfolio through roll-overs of
maturing securities, which are an add-on to the auction. As discussed above, the definition of indirect bidders from official auction results includes competitive bids placed
by foreign officials through the NY Fed.10 Bids by foreign official investors are driven
by exogenous factors such as foreign exchange strategies and their need to roll-over large
quantities of reserve balances, as opposed to fluctuations in short-term market values. As
a result we apply a simple calculation to reclassify these bids as part of the noise trader
group (non-competitive). Although auction result data do not detail indirect bids from
FIMA customers, we use information on foreign security holdings and on foreign bids from
investment allotment data to reconstruct the amount of these bids at each auction.11
Figure 2 plots Treasury auction participation by type of bids over time and the corresponding target moments (first and second) are reported in Table 1. As shown by the
dark grey area, primary dealers bidding for their own account, are the largest bidder category at auctions accounting for about half of all security allotments. Indirect bidders,
excluding estimated FIMA bids, are the second largest at 32 percent (light gray). Direct
bids (medium gray) are about 8 percent and non-competitive bids, as computed above, are
about 11 percent (red areas).
10

FIMA customers can place non-competitive bids for up to $100 million per account and $1 billion in
total. Additional bids need to be placed competitively.
11
For example, from Treasury International Capital (TIC) data, as of August 2014, about 6 trillion
of securities are held by foreign investors, while from the Fed Board’s H4.1 release, FIMA holdings at
the New York Fed are about $3.4 trillion as of that time. Assuming that the portfolio composition and
bidding strategy of FIMA and non-FIMA are similar then an estimate of FIMA’s share of competitive bids
reported as indirect ones on that date is: 3.3/6 × all foreign bids (from investment allotment) less FIMA
non-competitive bids that are reported separately.

15

Figure 2: Allotted shares by bidders across all auctions. Market orders (FIMA
other) are constructed from indirect FIMA bids as discussed in Section 3. Source: Treasury
auction results.
1

.8

.6

.4

.2

0
Apr04 Apr05 Apr06 Apr07 Apr08 Apr09 Apr10 Apr11 Apr12 Apr13 Apr14
Primary Dealers

Direct

Indirect

Market Orders (FIMA other) Market orders (Retail, FIMA non-comp )

We turn next to the calibration of the security fundamental value. We first note that the
type of uncertainty faced by Treasury bidders is different from the risks faced by corporate bond investors. Because sovereign secondary markets are deep and liquid, Treasury
investors can hedge issuer-specific risks by shorting already-issued securities. Newly issued
government securities do, however, carry a liquidity premium relative to already-issued
securities. Investors’ demand for specific issues is the key determinant of these liquidity
differences. As a results, key underwriting risks for bidders are issue-specific rather than
issuer-specific. In our model, we assume that each investor observes a signal of the issuespecific value of the newly issued security, and uses this signal to form an expectation of
the value of the security after the auction.
To calibrate the first and second moments of p and f , it is important to first note that, up
to rounding, the auction price clears at par. The stop-out coupon rate is, instead, uncertain
and will be a function of issue-specific value as well as the term structure of interest rates
at the time of the auction, which depends on factors unrelated to the auction, such as
monetary policy and inflation expectations. We focus on issue-specific fundamentals, or
the “on-the-run” value of the issue, for two reasons. First, an investor can easily hedge
interest rate risk into the auction by shorting a portfolio of currently outstanding securities.
Second, from the issuer perspective, the stop-out rate could be very low because of low
interest rates, but an issue could still be “expensive” relative to the rate environment due
to auction features, which is what we are after. To strip out the aggregate interest-rate

16

effects, we assume that the bidder enters the auction with an interest-rate-neutral portfolio,
which holds one unit of the auctioned security and shorts a replicating portfolio of bonds
trading in the secondary market. This portfolio is equivalent to the excess revenue on the
current issue, relative to outstanding securities. Thus, price p in our model corresponds
to the auction price, minus the present value of the security’s cash-flows, where future
cash flows are discounted using a yield curve. To compute this measure, we estimate a
Svensson yield curve following the implementation details of Gürkaynak, Sack, and Wright
(2007) but using intraday price data as of 1pm, which is when the auction closes (data
from Thomson Reuters TickHistory). The fundamental value f in the model corresponds
to the value of the interest-rate neutral portfolio on the date when the security is delivered
to the winning bidders (close of issue date). The issue date in our sample lags the auction
date by an average of 5.5 days with a standard deviation of about 2.3 days. For example,
in Table 1, the average revenue from selling a new coupon-bearing security is 37.18 basis
points higher than the replicating portfolio formed using outstanding securities. Thus, we
calibrate the model to have this average asset payoff. This excess revenue is positive across
all maturities. This is the well-known “on-the-run” premium (Lou, Yan, and Zhang, 2013;
Amihud and Mendelson, 1991; Krishnamurthy, 2002). Appendix D details exactly how
we calculate payoffs, explores other possible ways of hedging the interest rate risk, and
discusses the role of the when-issued (WI) market.
Table 1: Calibration targets and model-implied values. Prices and excess revenues
are all expressed in basis points.
Data

Model

A
Price sensitivity to fundamental
C
Error Std. Dev.

-17.01
0.97
124.38
29.72

-7.55
0.91
73.88
23.12

Expected excess revenue
Volatility of excess revenue

37.18
72.64

38.72
70.81

0.25
0.09
0.53
0.14
0.10
0.09

0.51
0.73
0.43
0.19
0.00
0.01

Indirect
Volatility of indirect
Dealer
Volatility of dealer
Direct
Volatility of direct

share
share
share
share
share
share

We fit the parameters of the full model to aggregate moments. The full model differs from
the one presented in the previous section for the inclusion of a direct bidder in the model,
which, as we discuss in Section 5, is a key distinguishing feature of Treasury auctions. The
objective function matches a few moments from the model to their empirical counterparts:

17

the pricing coefficients A, B and C in equation (16), the mean and variance of the price of
the interest-rate-risk-neutral portfolio p at auction, the mean and variance of the price of
the portfolio f at issuance, the mean allotted share and variance of non-competitive bids x
(including the FIMA trades, or market orders), the mean allotted share to primary dealers,
PD
PN
d=1 qd , the mean allotted share to indirect bidders ( i=1 qi ), and the mean allotted share
to direct bidders, qL .12 We obtain sample estimates of A, B and C by regressing the stopout-price at each auction on a constant, the end-of-day secondary price on the issue date of
the auction security (data from Bloomberg LP) and the non-competitive bids. As shown
in Table 1, consistent with the model, excess revenues are positively correlated to the
fundamental value on issue date (positive B = BI + BL + BD ), and it also increases with
the share of securities allocated to market orders (positive C). The model moments are
computed by making 100000 draws of realization of the fundamental f , all the signals in
the economy si and the non-competitive demand x from the model, and calculating the
equilibrium outcomes.
−1

−1

−1

Table 2: Calibrated parameters µ, χ0 , τf 2 , τε,s2 and τε,l2 are all expressed in basis
points.
µ
40.8

− 21

−1

−1

− 12

τf

τε,s2

τε,l2

τx

73.5

529.9

272.3

0.06

x̄

ρ

ρL

χ0

χ

NS

NL

ND

0.12

47825

505

0.06

0.05

240

40

20

We set the level of minimum bids χ0 to be equal to the pro-rata share of the issuance at
the expected price in the baseline model, with perfect information sharing with clients and
no information sharing with other dealers. This reflects the spirit of the minimum bidding
requirement: dealers have an effective price concession when they bid for a larger fraction
of the auction or at a higher price.
The final parameter, τξ regulates how much information dealers share with clients. Without
micro data, we cannot infer this value, and assume that τξ = ∞ (perfect sharing) in
calibrating the other parameters. We explore the stability of the calibrated parameters and
of the equilibrium outcomes under different assumptions on information sharing between
clients and dealers and between dealers in appendix E. In reality, different dealers probably
engage in different degrees of information-sharing. Instead, we show results from the whole
spectrum of potential values, from τξ = 0 (no information sharing) to τξ = ∞ (perfect
sharing).
Given these parameters, we solve the model by solving for the equilibrium pricing coefficients in Result 1. This amounts to solving for a fixed point in a set of up to seven
12

We use the pricing coefficients A, B and C for calibration, but not D. The reason is that D multiplies
the dealer signal noise ξ, which is not observed. Thus, D is part of the estimation residual.

18

non-linear equations (five for pricing coefficients and two for demand elasticities of dealers
and large investors). We iterate to convergence, using the average violation of the market clearing condition (9) to ensure that we find the equilibrium pricing coefficients. The
average violation of the market clearing condition at the solution does not exceed 4 basis
points for the models in Result 1. For some models, we have to use multiple starting points
to ensure that the maximum is a global one.

4

Results: Effects of Information Sharing

We examine two forms of information sharing: First, the case in which dealers vary the
degrees of information with their clients but do not communicate with each other. Then, we
hold the precision of client communication fixed and vary the number of dealers that dealers
share information with. In both cases, we find that information sharing increases auction
revenues as well as revenue volatility. The surprising finding is that small investors dislike,
as a group, when dealers share more precise information with them, but benefit when
dealers share information with each other. The intuition for this puzzling finding is that
client information sharing increases information asymmetry and inhibits risk sharing, as
in Hirshleifer (1971), while inter-dealer talk reduces information asymmetry and improves
risk sharing.
Since the quantity of Treasury securities sold is normalized to 1, the auction price and
auction revenues are the same. Therefore, in the plots that follow, we report the expected
price, varying one exogenous parameter at a time. In each exercise, all parameters other
than the one being varied are held at their calibrated values. The one exception is χ, the
minimum bidding penalty. For simplicity, we turn that off (χ = χ0 = 0) to start, and
return to examine its effect in section 4.2.

4.1

Information Sharing and Auction Revenue

The top-left panel of Figure 3 plots expected auction revenues as a function of different
levels of dealer information sharing with clients. The horizontal axis shows the precision
of the dealer signal τξ from zero (no information sharing) to infinity (perfect information
sharing). More information sharing means that dealers reveal their information s̄d with less
noise to their clients. The figure shows that moving from no sharing to perfect information
sharing increases expected revenue by 1.5 basis points.
Information sharing makes investors better informed which in turn makes Treasuries less
risky to investors, eliciting stronger bids and increasing auction revenues. To put this yield

19

Figure 3: Dealer Information Sharing. Top row: dealer information sharing with
clients; bottom row: dealer information sharing with other dealers. In the top row, the
horizontal axis shows the precision of the dealer signal τξ from zero (no information sharing)
to infinity (perfect information sharing). Expected utility is plotted as a fraction of the
utility each type gets in the Chinese wall equilibrium.
(a) Sharing with clients: Expected Revenue

(b) Sharing with clients: Expected Utility
640
630
620

38

Utility gain (bps)

Expected excess revenue (bps)

38.5

37.5

610
600

Small investors

590

Large investors
Dealers

580
570

37
560
550
36.5
0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

540
0

Infinity

Information sharing with clients (precision)

←

Utility gain (bps)

37
36

Infinity

Large investors

3000
2500
2000
1500

←

35
0

0.08

Dealers

No information sharing
with clients

38

0.06

Small investors

3500

←

39

0.04

(d) Sharing with dealers: Expected Utility
4000

All information
is commmon
Full information sharing
with clients
←

Expected excess revenue (bps)

(c) Sharing with dealers: Expected Revenue

40

0.02

Information sharing with clients (precision)

1

2

3

4

5

1000

Chinese wall
6

7

8

9

0

Number of dealers information is shared with

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Number of dealers information is shared with

20

9

effect in perspective, applying this estimated effect to annual Treasury issuance (or about
$8 trillion), the model implies that total auction revenues would increase about $1.2 billion
when going from no dealer sharing with customers to perfect sharing with them.
In unreported results, we also find that sharing information with clients also increases the
variance of auction revenue by about 1.6 basis points. This higher variance arises because
dealers make investors better informed. Absent any information about the future value
of a security, bidders would always bid the same amount and revenue would be constant.
With more precise information, bidders condition their bids on this information. When the
fundamental value of the securities fluctuate, investors learn this information with a high
degree of accuracy, and use this information in their bids leading to more volatile auction
revenues. One parameter that is important for these quantitative results is the variance
of non-competitive bids. When these bids are less predictable, auction clearing prices are
less clear signals about the true value of the asset. The value of information aggregation
increases, which makes dealers more valuable in expected auction revenue terms.
In terms of bidders’ welfare, the top-right panel of Figure 3 shows that dealers’ utility
declines when they share more information. That’s not surprising since they are giving up
some of their information advantage. But it also shows that small and large investors’ utility
declines with information sharing. Information acquisition is like a prisoners’ dilemma in
this setting. Each investor would like more of it. But when they all get more, all are worse
off. One reason is that better-informed investors bid more for the asset. By raising the
price, they transfer more welfare to the issuer (Treasury).
When dealers share information among themselves, as opposed to with customers, auction
revenues also increase (Figure 3, bottom-left panel). As we increase the number of dealers
with which each dealer shares information with auction revenues increase by about 1.5
basis points.13 In doing this exercise, we hold dealer information-sharing with clients fixed
by assuming that all dealers share all information with their clients. In additional analysis,
we find that when prior uncertainty about the future value of the asset is high (precision
τf is low), or the variance of non-competitive bids grow, information sharing raises revenue
by more. The increased auction revenue effect is similar to that resulting from information
sharing with clients. In both cases, additional information makes the average bidder for
the asset less uncertain. Since dealers disclose some of their information to their clients,
all investors have more precise information sets. All else equal, a reduction in risk prompts
bidders to bid more for the asset.
13

Since we assume dealers are symmetric, we need the number of dealers in an information-sharing
collective to be a factor of 20, the calibrated number of dealers. Thus, we stop at 9, which implies that two
groups of 10 dealers each are sharing information with each other. Any more information sharing beyond
this level would be perfect inter-dealer sharing.

21

4.2

Client vs. Dealer Information Sharing: Utility Effects

A key insight of our model is how client and dealer information sharing differ. While both
types of information sharing reduce uncertainty and increase auction revenue, client and
dealer information sharing have opposite effects on investor utility. The reason for this
opposite effect lies in how each type of information sharing affects information asymmetry
and risk-sharing.
One might expect that when dealers share information with each other, investors are
harmed. In fact, the opposite is true here. When dealers share information with each
other, their information sets become more similar. That is the essence of information
sharing. Since dealers’ beliefs are more similar, the signals that dealers share with their
clients also become more similar. With similar signals, investors’ beliefs become more
similar. As a result, their bids and auction allocations become more symmetric as well.
When allocations are more similar, they are closer to the full-information optimal asset
allocation. Because investor preferences are concave, this reduction in information and investment asymmetry improves average investor utility. The welfare effects of dealer interand within-dealer information is different.
In contrast, sharing information with clients increases information asymmetry. When dealers share little information with clients, the clients beliefs are not very different. They all
average their priors with a heterogeneous, but imprecise, private signal. Because the private information is imprecise, beliefs mostly reflect prior information, which is common to
all investors. But different dealers transmit different signals. When investors get the more
precise dealer’s signal, they weigh it more heavily in their beliefs, which makes investors’
beliefs quite different from each other. This increase in information asymmetry makes
ex-ante similar investors hold different amounts of securities ex-post. Asymmetric information pushes the asset allocation further away from the efficient diversified benchmark.
The consequent reduction in risk sharing reduces utility.
Figure 4 shows how the two types of information sharing affect information asymmetry as
measured by the cross-sectional dispersion of investments – the average squared deviation
of each investor’s auction allocation from the average for that investor’s type. The fact
that this dispersion increases with client information sharing and decreases with dealer
information sharing illustrates how client information sharing increases information asymmetry and dealer information sharing reduces it. This is why the two types of information
sharing affect risk-sharing and welfare in opposite ways.
The result that more informative signals can increase information asymmetry and thereby
reduce utility is the same force that is at work in Hirshleifer (1971). Instead, sharing

22

Figure 4: Client information sharing makes allocations more heterogeneous. Dealer
information sharing reduces asymmetry this dispersion. Average P
squared deviation is a
cross-sectional measure of dispersion of Treasury holdings: (1/Nj ) i∈Nj (qi − q̄j )2 , where
P
q̄j is the average Treasury allocation of investors of type j: q̄j = (1/Nj ) i∈Nj qi .
(a) Sharing with clients

(b) Sharing with dealers
1

Average cross−sectional st. dev.

Average cross−sectional st. dev.

2
1.9
1.8

Small investors

1.7

Large investors

1.6
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1
0

0.9
0.8
0.7

Small investors
Large investors

0.6
0.5
0.4

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

Infinity

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Number of dealers information is shared with

Information sharing with clients (precision)

information between dealers makes agents better informed, but in a way that makes information more symmetric. This has the opposite effect on utility. Dealer information
sharing is more like giving investors more public information. The results here are the
opposite of the Morris and Shin (2002) result that in a coordination game with negative coordination externalities, public information is welfare-reducing. In our setting, the
Morris-Shin assumptions are reversed: actions are substitutes instead of complements and
there are positive instead of negative externalities of correlated actions because correlated
investments share risk more efficiently. Thus in our setting, inter-dealer sharing making
information more correlated (more public), which is welfare-improving.

Non-competitive bidder profits

Since most of our non-competitive bids come for

foreign monetary authorities, we do not focus our analysis on their profits. Presumably,
the U.S. Treasury will not change policy to ensure that the Chinese central bank faces
low prices. However, we do note that whenever information is shared, resulting in more
informed competitive bidders, the profits of non-competitive bidders declines.

The role of minimum bidding requirements Primary dealers are required to be
consistent, active participants in Treasury auctions. Today, primary dealers are expected
to bid at all auctions an amount equal to the pro-rata share of the offered amount, with bids
that are “reasonable” compared to the market. The inclusion of minimum bidding penalties
in the model is therefore realistic, but also helps to calibrate the model in a sensible way.
Without them, it would be hard to explain why dealers bid for so much of the auction.
23

However, removing low bid penalties does not change our main findings. In most cases,
the penalties raise revenue, since dealers are incentivized to bid more aggressively. But
bidding requirements leave the effect of client information-sharing on revenue and utility
unchanged. One difference is that, with bidding requirements, dealer information sharing
has a non-monotonic effect on revenue. The reason is that bidding requirements make
dealers less responsive to changes in price. Therefore prices have to move more to induce
dealers to bid more or less to clear the market. These large swings in price make prices
more informative about dealer’s signals. That leaves less scope for precision improvements
through dealer information-sharing.

4.3

What if Information Sharing Enabled Collusion?

One of the reasons that information-sharing has raised concerns is that dealers who share
information can also collude. Many textbook analyses show the economic losses associated
with collusion. We do not repeat those arguments here. Instead, we look at how information
sharing interacts with the costs of collusion.
Suppose that every time dealers shared information with each other, that group of dealers
colluded, meaning that they bid as one dealer in order to amplify their price impact. How
would this collusion and information sharing jointly affect auction revenue? It turns out
that the answer depends on how much information is shared with clients. Figure 5 shows
that when dealers pass most of their information on to their clients, sharing information
and colluding with other dealers increases revenue. Collusion, by itself, is of course revenue
reducing. But the joint effect of better informed bidders and colluding dealers is a net
positive for revenue. The problem arises when dealers talk, collude and don’t inform their
clients: that reduces revenue. Notice, however, that the proposed “remedy” of imposing
Chinese walls reduces revenue by more than collusion.

5

Mixed Auctions: Choosing Direct or Indirect Bidding

A key distinguishing feature of U.S. Treasury auctions is that they are mixed auctions: Any
investor can either place an intermediated bid through a primary dealer, or bid directly.14
The option to bid directly is important because it amplifies the effect of low signals on
auction revenue.
14

While direct bidding has been historically allowed since 1992, electronic bidding systems and the elimination of deposit requirements for all bidders have facilitated direct bids. Direct bidding has grown from
2 percent of all bids in 2003 to about 10 percent in 2014. While auction results do not disclose the number
of direct bidders, public remarks of Treasury officials suggest there were about 1200 direct bidders in 2001,
and 825 in 2004.

24

←

All information
is common
Full information sharing
with clients

40
39

←

38
37

No information sharing
with clients

36

←

35
0

←

Expected excess revenue (bps)

Figure 5: Collusion reduces revenue when client information sharing is too low.
Figure plots average equilibrium auction revenue against the number of other dealers that
share information. We assume here that when dealers share information, they also bid
as one. These results differ from previous ones because here, varying information-sharing
along the x-axis also varies the extent of collusion.

Chinese wall

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Number of dealers information is shared with

5.1

A Model with Intermediation Choice

Consider one investor choosing between bidding directly or indirectly through an intermediary. Without loss of generality, we assume that this choice is made by one of the large
investors bidding through dealer 1. The large investor’s choice to bid directly or indirectly
affects the information structure of that investor, its dealer, other investors bidding with
that same dealer, and the information content of the price s(p).
When the large investor chooses to bid directly on his own behalf, he observes only his
own signal and the price information: XL S = [sL , s(p)]. His dealer’s signal is the average
of the first νI investors’, the first νl − 1 large investors’ and the dealer’s signal:
τε,s
s̄1 =

P

k∈I1s

sk + τε,l

P

j∈I1l

sj + sd



νI τε,s + νl τε,l

As in the previous model, investor i who bids through intermediary d observes signals
Xi S = [si , s̄d , s(p)].

Solution: Auction Outcomes Solving this model introduces a technical challenge.
The decision to bid directly or indirectly becomes in itself a signal. We assume that the
dealer who would intermediate this trade observes the large investor’s bidding decision and
transmits this information to clients, with noise. If the large investor bids through the
dealer, the dealer can infer exactly what the large investor’s signal is. But if the large
investor bids directly, the dealer only knows that the investor’s signal is above a threshold.
25

The information that has been revealed is that a normal variable (the large investor’s signal)
lies in two disjoined truncated regions of the distribution. This is problematic because doing
Bayesian updating of beliefs with truncated normals would require involved simulation
methods. Embedding that updating problem in the non-linear fixed point problem we
already have would render the model intractable.
We circumvent this problem by constructing an approximating normal signal. Through
simulation, we first estimate the mean and variance of the large investor’s signal, conditional
on choosing direct bidding. Then, whenever the large investor chooses to bid directly, we
allow the dealer who would have intermediated that trade to make inference from the
direct bidding decision, by observing a normally distributed signal with the same mean
and variance as the true information. This signal is included in the precision-weighted
average signal of dealer 1, s̄1 . (See appendix B for details.)
If the large investor bids through the dealer, the problem and the solution are the same
as in the previous section. With direct bidding, the auction price (revenue) is a linear
function of the dealer-level average individual investor signals, s̄d (where s̄1 includes the
information inferred from the large investor’s decision to bid directly), the signal of the
large direct bidder, sL , and of market orders x.
Result 2. With ND dealers and 1 large investor who bids directly, the auction revenue is
P D
p = A + Bd1 s̄1 + Bd6=1 /(ND − 1) N
d=2 s̄d + Cx + BL sL , where the coefficient formulas are
in reported appendix B.

5.2

Understanding Intermediation Choice: Why Is Bad News Revealed?

When an investor bids directly, no one observes their order flow and their signal remains
private. When they bid through an intermediary, they reveal their signal realization to the
dealer, but also learn from the dealer’s signal. An investor whose signal indicates a high
future value for the security expects to take a large position, which will make his utility more
sensitive to the auction-clearing price. Sharing his good news with others will increase the
clearing price and negatively affect his expected utility. Thus, an investor with good news
prefers not to share his information and bids directly. Conversely, when the news is bad, the
investor expects to take a small position in the auction making his utility not as sensitive
to the clearing price. With a low signal, the investor is less concerned about sharing his
signal but still benefits from learning new information from other investors. Thus, lowsignal investors are more likely to bid indirectly through the dealer. When negative signals
are shared, they affect bids of many investors and their price impact is amplified. Dealer
information sharing makes the accelerator stronger by making intermediation more costly

26

and direct bidding more likely.
To solve for the large investor’s choice of whether to bid directly or indirectly l ∈ {Ld, Li},
we compute expected utility conditional on signals and a realized price. When the investor
chooses whether to invest through a dealer the only signal that he has seen is his private
signal si . Thus the intermediation choice maximizes expected utility with an additional
expectation over the information that the large investor has not yet observed. Computing
the expectation over possible price realizations and dealer signals, we find that expected
utility is
− 12

EU (l) = − exp(ρL WL )(1 + 2θl ∆Vl )


exp


µ2rl
.
− −1
θl + 2∆Vl

(17)

The intermediation decision affects utility in three ways: through the expected profit per
unit alloted µrl , the sensitivity of demand to expected profit θl , and through the ex-ante
variance of expected profit ∆Vl . These three terms are:15
µrl ≡ E{E[f |Xl S] − p|si },

(18)


1
θl ≡ ρL [ρL V[f |SL ] + dp/dqL ]−1 1 − ρL [ρL V[f |SL ] + dp/dqL ]−1 V[f |SL ] ,
2
∆Vl ≡ V{E[f |Xl S] − p|si } = V[f − p|si ] − V[f |Xl S].


(19)
(20)

The first term µrl embodies the main cost of intermediation: It reveals one’s private information si to others. This effect shows up as a reduction in µrl , the ex-ante expectation
profit per share, after all signals are observed. Information sharing reduces µrl for two reasons. First, since many investors all condition their bids on the shared information Xd1 S,
the expectation conditional on that information, E[f |Xd1 S], has a large effect (closer to 1)
on the auction-clearing price. Thus the difference E[f |Xl S] − p is closer to zero with intermediation. Second, improving the precision of other investors’ information lowers their
risk, raises the expected price p, which in turn, lowers µrl (see eq (18)).
Why does the asymmetry appear? In equation (17), a decrease in µ2rl decreases expected
utility because θl > 0 (see appendix). In principle, a very negative signal could make µrl a
large negative number, which would also trigger direct bidding. However, on average µrl
is positive. That positive mean reflects the positive risk premium. So while it is possible
that a very negative signal triggers direct bidding, it is highly unlikely.
The second term θl captures the main advantage of intermediation: Dealers give their
clients an extra signal, which makes them better informed. Better information allows
the large investor to make better bids, increasing expected utility. In appendix A, we
15

See the appendix for derivations of the following three equations and support for the analysis that
follows.

27

Figure 6: Mixed auctions: Probability of bidding directly, conditional on signal realization above (solid line) or below (dashed line) its mean.
Probability of bidding directly

70
60
50
40

Signal>µ
Signal<µ

30
20
10
0

0.01

0.015

0.02

0.025

0.03

Infinity

Information sharing with clients (precision)

show that θl is positive and strictly decreasing in the posterior variance of the asset payoff V[f |Xl S]. Thus, intermediation improves the investor’s information, which decreases
variance V[f |Xl S], increases θ, and (holding all other terms equal) increases expected utility.
The third effect of intermediation, which operates through ex-ante variance ∆Vl , is ambiguous and turns out to be quantitatively unimportant.16
A zero-profit signal (bad news) is always shared. Note from equation (17) that as
µrl → 0, the first effect disappears and an increase in the ex-ante variance of the profit will
unambiguously increase expected utility. The reason for this is that the strength of the
second effect depends on the mean of the expected profit, µrl . When µrl 6= 0 the increase
in the ex-ante variance ∆Vl increases the probability that the expected profit E[f |Xl S] − p
will be close to zero as well as increasing the probability of large observations. So intuitively
the gains from the increase in ex-ante variance are larger when µrl is closer to zero. We
use these three effects to understand the intermediation choice results below.

5.3

Intermediation Choice and the Financial Accelerator

This asymmetry, whereby bad news is shared and good news is not, is a new channel
through which intermediation can amplify shocks. Figure 6 shows that when signals about
16

When the large investor trades through a dealer, his uncertainty V[f |Xl S] declines. From equation
(20) we can see that this increases the ex-ante variance of the expected profit ∆Vl . This is because more
information makes the investor’s beliefs change more, which means a higher ex-ante variance. This change
in ∆Vl has two opposing effects on expected utility. First, an increase in ∆Vl increases the exponential
term in equation (17), which decreases EU (l). This effect arises because the large investor is risk averse
and higher ∆Vl corresponds to more risk in continuation utility. The second effect is that an increase in
1
∆Vl reduces (1 + 2θL ∆Vl )− 2 , which increases EU (l). The intuition for this is that when the variance of
the expected profit is larger, there are more realizations with large magnitude (more weight in the tails of
the distribution). Since these are the states that generate high profit, this effect increases expected utility.

28

the value of a financial asset are negative (dashed line), this information is more likely to be
shared with a dealer and his clients (lower probability of direct bidding). Positive signals
(solid line) are less likely to be shared because an investor who receives a positive signal
then expects to take a large portfolio position in the asset and faces a high expected cost
from sharing his information. But sharing a bad signal places that signal in the information
set of many more investors and leads to a large number of investors to demand less of the
asset. Thus, bad signals may affect the demand of more investors than good signals do
and have a larger effect on asset prices. When bad news is amplified and good news is not,
revenue is negatively skewed, a prediction we test in the next section.
Moving right along the horizontal axis of Figure 6 represents an increase in the precision
of the information dealers share with their clients. Increasing this precision strengthens
the asymmetry. An increase of 250 bps, which is equivalent to doubling the precision of a
large investor’s signal, loses a dealer 20% of his clients with positive information and only
2% of clients with negative information, for an average loss of just over 10% of the dealer’s
clientele.

6

Testing Two Model Predictions

So far, we used the model to make qualitative and quantitative predictions about the effects
of various information-sharing regimes on treasury auction revenues and investor utilities.
But we have not yet shown that the data supports our interpretation of how and what
information is shared. Therefore, our final section compares two central predictions of the
model to the data.

Testable Prediction 1: Informed Traders’ Demand Forecasts Profits. An essential feature of the model is that a subset of agents have private information about the
future resale value of Treasury securities. If they did not, then observing order flow would
not be useful for dealers. The hallmark of informed trading is that such trades, as opposed
to uninformed ones, forecast profits. An uninformed agent cannot systematically buy more
securities when profits (f − p) are high and sell when they are low. Absent information
about the difference between the fundamental and the auction price f − p, such an investment strategy would not be a measurable one. In other words, Cov(qi , f − p) > 0 is
evidence of informed trading.
The data counterpart to profit f − p is post-auction appreciation, which is the difference
between the resale price of the asset in the secondary market, minus the price paid at
auction. Since we assumed that all competitive bidders have private information and all
29

Table 3: Regression of f −p on competitive bidders’ auction share. The dependent
variable is difference between the value of the interest-rate neutral portfolio on issue date
(f ) and on auction date (p) expressed in dollar units. Robust standard errors reported in
square brackets. *** significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, *significant at 10%.
(1)

Adj. R2
Obs.
Month FEs?
Tenor FEs?

(3)

0.0115∗∗∗
0.0003∗∗
[0.0001]

[0.0031]
0.0017∗∗∗
[0.0005]

0.0147∗∗∗
[0.0043]
0.0018∗∗∗
[0.0005]

0.00
494
No
No

0.05
494
No
No

0.23
494
Yes
Yes

Competv. Share
Const

(2)

non-competitive bidders are uninformed, the data counterpart to qi of an informed trader
is the share of the auction awarded to competitive bidders. We use share of the auction,
rather than face value because the size of auctions varies and this introduces noise in our
regression.
Corollary 1. High competitive share predicts high post-auction appreciation: ∂E[f −
R
p]/∂ q̄ > 0, where q̄ ≡ qi di is the share of the auction awarded to competitive bidders.

We test this prediction, using the auction data. Table 3 reports estimates of a regression
of the price appreciation of the hedged portfolio from the time of the auction close to the
issue date, or f − p. As shown in the first column of the table, the value of the newly issued
security appreciates on average by about 3 basis points between the auction date and the
issue date (column 1), consistent with the findings of Lou, Yan, and Zhang (2013). As
shown in the second column, this appreciation is higher the higher the share of competitive
bids into the auction (column 2) with a highly statistically significant coefficient (t-stat
= 3.5, column 2). This empirical result is robust to the inclusion of month and tenor
fixed effects (column 3). This effect is consistent with non-competitive being noise traders
and competitive bidders being informed. It is not a mechanical result from high demand.
When informed traders demand is high, the price is lower on average, relative to the payoff.
It is that low price relative to fundamental value that induces informed investors to buy
more. We run analogous regressions using data generated from the model and find similar
results. This result does not prove that primary dealers aggregate this information. But
it does support the notion that client order flow contains some private information to be
aggregated.

30

Figure 7: Distribution of post-auction price appreciation f − p: Model and Data.
Post-auction appreciation is the difference between the value of the interest-rate neutral
portfolio on issue date (f ) and on auction date (p)
(b) Data

(a) Model
0.18

.4

0.16
0.14

.3
Fraction

Fraction

0.12
0.1
0.08

.2

0.06

.1

0.04
0.02

0
0

−0.01

−0.005

0

0.005

0.01

-.01

0.015

f−p

0

.01
f-p

.02

.03

Testable Prediction 2: Positive Skewness in Post-Auction Appreciation The
financial accelerator effect from the intermediation choice shows up as a distribution of
auction-clearing prices that has unconditional negative skewness. Negative skewness in the
price p translates into positive skewness in the post-auction appreciation f − p. Table 4
reveals that the unconditional skewness in p is −.75%. This translates into positive skewness in post-auction appreciation of 5.7%. When shocks are good, they have a moderate
effect on the asset price and the auction revenue. But with a bad realization of the asset’s
value, large investors observe negative signals. These investors choose to share their low
signals with primary dealers, which in turn lowers the demands of other investors and has
a significantly negative effect on auction revenues. Depressed auction revenue corresponds
to high post-auction appreciation.
The sign of the skewness prediction is consistent with the empirical distribution of postauction appreciation f −p, (see histogram in Figure 7). However the magnitude of skewness
in the data is much stronger. Our model’s potential to generate skewness is limited by the
fact that we only allow one bidder the choice of bidding directly or indirectly. One agent
alone can only generate limited skewness in aggregate revenue. If we could compute a
model with many agents making an intermediation choice, this skewness would likely be
amplified.

31

7

Conclusions

Recent instances of market abuse involving sharing of confidential client information has
led to calls to restrict the use of order flow information by financial intermediaries. While
the need for regulation and sanctions may be evident in the case of collusive behaviour,
in a setting in which all agents are informed about how information is shared, gains and
losses of information sharing are not as apparent. Using data from U.S. Treasury auctions,
we estimate a structural auction model to quantify the costs and benefits of information
sharing both between dealers and between dealers and customers.
We find that, information sharing raises auction revenues, as bidders are better informed.
Investors’ welfare depends on how information is shared. Surprisingly, we find that investors
are worse off when dealers share more information with them, but are better off when
the dealers share information among themselves. The model analysis shows that client
information sharing is like private information, which makes beliefs more different from each
other, while inter-dealer talk is like public information, which makes beliefs more similar.
Once we understand that analogy, the first finding that sharing with clients reduces welfare
looks similar to a Hirshleifer (1971) effect. The second finding shows how Hirschliefer’s
effect can be reversed when information-sharing makes information sets more common.
We also study the choice of investors to bid directly or through dealers, as well as the
effect of minimum bidding requirements on primary dealers, which are an essential part of
Treasury auctions.
While the paper uses the model to study the role of information in Treasury auctions, an
alternative interpretation of the model sheds light on a related policy question: What is
the optimal number of primary dealers? The number of primary dealers has varied over
time. In 1960, there were 18 primary dealers. Amid the rapid rise in federal debt and
interest rate volatility of the 1970’s, the number of primary dealers rose to 46 in the mid1980s. Subsequently, the population of primary dealers dwindled to about 22 today. The
experiment in which dealers collude is equivalent to combining pairs of dealers, with half
the resulting number of dealers. When we reinterpret the collusion results as reducing the
number of dealers, we find that restricting the number of dealers improves revenue, but
only if the information sharing with clients is sufficiently high.
The common theme throughout the paper is a reversal of the common wisdom about
dealers as underwriters. The prevailing thinking about underwriters is that they lower
auction revenue, but also revenue risk (for example, Ritter and Welch, 2002). In the
information model that we present, we find the exact opposite: when investors bid through
dealers, both mean and variance of auction revenue increase. The stark difference in these

32

predictions highlights how policy prescriptions may be heavily dependent on the exact
role of intermediation in a given market. While many intermediaries perform roles other
than information aggregation, this role is a key one in Treasury auctions and is likely
to be present in some form in other markets as well. The unique features of Treasury
auctions makes them a useful laboratory to isolate, investigate and quantify this new facet
of intermediation.

33

References
Amihud, Y., and H. Mendelson (1991): “Liquidity, maturity, and the yields on US
Treasury securities,” The Journal of Finance, 46(4), 1411–1425.
Armantier, O., and E. Sbaı̈ (2006): “Estimation and comparison of Treasury auction
formats when bidders are asymmetric,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 21(6), 745–779.
Babus, A., and C. Parlatore (2015): “Strategic Fragmented Markets,” Working paper,
New York University.
Back, K., and J. F. Zender (1993): “Auctions of divisible goods: on the rationale for
the treasury experiment,” Review of Financial Studies, 6(4), 733–764.
Bikhchandani, S., and C.-f. Huang (1989): “Auctions with resale markets: An exploratory model of Treasury bill markets,” Review of Financial Studies, 2(3), 311–339.
(1993): “The economics of Treasury securities markets,” The Journal of Economic
Perspectives, pp. 117–134.
Brady, N., R. Breeden, and A. Greenspan (1992): “Joint report on the government
securities market,” US Government Printing Office.
Brunnermeier, M. K., and Y. Sannikov (2014): “A macroeconomic model with a
financial sector,” The American Economic Review, 104(2), 379–421.
Chari, V. V., and R. J. Weber (1992): “How the U.S. Treasury Should Auction Its
Debt,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 16(4), 1–8.
Duffie, D. (1996): “Special repo rates,” The Journal of Finance, 51(2), 493–526.
Easley, D., N. Kiefer, M. O’Hara, and J. Paperman (1996): “Liquidity, Information
and Infrequently Traded Stocks,” The Journal of Finance, 51(4), 1405–1436.
Fleckenstein, M., F. A. Longstaff, and H. Lustig (2014): “The TIPS-Treasury
Bond Puzzle,” the Journal of Finance, 69(5), 2151–2197.
Fleming, M. J., and K. D. Garbade (2007): “Dealer behavior in the specials market
for US Treasury securities,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, 16(2), 204–228.
Gürkaynak, R. S., B. Sack, and J. H. Wright (2007): “The US Treasury yield curve:
1961 to the present,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(8), 2291–2304.
He, Z., and A. Krishnamurthy (2013): “Intermediary Asset Pricing,” American Economic Review, 103(2), 732–770.
He, Z., A. Krishnamurthy, and K. Milbradt (2016): “What Makes US Government
Bonds Safe Assets?,” American Economic Review, 106(5), 519–523.
Hirshleifer, D. (1971): “The private and social value of information and the reward of
inventive activity,” American Economic Review, 61, 561–574.
Hortaçsu, A., and J. Kastl (2012): “Valuing Dealers’ Informational Advantage: A
Study of Canadian Treasury Auctions,” Econometrica, 80(6), 2511–2542.

34

Hortaçsu, A., and D. McAdams (2010): “Mechanism Choice and Strategic Bidding
in Divisible Good Auctions: An Empirical Analysis of the Turkish Treasury Auction
Market,” Journal of Political Economy, 118(5), 833–865.
Jordan, B. D., and S. D. Jordan (1997): “Special repo rates: An empirical analysis,”
The Journal of Finance, 52(5), 2051–2072.
Krishnamurthy, A. (2002): “The bond/old-bond spread,” Journal of Financial Economics, 66(2), 463–506.
Kyle, A. S. (1985): “Continuous auctions and insider trading,” Econometrica: Journal
of the Econometric Society, pp. 1315–1335.
(1989): “Informed Speculation with Imperfect Competition,” Review of Economic
Studies, 56(3), 317–355.
Lou, D., H. Yan, and J. Zhang (2013): “Anticipated and Repeated Shocks in Liquid
Markets,” Review of Financial Studies, 26(8), 1891–1912.
Malvey, P. F., and C. M. Archibald (1998): “Uniform-price auctions: Update of the
Treasury experience,” US Treasury.
Malvey, P. F., C. M. Archibald, and S. T. Flynn (1995): “Uniform-Price Auctions:
Evaluation of the Treasury Experience,” Office of Market Finance, US Treasury.
Medrano, L., and X. Vives (2004): “Regulating Insider Trading when Investment Matters,” Review of Finance, 8, 199–277.
Morris, S., and H. S. Shin (2002): “Social value of public information,” The American
Economic Review, 92(5), 1521–1534.
Nyborg, K. G., and S. M. Sundaresan (1996): “Discriminatory versus uniform Treasury auctions: Evidence from when-issued transactions,” Journal of Financial Economics, 42, 63–104.
Ritter, J. R., and I. Welch (2002): “A Review of IPO Activity, Pricing, and Allocations,” The Journal of Finance, 57(4), 1795–1828.
Roosa, R. V. (1956): Federal Reserve Operations in the Money and Government Securities Markets, vol. 332. Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Song, Z., and H. Zhu (2016): “QE Auctions of Treasury Bonds,” Discussion paper, MIT
working paper.
Svensson, L. E. (1994): “Estimating and interpreting forward interest rates: Sweden
1992-1994,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Wilson, R. (1979): “Auctions of shares,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 93(4), 675–
689.

35

A

Appendix: Derivations and Proofs

A.1

Result 1

This result has three cases. We prove each separately, reasoning through case 1 in the
most detail and then pointing out similar steps that arise in cases 2 and 3. Each proof is
divided into two parts: The first part takes the linear equilibrium price equation as given
and produces beliefs and asset demands for the case in question. The second part imposes
market clearing, uses coefficient-matching to solve for the price equation coefficients, and
in doing so shows that the linear price hypothesis is an equilibrium outcome.
A.1.1

Case 1: Dealer-Client Sharing, No Dealer-Dealer Sharing

Information Structure In this case, dealers share information about average order flow
with their clients by means of a noisy signal. First, recall the following definitions:
• NI , NL , ND , N ≡ The number of small, large, dealer, and total investors, respectively.
• s̄d ≡ The dealer’s unbiased estimate of average order flow, constructed as a precisionweighted average of her client’s orders.
First, recall that the information set for non-dealer investor i is a three-dimensional object:
Si = [si , s̄d + ξi , s(p)], where the first entry is i’s private signal, the second is that which i
receives from his dealer, and the third is the information i derives from the price.
These three signals load on the following vector of orthogonal shocks:
Z = [1 , ..., N , ξi , ..., ξND , x]0

(21)

The variance matrix for this vector is:
−1
−1
1NI , τe,l
1NL +ND , τξ−1 1ND , τx−1 ])
V(Z) = diag([τe,s

(22)

Next, we construct the loading matrix Πi for investor i, which maps shocks Z to signals
Si = f + Πi Z. This requires the construction of some auxiliary objects. Let φi denote the
1 × N vector of zeros with a 1 in the i−th position (i.e., an investor identifier), and ψd (i)
the 1 × ND vector of zeros with a 1 in the d(i)−th position (i.e., a dealer identifier).
It follows that the first row of the loading matrix is simply [φi , 0 · 1ND , 0], as this row
simply identifies the investor’s private shock. The next row requires the construction of
the precision-weighted average the dealer uses to construct s̄d . Let t(i) be a type operator
for precision, which returns τs if the investor indexed by i is small, and τl otherwise (recall
that precisions are identical within types). Let 1i (j) be an indicator variable for whether
i and j bid through the same dealer, and |v| be the l1 -norm of a vector. Then, ωi is given
as follows, written as a list comprehension over 1, 2, ..., N .
ωi = [t(j)1i (j) for j in 1, 2, ..., N]
36

(23)

The second row then requires identification of the signal and noise that i receives from his
dealer: i.e., [ |ωωii | , ψd (i), 0].
The third row requires us to extract relevant information from the supply shock. This first
requires rewriting our price assumption such that it represents our unbiased signal about
asset fundamentals:

p = A + BI s¯I + BL s¯L + BD s̄d + Cx + Dξ¯d =⇒
p − A − Cx
s(p) =
BI + BL + BD

(24)
(25)

P
P
P
sj
si
xd
BI
BL
BD
·
·
·
+
+
NI
NL
ND +
B̃
B̃
B̃
C
[ BB̃I · 1NI , BB̃L · 1NL , BB̃D · 1ND , 0 · 1ND , B̃
],

Writing B̃ = BI + BL + BD , we can express this as s(p) =
C
(x − x̄),
B̃

which means that the third row here is
assuming that the indexes run first through small investors, than to large ones, than to
dealers.
Therefore, we can write:


Πi = 

φi
BI
B̃

· 1NI ,

BL
B̃

ωi
|ωi |

·

1NL BB̃D

· 1N D

0 · 1ND
ψd (i)
0 · 1ND


0
0 


(26)

C
B̃

With this, we can compute the Bayesian updating weights mentioned earlier in the paper,
which came from the projection formulas we used to excise shock covariance from the
problem. These are the entries βsi , βs̄i , βpi of the vector given by:
βi = V(Si )−1 13 τf−1

(27)

Using these weights, and equations (4) and (6), we can express the expectation and variance
of the posterior beliefs f |Si :

E(f |Si ) = (1 − βs̄i − βpi − βsi )µ + βsi si + βs̄i s̄ξd(i) + βpi

p − A − Cx
B̃

V(f |Si ) = τf−1 − τf−1 (βsi + βs̄i + βpi )

(28)
(29)

Recall that s̄ξd(i) is the realized signal that a dealer shares with her clients.
All that remains is to do the same thing for dealers, and the information structure will be
explicitly solved. Here, dealers are essentially similar to large investors, except that they
observe s̄d noiselessly (i.e., ξ = 0).
We can then produce an signal vector and shock weighting matrix:

37

Sd = [s̄d , s(p)]
"
Πd =

BI
B̃

(30)

· 1NI ,

BL
B̃

ωi
|ωi |

·

1NL BB̃D

· 1ND

0
0 · 1ND

0

#

C
B̃

(31)

From these loadings, we can produce Bayesian updating weights exactly as we did above,
noting that here we’d have a two-dimensional object as opposed to a three-dimensional
one.17
These determine the posterior expectations and variances of all agents in the model whose
behavior is contingent on information, we’ve produced the applicable information structure.
Coefficient Matching For large investors, let the sensitivity of asset demand to changes
dp
in the expected per-share profit be denoted ML = ρZ V(f |SZ ) + dq
.
L
The asset demand for each small investor is given by the first-order condition solved in
(13), i.e.:
qi (p) =

E(f |Si ) − p
ρI V(f |Si )

(32)

The total demand for each large investor is written analogously in (39):
qj (p) =

E(f |Sj ) − p
ML

(33)

The dealers’ demand function looks similar, except that dealers are subject to a sharper
budget constraint, in virtue of the shadow costs associated with the minimum bid penalty.
Therefore, we can write the demand function as given in (15):
qd (p) =

E(f |SD ) − p(1 − χ)
dp
ρl V(f |SD ) + (1 − χ) dq
L

(34)

dp
The next step is to determine dq
, which we do by applying the market-clearing condition
L
to the demands of all agents save one large investor:

x+

NI
X
i=1

qi (p) +

NX
L −1

qj (p) +

j=1

ND
X

qd (p) + qL = 1

(35)

d=1

Or:
17
This is partly a matter of convenience: separating the dealer’s own signals from her clients’ would
restore a three-dimensional structure.

38

x+ρ−1
I τˆI

NI
X

(E(f |Si )−p)+ML−1

i=1

NX
L −1

ND
X

j=1

d=1

−1
(E(f |Sj )−p)+MD

(E(f |Sd ) − p(1 − χ))+qL = 1
(36)

Next, we substitute in for the conditional expectations in terms of our Bayesian updating
dp
, which we need to determine
weights, and use the implicit function theorem to calculate dq
L
ML .


NI 
p − A − C x̄
τ̂I X
(1 − βsi − βs̄i − βpi )µ + βsi si + βs̄i s̄ξd(i) + βpi
−p
1 = x+
ρI
B̃
i=1

NX
L −1 
p − A − C x̄
−1
+ ML
−p
(1 − βsj − βs̄j − βpj )µ + βsj sj + βs̄j s̄ξj + βpj
B̃
j=1

ND 
X
p − A − C x̄
−1
− p(1 − χ)
(1 − βs̄d − βpd )µ + βs̄d s̄d + βpd
+ MD
B̃
d=1
+ qL

(37)

Taking the derivative with respect to qL , we obtain:
0=

βpL − B̃
βpi − B̃
−1 βpd − B̃(1 − χ)
NI τ̂I ρ−1
+ (NL − 1)ML−1
+ ND MD
I
B̃
B̃
B̃

At this point, we can solve for

dp
dqL ,

!

dp
+1
dqL

and then express ML−1 implicitly, as follows:

βpL − B̃
βpi − B̃
−1 βpd − B̃(1 − χ)
ML = ρL τˆL −1 − NI τ̂I ρ−1
+ (NL − 1)ML−1
+ ND MD
I
B̃
B̃
B̃

!−1

)−p(1−χ)
To determine the dealers’ demand qd = E(f |SdM
, the solution is identical, except that
D
the dealers’ signal precision is higher (as she receives a noiseless signal about average order
flow), and therefore her posterior variance τ̂ −1 is lower.
−1
Following the same steps, we find that we can express MD
as follows:

−1
MD = ρL τ̂D
−

βpl − B̃
βpi − B̃
−1 βpd − B̃(1 − χ)
+ NL ML−1
+ (ND − 1)MD
NI τ̂I ρ−1
I
B̃
B̃
B̃

!−1

Finally, we can express the price coefficients as functions of these M ’s. To do this, we
substitute all the investors’ demands into the market-clearing condition we used before
39

(i.e., we sum over all investors, instead of all but one), and then match coefficients to yield
the following results:


A = C NI τ̂I ρ−1 (1 − βsI − βs̄I − βpI )µ + NL ML−1 (1 − βsL − βs̄L − βpL )µ
i
−1
+ND MD
(1 − βs̄D − βpD )µ − B̃ −1 (A + C x̄)(βpI + βpL + βpD ) − 1

−1
BI = CNI τ̂I ρ−1 βsI + MD
βs̄d ωI + NI DωI

−1
BL = CNL ML−1 βsL + MD
βs̄d ωL + NL DωL

(40)

−1
BD = CND MD
βs̄d ωD + ND DωD

(41)

βpL − B̃
βpI − B̃
−1 βpd − B̃(1 − χ)
+ NL ML−1
+ ND MD
B̃
B̃
B̃


NI
NL
D = C τ̂I ρ−1
βs̄I + ML−1
βs̄L
ND
ND

(38)
(39)

!−1

C = − NI τ̂I ρ−1

(42)
(43)

The solution to this model is the set of β’s for each type of agent, price coefficients, and
M coefficients which jointly solve the above, the implicit definitions of ML and MD , and
the definitions of the Bayesian updating weights.
A.1.2

Case 2: Dealer-Client and Dealer-Dealer Information Sharing

In this setup, dealers share information with clients using the same noisy signal as before,
but they also share information with ψ other dealers. Dealer-dealer sharing is symmetric,
which requires that the number of dealers in an information-sharing collective be a factor
of 20. We also require that ψ 6= 19, as that would imply perfect inter-dealer sharing. Thus,
we only consider ψ ∈ {0, 1, 3, 4, 9}.
It would be repetitive to re-derive each part of the preceding analysis when most of it
can be preserved. So, rather than do that, we will wherever possible argue by analogy;
that is, by pointing out that such-and-such term maps to such-and-such combination of
terms.
Perfect Dealer-Dealer Sharing First, observe that if dealers transmit their signals
s̄d to one another noiselessly, then this result follows from the above. This is so because
the effects of dealer-dealer sharing would simply be as if each dealer observed a greater
proportion of the overall order flow. Each dealer’s signal s̄0d , which we define to be their
signal about order flow after dealer-dealer sharing is complete, would be more precise, and
consequently each investor’s signal s̄0d + ξd would be more precise, but no part of the above
machinery would be rendered invalid.

40

Imperfect Dealer-Dealer Sharing, Information Structure Define a transmission
signal γD ≡ s̄D + δD , where δD is dealer-dealer transmission noise which is i.i.d. across
dealers. We say that δd ∼ N (0, σγ2D ).
First, note that from the point of view of non-dealer investor i, all objects are nearly
exactly the same. We need to add another set of orthogonal shocks δ1 , ..., δD to identify
those dealers who share with i’s dealer:
Z = [1 , ..., N , ξ1 , ...., ξD , δ1 , ..., δD , x]0

(44)

Agents’ signals load on Z according to the signal loading matrix:


Πi = 

φi
BI
B̃

· 1NI ,

BL
B̃

ωi
|ωi |

· 1NL ,

BD
B̃

· 1ND

0ND
ψd(i)
0 · 1ND

0ND
ζd(i)
0 · 1ND


0
0 


(45)

C
B̃

In the above, ωi (j) returns the type-specific precision for investor j if i and j bid through
the same dealer, or if j bids through a dealer who talks with i’s dealer. ψd(i) is the dealer
identifier as before, and we define a new 1 × ND vector ζd(i) , which is 0 everywhere, except
for those dealers who talk to i’s dealer.
Which in turn entails the following posterior expectations and variances:
E(f |Si ) = (1 − βs̄0 i − βpi − βsi )µ + βsi si + βs̄0 i s̄ξd(i) + βpi
V(f |Si ) = τf−1 − τf−1 (βsi + βs̄0 i + βpi )

p − A − Cx
B̃

(46)
(47)

Here, the weights must be re-derived using the formulas introduced in the preceding case.
The main difference will be to the term βs̄i , as dealer-dealer sharing induces agents to
weight the signal more heavily, and dealer-dealer noise induces agents to weight it less
heavily.
The setup for dealer j is slightly different, in that j observes the aggregated dealer signal
s̄0d without ξ noise, and that she observes her clients’ order flow without ζ noise.
So, define the dealer’s signal vector as the 3-dimensional object [s̄, s0 , s(p)], where the
first term denotes information received from clients, the second term denotes information
received from other dealers, and the third term denotes information received from the
unobserved price.18
This enables us to write the following loading matrix for dealer j, which in turn entails a
specific set of Bayesian updating weights by the formulas above. Below, define λ to be the
original ω (i.e., the signal aggregator over our dealer’s clients), and ω similarly to the above
In practice, s0 will be a ψ−dimensional object, as each dealer speaks with ψ others. However, as all
dealer-dealer noise is i.i.d., and all dealers are symmetric, this reduces to a simple average. In our notation,
s0 refers to this averaged signal of all dealer’s messages.
18

41

(i.e., the signal aggregator over clients of other dealers, who talk to our dealer).


λi
0 · 1ND 0 · 1ND 0
|λi |

ωi
0 · 1ND
ζd(i)
0 
Πi = 

|ωi |
BL
BD
BI
C
· 1NI , B̃ · 1NL , B̃ · 1ND 0 · 1ND 0 · 1ND B̃
B̃

(48)

Imperfect Dealer-Dealer Sharing, Coefficient Matching We inherit the demand
functions from the previous section. For non-dealer investors, we also inherit the Bayesian
updating weights, with the exception that βs̄ is replaced with βs̄0 , reflecting changes in the
signal the dealer shares with her clients.
For dealers, we have a new set of beliefs:
E(f |Sj ) = (1 − βs̄d − βpd − βs0 ζd )µ + βs̄d s̄d + βs0 ζd s0ζd + βpd

p − A − C x̄
B̃

V(f |Sj ) = τf−1 = τf−1 (βs̄d + βs0 ζd + βpd )
In the above, the signal s0ζd is the realized (i.e., noisy) signal that d shares with her clients
after dealer-dealer sharing is complete. The term βs0 ζd is the corresponding Bayesian
weight, which is computed using the formula above.
The only difference in the market-clearing condition is that MD now modifies a term with
instances of βs0 d s0d , i.e.:


p − A − C x̄
−1
0
1 = x + ... + MD (1 − βs̄d − βpd − βs0 ζd ) + βs̄d s̄d + βs0 ζd sζd + βp
−p
B̃
It’s clear that adding in that constant doesn’t affect our ability to match coefficients — any
terms which aren’t common, like that representing dealer-dealer noise, are simply present
in the constant A. Therefore, we still have linearity in prices under noisy (yet symmetric)
dealer-dealer signal transmission, and the result holds.
A.1.3

Case 3: No Information Sharing (“Chinese Wall”)

In this model, dealers do not use or share any information derived from client order flow.
Practically speaking, it is as if each type of investor submits bids on their own behalf,
rather than through an intermediary. Each investor’s information set is therefore a 2 × 1
vector Si = [si , s(p)], comprised of their private signal si and the counterfactual price signal
s(p).
Since there is no longer a meaningful informational distinction between dealers and large
investors, we refer to both as large investors, i.e.: NL0 ≡ NL + ND .19
19

In this regime, the only difference between dealers and non-dealer large investors is that dealers are
subject to a minimum bidding penalty.

42

Information Structure
form for s(p):

As above, the linear form we assume for prices entails a specific
s(p) =

p − A − Cx
B̃

(49)

The above signal is unbiased, but as we noted, the price signal and the private signals have
correlated errors. The Bayesian updating weights β come from optimal linear projection
formulas that correct for this covariance.
The shock vector is now simply:
Z = [1 , ..., N , x]0 ,

(50)

where individuals are ordered by putting small investors first, then large investors, then
dealers. The variance vector of this matrix is:
−1
−1
V(Z) = diag(τ,I
1NI , τ,L
1N0L , τx−1 )

(51)

The loading matrix is given by:

Πi =

φi
BI
1
, BL 1 0
B̃ NI B̃ NL

0


(52)

C
B̃

We can then determine the posterior beliefs exactly as previously. Because dealers are
indistiguishable from large investors here, these formulas are true for all agents:
E(f |Sz ) = (1 − βsz − βpz )µ + βsz sz + βpz

p − A − Cx
B̃

V(f |Sz ) = τf−1 − τf−1 (βsz + βpz ),

(53)
(54)

where z is a type variable z ∈ {I, L}.
Coefficient Matching We can follow exactly the same process as in the above two
proofs to yield the final set of coefficients. For clarity, only those coefficients are reported
here:20


A + C x̄
−1
A = −C 1 + (NI τ̂I βpI + NL ML−1 βpL + ND MD
βpd )
B̃


τ̂I
−1
−1
+ C NI (1 − βsI − βpI ) + NL ML (1 − βsL − βpL ) + ND MD (1 − βsd − βpd ) µ
ρ
BI

= CNI ρ−1 βsI

−1
BL = CNL MD
βsL
−1
BD = CND MD
βsD
h
i−1
−1
C = −B̃ NI ρ−1 (βpI − B̃) + NL ML−1 (βsL − B̃) + ND MD
(βsD − B̃(1 − χ))

D = 0
20

Recall that once again NL ≡ the number of non-dealer large investors, and ND ≡ the number of dealers.

43

The existence of a set of coefficients verifies the price conjecture. Since the supply of the
asset is one, auction revenue is the price of the asset. The solution to this model is a joint
solution to (7)-(11) and (13)-(18)

A.2

Corollary 1

We argue by contradiction here, by showing that noncompetitive shares decreased the
expected profit E(π) = E(f − p). Since the total supply of the asset is 1, which is the sum
of competitive and non-competitive demand, the competitive share must increase E(π).
We can break the partial derivative ∂π
∂x into the two terms, the first of which is zero by
construction, as f and x are exogenous, independent variables.
The second term can be expressed as

∂A+Bf +Cf
.
∂x

Note that

∂p
∂x

> 0 if C is negative.

First, we assume that NI >> NL , ND . This reduces the expression for C to:
C = −NI

βsI − B̃
B̃

(55)

C is positive if B̃ > βsI , or that the price puts more weight on the true payoff f than
individuals do.

A.3

Result 2

Recall that this result states that in an auction with ND dealers, and one large investor
who bids directly, prices follow a particular linear form. We solve the model generally with
a minimum bidding penalty, modeled by a per-period cost χ, after which χ = 0 lets us
evaluate results for the no-penalty model.
This proof is divided into three parts. The first two are the standard sections we have
seen before, and the third considers the case where the dealer incorporates the information
gleaned from the intermediation decision of the large investor into the signal about order
flow that she shares with her clients.

Information Structure
When the first large investor chooses to bid directly on his own behalf, the aggregated
signal for the first dealer d is the precision-weighted average of her proportional share of
small and large investors, less one large investor, i.e.:
!
τ,I
s1 =

P

sk + τ,l

k∈I I

P

sj + sd

j∈I L

τ,I NI /ND + τ,l (NL /ND − 1) + τe,l

44

(56)

As in the previous model, investor i who bids through dealer d observes signals Si =
[si , s̄d + ξd , s(p)]. The large investor bidding directly observes only his own signal sj , and
the counterfactual price signal s(p), i.e.: Sj = [sj , s(p)].
Variance-Covariance Matrix of Signals The only difference in the signal construction
is that the first large bidder does not trade through the large dealer. Thus, the large bidder’s
signals are only his own private signal and the price. The first dealer’s information (and,
therefore, her clients’) are less precise because they miss the one large investor.21
We can construct loading matrices Π that map shocks into signals as before. Let
Z̄ = [L1 , 1 , ..., ND , x]

(57)

Then:

"
ΠL =
"
Πd=1 =
"
Πd6=1 =

1

0

BL
B̃

Bd1
B̃

0

1

BL
B̃

Bd1
B̃

0...
Bd6=1
1ND −1
B̃

Bd1
B̃

ψi
Bd6=1
1ND −1
B̃

1
BL
B̃

...
Bd6=1
1ND −1
B̃

0

#
(58)

C
B̃

0

#
(59)

C
B̃

0

#

C
B̃

(60)

where B̃ ≡ Bd1 + Bd6=1 + BL and d 6= 1 stands for all dealers, besides dealer 1.
Then, for all agents j who are clients of dealer d(j), or for the large investor d(j) = L, the
signal variance-covariance is
V(Sj ) = τf−1 + Π̄d(j) V(Z̄)Π̄0d(j)

∀j

(61)

Bayesian Updating Weights For each agent who bids through a dealer, there are three
signals — the dealer’s signal ξ¯s , the private signal si , and the counterfactual price signal
s(p). We can compute corresponding Bayesian weights using the machinery introduced
previously. These have precision given by:
τˆl = τf−1 (1 − βs − βp )

(62)

Coefficient Matching We work through the same process as above (i.e., substitute all
but one agent into the market clearing constraint to solve implicitly for ML and MD ,
and then go back and match coefficients). This yields the following set of price sensitivities:
21

Note that in the following, the first dealer’s information set — and therefore 1 — include the information encoded in the first large investor’s intermediation decision.

45



dp
dqL

−1

−1
−1
= −(νI τ̂I ρ−1 + (νL − 1)ML(d=1)
+ Md=1
)

βp,d1 − B̃
B̃

−1
−1
−1
−1
− χMd=1
− χ(ND − 1)Md6−1
=1 − (ND − 1)(νI τ̂L ρL + νL Ml(d6=1) + Md6=1 )



dp

−1
=

dqL(d=1)




dp



−1

dqL(d6=1)
−1
dp
dq(d=1)

dp
dqL

−1

− ML−1

βp,d6=1 − B̃
B̃

βpL − B̃
β − B̃
−1
+ ML(d=1)
B̃
B̃


βpL − B̃
β − B̃
dp −1
−1
+ ML(d6
=
− ML−1
=
1)
dqL
B̃
B̃
!


β
B̃
β
−
B̃
dp −1
pL
p,d1
−1
=
− ML−1
+ Md=1
χ+
dqL
B̃
B̃


This holds true for dealers, recalling their altered demand function:
MD ≡ ρL τ̂L + (1 − χ)


dp

−1
=

dq(d=1)


dp
dq(d6=1)



−1


=

dp
dqL

−1

dp
dqL

−1

dp
dqL

βpL − B̃
−1
+ Md=1
− ML−1
B̃
βpL − B̃
+ Md6−1
− ML−1
=1
B̃

χ+

χ+

βp,d1 B̃

!

B̃
βp,d1 B̃

!

B̃

And the following set of pricing coefficients:





βp,d1
−1
−1
−1
(1 − βs̄,d1 − βp,d1 ) µ −
A = C −1 + νI τ̂1 ρ + (νl − 1) ML(d=1) + Md=1
(A + C x̄)
B̃



βp,d6=1
−1
−1
+ C (ND − 1) νI τ̂2 ρ−1 + νl ML(d6
+
M
(1
−
β
−
β
)
µ
−
(A
+
C
x̄)
s̄,d6=1
p,d6=1
d6=1
=1)
B̃


βpL
+ CML (1 − βsL − βpL ) µ −
(A + C x̄)
(63)
B̃


−1
−1
Bd=1 = C νI τ̂1 ρ−1 + (νl − 1) ML(d=1)
+ Md=1
βs̄,d1
(64)


−1
−1
Bd6=1 = C (ND − 1) νI τ̂2 ρ−1 + νl ML(d6
(65)
=1) + Md6=1 βs̄,d6=1
BL = CML−1 βL (1)

(66)

46

!
!

 β
−
B̃
βpL
−
B̃
p,d1
−1
−1
−1
C −1 = −ML
− νI τ̂1 ρ−1 + (νl − 1) ML(d=1)
+ Md=1
− χMd=1
B̃
B̃
!

 β
−
B̃
p,d6=1
−1
−1
− (ND − 1) νI τ̂2 ρ−1 + νl ML(d6
− (ND − 1) χMd6−1
=1 . (67)
=1) + Md6=1
B̃

B

Learning from the intermediation decision of the large
investor

In this appendix, we consider the model where dealer 1 incorporates the information that
can be learned from the intermediation choice of the large investor in the average signal
shared with the rest of his clients. When the large investor chooses to bid through the
dealer, the dealer observes the investor’s signal directly and the equilibrium outcomes are
the same as before. We solve this model generally with a minimum bidding penalty. Then
we can set χ = 0 to get the results for the no-penalty model.
Consider now the case when the large investor bids directly in the auction. Recall that the
large investor chooses to bid directly whenever EU (Ld) ≥ EU (Li). Using (17), we can
rewrite this as
!
!
2
2
θ
µ
θ
µ
1
1
Ld
Li
r,Li
r,Ld
(1 + 2θLd ∆VLd )− 2 exp −
≤ (1 + 2θLi ∆VLi )− 2 exp −
.
1 + 2θLd ∆VLd
1 + 2θLi ∆VLi
Equivalently, the large investor chooses to bid directly when
! r
θLd µ2r,Ld
θLi µ2r,Li
1 + 2θLd ∆VLd
+
≤
,
exp −
1 + 2θLd ∆VLd 1 + 2θLi ∆VLi
1 + 2θLi ∆VLi
or
θLd µ2r,Ld
1 + 2θLd ∆VLd

−

θLi µ2r,Li
1 + 2θLi ∆VLi

1
1
≥ − log (1 + 2θLd ∆VLd ) + log (1 + 2θLi ∆VLi ) .
2
2

The left hand side of the above is a quadratic function of the signal of the large investor,
sNI +1 . Let Υl,u be the two solutions to the quadratic equation for the boundaries of the
indirect bidding region, so that the large investor bids indirectly whenever Υl ≤ sNI +1 ≤
Υu ; equivalently, the large investor bids directly if sNI +1 ≥ Υu or sNI +1 ≤ Υl .
To solve the model where all agents make rational inferences from the intermediation
decision, we first solve our model without this information and determine the cutoffs υl and
υh . We simulate the model to determine the probability of direct bidding P r(υ). We also
compute, conditional on choosing to bid directly, what the direct bidder’s average signal
is (sυ ) and the variance of that signal (τυ−1 ). Next, we construct a normally-distributed,
conditionally independent approximating signal with the same mean and variance: sυ =
f +υ where υ ∼ N (0, τυ−1 ) . In cases where the large investor bids directly, we allow dealer
1 to observe sυ and incorporate it in his advice to his clients. When the large investor
bids indirectly, his dealer observes his signal exactly, as in the indirect bidding model
we solved before. The other dealers and their clients do not observe the intermediation
47

decision and instead use P r (υ) to weight the price signal that would be extracted in both
scenarios.
Variance-covariance matrix of signals When the large investor bids directly, the first
dealer’s signal is the average of the first νI investors’, the first νl −1 large investors’, the first
dealer’s signal and the new signal sυ that arises from observing the direct bidding decision.
By Bayes’ law, the posterior expectation, conditional on all these signals is:
P

P
τε,s k∈I s sk + τε,l
s
+
s
+ τυ sυ
l
j
d
j∈I1
1
s̄1 =
νI τε,s + νl τε,l + τυ
Bayes law also tells us that the precision is τ̂d1 = νI τε,s + νl τε,l + τυ . The signals of all other
dealers are the same as before because those dealers are not aware of the large investor’s
intermediation decision.
As in the previous model, investor i who bids through intermediary d observes signals
S̃i = [si , s̄d , s(p)]. Since dealer share information perfectly here, the investor’s own signal
is redundant. Thus, for notational convenience, we continue as if S̃i = [s̄d(i) , s(p)], ∀i 6= L.
The large investor bidding directly observes only his own signal and the price information:
S̃L = [sL , s(p)].
We can construct the signals as the true payoff f plus weights Π on orthogonal shocks Z.
Let

0
Z̄υ = L ¯1 ¯2 . . . ¯N d (x − x̄)
where l ≡ SL − f and ¯d ≡ s̄d − f are the noise the the signals of the large investors
and the dealer and x is the non-competitive bids. Note that the information from the
intermediation decision of the direct bidder in incorporated in the first dealer’s signal, and
thus in ¯1 . The variances of these shocks are:
h
i
−1
, τd−1 1Nd −1 , τx−1 ]).
(68)
V Z̄ direct = diag([τL−1 , τ̂d1
The signals of the large investor L, dealer 1 and his clients d (1) and all others d 6= 1 have
loadings on the orthogonal shocks given by (58), (59) and (60). Then, for all agents j who
are clients of dealer d(j), or for the large investor d(j) = L, the signal variance-covariance
0
is V(Sj ) = τf−1 + Πd¯(j)V [Z̄υ ]Πd¯(j)
∀j.
Bayesian updating weights β and posterior precisions τ The posterior expectation
of the asset value is a linear combination of the prior and two signals: (1) the signal sL or
sd(i) provided by the dealer; and (2) the signal conveyed by the price (p − A − C x̄)/B). βs
and βp are the weights the agent places on the two signals. The weights are given by (5),
the resulting conditional expectation is given by (4), with precision (62).
Equilibrium Price Once we’ve adjusted the Bayesian updating weights β, the rest of the
solution of the direct bidding model follows just as before. The equilibrium price coefficients
are a joint solution to the coefficient equations (63) - (67), the M equation (A.1.1), in
conjunction with the price sensitivities (63) - (A.3) and the β’s (5), which in turn depend
48

on the Π’s (58), (59) and (60) and the variances of the orthogonal shocks (61). Setting
χ = 0 yields the solution to the model without the minimum bidding requirement.

C

A Private Value Auction Model

The model economy lasts for two periods and agents can invest in a risky asset (the newly
issued Treasury security) and a riskless storage technology with zero net return. The
risky asset is auctioned by Treasury in a fixed number of shares (normalized to 1) using
a uniform-price auction with a market-clearing price p. The value of the newly issued
asset to small investor i is f˜i , which is known only to investor i. The small investors’
valuations are correlated. They have an aggregate and an idiosyncratic component that
are not separately observed: f˜i = f + vi , where f ∼ N (µ, τf−1 ) and vi ∼ N (0, τv−1 . Each
investor knows the private component of their valuation (perhaps a heding motive), but
not the common valuation f or the sum f˜i . Large investors’ valuation for the treasury is
f˜i = f , which is also unknown to them.
As before, preferences are exponential,
max E[− exp(−ρWi )|Si ]
qi (p)

s.t. Wi = W0i + qi (f˜i − p).
The timing, information sets, intermediation choices are all as before, except for one twist.
An investor’s order flow no longer perfectly reveals their signal si . The dealer cannot
perfectly disentangle private information si from private valuation vi . So, we assume that
dealers see their clients bids qi , but not that dealers know si directly.
The definition of equilibrium is the same as before, with the adjusted preferences and the
one change to the information set.
Updating Investors who bid through dealers have access to four pieces of information.
They know their priors and their private signal. They get information from their dealer
and the observe the market price. The first two pieces of information are the same as
before. The second two change.
By placing orders through dealers, customers reveal their order flow to their dealer. From
the first order condition for portfolio choice qi , that order is
qi =

E[f |Si ] + vi − p
ρV ar[f |Si ]

Since risk aversion and conditional variances are known, and price p is observable to all,
observing qi lets a dealer observe E[f |Si ] + vi . We can then decomponse E[f |Si ] into the
private signal, common prior and the price:
E[f |si , p] =

τf µ + τs si + τp ηp
τf + τs + τp

49

Table 4: Descriptive statistics for the calibrated, simulated model with direct and indirect
bidding and low-bid penalty. Revenue is in basis points, and allocations are in percent.

Mean
Std. Dev.
Skew
Kurtosis

Revenue

Dealer allocation

Direct allocation

Indirect allocation

38.7236
70.8100
-0.0075
3.0060

43.3994
19.4523
-0.0091
3.0326

0.4698
0.7284
1.2365
3.2103

50.5758
73.1065
0.1008
4.2614

Thus, the dealer can form a signal sqi = [(τf + τs + τp )(E[f |Si ] + vi ) − (τf µ + τp ηp )]/τs . This
yields a signal sqi = si + eqi where eqi = (τf + τs + τp )/τs vi , which is distributed N (0, τq−1 ),
where the signal variance is τv−1 (τf + τs + τp )2 /τs2 . But sqi is a noisy signal about the
underlying noisy signal si . Thus sqi as a signal of f has a conditional variance equal to the
sum of the variance of each of the signal components. Let τq−1 ≡ τi−1 +τv−1 (τf +τs +τp )2 /τs2 .
Then τq is the precision of sqi as a signal about f .
Thus, if we re-write the dealer’s Bayesian signal-precision-weighted average of his and his
clients’ private signals, it is
P

P
P
τ
s
+
τ
s
+
s
s
l
q
ε,l
d
k∈Id qk
j∈Id j
i∈I τq sqi
,
(69)
s̄d = P d
=
νI τq + (1 + νl )τε,l
i∈Id τi
Once we redefine this signal s̄d and adjust its precision to be τξ = νI τq + (1 + νl )τε,l , we
can then proceed to solve the model, exactly the same as before.
The last piece of the model that could be affected by the presence of private values is the
information extracted from prices. But, it turns out that once we adjust the dealers’ signal
precision, there is not further change needed to price informativeness. The reason is that
the average of private values is known. It’s zero. That’s common knowledge. So, when se
aggregate demand to clear the market, we get
Z
E[f |Si ] + vi − p
di = 1
ρV ar[f |Si ]
Z
E[f |Si ] − p
=
di
ρV ar[f |Si ]
R
because vi di = 0 and vi is uncorrelated with any other variables in the model.
So, while private values affect individuals’ demands, they average out and have no direct
effect on prices. The only aggregate effect of private values is through their effect on the
dealers’ information s̄d and its precision τξ .

50

D

Measuring Treasury Payoffs

This appendix provides additional detail about how payoffs are calculated. Because of
lags between trade and settlement dates, the appendix also provides detail on funding
costs. The first subsection describes what those terms are and argues that they are small
and stable. The second subsection discusses an alternative hedging strategy, known as a
coupon roll. The third explains why information from the when-issued-market (or WIs) is
not relevant in our setting.
Funding position. In the model, winning bids pay p and the common fundamental
value is f . In Treasury auctions bidders bid a coupon rate rather than a price. The price is
always set to $100 up to rounding, which we rescale to $1 for the purposes of this discussion.
To assess auction results from the issuer perspective we discount future interest payments
using a yield curve estimated on outstanding Treasury securities. Economically this means
that we measure issuance cost relative to other debt outstanding at the time of the auction.
Newly issued Treasury securities are typically valued more than older securities because of
their better liquidity, a phenomenon known as the on-the-run premium (see e.g., Vayanos
and Weill 2008). As a result of the on-the-run premium, the discounted value of Treasury’s
future interest and principal payments is smaller the price at which the security sells ($1),
and we define net auction revenue as the gap between the two:
!
T
X
Zauction (t) C + Zauction (T ) ,
(70)
R̂auction = 1 −
t=0

where C is the coupon determined at the auction, T is the maturity, Zauction (i) = exp(−iyauction (i))
is the price at the time of the auction of a zero-coupon bond maturing at i, y(i) is the ith
maturity yield from the yield curve estimated on outstanding securities at the time of the
auction.
Trades in the secondary Treasury market settle on the business day following a trade,
meaning that securities are delivered and cash is paid a day after a transaction is agreed
upon. In Treasury auctions, instead, investors pay bids to Treasury and receive securities
on the issuance date, which occurs one to 14 days following the date of the auction. This
different settlement rule is the source of extra funding cost/income in our setting.
We measure f as the market price of the security on the issuance date, which is when
the security is first available to investors. The value of f depends on the general level of
interest rates and the on-the-run premium. While fluctuations in interest rates between
auction and issuance date create risk for investors, this risk can be hedged with other
outstanding Treasuries. We assume that investors hedge interest rate risk optimally by
selling a replicating portfolio of other Treasury securities. On the auction date, the investor
buys the new security and shorts the replicating portfolio of off-the-run issues. On the
issuance date, the investor reverses by selling the new security and covering the short in
older securities. The per-unit value of the hedged portfolio at auction is equal to −R̂auction ,
and to:

51

fˆissue =

T
X

!
Zissue (t) C + Zissue (T )

− Pissue ,

(71)

t=0

on the issuance date, where Pissue is the market price of the new security on that date.
Detailed steps in the investment strategy are:
1. Auction date:
(a) Place bid
(b) For each unit of successful bid alloted, sell T zero coupon bond each priced at
Zauction (t) and in amounts equal to C for t < T and 1 + C for t = T. The zero
coupon bonds could either be stripped Treasuries (as in Fleckenstein, Longstaff,
and Lustig, 2014) or proxied with a combination of coupon securities.
2. Post-auction date:
(a) Borrow (to post-issuance date) the amount Zauction =
Zauction (T ) paying the per-diem unsecured rate rb .

PT

t=0 Zauction (t) C

+

(b) Borrow zero-coupon bonds with reverse repos (to post-issuance date) and receive
the per-diem repo rate rrepo . Deliver the T zero coupons to the auction-date
buyer.
3. Issuance date:
(a) Borrow $1 at rate rb . Receive new issue from, and pay $1, to Treasury; sell issue
in the secondary market
(b) Buy portfolio of T zero-coupon bonds at Zissuance
4. Post-issuance date:
(a) Receive payment of pissue and repay the issuance-date loan
(b) Receive T zero-coupon bonds and deliver into the reverse repo;
(c) Receive payment of Zauction from reverse-repo and pay Zissue to settle the issuedate purchase; Repay post-auction date loan
The cash flows from this position at the post-issue date are:
(Pissue − 1)+(Zauction − Zissue )+

(issue date − auction date)
rborrow
×(rrepo − rborrow )×Zauction −
×1
360
360
(72)

In our calculations we disregard the two funding terms because they are small and don’t
vary much when rrepo ≈ rborrow . The repo rate for old issues, which are being funded
between the post-auction and post-issue date, typically trades within a few basis points to
the unsecured rate rb , so the funding terms are small. Repo rates for new (or first-off-therun) securities instead can trade far off from uncollateralized rates and be volatile because
they funding rates balance the supply and demand of new securities, which can be in high
demand to take short position in interest rates (see e.g. Duffie, 1996; Jordan and Jordan,
1997). As per the detailed steps above the new issue is never shorted or funded, as it is

52

sold as soon as it is received by the investor. Thus fluctuations in the special-repo rate do
not affect the returns in our position.
Coupon roll An investor could achieve approximately the same hedged position by
shorting only the previously on-the-run (same maturity) security. This strategy is fairly
common around Treasury auctions as discussed by Fleming and Garbade (2007). While
this would be a preferred approach in practice, the paper focuses on a OTR strategy for two
reasons. First, interest hedging with the former on-the-run is imperfect because maturities
are not matched and additional accrued interest calculations would need to be accounted
for. Second, the repo rate for recently issued securities can trade “special”, that is at a
significant gap to the rborrow so that the funding terms would become more important. At
the same time historical special repo rates are not readily available, so we focus on OTR
for which these terms are not important.
Information from the When-Issued Market Days ahead of the auction date, when
details such as amounts and maturities are set, dealers and other market participants
begin to trade the not-yet-available security. Trades on when-issued securities (or WIs),
are quoted in coupon rates that investors are willing to pledge, in advance of the auction, to
pay to receive the treasury on the issuance date. The price at which WIs trade is indeed a
good predictor of what the auction-clearing coupon rate will be. But in the model, investors
can condition their bids on the realized auction price p. Thus all information that is in the
auction is already in their information sets. Pre-auction information from the WI market
is a noisy signal about something they effectively know perfectly already. As such, it is
redundant information and does not affect investors’ bids in our model.

E

Calibration Robustness

In Section 3, we calibrated the full model to Treasury auction outcomes assuming that
dealers share fully their average signal with their clients, so that τξ = +∞, and that the
20 dealers do not share information with each other, so that ψ = 0. In this Appendix, we
investigate alternative information sharing assumptions for the calibration. It is important
to note that the parameters of the distribution of the fundamental value of the security,
µ and τf , and the parameters of the non-competitive agent demand, x̄ and τx , remain
fixed over the alternative calibrations as we can directly observe these moments from the
data.
We consider three alternative assumptions for τξ and NP :
1. Full information sharing with clients (τξ = +∞) and information sharing with one
other dealer (ψ = 1).
2. No information sharing with clients (τξ = 0) and no information sharing with the
other dealers (ψ = 0).
3. No information sharing with clients (τξ = 0) and information sharing with one other
dealer (ψ = 1).

53

Though this is by no means an exhaustive list of possible assumptions for the true information sharing structure that occurs in practice, we find the differences in calibration
outcomes to be representative of the changes to the calibrated parameters – and corresponding quantitative implications of the comparative statics conducted in the paper –
under alternative assumptions.
We evaluate the alternative calibration assumptions along several dimensions. First, Table 5 reports the calibrated parameters under the baseline assumption used in the main
body of the paper and the three alternatives. Comparing first the baseline calibration with
alternative 1 (τξ = +∞, ψ = 1), we see that the calibrated parameters are nearly identical,
with slightly higher risk aversion for the large investors and dealers, lower signal precision
of private signals, lower risk aversion for the small investors and higher minimum bidding
requirement penalty. Comparing next the baseline calibration to alternative 2 (τξ = 0,
ψ = 0), we see that the risk aversion of large investors and dealers decreases, precision of
the private signals observed by large investors and dealers increases, while the calibration
of the small investors moves in the opposite direction (high risk aversion and lower signal
precision). Finally, alternative 3 (τξ = 0, ψ = 1) moves the calibrated parameters back
toward the baseline calibration.
−1

−1

−1

Table 5: Calibrated parameters µ, χ0 , τf 2 , τε,s2 and τε,l2 are all expressed in basis
points.
µ
Baseline
Info share with 1 dealer
No info sharing with
clients
Info share with 1 dealer;
no client info sharing

−1
2

τf

−1

−1

−1
2

τε,s2

τε,l2

τx

x̄

ρ

ρL

χ

NS

NL

ND

40.8
40.8
40.8

73.5
73.5
73.5

494.9
491.1
5386.7

295.1
295.4
107.5

0.06
0.06
0.06

0.12
0.12
0.12

49402
49355
99927

1068
1079
20

0.06
0.08
0.04

240
240
240

40
40
40

20
20
20

40.8

73.5

414.8

236.4

0.06

0.12

17534

874

0.06

240

40

20

Table 6 evaluates the goodness-of-fit of the four different assumptions on the information
sharing structure. Comparing the four calibrations, we see that, while they all do fairly
well in matching the moments of price (A, price sensitivity to fundamentals, C, and error
standard deviation) and the expected excess revenue and volatility of excess revenue, the
alternatives are less able to match average shares allotted. Indeed, if we compare the
minimized objective of the calibration (the sum of squared deviations), we see that the
baseline calibration achieves the lowest minimized objective.
Finally, in Table 7, we compare the full information sharing outcome and the Chinese
wall outcome for the four calibrations, in terms of expected revenue, revenue volatility,
expected utility of a small investor and expected utility of a dealer (or large investor). The
full information outcome looks very similar for all four calibration alternatives, with the
only exception the revenue volatility and agents’ utility for alternative 2 (τξ = 0, ψ = 0),
corresponding to the much lower risk aversion and much higher signal precision of the large
investors and dealers in this calibration. Comparing the Chinese wall outcomes to the full
information sharing outcomes, we see that alternative 2 has the lowest expected excess
revenue gain from moving from no information sharing to full information sharing but the
largest expected utility gain for both large and small investors. Even in this case, however,
the Treasury would loose 2.7 bps per dollar of security auctioned (or $2.1 billion annually)

54

Table 6: Calibration targets and model-implied values. Prices and excess revenues
are all expressed in basis points.
Data

Baseline

Info share with
1 dealer

No info sharing
with clients

Info share with
1 dealer; No
info
sharing
with clients

A
Price sensitivity to fundamental
C
Error Std. Dev.

-17.01
0.97
124.38
29.72

-7.51
0.91
73.57
23.12

-6.38
0.91
64.81
22.73

-28.54
0.92
240.03
17.10

-25.38
0.90
223.46
19.29

Expected excess revenue
Volatility of excess revenue

37.18
72.64

38.73
70.81

38.65
70.46

38.64
70.82

39.10
70.10

share
share
share
share
share
share

0.25
0.09
0.53
0.14
0.10
0.09

0.51
0.73
0.43
0.19
0.00
0.01

0.70
0.65
0.24
0.14
0.01
0.01

0.52
0.26
0.35
0.25
0.01
0.01

0.55
0.27
0.32
0.27
0.01
0.00

Sum of squared errors

-

19758.66

90853.26

58752.48

70498.48

Indirect
Volatility of indirect
Dealer
Volatility of dealer
Direct
Volatility of direct

in moving from full information sharing to no information sharing.
Table 7: Full information and Chinese Wall outcomes under different calibration assumptions. Prices and excess revenues are all expressed in basis points.
A. Full information outcomes

Baseline
Info share with 1 dealer
No info sharing with
clients
Info share with 1 dealer;
no client info sharing

Expected revenue

Revenue volatility

Small client utility

Large agent utility

39.987
39.986
40.767

79.881
79.885
343.439

-0.545
-0.544
-0.049

-0.545
-0.544
-0.049

40.367

78.115

-0.545

-0.546

B. Chinese Wall outcomes

Baseline
Info share with 1 dealer
No info sharing with
clients
Info share with 1 dealer;
no client info sharing

Expected revenue

Revenue volatility

Small client utility

Large agent utility

32.808
32.781
38.044

58.237
58.208
71.020

-1.041
-1.041
-1.097

-1.041
-1.041
-1.036

36.976

64.302

-1.085

-1.082

55

