NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE FINTECH OPPORTUNITY
Thomas Philippon
Working Paper 22476
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22476

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016

This paper was prepared for the 2016 Annual Conference of the BIS. I am grateful to my
discussants Martin Hellwig and Ross Levine, and to Kim Schoenholtz, Anat Admati, Stephen
Cecchetti, François Véron, Nathalie Beaudemoulin, Stefan Ingves, Raghu Rajan, Viral Acharya,
Philipp Schnabl, Bruce Tuckman, and Sabrina Howell for stimulating discussions and/or
comments on early drafts. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Thomas Philippon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The FinTech Opportunity
Thomas Philippon
NBER Working Paper No. 22476
August 2016
JEL No. G2,G38,L1,L4,O3
ABSTRACT
This paper assesses the potential impact of FinTech on the finance industry, focusing on financial
stability and access to services. I document first that financial services remain surprisingly
expensive, which explains the emergence of new entrants. I then argue that the current regulatory
approach is subject to significant political economy and coordination costs, and therefore unlikely
to deliver much structural change. FinTech, on the other hand, can bring deep changes but is
likely to create significant regulatory challenges.

Thomas Philippon
New York University
Stern School of Business
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
tphilipp@stern.nyu.edu

This paper studies the FinTech movement in the context of the long run evolution of the finance industry and its
regulations. The 2007/2009 financial crisis has triggered new regulatory initiatives and has accelerated existing ones.
I argue that the current framework has been useful but that it has run its course and is unlikely to deliver significant
structural changes in the future. If regulators want to go further, they will need to consider alternative approaches that
are likely to involve FinTech.
FinTech covers digital innovations and technology-enabled business model innovations in the financial sector.
Such innovations can disrupt existing industry structures and blur industry boundaries, facilitate strategic disintermediation, revolutionize how existing firms create and deliver products and services, provide new gateways for
entrepreneurship, democratize access to financial services, but also create significant privacy, regulatory and lawenforcement challenges. Examples of innovations that are central to FinTech today include cryptocurrencies and the
blockchain, new digital advisory and trading systems, artificial intelligence and machine learning, peer-to-peer
lending, equity crowdfunding and mobile payment systems.
The starting point of my analysis, developed in Section 1, is that the current financial system is rather ineﬃcient.
To show this, I update the work of Philippon (2015) with post-crisis U.S. data. I find that the unit cost of financial
intermediation has declined only marginally since the crisis. The evidence outside the U.S. is remarkably similar, as
shown in Bazot (2013). Recent research also suggests that many advanced economies have reached a point where “more
finance” is not helpful.1 Significant welfare gains from improvement in financial services are technologically feasible
but unlikely to happen without entry of new firms.
I then propose an analysis of financial regulation based on the dichotomy between a top-down regulation of
incumbents and a bottom-up regulation of entrants. I argue that current regulations fall in the first category, and
I explain how an alternative approach would look like in the context of the FinTech movement.
Section 2 reviews recent regulatory eﬀorts and challenges. The financial regulations enacted after 2009 are not as
far reaching as the ones implemented after the Great Depression, but the evidence suggests that these eﬀorts have
made the financial sector safer.2 A defining feature of the current approach, however, is that it focuses almost
exclusively on incumbents. I argue that this approach makes it diﬃcult to implement deep structural changes
because of ubiquitous ratchet eﬀects in leverage, size and interconnectedness, preferential tax treatments, and
oligopoly rents. These distortions are embedded in the current financial system to such an extent that the political
and coordination costs of removing them have become prohibitive.
An alternative approach to financial regulation is to encourage entry and shape the development of new systems
in order to reach one’s policy goals. This approach seeks to contain incumbents, consolidate existing eﬀorts and
prevent future regulatory arbitrage, but it does not seek not to impose top-down structural changes. The
alternative approach can be complementary to the ongoing development of FinTech firms. One can achieve bottom1 See

Favara (2009), Cecchetti and Kharroubi (2012), Shin (2012) among others.
instance, capital requirements are significantly higher, but funding costs have not increased (Cecchetti, 2014). Of course, higher
capital ratios could be desirable (Admati et al., 2013).
2 For

2

up structural change by encouraging, for instance, firms that provide transaction services without leverage, and trading
systems that are cheap, transparent and open-access. This alternative approach creates specific regulatory challenges
that are discussed in Section 3.

1

Ineﬃciency of the Existing System

The main finding in Philippon (2015) is that the unit cost of financial intermediation in the U.S. has remained
around 2% for the past 130 years. Bazot (2013) finds similar unit costs in other major countries (Germany, U.K.,
France). Improvements in information technologies have not been passed through to the end users of financial
services. This section oﬀers an update of this work, with two goals in mind. First, measurement is diﬃcult, and
statistical agencies have recently made some significant data revisions to financial accounts. One needs to know if
these revisions aﬀect the main insights of the original paper. The second reason for updating the series is that the
data in Philippon (2015) predates the ﬁnancial crisis and one would like to know how the unit cost of intermediation has
evolved since then. I then discuss recent trend in labor compensation and employment. Finally, I discuss the
evidence on the link between finance and growth.

1.1

Financial Expenses and Intermediated Assets

To organize the discussion I use a simple model economy consisting of households, a non-financial business sector, and
a financial intermediation sector. The details of the model are in the Appendix. The income share of finance, shown
in Figure 1, is defined as3
Value Added of Finance Industry
ytf
.
=
yt
GDP
The model assumes that financial services are produced under constant returns to scale. The income of the finance
industry ytf is then given by
ytf = ψc,t bc,t + ψm,t mt + ψk,t kt ,

(1)

where bc,t is consumer credit, mt are assets providing liquidity services, and kt is the value of intermediated corporate
assets. The parameters ψi,t ’s are the unit cost of intermediation, pinned down by the intermediation technology.
The model therefore says that the income of the finance industry is proportional to the quantity of intermediated
assets, properly defined. The model predicts no income eﬀect, i.e., no tendency for the finance income share to grow
3 Philippon (2015) discusses various issues of measurement. Conceptually, the best measure is value added, which is the sum of
profits and wages. Whenever possible, I therefore use the GDP share of the finance industry, i.e., the nominal value added of the finance
industry divided by the nominal GDP of the U.S. economy. One issue, however, is that before 1945 profits are not always properly
measured and value added is not available. As an alternative measure I then use the labor compensation share of the finance industry,
i.e., the compensation of all employees of the finance industry divided by the compensation of all employees in the U.S. economy.
Philippon (2015) also explains the robustness of the main findings to large changes in government spending (because of wars), the rise
of services (finance as a share of services displays a similar pattern to the one presented here), globalization (netting out imports and
exports of financial services).

3

with per-capita GDP. This does not mean that the finance income share should be constant, since the ratio of assets
to GDP can change. But it says that the income share does not grow mechanically with total factor productivity.
This is consistent with the historical evidence.4
Measuring intermediated assets is complicated because these assets are heterogenous. As far as corporate finance
is concerned, the model is fundamentally a user cost model. Improvements in corporate finance (a decrease in ψk )
lower the user cost of capital and increase the capital stock, which, from a theoretical perspective, should include
all intangible investments and should be measured at market value. A significant part of the growth of the finance
industry over the past 30 years is linked to household credit. The model provides a simple way to model household
finance. The model also incorporates liquidity services provided by specific liabilities (deposits, checking accounts,
some form of repurchase agreements) issued by financial intermediaries. One can always write the RHS of (1) as
!
"
ψ
ψ
ψk,t
ψ
ψc,t bc,t + ψm,t
. Philippon (2015) finds that the ratios ψm,t
m
+
k
and ψk,t
are close to one.5 As a result
t
t
ψc,t
c,t
c,t
c,t
one can define intermediated assets as

qt ≡ bc,t + mt + kt .

(2)

The principle is to measure the instruments on the balance sheets of non-financial users, households and nonfinancial firms. This is the correct way to do the accounting, rather than looking at the balance sheet of financial
intermediaries. After aggregating the various types of credit, equity issuances and liquid assets into one measure, I
obtain the quantity of financial assets intermediated by the financial sector for the non-financial sector, displayed
in Figure 1.

1.2

Unit Cost and Quality Adjustments

I can then divide the income of the finance industry by the quantity of intermediated assets to obtain a measure of
the unit cost
ψt ≡

ytf
.
qt

(3)

Figure 2 shows that this unit cost is around 2% and relatively stable over time. In other words, I estimate that it
costs two cents per year to create and maintain one dollar of intermediated financial asset. Equivalently, the annual
rate of return of savers is on average 2 percentage points below the funding cost of borrowers. The updated series
are similar to the ones in the original paper. The unit costs for other countries are estimated by Bazot (2013) who
finds convergence to US levels.

The raw measure of Figure 2, however, does not take into account changes in the characteristics of borrowers.
4 The

fact that the finance share of GDP is the same in 1925 and in 1980 makes is already clear that there is no mechanical relationship
between GDP per capita and the finance income share. Similarly, Bickenbach et al. (2009) show that the income share of finance has
remained remarkably constant in Germany over the past 30 years. More precisely, using KLEMS for Europe (see O’Mahony and Timmer
(2009)) one can see that the finance share in Germany was 4.3% in 1980, 4.68% in 1990, 4.19% in 2000, and 4.47% in 2006.
5 This is true most of the time, but not when quality adjustments are too large. Philippon (2015) provides calibrated quality
adjustments for the U.S. financial system.

4

1

.02

Share of GDP
.04
.06

2
3
Intermediated Assets/GDP

4

.08

Figure 1: Finance Income and Intermediated Assets

1880

1900

1920

1940
1960
year...

Share of GDP

1980

2000

2020

Intermediated Assets/GDP

Notes: Both series are expressed as a share of GDP. Finance Income is the domestic income of the finance and insurance industries, i.e.,
aggregate income minus net exports. Intermediated Assets include debt and equity issued by non financial firms, household debt, and various
assets providing liquidity services. Data range for Intermediated Assets is 1886 - 2012. See Philippon (2015) for historical sources and details
about the underlying data.

These changes require quality adjustments to the raw measure of intermediated assets. For instance, corporate
finance involves issuing commercial paper for blue chip companies as well as raising equity for high-technology startups. The monitoring requirements per dollar intermediated are clearly diﬀerent in these two activities. Similarly,
with household finance, it is more expensive to lend to poor households than to wealthy ones, and relatively poor
households have gained access to credit in recent years.6 Measurement problems arise when the mix of high- and
low-quality borrowers changes over time.
Following Philippon (2015), I then perform a quality adjustment to the intermediated assets series. Figure 3
shows the quality adjusted unit cost series. It is lower than the unadjusted series by construction since quality
adjusted assets are (weakly) larger than raw intermediated assets. The gap between the two series grows when
there is entry of new firms, and/or when there is credit expansion at the extensive margin (i.e., new borrowers).
Even with the adjusted series, however, we do not see a significant decrease in the unit cost of intermediation over
time.
6 Using the Survey of Consumer Finances, Moore and Palumbo (2010) document that between 1989 and 2007 the fraction of households
with positive debt balances increases from 72% to 77%. This increase is concentrated at the bottom of the income distribution. For
households in the 0-40 percentiles of income, the fraction with some debt outstanding goes from 53% to 61% between 1989 and 2007.
In the mortgage market, Mayer and Pence (2008) show that subprime originations account for 15% to 20% of all HMDA originations
in 2005.

5

Figure 2: Unit Cost of Financial Intermediation

0

.005

.01

.015

.02

.025

.03

Raw Unit Costs

1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

2020

time
2012 Data

New Data

Notes: The raw measure is the ratio of finance income to intermediated assets, displayed in Figure 1. The 2012 data is from Philippon (2015),
while the new data was accessed in May 2016. Data range is 1886 - 2015.

Figure 3: Unit Cost and Quality Adjustment

0

.005

.01

.015

.02

.025

.03

Unit Cost, with Quality Adjustment

1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

2020

time
Raw

Quality Adjusted

Notes: The quality adjusted measure takes into account changes in firms’ and households’ characteristics. Data range is 1886 - 2015.

Finance has benefited more than other industries from improvements in information technologies. But, unlike
in retail trade for instance, these improvements have not been passed on as lower costs to the end users of financial
services. Asset management services are still expensive. Banks generate large spreads on deposits (see Figure 1 in
Drechsler et al. (2014)). Finance could and should be much cheaper. In that respect, the puzzle is not that FinTech
is happening now. The puzzle is why it did not happen earlier.

6

1.3

Wages and Employment

Philippon and Reshef (2012) document the evolution of the relative wage in the finance industry defined as

relw =

w̄tf in
w̄tall

where w̄ is the average wage (total compensation divided by total number of employees). This measure does not
control for changes in the composition of the labor force within a sector (see Philippon and Reshef (2012) for micro
evidence on this issue). Figure 4 updates their findings. One can clearly see the high wages of the 1920s, the drop
following the Great Depression and WWII, and then a period a remarkably stability, from 1945 to 1980. After 1980
the relative wage starts increasing again, in part because low skill jobs are automated (ATMs) and in part because
the finance industry hires more brains.

1.2

1.4

Relative Wage
1.6

1.8

2

Figure 4: Relative Wage

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

2020

time

Notes: Wage in Finance divided by Average Wage in All Industries.

We can see some relative wage moderation following the 2007/2009 crisis but it is clearly limited. The labor
share in finance has increased a bit relative to the rest of the private sector (i.e., the profit share has fallen a bit
more in finance), suggesting that some more moderation in the future, but the changes are not large.
Figure 5 compares the employment dynamics in finance and other industries over the past 25 years. It is quite
striking to see that the financial crisis did not initially hit the finance industry more than the rest of the economy.
The main diﬀerence is the weaker recovery of employment in finance from 2010 onward. Overall finance has shrunk
somewhat after the crisis but nowhere near as much as after the Great Depression.

7

5

120

Emp. Finance
5.5
6

130
140
Emp. All industries

6.5

150

Figure 5: Employment

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

year
Emp. Finance

Emp. All industries

Notes: Millions of Jobs.

1.4

Finance and Growth

There is a large literature studying the links between finance and growth. Levine (2005) provides an authoritative
survey, and Levine (2015) a recent discussion. One main finding is displayed in the left panel of Figure 6. Countries
with deeper credit markets in 1960 (measured as credit outstanding over GDP) have grown faster between 1960
and 1995.

6

6

Figure 6: Credit and Growth, All vs OECD Countries

MLT
CYP
MYS

PRT

MUS

GBR
HTI

−4

BOL

VEN

JPN

ZWE

ZAR

−2

−1
0
Residual Log Private Credit in 1960

AUT

BEL
GBR

JPN
NOR
ISL
CANFIN
DEU
IRL ITA DNK USA
FRA
AUS
SWE
NLD
CHE
ESP PRT
GRC
NZL

−4

NPL
TTO BEL

SYR
PAK
BRA
ESP
ITA
GRC NOR
ISL
DOM MEX FRA
LKA
ECU
COL
IRL
KEN
PRYNLD IND
ISR GTM PAN FIN
CRI
DEU
CAN
CHL HNDSWE
CHE
JAM
URY
PHL
USA
ARG SLE
AUS
PER DNK
SLV
GHA
NZL GUY
AUT

Residual Growth 1960−1995
−2
0
2
4

Residual Growth 1960−1995
−2
0
2
4

TWN

−2

1

−1
0
Residual Log Private Credit in 1960

1

Notes: Dataset “Financial_Intermediation_and_Growth_dataset” available on Ross Levine’s website. See Beck et al. (2011)

It is also important to emphasize that the link between finance and (long term) growth is not a mechanical
consequence of credit expansion. As Levine (2005) emphasizes, the primary driver of the finance–growth nexus is
the allocation of capital. Better financial systems provide a better allocation of capital, not necessarily more overall
credit. This is consistent with the findings in Favara (2009) and Cecchetti and Kharroubi (2012) who argue that

8

the relation between credit and growth is not monotonic.7 One way to quickly see this is to take the same data,
but focus only on OECD countries. Among OECD countries the link between credit and growth is not significant,
as can be see in the right panel of Figure 6.

1.5

Summary

Finance is important for growth, in particular for the allocation of capital, but much of the recent growth of the
finance industry has little to do with eﬃcient capital allocation. Financial services remain expensive and financial
innovations have not delivered significant benefits to consumers. The point is not that finance does not innovate. It
does. But these innovations have not improved the overall eﬃciency of the system. This is not a great theoretical
puzzle: we know that innovations can be motivated by rent seeking and business stealing, in which case the private
and social returns to innovation are fundamentally diﬀerent. The race for speed is an obvious example: there is a
large diﬀerence between foreknowledge and discovery in terms of social welfare, even though the two activities can
generate the same private returns (Hirshleifer, 1971). This tension between private and social returns exists in most
industries, but economists tend to think that entry and competition limit the severity of the resulting ineﬃciencies.
Lack of entry and competition, however, has been an endemic problem in finance in recent decades. Berger et al.
(1999) review the evidence on consolidation during the 1990s. The number of US banks and banking organizations
fell by almost 30% between 1988 and 1997, and the share of total nationwide assets held by the largest eight
banking organizations rose from 22.3% to 35.5%. Several hundred M&As occurred each year, including megamergers between institutions with assets over $1 billion.8 The main motivations for consolidation were market
power and diversification. Berger et al. (1999) do not find much evidence of cost eﬃciency improvement, which is
consistent with Figure 2 and 3. DeYoung et al. (2009) show that consolidation continued during the 2000s. They
argue that there is growing evidence that consolidation is partly motivated by the desire to obtain TBTF status,
and that M&As have a negative impact certain types of borrowers, depositors, and other external stakeholders.
It is also important to keep in mind that the welfare implications are significant. Figure 7 plots the welfare
of agents in the economy as a function of the unit cost of intermediation. Welfare is measured in equivalent
consumption units and normalized to one in the benchmark case of a unit cost of 2%. Agents in the economy would
be willing to pay 8.7% of consumption to bring the unit cost of intermediation down to 1%.
7 It is also related to the issue of credit booms. Schularick and Taylor (2012) document the risk involved in rapid credit expansions.
This is not to say that all credit booms are bad. Dell’Ariccia et al. (2016) find only 1/3 of credit booms end in a financial crisis, while
many booms are associated with financial reform and economic growth.
8 Banking M&As were part of a large wave. “Nine of the ten largest M&As in US history in any industry occurred during 1998,
and four of these – Citicorp-Travelers, BankAmerica-NationsBank, Banc One-First Chicago and Norwest-Wells Fargo – occurred in
banking.” (Moore and Siems, 1998)

9

Figure 7: Welfare and The Unit Cost of Intermediation
Welfare

1.1

1.08

Consumption Equivalent

1.06

1.04

1.02

1

0.98

0.96

0.94
0.01

0.012

0.014

0.016

0.018

0.02

0.022

0.024

0.026

0.028

0.03

Unit Cost of Intermediation

If one steps back, it is diﬃcult not to see finance as an industry with excessive rents and poor overall eﬃciency.
The puzzle is why this has persisted for so long. There are several plausible explanations for this: zero-sum games
in trading activities, ineﬃcient regulations, barriers to entry, increasing returns to size, etc.9 I will not attempt
to disentangle all these explanations. The important point for my argument is simpler: there is (much) room for
improvement. In the next section, I will argue that the current regulatory approach is unlikely to bring these
improvements.

2

A Perspective on Current Regulations

I will not provide a comprehensive overview of recent financial regulations since the major regulatory bodies publish
annual reports that summarize ongoing regulations. The goal of this section is instead to make the case that the
focus on incumbents inherent in current regulations increases political economy and coordination costs.

2.1

Recent Achievements

The logic of the current regulatory eﬀort is well summarized in Ingves (2015). Regulators have drawn the lessons
from the 2008 disaster and tried to fix the existing system. For instance, before the crisis, banking regulation was
mostly based on RWA ratios that were set quite low. Today’s regulation is actually quite diﬀerent:
9 Greenwood and Scharfstein (2013) provide an illuminating study of the growth of modern finance in the U.S. They show that two
activities account for most of this growth over the past 30 years: asset management and the provision of household credit. For asset
management, they uncover an important stylized fact: individual fees have typically declined but the allocation of assets has shifted
towards high fee managers in such a way that the average fee per dollar of assets under management has remained roughly constant.
In Glode et al. (2010), an “arms’ race” can occur as agents try to protect themselves from opportunistic behavior by (over)-investing in
financial expertise. In Bolton et al. (2011), cream skimming in one market lowers assets quality in the other market and allows financial
firms to extract excessive rents. In Pagnotta and Philippon (2011) there can be excessive investment in trading speed because speed
allows trading venues to diﬀerentiate and charge higher prices. Gennaioli et al. (2014) propose an alternative interpretation for the
relatively high cost of financial intermediation. In their model, trusted intermediaries increase the risk tolerance of investors, allowing
them to earn higher returns. Because trust is a scarce resource, improvements in information technology do not necessarily lead to a
lower unit cost.

10

• RWA ratios are significantly higher;
• there are multiple metrics, including simple leverage, liquidity ratios, and counter-cyclical buﬀers;
• there are surcharges for SIFIs, and systemic risk regulation extends beyond banking;
• regulators run rigorous stress tests and banks are required to write living wills.
These regulations are a work in progress, and the path has not always been straightforward. For example, European
stress tests were poorly designed in 2009, and became credible only in 2014. The new regulations are costly and
sometimes complex, and policy makers are likely to consolidate some of them and streamline the reporting process.
But, by and large, these regulations are here to stay, and some of the complexity is by design. As Ingves (2015)
argues, multiple metrics make it harder for banks to game the system. Using several measures of risk is also useful
because diﬀerent measures have diﬀerent advantages and drawbacks. For instance, RWA is better than simple
leverage if we think about arbitrage across asset classes at a point in time. On the other hand, simple leverage is
more counter-cyclical, as shown by Brei and Gambacorta (2016).
The regulatory tightening, although not as ambitious as after the Great Depression, has achieved several important goals. Capital requirements have increased without adverse eﬀects on funding costs (Cecchetti and Schoenholtz,
2014). For instance, EBA (2015) reports that the CET1 ratio of EU banks increased by 1.7% between December
2013 and June 2015, with a 1.9% increase in capital and about 0.1% increase in RWA. The banking industry has
become less risky, at least in developed economies (see for instance the real time value of the Systemic Risk Measure
of Acharya et al. (2009) at http://vlab.stern.nyu.edu). Some important goals, however, remain elusive.

2.2

The Leverage Controversy

The most important regulatory debate following the 2007/2009 crisis revolves around the appropriate level of capital
requirement for banks. An influential paper by Admati et al. (2013) argues for high capital ratios and debunked
several misleading claims about the supposed cost of such requirements. In the end, capital ratios have been raised
significantly, but not to the extent advocated by these authors. The bank leverage debate illustrates an important
pitfall of the current approach to financial regulation. Almost everyone agrees that bank leverage was too high
before the crisis, but agreeing on a new target capital ratio is more diﬃcult. Countries have conflicting objectives,
lobbies are powerful, and, perhaps most importantly, we do not know what the ‘right’ ratio is because there are
several tradeoﬀs to consider. If the world had only commercial banks and one global regulator, we would be able to
estimate an optimal capital ratio, and it would probably be rather high, for the reasons explained in Admati and
Hellwig (2013). But this is not our world. Regulators do not always cooperate, jurisdictions compete and undermine
each other, and we worry about pushing activities away from the regulated banking sector. Regulatory arbitrage is
omnipresent and regulators are highly uncertain about when and how it could happen. Finding the second-best (or
third-best) optimal ratio becomes a daunting task. The information and coordination requirements of the current
11

regulatory approach are prohibitive. I will argue in the last section of the paper that another approach might be
feasible.
Leverage is Diﬃcult to Measure. Regulating leverage is also particularly diﬃcult because there are many
ways for banks to take risks without increasing their “measured” leverage. One example is the use of derivatives.
Figure 8, from Cecchetti and Schoenholtz (2016), shows the impact of netting on the size of balances sheets under
two accounting standards. GAAP allows more netting than IFRS. As a result, the equity equity-to-assets ratio
appears larger under GAAP than under IFRS. The diﬀerence between the two measures is large for banks that are
active in derivatives. This has a material impact on financial regulation, but it is diﬃcult to figure out the true
riskiness of these positions.

Figure 8: Leverage and Derivatives

Notes: Vertical axis is E/AGAAP − E/AIF RS . Source:

Cecchetti and Schoenholtz (2016), http://www.moneyandbanking.com

Banks Want to Be Large and Opaque. Banks may want to be large for many reasons. A legitimate reason
is to achieve better cost eﬃciency, as documented in Kovner et al. (2014) and presented in Figure 9. Other reasons
involve market power, political influence and implicit guarantees. Consistent with the TBTF idea, Santos (2014)
finds that the funding advantage enjoyed by the largest banks is significantly larger than that of the largest nonbanks and non-financial corporations. As banks grow, they take on more leverage and they become more opaque.
Cetorelli et al. (2014) consider the implications of increasing complexity for supervision and resolution. Finally,
implicit guarantees are not only a function of a bank’s individual size. Kelly et al. (2016) find evidence of collective
government guarantees for the financial sector.

12

Figure 9: Cost Eﬃciency and Size

Notes:
Eﬃciency
Ratio
is
non-interest
expense
over
(net
interest
http://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/ based on Kovner et al. (2014).

2.3

income

+

non-interest

income).

Source:

G-SIFIs versus Narrow Banks

A formidable challenge in financial regulation is to provide credible resolution mechanisms for G-SIFIs. There are
two fundamental diﬃculties. One diﬃculty comes from the sheer size and complexity of these organizations and the
impossibility to forecast what would happen during a crisis. The other issue is that there is little scope for learning
and testing various mechanisms because G-SIFIs do not usually fail for idiosyncratic reasons. Living wills, TLAC
requirements, are necessary, but in all likelihood they will not be properly battle-tested before a crisis actually
happens.
This issue, among others, has led several observers to argue for some form of narrow banking. As Pennacchi
(2012) explains, a narrow bank is a financial firm that “issues demandable liabilities and invests in assets with little
or no nominal risk”. Depending on how restrictive one’s definition is, narrow banking can range from money market
funds investing exclusively in Treasury Bills to Commercial Banks that are restricted to back all their deposits
with money market instruments but can hold many other assets.10 Pennacchi (2012) notes that “recommendations
for narrow banking appear most frequently following major financial crises”. The crisis of 2008 is no exception.
Chamley et al. (2012) explain how “limited-purpose banking could work, and Cochrane (2014) propose reforms to
make the financial system “run-proof”.
These are certainly powerful arguments in favor of narrow banking, but there are also several issues. The
10 Narrow banking has deep historical roots. The evidence suggests that, prior to the 20th century, British and American banks lent
mostly short term. Early american banks did not oﬀer long term loans. According to Bodenhorn (2000), banks made short-term loans
that early manufacturing firms used to finance inventories and pay rents and wages. According to Summers (1975), “the practice of
guaranteeing future credit availability has existed since the beginning of banking in the United States”, but “it has only been since the
mid-1960’s that the topic of commercial bank loan commitment policies has become an explicit issue in banking circles.”

13

theoretical case is not as clear-cut as some proponents argue. Wallace (1996) shows that narrow banking negates
liquidity risk sharing, in the sense that, in a Diamond and Dybvig (1983) setup, any allocation under narrow
banking can be achieved under autarky. Another critique of the narrow banking proposal is that the joint provision
of demand deposits and loan commitments allows banks to diversify the use of liquidity (Kashyap et al., 2002).
Pennacchi (2012), however, argues that this synergy might in fact be a consequence of FDIC- provided insurance.
Another major issue is that narrow banking would require powerful regulators to implement a radical transformation of existing firms, and would create incentives to move maturity transformation outside the regulated system.
Of course, the fact that an idea would be diﬃcult to implement should not prevent us from studying its merits. As
Zingales (2015) argues, “when we engage in policy work we try to be relevant”, and this can be a problem because
it is easy to discredit good ideas by labelling them politically unrealistic. It is, however, a reason to think about
diﬀerent ways to reach the same goal, as I argue below.

2.4

Why a New Strategy is Needed

There is an apparent contradiction between a fairly shared diagnostic of some issues and significant disagreements
about how to address them. Essentially everyone agrees that leverage (especially short term leverage), opacity
and complexity were significant contributors to the financial crisis of 2007/2009. It seems also clear that many
large financial firms enjoy TBTF subsidies and oligopolistic rents. Yet, as I have argued earlier, our tools and our
understanding of how to use them are limited. In other words, the problem is not so much that we do not know
where we would like to go, the problem is that we do not know which path to follow.
Two reasons explain these diﬃculties. The first is the complexity and depth of the distortions embedded in
the current system: the tax treatment of interest expenses, too-big-to-fail subsidies, oligopoly rents, and much of
the plumbing of the global financial system. These distortions are protected by powerful incumbents who benefit
directly and indirectly from them, as argued in Rajan and Zingales (2003) and Admati and Hellwig (2013). The
bottom line is that transforming incumbent financial firms into safe and eﬃcient providers of financial services is
an uphill battle. At best, it will be long and costly. At worst, it will simply not happen.
The second reason is that it is genuinely diﬃcult to design good regulations. When we think about systemic
risk, for instance, there is always a tension between regulating by entity and regulating by function. Regulating by
function is intellectually appealing, but it is technically challenging and requires cooperation among many parties.
On the other hand, regulating by entity is simpler but designating non-bank SIFIs creates legal challenges, as seen
recently in the case of MetLife. Tightening regulations is not only diﬃcult, it can also be counter-productive.
The most obvious risk is that of shifting activities outside the regulated banking system. Another risk is to make
compliance costs prohibitive for would-be entrants. Finally, and most importantly, no one knows how a safe and
eﬃcient financial system should look like. All we know is that the current one is expensive, risky, and dominated
by too-big-to-fail companies. Many proposals for wide-ranging structural change would require unrealistic amounts

14

of foresight by regulators.
The current regulatory approach, then, has reached its limits because of political economy and coordination
costs. If we could design the rules from scratch, we would write them quite diﬀerently from what they are today.
We do not have this luxury for the legacy systems, but we could do it for the new ones. My point is that it is a
lot easier to create and maintain a simple and transparent system, than it is to transform a complex and opaque
system into a simple and transparent one.

3

The FinTech Opportunity

The previous section has argued that the current approach to financial regulation is to impose changes on existing
firms. This section asks if the same regulatory goals can be achieved via a diﬀerent approach, focused on new
financial firms and systems. This alternative approach creates new challenges but I argue that it is likely to benefit
from the FinTech movement. This section is therefore not a survey of current trends in FinTech. Instead, I highlight
instances where there is a tension between private incentives to innovate and broad regulatory objectives.

3.1

Some Specific Features of FinTech

The FinTech movement shares some features with all other movements of disruptive innovations, but it also has
some features that are specific to the finance industry.
Like in other industries, FinTech startups propose disruptive innovations for the provision of specific services.
The key advantage of incumbents is their customer base, their ability to forecast the evolution of the industry, and
their knowledge of existing regulations. The key advantage of startups is that they are not held back by existing
systems and are willing to make risky choices. In banking, for instance, successive mergers have left many large
banks with layers of legacy technologies that are at best partly integrated, as discussed in Kumar (2016). FinTech
startups, on the other hand, have the chance to build the right systems from the start. Moreover they share a
culture of eﬃcient operational design that many incumbents do not have.
A feature that is more specific to the finance industry is the degree to which incumbents rely on leverage. As
argued earlier, leverage is embedded in many financial contracts and subsidized by several current regulations. This
gives the illusion that leverage is everywhere needed to operate an eﬃcient financial system. Conceptually, one can
think of leverage today as partly a feature and partly a bug. It is a feature, for instance, when it is needed to provide
incentives, as in Diamond and Rajan (2001). It is a bug when it comes from bad design or regulatory arbitrage (as
in fixed face value money market funds), or when it corresponds to an old feature that could be replaced by better
technology (as in some payment systems discussed below). The issue, of course, is that it is diﬃcult to distinguish
the leverage-bug from the leverage-feature. FinTech startups can therefore help for two reasons. First, they will
show how far technology can go in providing low-leverage solutions. Second, they are themselves funded with much

15

more equity than existing firms.

3.2

An Alternative Approach to Financial Regulation

Financial stability and access to financial services are often stated as two important goals of financial regulation.
This section asks if an alternative approach to regulation can make progress towards these goals, specifically in
the context of the FinTech movement. FinTech innovations are happening and are likely to have an impact in
many areas of finance, as discussed by Yermack (2015) in the case of corporate governance. There is no reason to
think, however, that these innovations will automatically enhance stability or even access of services. If regulators
want FinTech to reduce the risks created by TBTF firms and high leverage, for instance, they need to adapt the
regulatory framework. This section discusses the challenges they are likely to face.
Challenge 1: Entry and level-playing-field FinTech oﬀers an opportunity but its interests are not naturally
aligned with regulators’ long term goals. FinTech firms will enter where they think they can make a profit, but
there are many regions of the financial system where incumbents are entrenched and entry is diﬃcult. An example
of a highly concentrated market is custody and securities settlement. In theory, the blockchain technology could
improve the eﬃciency of the market, but if there is no entry, this could simply increase the rents of incumbents.
A restricted blockchain could in fact be used by incumbents to deter entry and stifle innovation. As successful
firms grow large, they seek to alter the political system to their advantage and increase the cost of entry. The
beneficiaries of an open, competitive system often work to close the system and stifle competition, as argued in
Rajan and Zingales (2003)
This highlights the complex issue of biases in the competition between entrants and incumbents. Ensuring a
level playing field is a traditional goal of regulation. Darolles (2016) discusses this idea in the context of FinTech
and argues, from a microeconomic perspective, that regulators should indeed ensure a level playing field. This
line of argument, however, does not readily apply to many of the distortions that plague the finance industry. For
instance, what does a level playing field mean when incumbents are too-big-to-fail? Or when they rely excessively
on short term leverage? The level playing field argument applies when entrants are supposed to do the same things
as incumbents, only better and/or cheaper. But if the goal is to change some structural features of the industry,
then a strict application of the level-playing-field principle could be a hindrance.
The level-playing-field argument also sheds new light on some old debates, such as capital requirements. Over
the years incumbents have optimized their use of implicit and explicit public subsidies and barriers to entry, and it is
costly to undo these distortions one by one.11 Regulators can, however, prevent an erosion of the standards agreed
upon after the crisis, and given the various subsidies and advantages of debt, one can see capital requirements as
a way to reduce barriers to entry and foster a level-playing-field. The substantial increase in bank capital that
11 In addition, as Baker and Wurgler (2015) argue, leverage can be rewarded by institutional investors who would like to lever up, but
are precluded by charter or regulation.

16

has occurred since the crisis does not appear to have shifted activity from banks to shadow banks, as argued by
Cecchetti and Schoenholtz (2014).

Challenge 2: Leverage and history-dependence Payment systems have been an early target of FinTech
firms. Rysman and Schuh (2016) review the literature on consumer payments and discuss three recent innovations:
mobile payments, real-time payments, and digital currencies. Mobile payments are already popular in Asia and
parts of Africa and faster systems are often encouraged by central banks. These innovations are likely to improve
retail transactions, but they are unlikely to fundamentally change the payment system. In particular, they are
unlikely to decrease its reliance on short term, runnable claims.
We are used to thinking that many financial services (payment among others) require accounts with fixed
nominal values. The best examples are retail deposits and checking accounts. This has been true for over 300 years
of banking history. But today’s technologies open new possibilities. We can assess the value of many financial
assets in real time, and we can settle payments (almost) instantly. Many transactions could therefore be cleared
using floating value accounts.12 Suppose buyer B and seller S agree on a price p in units of currency. B and S can
both verify with their smartphones the value v of a financial security (say a bond index fund). B can transfer p/v
units of the security to S to settle the transaction. S does not need to keep the proceeds in the bond fund. S could
immediately turn them into currency or shares of a treasury bill fund. The point here is that new systems would
not need to rely on (fixed nominal value) deposits like the old system did. Deposit-like contracts create liquidity
risk and macro-financial stability would be enhanced if more transactions could be settled without them. This
was not technologically feasible a few years ago, but today it is. As Cochrane (2014) argues, however, there are
non-technological impediments, most notably with accounting and taxes, since these transactions would generate
capital gains. If regulators want to decrease the systemic reliance on short term leverage, they will need to identify
issues that often lay beyond their traditional regulatory horizon.
The other important point here is history dependence. Regulations are likely to be more eﬀective if they
are put in place early, when the industry is young. A counter-factual history of the money market mutual fund
industry can be used to motivate this idea. Suppose that regulators had decided in the 1970s that, as a matter of
principle, all mutual funds should use a floating NAV. Such regulation would have been relatively straightforward
to implement when the industry was small, and it would have guided its evolution and encouraged innovations
consistent with the basic principle. It is significantly more diﬃcult today when the industry has several trillion of
dollars under management. A challenge for regulators is then to be forward-looking when dealing with FinTech.
Eﬀective regulation requires them to identify some basic features they would like FinTech to have in thirty years,
and mandate them now.
12 This possibility was recognized by Samuelson (1947) “in a world involving no transaction friction and no uncertainty ... securities
themselves would circulate as money and be acceptable in transactions. . . ” (page 123), and discussed in Tobin (1958). I thank Kim
Schoenholtz for these references.

17

Challenge 3: Consumer Protection FinTech is likely to create new issues of consumer protection. An example
is robo-advisors for portfolio management. An important issue for the industry is when and how investors will “trust”
robots, as discussed by Dhar (2016). Robo-advising will certainly create new legal and operational issues, and is
likely to be a headache for consumer protection agencies.
But if the goal is to protect consumers, robo-advising does not need to be perfect. It only needs to be better
than the current system. And it is important to keep in mind just how bad the track record of human advisors really
is. First, at an aggregate level, fees have not declined because, as standard product became cheaper, customers
were pushed into higher fee products (Greenwood and Scharfstein, 2013). Second, the conflicts of interest are
pervasive in the industry. Bergstresser et al. (2009) find that broker-sold mutual funds deliver lower risk-adjusted
returns, even before subtracting distribution costs. Chalmers and Reuter (2012) find that broker client portfolios
earn significantly lower risk-adjusted returns than matched portfolios based on target-date funds but oﬀer similar
levels of risk. Broker clients allocate more dollars to higher fee funds and participants tend to perform better when
they do not have access to brokers.Mullainathan et al. (2012) document that advisers fail to de-bias their clients
and often reinforce biases that are in their interests. Advisers encourage returns-chasing behavior and push for
actively managed funds that have higher fees, even if the client starts with a well-diversified, low-fee portfolio. Foà
et al. (2015) find that banks are able to aﬀect customers’ mortgage choices not only by pricing but also through
an advice channel. Egan et al. (2016) show that misconduct is concentrated in firms with retail customers and in
counties with low education, elderly populations, and high incomes. They also document that the labor market
penalties for misconduct are small.
So robo-advisors will have issues, but there is so much room for improvement that it should be easy for them to
do better, on average, than human-advisors. One can also make the case that a software is easier to monitor than
a human being. For instance, if the robo-advisor contains a line of code that says: “if age>70 & education<High
School, then propose fund X”, and X happens to be a high-fee actively managed fund, then the meaning of the advice
is clear. Any equivalent advice a human advisor could give would certainly be much more ambiguous. Humans are
good at maintaining plausible deniability, and in the case of financial advising, that is a serious problem.

If the goal of financial regulation is to foster stability and access to services, then regulators should consider
policies that promote low-leverage technologies and the entry of new firms. This alternative approach can complement the current, incumbent-focused approach. It does not require regulators to forecast which technology will
succeed or which services should be unbundled (i.e., what the “finance-Uber” or “finance-Airbnb” could look like).
It also does not require regulators to force top-down structural changes onto powerful incumbents.

18

Appendix
A

A Simple Model of Financial Intermediation Accounting

In this Appendix I sketch a model, based on Philippon (2015), that can be used for financial intermediation accounting. The model economy consists of households, a non-financial business sector, and a financial intermediation
sector. Long term growth is driven by labor-augmenting technological progress At = (1 + γ) At−1 . In the benchmark model borrowers are homogenous, which allows a simple characterization of equilibrium intermediation.13
I consider a setup with two types of households: some households are infinitely lived, the others belong to an
overlapping generations structure.14 Households in the model do not lend directly to one another. They lend to
intermediaries, and intermediaries lend to firms and to other households.

A.1

Technology and Preferences

Long-Lived Households
Long-lived households (index l) are pure savers. They own the capital stock and have no labor endowment. Liquidity
services are modeled as money in the utility function. The households choose consumption C and holdings of liquid
assets M to maximize
#
β t u (Ct , Mt ) .
E
t≥0

(C M ν )1−ρ −1

t
. As argued by Lucas (2000), these homothetic preferences
I specify the utility function as u (Ct , Mt ) = t 1−ρ
are consistent with the absence of trend in the ratio of real balances to income in U.S. data, and the constant
relative risk aversion form is consistent with balanced growth. Let r be the interest rate received by savers. The
budget constraint becomes
St + Ct + ψm,t Mt ≤ (1 + rt ) St−1 ,

where ψm is the price of liquidity services, and S are total savings. The Euler equation of long lived households
uC (t) = βEt [(1 + rt+1 ) uC (t + 1)] can then be written as
ν(1−ρ)

Ml,t

$
%
ν(1−ρ) −ρ
−ρ
.
Cl,t
= βEt (1 + rt+1 ) Ml,t+1 Cl,t+1

The liquidity demand equation uM (t) = ψm,t uC (t) is simply
ψm,t Ml,t = νCl,t .

Overlapping Generations
The other households live for two periods and are part of on overlapping generation structure. The young (index
1) have a labor endowment η1 and the old (index 2) have a labor endowment η2 . We normalize the labor supply to
one: η1 +η2 = 1. The life-time utility of a young household is u (C1,t , M1,t )+βu (C2,t+1 , M2,t+1 ) . I consider the case
where they want to borrow when they are young (i.e., η1 is small enough). In the first period, its budget constraint
is C1,t + ψm,t M1,t = η1 W1,t + (1 − ψc,t ) Btc . The screening and monitoring cost is ψc,t per unit of borrowing. In the
second period, the household consumes C2,t+1 + ψm,t+1 M2,t+1 = η2 Wt+1 − (1 + rt+1 ) Btc . The Euler equation for
OLG households is
$
%
ν(1−ρ) −ρ
ν(1−ρ) −ρ
.
C1,t = βEt (1 + rt+1 ) M2,t+1 C2,t+1
(1 − ψc,t ) M1,t
Their liquidity demand is identical to the one of long-lived households.
13 Heterogeneity

and quality adjustments are discussed in Philippon (2015).
pure infinite horizon model and the pure OLG model are both inadequate. The infinite horizon model misses the importance
of life-cycle borrowing and lending. The OLG model ignores bequests, and in the simple two-periods version households do not actually
borrow: the young ones save, and the old ones eat their savings. The simplest way to capture all these relevant features is the mixed
model. The standard interpretation is that long-lived households have bequest motives, and are therefore equivalent to infinitely lived
agents.
14 The

19

Non Financial Businesses
Non-financial output is produced under constant returns technology, and for simplicity I assume that the production
function is Cobb-Douglass:15
α
F (At nt , Kt ) = (At nt ) Kt1−α .
The capital stock Kt depreciates at rate δ, is owned by the households, and must be intermediated. Let ψk,t be
the unit price of corporate financial intermediation. Non financial firms therefore solve the following program:
maxn,K F (At n, K) − (rt + δ + ψk,t ) K − Wt n. Capital demand equates the marginal product of capital to its user
cost:
'α
&
At nt
,
= rt + δ + ψk,t .
(4)
(1 − α)
Kt
Similarly, labor demand equates the marginal product of labor to the real wage:

α

&

At nt
,
Kt

'α−1

=

Wt
.
At

(5)

Financial Intermediation
Philippon (2012) discusses in details the implications of various production functions for financial services. When
financial intermediaries explicitly hire capital and labor there is a feed-back from intermediation demand onto the
real wage. This issue is not central here, and I therefore assume that financial services are produced from final
goods with constant marginal costs. The income of financial intermediaries is then
Ytf = ψc,t Bc,t + ψm,t Mt + ψk,t Kt
where Bc,t , Mt and Kt have been described above.

A.2

Equilibrium Comparative Statics

An equilibrium in this economy is a sequence for the various prices and quantities listed above such that households
choose optimal levels of credit and liquidity, financial and non financial firms maximize profits, and the labor and
capital markets clear. This implies nt = 1 and
St = Kt+1 + Btc .
Let us now characterize an equilibrium with constant productivity growth in the non-financial sector (γ) and
constant eﬃciency of intermediation (ψ). On the balanced
growth path, M grows) at the same rate as C. The Euler
(
"ν(1−ρ)−ρ
!
, so the equilibrium interest rate
equation for long-lived households becomes 1 = βEt (1 + rt+1 ) CCt+1
t
is simply pinned down by

θ

β (1 + r) = (1 + γ) .

(6)

where θ ≡ ρ − ν (1 − ρ) . Let lower-case letters denote de-trended variables, i.e. variables scaled by the current level
Ci,t
t
of technology: for capital k ≡ K
At , for consumption of agent i ci ≡ At , and for the productivity adjusted wage
w ≡ Wt /At . Since n = 1 in equilibrium, equation (4) becomes
kα =

1−α
.
r + δ + ψk

15 Philippon (2012) discusses the consequences of assuming a diﬀerent production function for the industrial sector. The key parameter
is the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor, which is 1 under Cobb-Douglass technology. Qualitatively diﬀerent results only
happen for elasticity values above 6, which is far above the range of empirical estimates. Thus assuming a Cobb-Douglass technology
does not entail much loss of generality.

20

Non financial GDP is y = k 1−α , and the real wage is
w = αk 1−α = αy.
Given the interest rate in (6), the Euler equation of short lived households is simply
1

c1 = (1 − ψc ) θ c2 .

(7)

If ψc is 0, we have perfect consumption smoothing: c1 = c2 (remember these are de-trended consumptions). In
addition, all agents have the same money demand ψm mi = νci . The budget constraints are therefore (1 + ν) c1 =
1+r
η1 w + (1 − ψc ) b and (1 + ν) c2 = η2 w − 1+γ
b. We can then use the Euler equations and budget constraints to
compute the borrowing of young households
1

(1 − ψc ) θ η2 − η1
bc
=
.
1
1+r
w
1 − ψc + (1 − ψc ) θ 1+γ

(8)

Borrowing costs act as a tax on future labor income. If ψc is too high, no borrowing takes place and the consumer
credit market collapses. Household borrowing increases with the diﬀerence between current and future income,
captured by η2 − η1 . Liquidity demand is
νc
m=
.
ψm
and aggregate consumption is
c=

1
(w − ψc bc + (r − γ) k) .
1+ν

(9)

The comparative statics are straightforward. The ratios are constant along a balanced growth path with constant
intermediation technology, constant demographics, and constant firms’ characteristics. Improvements in corporate
finance increase y, w, k/y, c/y and m/y, but leave bc /y constant. Improvements in household finance increase bc /y,
c/y and m/y, but do not aﬀect k. Increases in the demand for intermediation increase the finance income share φ
while supply shifts have an ambiguous impact.
ν 1−ρ
)
and since m = ψνcm , we have
The utility flow at time t is u (c, m) = (cm1−ρ

u (c, m) =

!

ν
ψm

"ν(1−ρ)

c(1+ν)(1−ρ) − 1

1−ρ

Imagine A = 1 for simplicity. Then welfare for a particular generation is

W

ω
u (cl , ml )
1−β
*
+
c1−θ
1
1−θ
1−θ
l
c1 + βc2 + ω
−
1−β
1−ρ

=

u (c1 , m1 ) + βu (c2 , m2 ) +

=

!

ν
ψm

"ν(1−ρ)

1−ρ

where ω is the Pareto weight on the long lived agents.

21

References
Acharya, V. V., L. H. Pedersen, T. Philippon, and M. Richardson (2009). Measuring systemic risk. Working Paper
NYU.
Admati, A. R., P. M. DeMarzo, M. Hellwig, and P. Pfleiderer (2013). Fallacies, irrelevant facts, and myths in the
discussion of capital regulation: Why bank equity is not socially expensive. Working Paper Stanford University.
Admati, A. R. and M. Hellwig (2013). The Bankers’ New Clothes. Princeton University Press.
Baker, M. and J. Wurgler (2015). Do strict capital requirements raise the cost of capital? bank regulation, capital
structure, and the low risk anomaly. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings.
Bazot, G. (2013). Financial consumption and the cost of finance: Measuring financial eﬃciency in europe (19502007). Working Paper Paris School of Economics.
Beck, T., A. Demirguc-Kunt, and R. Levine (2011). Financial Structure and Economic Growth: A Cross-Country
Comparison of Banks Markets, and Development, Chapter The Financial Structure Database, pp. 17–80. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Berger, A., R. Demsetz, and P. E. Strahan (1999). The consolidation of the financial services industry: Causes,
consequences, and implications for the future. Journal of Banking and Finance 23, 135–194.
Bergstresser, D., J. Chalmers, and P. Tufano (2009). Assessing the costs and benefits of brokers in the mutual fund
industry. The Review of Financial Studies 22 (10), 4129–4156.
Bickenbach, F., E. Bode, D. Dohse, A. Hanley, and R. Schweickert (2009, October). Adjustment after the crisis:
Will the financial sector shrink? Kiel Policy Brief.
Bodenhorn, H. (2000). A History of Banking in Antebellum America: Financial Markets and Economic Development
in an Era of Nation Building. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Bolton, P., T. Santos, and J. Scheinkman (2011). Cream skimming in financial markets. Working Paper, Columbia
University.
Brei, M. and L. Gambacorta (2016). Are bank capital ratios pro-cyclical? new evidence and perspectives. Economic
Policy 31 (86), 357–403.
Cecchetti, S. (2014, November). The jury is in.
Cecchetti, S. and E. Kharroubi (2012). Reassessing the impact of finance on growth. BIS WP 381.
Cecchetti, S. and K. Schoenholtz (2014, December).
http://www.moneyandbanking.com.

Higher capital requirements didn’t slow the economy.

Cecchetti, S. and K. Schoenholtz (2016, May). Leverage and risk. http://www.moneyandbanking.com.
Cetorelli, N., J. McAndrews, and J. Traina (2014, December). Evolution in bank complexity. FRBNY Economic
Policy Review .
Chalmers, J. and J. Reuter (2012). Is conflicted investment advice better than no advice?
Chamley, C., L. J. Kotlikoﬀ, and H. Polemarchakis (2012, May). Limited-purpose banking–moving from "trust me"
to "show me" banking. American Economic Review 102 (3), 113–19.
Cochrane, J. H. (2014). Toward a run-free financial system. In M. N. Baily and J. B. Taylor (Eds.), Across the
Great Divide: New Perspectives on the Financial Crisis. Hoover Press.
Darolles, S. (2016, April). The rise of fintechs and their regulation. Financial Stability Review (20).
Dell’Ariccia, G., D. Igan, L. Laeven, and H. Tong (2016). Credit booms and macrofinancial stability. Economic
Policy 31 (86), 299–355.
DeYoung, R., D. Evanoﬀ, and P. Molyneux (2009). Mergers and acquisitions of financial institutions: A review of
the post-2000 literature. Journal of Financial Services Research 36, 87–110.
Dhar, V. (2016). When to trust robots with decisions, and when not to. Harvard Business Review .
Diamond, D. W. and P. H. Dybvig (1983). Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity. Journal of Political
Economy 91, 401–419.
Diamond, D. W. and R. G. Rajan (2001). Liquidity risk, liquidity creation and financial fragility: A theory of
banking. Journal of Political Economy 109, 287–327.
22

Drechsler, I., P. Schnabl, and A. Savov (2014). The deposits channel of monetary policy the deposits channel of
monetary policy. NYU.
EBA (2015, November). 2015 eu-wide transparency exercise. Technical report, European Banking Authority.
Egan, M., G. Matvos, and A. Seru (2016). The market for financial adviser misconduct. NBER WP.
Favara, G. (2009). An empirical reassessment of the relationship between finance and growth.
Foà, G., L. Gambacorta, L. Guiso, and P. E. Mistrulli (2015). The supply side of household finance. BIS Working
Papers 531.
Gennaioli, N., A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny (2014). Money doctors. Journal of Finance.
Glode, V., R. C. Green, and R. Lowery (2010). Financial expertise as an arms race. forthcoming in Journal of
Finance.
Greenwood, R. and D. Scharfstein (2013). The growth of modern finance. Journal of Economic Perspectives 27 (2),
3–28.
Hirshleifer, J. (1971). The private and social value of information and the reward to inventive activity. The American
Economic Review 61 (4), pp. 561–574.
Ingves, S. (2015, October). Update on the work of the basel committee. Speech at the IIF Annual Meeting.
Kashyap, A., R. Rajan, and J. Stein (2002). Banks as liquidity providers: An explanation for the coexistence of
lending and deposit-taking. Journal of Finance 57, 33–73.
Kelly, B., H. Lustig, and S. V. Nieuwerburgh (2016). Too-systemic-to-fail: What option markets imply about
sector-wide government guarantees. American Economic Review .
Kovner, A., J. Vickery, and L. Zhou (2014, December). Do big banks have lower operating costs? FRBNY Economic
Policy Review .
Kumar, S. (2016). Relaunching innovation: Lessons from silion valley. Banking Perspective 4 (1), 19–23.
Levine, R. (2005). Finance and growth: Theory and evidence. In P. Aghion and S. N. Durlauf (Eds.), Handbook of
Economic Growth, Volume 1A, pp. 865–934. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Levine, R. (2015). In defense of wall street: The social productivity of the financial system. WP Berkeley.
Lucas, R. E. J. (2000, March). Inflation and welfare. Econometrica 68 (2), 247–274.
Mayer, C. and K. Pence (2008). Subprime mortgages: What, where, and to whom? Staﬀ Paper Federal Reserve
Board.
Moore, K. B. and M. G. Palumbo (2010, June). The finances of american households in the past three recessions:
Evidence from the survey of consumer finances. Staﬀ Paper Federal Reserve Board.
Mullainathan, S., M. Noeth, and A. Schoar (2012). The market for financial advice: An audit study. NBER WP
17929.
O’Mahony, M. and M. P. Timmer (2009). Output, input and productivity measures at the industry level: The eu
klems database. The Economic Journal 119 (538), F374–F403.
Pagnotta, E. and T. Philippon (2011). Competing on speed. NBER WP 17652.
Pennacchi, G. (2012). Narrow banking. Annual Review of Financial Economics.
Philippon, T. (2012). Equilibrium financial intermediation. Working Paper NYU.
Philippon, T. (2015). Has the us finance industry become less eﬃcient? on the theory and measurement of financial
intermediation. The American Economic Review 105 (4), 1408–38.
Philippon, T. and A. Reshef (2012). Wages and human capital in the u.s. financial industry: 1909-2006. Quarterly
Journal of Economics.
Rajan, R. G. and L. Zingales (2003). Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists. New York: Crown Business.
Rysman, M. and S. Schuh (2016). New innovations in payments. NBER Working Paper No. 22358.
Samuelson, P. (1947). Foundations of Economic Analysis. Harvard University Press.

23

Santos, J. (2014, December). Evidence from the bond market on banks’ “too-big-to-fail” subsidy. FRBNY Economic
Policy Review .
Schularick, M. and A. M. Taylor (2012, April). Credit booms gone bust: Monetary policy, leverage cycles and
financial crises, 1870–2008. American Economic Review , 1029–61.
Shin, H. S. (2012). Global banking glut and loan risk premium. mimeo Princeton.
Summers, B. (1975). Loan commitments to business in united states banking history. Federal Reserve Bank of
Richmond Economic Review , 15–23.
Tobin, J. (1958). Liquidity preference as behavior towards risk. The Review of Economic Studies 25 (2), 65–86.
Wallace, N. (1996). Narrow banking meets the diamond-dybvig model. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Quarterly Review Winter, 3–13.
Yermack, D. (2015). Corporate governance and blockchains. Working Paper.
Zingales, L. (2015). Does finance benefit society? Journal of Finance 70 (4), 1327–1363.

24

