                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            THE GAP WITHIN THE GAP:
                    USING LONGITUDINAL DATA TO UNDERSTAND
                  INCOME DIFFERENCES IN STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT

                                     Katherine Michelmore
                                        Susan Dynarski

                                      Working Paper 22474
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22474


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2016




We thank our partners at the Michigan Department of Education (MDE) and Michigan’s Center
for Educational Performance and Information (CEPI) for providing the data used in these
analyses, especially Erika Bolig, Thomas Howell, and Venessa Keesler. We thank Mónica
Hernandez, Amy Schwartz, and seminar participants at Aarhus University, University of
California Santa Barbara, University of Chicago, University of Southern California, University of
Michigan, University of Wisconsin, and the Institute for Research on Poverty Summer Research
Workshop for providing helpful comments. The Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department
of Education provided support through Grants R305E100008 and R305B110001. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Katherine Michelmore and Susan Dynarski. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Gap within the Gap: Using Longitudinal Data to Understand Income Differences in Student
Achievement
Katherine Michelmore and Susan Dynarski
NBER Working Paper No. 22474
July 2016
JEL No. I24,I28,I32

                                           ABSTRACT

Gaps in educational achievement between high- and low-income children are growing.
Administrative datasets maintained by states and districts lack information about income but do
indicate whether a student is eligible for subsidized school meals. We leverage the longitudinal
structure of these datasets to develop a new measure of persistent economic disadvantage. Half of
8th graders in Michigan are eligible for a subsidized meal, but just 14 percent have been eligible
for subsidized meals in every grade since kindergarten. These children score 0.94 standard
deviations below those never eligible for subsidies and 0.23 below those occasionally eligible.
There is a negative, linear relationship between grades spent in economic disadvantage and 8th
grade test scores. This is not an exposure effect: the relationship is almost identical in 3rd grade,
before children have been differentially exposed to five more years of economic disadvantage.
Survey data show that the number of years that a child will spend eligible for subsidized lunch is
negatively correlated with her current household income. Years eligible for subsidized meals can
therefore be used as a reasonable proxy for income. Our proposed measure can be used in
evaluations to estimate heterogeneous effects, to improve value-added calculations, and to better
target resources.


Katherine Michelmore
Syracuse University
Center for Policy Research
426 Eggers Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244
kmichelm@umich.edu

Susan Dynarski
University of Michigan
Weill Hall
735 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-3091
and NBER
dynarski@umich.edu
        Gaps in educational achievement between high- and low-income children are growing.

The poverty gap in standardized test scores is 40 percent larger today than it was 25 years ago

and is twice as large as the black-white gap (Reardon 2011). Test scores are an early predictor of

educational attainment and income in adulthood: a one-standard deviation difference in test

scores in grade school corresponds to a five percentage-point difference in college attendance

and a nine percent difference in earnings at age 28 (Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff, 2011).

        A long literature studies the link between family resources in childhood and educational

outcomes.1 Studies that exploit longitudinal data show that deficits are particularly large for

children who are persistently disadvantaged.2 But the household surveys that these studies rely

upon are infrequent and suffer from non-response and attrition.3 The administrative datasets

increasingly analyzed by education researchers (Dynarski and Berends, 2015) do not have these

weaknesses, but typically contain a single, crude proxy for income: an indicator of a students’

eligibility for federally-subsidized school meals.

        Children in households with income below 185 percent of the federal poverty line are

eligible for subsidized meals in school. Subsidized-meal eligibility is widely used by researchers

as a proxy for poverty. But nearly half of students nationwide are eligible for subsidized meals,

while only a quarter of US children live in poverty. These two statistics make clear that

eligibility for subsidized meals is a blunt measure of economic disadvantage. It is, for now, the

only measure available to the many researchers and practitioners who work with administrative




1
  See Duncan and Brooks-Gunn 1997; Duncan, Magnuson, Kalil, and Ziol-Guest 2012; Duncan and Murnane 2011;
or Mayer 1997 for a review of this literature.
2
  See, for example, Duncan, Brooks-Gunn and Klebanov 1994; Haveman, Wolfe, Spaulding 1991; Ku and Plotnick
2003; NICHD 2005; Rothstein and Wozny 2013; and Wolfe et al. 1996.
3
  Meyer, Mok, and Sullivan 2015 and Meyer Nittag 2015 show that non-response and attrition are increasingly
common in household surveys.

                                                                                                          1
data to evaluate the effects of educational programs, measure gaps in student achievement, and

steer resources toward the most needy children.

        We use administrative data from Michigan to develop a more detailed measure of

economic disadvantage. Our data contain information on the entire population of students in the

Michigan public schools. We leverage the longitudinal nature of these data to document

systematic variation in outcomes and disadvantage within the population of children who are

eligible for subsidized meals. Children who spend all of their school years eligible for subsidized

meals have the lowest scores, while those who are never eligible have the highest. In 8th grade,

the score gap between these two groups is nearly a standard deviation. The scores of children

who spend a few of their school years eligible for subsidized meals fall between these two

extremes.

        There is a negative, nearly linear relationship between the number of grades spent in

economic disadvantage and 8th grade test scores. This relationship holds after controlling for

student demographics and school fixed effects. The lower scores do not appear to be caused by

more years in disadvantage: this linear relationship is similar in 3rd grade, before children have

been differentially exposed to five more years of economic disadvantage. Rather, we show that

family income in a given year is negatively correlated with the number of years that a child will

spend eligible for subsidized meals.4

        Our results imply that the number of years that a child spends eligible for subsidized

meals is a reasonable proxy for household income. While still crude, this proposed measure

captures greater variation in economic resources and educational outcomes than does the variable


4
  We use a household survey, the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study (ECLS) in this supplementary analysis. Our
findings are consistent with income following a random walk, with drift: families with very low permanent incomes
are unlikely to randomly cross the eligibility threshold for subsidized meals, while those with slightly higher
incomes will randomly do so in some years.

                                                                                                                2
currently used by researchers, which captures only a child’s current eligibility for subsidized

meals. In Michigan, roughly half of 8th graders are eligible for a subsidized meal; they score

about 0.69 standard deviations below those who are not eligible. But just 14 percent of 8th

graders had been eligible for subsidized meals in every year since kindergarten, and these

children score 0.94 standard deviations below those who were never eligible (and 0.23 standard

deviations below those who were occasionally eligible). In future work, we will examine how

well our new measure predicts educational attainment, including college attendance and

graduation. We will also examine its performance in states other than Michigan.

        Our proposed measure of economic disadvantage will improve estimates of the value

added by teachers and schools. Two classrooms may have identical numbers of currently

disadvantaged children but different numbers of persistently disadvantaged children. A value-

added measure that does not account for these differences will be biased against teachers of

persistently disadvantaged children. Our measure of persistence can also be used in evaluations,

in order to estimate heterogeneity in causal effects or as a control to reduce omitted-variables

bias.

        Finally, our proposed measure can be used to better target resources toward the most

disadvantaged children. Many federal, state and local programs distribute money based on the

share of a school’s or district’s students eligible for subsidized meals. In Michigan, schools that

have identical shares of students who are currently eligible for subsidized meals vary

considerably in the share of students who are persistently eligible (see Figure 5). By taking these

differences into account, practitioners and policy-makers can better target resources intended to

support the most disadvantaged children and their schools.




                                                                                                      3
II. Prior Literature: Family Resources and Child Outcomes

        Most research examining the correlation between income and child outcomes relies on

contemporaneous, rather than longitudinal, measures of income. Reardon (2011) uses multiple

surveys to show that gaps between poor and richer children have grown over time. For recent

years, he estimates that the math score gap between students with family incomes in the 90th and

10th percentiles is around one standard deviation.

        An extensive literature documents the chronic nature of poverty in the United States.5 It

is plausible that children who are chronically poor face more severe challenges than children

who experience poverty intermittently. Researchers who exploit longitudinal data show that

racial and socioeconomic gaps emerge by the time children enter kindergarten and persist into

adulthood.6,7 Persistently disadvantaged children have worse test scores, more behavioral

problems, and lower schooling and wages as adults.8

        This research rely on surveys such as the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) and

the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), which include longitudinal measures of

income as well as detailed demographics. But these surveys suffer from response bias and

sample attrition, which are plausibly correlated with depth of disadvantage. Recent work shows a

decline in the quality of household survey data compared to administrative data (Meyer, Mok,

and Sullivan 2015; Meyer and Nittag 2015).



5
  See Ashworth, Hill, Walker 1994; Bane and Ellwood 1986; and Cellini, McKernan, Ratcliffe 2008. Duncan and
Rodgers (1988) find that while incidence of chronic poverty in childhood was relatively uncommon among children
in the PSID in the late 1960s and 1970s, approximately half of all children experienced economic hardship at some
point during childhood.
6
  See Duncan and Magnuson 2011; Fryer and Levitt 2004; Magnuson and Duncan 2006; and Heckman et al., 2010.
7
  See Duncan, Brooks-Gunn, Klebanov 1994; Duncan et al. 2012; Haveman et al 1991; Ku and Plotnick 2003;
Peters and Mullis 1997; Petterson and Albers 2001; Rothstein and Wozny 2013; Smith, Brooks-Gunn, Klebanov
1997; Wolfe et al. 1996.
8
  Duncan and coauthors (1994) conclude that the IQ deficit associated with persistent poverty is 80 percent higher
than the deficit associated with transitory poverty.

                                                                                                                 4
       A large and rapidly expanding literature makes use of administrative data held by states

and school districts to conduct educational research (Dynarski and Berends, 2015). These

datasets lack the detailed data on income and demographics of the PSID and NLSY. But they are

large, covering the universe of public school students, and contain comprehensive information on

students’ test scores and educational attainment. These datasets track students longitudinally,

with each child assigned a unique identifier that in many states (including Michigan) stays with a

student through college.

       In these administrative data, eligibility for subsidized school meals is the only measure of

economic status. Local education agencies use this variable to allocate Title I funds, which

subsidize the schooling of low-income children (U.S. Department of Education 2012). This

variable, discussed in detail below, is used widely by education researchers as a proxy for

poverty (see, for example, papers in the volume edited by Dynarski and Berends 2015 such as

Papay, Murnane, and Willett 2015). To our knowledge, no study has leveraged the longitudinal

nature of these data systems to construct measures of the persistence of economic disadvantage

to examine the relationship between the duration of disadvantage and educational outcomes.



III. The National School Lunch Program

       The National School Lunch Program (NSLP) is an $11 billion federal program,

established by the 1946 National School Lunch Act. The NLSP provides subsidies that allow 31

million students to receive free or reduced-price lunch (Food and Nutrition Services 2012).

Schools receive federal reimbursement for each student eligible for subsidized lunches (Food and

Nutrition Services 2015).




                                                                                                  5
         In recent years, nearly half of all school children received subsidized meals (see Figure

1). The growth in the population of children receiving subsidized meals has outpaced the growth

in children living below the poverty line (again, Figure 1). This is in part due to the faster growth

in the share of children living in households with income between the poverty line and 185

percent of the federal poverty line.

         A student can qualify for free or reduced-price meals in two ways: by providing

paperwork to their school or through “direct certification,” which is triggered by a child’s receipt

of other federal, means-tested benefits. Once a student has gained eligibility for NSLP through

either methods, she is eligible for the entire school year and up to 30 days of the next school year

(USDA 2015).

         Under the first method, families showing monthly, household income below 185 percent

of the federal poverty guideline gain eligibility for a reduced-price meal, and families below 130

percent get a free meal.9 As of 2015, a family of four must have annual earnings below $31,525

in order to qualify for free meals and below $44,863 to qualify for reduced-price meals.10

         Under the second method, children automatically gain eligibility if their families receive

means-tested benefits such as food stamps (SNAP), food subsidies for women, infants and

children (WIC), welfare (TANF), or have foster children. In these cases, families do not have to

fill out paperwork: eligibility is proactively established (in Michigan’s case, by the state) using

administrative data from these other programs. Students who are directly certified for subsidized

9
  NSLP uses the federal poverty guideline which differs slightly from the federal poverty threshold. The federal
poverty threshold has different settings depending on whether the additional family members are children or not,
while the guidelines make no such distinction. See http://aspe.hhs.gov/poverty-guidelines for more information.
10
   These are the income cutoffs in the 48 contiguous states. Separate guidelines are established for Alaska and
Hawaii. See http://aspe.hhs.gov/poverty-guidelines for details. Take-up in social welfare programs is correlated with
attributes that determine social outcomes (Currie 2004). Research shows that some students receiving subsidized
meals have income above the program cutoff (Newman and Ralston 2006; Harwell and LeBeau 2010; Hauser 1994;
Kurki, Boyle, and Aladjem 2004; Randolph and Prejean-Harris 2014). This finding is in part due to the eligibility
rules: eligibility is determined by a single month’s income. Once a student is certified, she maintains her eligibility
for the entire calendar year, even if her household income rises over the course of the year.

                                                                                                                      6
meals tend to have lower incomes than those who become eligible by filling out an application,

as the income cutoffs for many of these programs are below 185 percent of the poverty

threshold.11

        Entire schools can now be deemed eligible for subsidized meals through the “community

eligibility” provision. As of 2010, schools are allowed to provide free lunches to all students if at

least 40 percent are directly certified. States and districts vary in the speed with which they have

taken up this option. Some states have stopped collecting student-level income data in schools

that are community-eligible. Michigan has not, since the student-level information is used to

distribute other state-controlled funds.

        For backward-looking evaluations using administrative data, the subsidized-meals

indicator is still the only available proxy for income. Our proposed measure, based on the

persistence of eligibility for school meals, is therefore relevant for researchers using the many

years of historical data that have been compiled by states and districts. Any researcher working

with administrative, education data from 2010 forward should ask the relevant agency when and

how it made the shift toward community eligibility, and whether individual student eligibility is

still recorded. We discuss this point further in the conclusion.



IV. Data and Method

        Our data are drawn from from the Michigan Center for Educational Performance and

Information (CEPI) and contain longitudinal information on all students in the Michigan public

school systems since the 2002-2003 school year. We focus on students who were in 8th grade

11
   The income cutoff for food stamps is 130 percent of poverty (U.S. Department of Education 2012) and for WIC it
is 185 percent of poverty (http://www.fns.usda.gov/wic/wic-income-eligibility-guidelines). The income thresholds
for TANF vary by state, in more than half of states it is $9,540 a year for a single parent of two children in 2012
(Falk 2014). Michigan required monthly income to be less than $814 for a single parent with two children as of
2012. There are no income requirements for foster care.

                                                                                                                  7
during the 2010-2011 through 2012-2013 school years. We can track these cohorts from

kindergarten through 8th grade and therefore observe their subsidized meal eligibility throughout

elementary school.12

         We restrict the sample to 8th graders who were in the Michigan public school system in

7th grade. This allows us to control for lagged achievement in some specifications. We make no

further restrictions on how many years students must be present in the Michigan public school

system.13 Within our sample, 76 percent of 8th graders are in Michigan public schools for the full

nine years since kindergarten. In all analyses, we include an indicator for whether a student was

missing in at least one year.14

         The outcome of interest is standardized test scores in math in 8th grade.15 Test scores are

standardized by grade and year for all students in Michigan public schools. Scores are therefore

interpreted as standard deviations and capture a student’s performance relative to other students

in Michigan public schools in that year and grade.

         We create several measures of economic disadvantage using the longitudinal data. We

define persistently disadvantaged children as those eligible for subsidized meals in every grade

since kindergarten.16 Those who were never eligible for subsidized meals during those grades




12
   Results are quite similar if we focus on an earlier cohort, e.g. those in 8th grade during the 2009-10 school year.
See Appendix Table 1. Patterns are also quite similar if we analyze students in other grades, see Appendix Table 2.
13
   See Data Appendix for detailed explanation of restrictions.
14
   Students who were missing in at least one year typically scored about 0.06 standard deviation below students
present for all nine years. Results are quite similar if we restrict the sample to children present for all nine years
between kindergarten and 8th grade (see Appendix Table 3).
15
   Patterns are quite similar for other subject areas.
16
   In order to be considered “persistently disadvantaged,” students must be present in the dataset for all nine years.
Students who were not present for all nine years and had at least one year of subsidized meal eligibility are
automatically considered “transitorily disadvantaged.” Our results are not sensitive to this decision, changing little
when we restrict the sample to students observed for the full nine years (see Appendix Table 3).

                                                                                                                         8
are defined as never disadvantaged. The remaining children spent some years eligible for

subsidized meals; we define them as transitorily disadvantaged.17

         We use the term currently disadvantaged to refer to a child’s eligibility for subsidized

meals in her tested grade (in our case, 8th grade). This is the variable that typically would be used

by researchers calculating income-based gaps in achievement.18



V. Sample Characteristics

         Nearly 60 percent of Michigan 8th graders in the 2011-2013 school years were eligible for

subsidized meals at least once between kindergarten and 8th grade (see Table 1). These children

spend, on average, six years eligible for subsidizes. Of this group, about a quarter (14 percent of

the full sample) were persistently disadvantaged, in that they were eligible in every grade since

kindergarten. Another forty percent of children were never disadvantaged.

         Demographics differ starkly by these measures of economic disadvantage. Ninety percent

of the never disadvantaged are white, compared to 60 percent of those who are ever

disadvantaged. Students ever disadvantaged by 8th grade were six times more likely to be black

and four times more likely to be Hispanic, compared to those who were never disadvantaged.

The persistently disadvantaged are more concentrated in urban areas, while the transitorily

disadvantaged are more concentrated in suburban areas. The persistently disadvantaged attend

schools with a higher concentration of students eligible for subsidized meals than those who are

transitorily disadvantaged.



17
   We also create measures based on kindergarten through 5th grade eligibility, 3rd through 8th grade eligibility, and
5 through 8th grade eligibility. See Appendix Figure 1 and Appendix Table 2.
 th
18
   Some administrative datasets include a variable that distinguishes between eligibility for free vs. reduced-price
meals. Since not all researchers have this variable, we don’t focus on it in our analysis. In Michigan, almost all
children (85 percent) eligible for a subsidized meal are eligible for a free meal; our results therefore change little if
we focus on the free-meal children (see Appendix Table 4).

                                                                                                                            9
         Our administrative data lack information on income, parental education, and family

structure. We show median income from the American Community Survey (ACS) in the zip

code in which students live. Students who are never disadvantaged live in a zip code where the

median household income is $63,000 (2014$), while those who were ever disadvantaged live in

neighborhoods with a median household income of about $46,000. For the persistently

disadvantaged, neighborhood income is $41,000.

         We turn to nationally-representative survey data to shed more light on demographic

differences between children who are persistently disadvantaged, transitorily disadvantaged and

never disadvantaged. The Early Childhood Longitudinal Study, Kindergarten Class of 1998-1999

(ECLS-K) includes information on household income and subsidized-meal eligibility. About half

of 8th graders in 2006-2007 were ever eligible for subsidized meals (similar to Michigan) and

about 10 percent were eligible in each survey wave of the ECLS-K (again, similar to Michigan;

see Appendix Table 5).19

         As in Michigan, persistently disadvantaged students in the ECLS-K are much more likely

to be a racial or ethnic minority (73 percent compared to 46 percent among transitorily

disadvantaged and 11 percent among the never disadvantaged). They were also much less likely

to live with both parents at the start of the survey (51 percent compared to 65 percent among the

transitorily disadvantaged and 91 percent among the never disadvantaged) and much less likely

to have a parent with a college degree (two percent compared to 244 percent among the

transitorily disadvantaged and 57 percent among the never disadvantaged). Family income also

varies substantially by the persistence of disadvantage; we discuss this in detail later in the paper.


19
   The ECLS-K does not collect annual information on subsidized meal eligibility; we can observe whether a student
is eligible in each of the five waves of data collection. We define the persistently disadvantaged as those who were
eligible in each of the five waves. The transitorily disadvantaged were eligible in at least one wave but not all five
waves.

                                                                                                                   10
       As these statistics make clear, the persistently disadvantaged are a distinct minority

within the larger population of students who are eligible for subsidized meals. They are poorer,

more likely to live in single-parent families, and have parents with lower educational attainment.

As we now show, these students have far lower test scores than their peers who are only

temporarily (or never) eligible for subsidized school meals.



VI. Achievement Gaps by Economic Disadvantage

       We first estimate a conventional measure of the income gap in academic achievement, by

comparing the math scores of children who are, at the time of testing, eligible and ineligible for

subsidized meals. Measured this way, the gap in 8th grade math score gap is 0.69 standard

deviations (see Table 2).

       If our goal is to capture the effect of persistent disadvantage, this measure is biased

downward by classification error. This error goes both ways: some of those currently eligible for

subsidized meals were not eligible in previous years, while some of those currently ineligible

were eligible at some point. Among Michigan students ineligible for subsidized meals in 8th

grade, 22 percent were eligible in a previous grade (Table 1, final column). And those who were

eligible for subsidized meals in 8th grade spent an average of 2.25 grades not eligible for the

subsidies.

       When we compare children who are persistently disadvantaged to those who are never

disadvantaged, the achievement gap widens considerably. The score difference between the

never disadvantaged and the persistently disadvantaged is nearly a standard deviation (0.94), 35

percent wider than the conventional measure (Table 2). Persistently disadvantaged students score

a quarter of a standard deviation below transitorily disadvantaged students.



                                                                                                   11
       The standard indicator for economic disadvantage is often included as a control in a

regression that includes other variables, such as race, ethnicity, sex, and school characteristics.

For quantitative researchers, a key question is therefore whether these other observables

“explain” the larger achievement deficit among persistently disadvantaged students. If

observables explain the differences, then the analyst need only include these observables in the

regression in order to eliminate biases that may otherwise be induced by unobserved

heterogeneity within the population of currently disadvantaged students.

       We explore this by estimating test-score gaps that control for student characteristics,

school fixed effects, and neighborhood characteristics. Table 3 presents results. In Panel A, we

measure disadvantage the conventional way, based on current eligibility for subsidized lunch. In

Panel B, we use our measures of persistent disadvantage, differentiating between those who were

never disadvantaged between kindergarten and 8th grade (the reference group), those who were

transitorily disadvantaged, and those who were persistently disadvantaged. In all regressions, we

cluster the standard errors at the school level to adjust for correlation in test scores among

students who attend the same school.

       Each column/panel combination in Table 3 represents a separate regression. Column 1

includes only the measures of disadvantage, Column 2 adds demographic characteristics, column

3 adds school fixed effects, Column 4 adds controls for median household income in a

household’s zip code, Column 5 includes controls for prior-year test scores,.

       With no controls in the model, we replicate the gaps shown in Table 2: a score gap of

0.69 standard deviations between those currently eligible for a subsidized meal and those not

eligible, 0.70 standard deviations between the never disadvantaged and the transitorily




                                                                                                      12
disadvantaged, and 0.94 standard deviations between the persistently disadvantaged and the

never disadvantaged.

         We next add controls for race, ethnicity and gender, as well as their interactions. We also

add a dummy that indicates a student is a Michigan native and one that indicates immigrant

status. Controlling for these variables moderately reduces the all of the test score gaps (column

2). But the gap between the never disadvantaged and the persistently disadvantaged (0.76

standard deviations) is still nearly 40 percent larger than the gap based on the conventional

measure of contemporaneous eligibility (0.55 standard deviations).

         Controlling for school fixed effects further reduces gaps (column 3). Still, the within-

school gap between the never disadvantaged and the persistently disadvantaged (0.55) is 41

percent larger than the gap based on standard measure of contemporaneous eligibility (0.39).20

The difference between these estimates is statistically significant.

         These last results indicate that persistent disadvantage is not solely a geographic

phenomenon. Even within schools, there is substantial variation in the performance of children

who are persistently vs. transitorily disadvantaged. This could be because schools draw on

neighborhoods with widely varying household incomes and levels of persistent poverty.

However, controlling for household income in the child’s home zip code (column 4) does very

little to change these within-school results.21

         Researchers estimating causal effects of programs on achievement often include lagged

test scores (e.g., Angrist et al., 2016). Does our proposed measure of persistent disadvantage



20
   Table 3 shows a substantial gap within schools between disadvantaged and non-disadvantaged children. This
contrasts with the black-white gap which, as shown by Fryer and Levitt (2004), is largely eliminated by school fixed
effects.
21
   Median household income data come from a five-year sample of the American Community Survey from 2010-
2014. In an alternative specification, we included zip code fixed effects, which produced very similar results to those
presented here. Results not shown but available upon request.

                                                                                                                    13
explain additional variation in scores, once lagged scores are included? In column 5 of Table 3,

we add 7th grade math scores to the regression. All of the gaps shrink considerably, but our

measure of persistent disadvantage (Panel B) still generates a larger gap than the conventional

measure (Panel B). The conventional gap, conditional on lagged test scores, is 0.095 standard

deviations; the gap by persistent disadvantage is 0.132 standard deviations. The gap based on our

persistent disadvantage is 40 percent larger than that based on the conventional measure of

disadvantage, even after including demographics, school effects, and lagged test scores.

        These results have implications for practitioners. Practitioners cannot identify the most

disadvantaged students using only measures of current disadvantage, even if they also have

access to information on prior test scores and neighborhood income. Our.

        The implication of these results for researchers depends upon the specific context. The

bias induced by an omitted variable rises with the conditional correlations of the omitted variable

(persistent disadvantage, in this case) with i) the variable of interest (e.g., an indicator for a

treatment) and ii) the outcome of interest (in this case, test scores). We have shown that the

second condition for omitted-variables bias is met when the outcome of interest is test scores and

persistent disadvantage is excluded from the regression. Whether this omission will bias

coefficients on other variables interest depends on how strongly correlated these variables are

with persistent disadvantage.



VII. Do Achievement Gaps Widen with Each Year of Disadvantage?

        We have shown that children who are persistently disadvantaged perform worse than

those who are disadvantaged in only some grades. We next examine how the size of this gap

varies with the number of grades spent in disadvantage.



                                                                                                     14
        Figure 2 plots the score gap in 8th grade against the number of grades spent in economic

disadvantage since kindergarten.22 The top line plots unconditional gaps. Note that no functional

form is imposed upon this line; it connects unconditional score differences. We obtain these

differences by regressing 8th grade scores against a set of nine dummies that indicate the number

of grades that a child has spent in economic disadvantage since kindergarten. The reference

group is children who spent no grades in economic disadvantage.23

        Children who spend one year in economic disadvantage score about a third of a standard

deviation below children who are never disadvantaged. This gap widens by about 0.08 standard

deviations for each additional year of disadvantage; the relationship is nearly linear after the first

year of disadvantage. The intercept drops slightly, and the slope is reduced, when demographic

controls are included in the regression (middle line). The relationship is further attenuated, but

the overall pattern remains, when school fixed effects are added (bottom line).

        Figure 2 reveals that the score gap widens steadily with each additional year of

disadvantage. The obvious interpretation is that this is a dosage effect, with each year of

disadvantage placing children yet further behind. But this interpretation is wrong, as we

demonstrate with Figure 3. Here, we replicate the unconditional, 8th grade gaps of Figure 2 (top

line). We add to the graph unconditional differences in scores in 3rd grade. While the intercept is

lower, the slope is almost identical. Figure 4 shows the same plots for scores for grades three

through eight. The lines shift up monotonically with each grade, tracing out the growth during




22
   We also examined how the timing of disadvantage is related to the achievement gap by estimating coefficients on
time-lagged indicators of disadvantage (see Appendix Figure 2 and Appendix Table 8). Eligibility for subsidized
meals in kindergarten and in the current grade have the largest coefficients.
23
  As in all previous regressions, we include a dummy that indicates whether a children was not observed in
Michigan public schools during one or more grades. Results are similar when the sample is limited to a balanced
panel of children enrolled in every grade from kindergarten through 8th grade.

                                                                                                                15
elementary school of the achievement gap. It is this upward drift in the gap that captures the

widening of the achievement gap over a child’s lifetime.

         The slope of each line, by contrast, appears to capture fixed differences between children

who spend more or fewer years in disadvantage. In 3rd grade, children who will spend nine years

in economic disadvantage (and have already spent four years in disadvantage) during grade

school score 0.84 standard deviations lower than children who will never be disadvantaged. By

8th grade, after they have spent nine grades in economic disadvantage, the gap is 0.94 standard

deviations. Ninety percent of the gap is already in place as of 3rd grade, when the linearity of the

relationship between the gap and ultimate years spent in disadvantage is also already established.

         These graphs clearly show that the linear relationship between years of disadvantage and

test scores do not reflect a “dosage effect,” where dosage is measured by years spent in

disadvantage. Rather, as we now show, years spent in disadvantage is correlated with the depth

of a child’s economic disadvantage.

         In kindergarten, children who will spend nine grades in economic disadvantage by 8th

grade are already poorer than children who will spend just a few grades in economic

disadvantage. We see this in the ECLS-K, where mean income falls with each additional year

spent eligible for subsidized meals (see Figure 5).24 Among children who will never be eligible

for subsidized meals, family income is an average of $85,000 in 3rd grade. Among children who

will be eligible for one grade, income is an average of about $47,000 (this is close to median

household income in the US). Among children who will be eligible for five grades, income is an

average of about $20,000. The relationship is similar in 8th grade.25


24
   Since the ECLS-K does not collect data every year, we are only able to observe whether a student is eligible for
each of the five waves collected between kindergarten and 8th grade, rather than the full nine years.
25
  Family income is measured in 13 income categories, ranging from less than $5,000 to more than $200,000. We
assigned the midpoint of each category for this analysis.

                                                                                                                      16
        These results indicate that the number of grades spent in economic disadvantage is a

proxy for the level of income. This is consistent with family income moving in a random walk,

drifting upward with each year. The poorest families have little chance of randomly moving

above the cutoff for subsidized meals, so will typically spend every grade eligible for subsidized

meals. Families with slightly higher incomes might randomly move above the cutoff for one

year. The closer a family’s permanent income is to the eligibility cutoff, the more likely it is to

drift over in a given year.



VIII. Changes in the Determination of Eligibility for Subsidized Meals
        Eligibility standards for subsidized, school meals are in motion. Federal “community

eligibility” rules established in 2010 allow a school to provide free meals to all of its students if

at least 40 percent are found to be individually eligible.26 States and districts vary in the speed

with which they have taken up this option. Some have stopped collecting information on student-

level eligibility in schools that are community-eligible (Michigan has not).

        How does this affect the relevance of our analysis? For backward-looking evaluations

using administrative data, the subsidized-meals indicator is still the only proxy for income. Our

proposed measure is therefore relevant for researchers using such historical data. In any research

that relies on data gathered since 2010, analysts should learn how eligibility for subsidized meals

is determined in their sample schools and how the student-level variable for eligibility in their

data is coded.

       Going forward, states will increasingly use eligibility for federal, means-tested programs

(TANF, WIC and food stamps) to automatically qualify students for subsidized meals. Adding

indicators for eligibility for these programs to administrative datasets will keep these datasets

26
  See Chingos (2016) for a further description of the changes to the subsidized meal program and its implications
for education policy researchers.

                                                                                                                    17
relevant. Without student-level proxies for family income, researchers cannot calculate gaps in

student outcomes, understand how program impacts differ by income, or reliably calculate value-

added measures of teacher and school quality.

      Once states and districts shift toward this new indicator of economic disadvantage, the

insights of this paper will still be relevant. Educational outcomes will certainly be correlated with

persistence in receipt of TANF, WIC and food stamps, just as they are correlated with

persistence in eligibility for subsidized meals. In future work, we will examine these correlations.



IX. Discussion and Conclusion
       Our findings have implications for researchers, policymakers and practitioners. We have

uncovered considerable heterogeneity within the population of children eligible for subsidized

meals. Sixty percent of Michigan’s 8th graders were eligible for subsidized lunch at least once

during their time in the public schools. But just a quarter of these children (14 percent of all 8th

graders) were economically disadvantaged in every year between kindergarten and 8th grade.

       These persistently disadvantaged children score nearly one standard deviation below

students who were never disadvantaged. The conventional method of estimating this gap, which

relies only on current eligibility for subsidized meals, yields a gap of 0.69 standard deviations.

The gap as defined by persistent disadvantage is comparable to that between children in the 90th

and 10th percentiles of the family income distribution (Reardon 2011). The gap as defined

conventionally is comparable to that between children at the midpoint and top (or bottom) of the

family income distribution (Reardon 2011).

       We find a negative, nearly linear relationship between scores and the number of grades

spent in economic disadvantage. This relationship holds even after controlling for student

demographics and school fixed effects. The lower scores do not appear to be caused by more


                                                                                                       18
years spent in disadvantage: this relationship is almost identical in 3rd grade, before children have

been differentially exposed to five more years of economic disadvantage. Rather, as we show in

a supplementary analysis with survey data, family income in a given year is negatively correlated

with the number of years that a child will spend eligible for subsidized meals. Years eligible for

subsidized meals is therefore a reasonable proxy for income.

       Researchers can use our proposed measure to better estimate value-added and to estimate

causal effects. A value-added measure that does not account for differences between current

disadvantage and persistent disadvantage will be systematically biased against the teachers and

schools of persistently disadvantaged children. In calculating measures of teacher and school

effectiveness, controlling for persistent disadvantage will better capture variation in students’

baseline characteristics.

       Policymakers and practitioners can use our proposed measure to better target resources

intended to support the most disadvantaged children. Schools with identical shares of currently

disadvantaged children may have widely differing shares of persistently disadvantaged children.

In Michigan, as in many states, there are many schools in which all children are eligible for

subsidized meals. In Michigan schools where 100 percent of 8th graders are currently

disadvantaged, the concentration of persistent disadvantage varies from 18 to 86 percent (see

Figure 6). The conventional measure of economic disadvantage (current eligibility for subsidized

meals) provides no traction in differentiating between these schools, or between classrooms

within these schools. Our proposed measure of persistent disadvantage allows for finer

distinctions between schools and classrooms, allowing for better targeting of scarce resources.




                                                                                                    19
References
Angrist, J.D., Cohodes, S.R., Dynarski, S.M., Pathak, P.A, & Walters, C.R. 2016. Stand and
       Deliver: Effects of Boston's Charter High Schools on College Preparation, Entry, and
       Choice Journal of Labor Economics

Ashworth, K., Hill, M., & Walker, R. 1994. Patterns of childhood poverty: New challenges for
      policy. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 13(4): 658-580.

Bane, M.J. & Ellwood, D. 1986. Slipping into and out of poverty: The dynamics of spells.
       Journal of Human Resources 21(1): 1-23.

Cellini, S.R., McKernan, S.M., & Ratcliffe, C. 2008. The dynamics of poverty in the United
        States: A review of data, methods, and findings. Working paper.

Chetty, R., Friedman, J. N. & Rockoff, J. 2011. New evidence on the long-term impacts of tax
       credits. IRS White Paper.

Chingos, M. 2016. No more free lunch for education policymakers and researchers. Brookings
      Institution Report. http://www.brookings.edu/research/reports/2016/06/30-no-more-free-
      lunch-for-education-policymakers-and-researchers-chingos

Currie, J. 2004. The take up of social benefits. NBER working paper w10488.

Duncan, G. J. & Brooks-Gunn, J. eds. 1997. Consequences of Growing Up Poor. New York:
      Russell Sage Foundation.

Duncan, G. J., Brooks-Gunn, J. & Klebanov, P. K. 1994. Economic deprivation and early
      childhood development. Child Development¸65 (2): 296-318.

Duncan, G. & Magnuson, K. 2011. The nature and impact of early achievement skills, attention
      skills, and behavior problems. In Greg J. Duncan and Richard J. Murnane (Eds). Whither
      Opportunity?: Rising Inequality, Schools, and Children’s Life Chances New York:
      Russell Sage Foundation.

Duncan, G. Magnuson, K., Kalil, A., & Ziol-Guest, K. 2012. The importance of early childhood
      poverty. Social Indicators Research 108 (1): 87-98.

Duncan, G. & Murnane, R. eds. 2011. Whither Opportunity? Rising inequality, schools, and
      children’s life chances. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Duncan, G. J. & Rodgers, W. L. 1988. Longitudinal aspects of childhood poverty. Journal of
      Marriage and Family 50(4): 1007-1021.

Dynarski, S., & Berends, M. 2015. Introduction to Special Issue. Educational Evaluation and
      Policy Analysis, 37(1 suppl), 3S-5S.




                                                                                               20
Falk, G. 2014. Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF): Eligibility and benefit
       amounts in state TANF cash assistance programs. Congressional Research Service
       Report.

Food and Nutrition Services. 2012. National School Lunch Program Fast Facts.
       http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/NSLPFactSheet.pdf, retrieved July 15, 2015.

Food and Nutrition Services. 2015. National School Lunch Program Rates of Reimbursement.
       http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/cn/NAPs14-15chart.pdf, retrieved July 20,
       2015.

Fryer, R. G. & Levitt, S. D. 2004. Understanding the black-white test score gap in the first two
        years of school. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(2): 447-464.

Harwell, M. & LeBeau, B. 2010. Student eligibility for a free lunch as an SES measure in
      education research. Educational Researcher 39(2): 120-131.

Hauser, R. M. 1994. Measuring socioeconomic status in studies of child development. Child
       Development 65(6): 1541-1545.

Haveman, R., Wolfe, B., & Spaulding, J. 1991. Childhood events and circumstances influencing
     high school completion. Demography, 28(1), 133-157.

Heckman, J.J., Moon, S.H., Pinto, R., Savelyev, P.A., & Yavitz, A. (2010). The rate of return to
     the HighScope Perry Preschool Program. Journal of Public Economics, 94(1-2), 114-128.

Ku, I. & Plotnick, R. 2003. Do children from welfare families obtain less education?
        Demography 40(1): 151-170.

Kurki, A., Boyle, A. & Aladjem, D. K. 2005. Beyond free lunch—Alternative poverty measures
       in educational research and program evaluation. American Institutes for Research report.

Magnuson, K. & Duncan, G. J. 2006. The role of family socioeconomic resources in the black-
     white test score gap among young children. Developmental Review, 26: 365-399.

Mayer, S. 1997. What money can’t buy: The effect of parental income on children’s outcomes.
       Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Meyer, B. D., Mok, W.K.C., & Sullivan, J. X. 2015. Household Surveys in Crisis. Journal of
       Economic Perspectives 29(4): 1-29.

Meyer, B.D. & Mittag, N. 2015. Using linked survey and administrative data to better measure
       income: implications for poverty, program effectiveness and holes in the safety net.
       NBER working paper 21676.

National Center for Education Statistics. 2013. Digest of Education Statistics, Table 216.60:
       Number and percentage distribution of public school students, by percentage of students
       in school who are eligible for free or reduced-price lunch, school level, locale, and

                                                                                                   21
       student race/ethnicity: 2012-13.
       http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d14/tables/dt14_216.60.asp?current=yes, retrieved
       July 15, 2015.

National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Early Child Care Research Network.
       (2005). Duration and developmental timing of poverty and children’s cognitive and social
       development from birth through third grade. Child Development, 76, 795–810.

Newman, C. & Ralston, K. 2006. Profiles of participants in the National School Lunch Program:
     Data from two national surveys. United States Department of Agriculture Economic
     Information Bulletin Number 17

Papay, J. P., Murnane, R. J. & Willett, J. B. 2015. Income-based inequality in educational
       outcomes: Learning from state longitudinal data systems. Educational Evaluation and
       Policy Analysis 37(1 suppl): 29S-52S.

Peters, H. E. & Mullis, N. C. 1997. The role of family income and sources of income in
        adolescent achievement, in Greg Duncan and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn (Eds.) Consequences
        of Growing Up Poor. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Petterson, S.M & Albers, A. B. 2001. Effects of poverty and maternal depression on early child
        development. Child Development 72(6): 1794-1813.

Randolph, J. & Prejean-Harris, R. 2014. The negative consequences of using free and reduced
      lunch as a measure of school-level poverty: A case from the state of Georgia. Georgia
      Educational Research Conference paper.

Reardon, S. F. 2011. The widening academic achievement gap between the rich and the poor:
      New evidence and possible explanations, in Greg J. Duncan and Richard J. Murnane
      (Eds.) Whither Opportunity?: Rising Inequality, Schools, and Children’s Life Chances
      New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Rothstein, J. & Wozny, N. 2013. Permanent income and the black-white test score gap. Journal
       of Human Resources 48(3): 510-544.

Smith, J.R, Brooks-Gunn, J., & Klebanov, P. 1997. The consequnces of living in poverty for
       young children’s cognitive and verbal ability and early school achievement. In G.J.
       Duncan & J. Brooks-Gunn (Eds.) Consequences of Growing Up Poor (Pp. 132-189).
       New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

U. S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Services, Office of Research and Analysis
       2007. NSLP/SBP Access, Participation, Eligibility, and Certification Study – Erroneous
       Payments in the NSLP and SBP: Vol. I. Study Findings. Alexandria, VA: U.S.
       Department of Agriculture. Retrieved July 2015 from
       http://www.fns.usda.gov/ora/MENU/Published/CNP/FILES/apecvol1.pdf.




                                                                                              22
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Services. 2015. Eligibility Manual for
       School Meals. Determining and Verifying Eligibility. Retrieved August 2015 from
       http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites/default/files/cn/SP40_CACFP18_SFSP20-2015a.pdf

U.S. Department of Education, Office of Planning, Evaluation and Policy Development,
       Performance Information Management Service, Free and Reduced-Price Lunch
       Eligibility Data in EDFacts: A White Paper on Current Status and Potential Changes,
       Washington, D.C., 2012.

U.S. Census Bureau. 2013. American Fact Finder.
       http://factfinder.census.gov/faces/tableservices/jsf/pages/productview.xhtml?pid=ACS_1
       3_5YR_DP03&src=pt

Wolfe, B., Haveman, R., Ginther, D., An, C.B. 1996. The “Window Problem” in Studies of
       Children’s Attainments” A Methodological Exploration. Journal of the American
       Statistical Association. 91: 435, 970-982.




                                                                                             23
                                          Data Appendix
   This research uses data structured and maintained by the Michigan Consortium for

Educational Research (MCER). MCER data are modified for analysis using rules governed by

MCER and are not identical to data collected and maintained by the Michigan Department of

Education (MDE) and the Michigan Center for Educational Performance and Information

(CEPI). Results, information and opinions are the authors’ and do not reflect the views or

positions of MDE or CEPI.

   Data are drawn from the Single Record Student Database (SRSD), the Michigan Student

Data System (MSDS), which replaced the SRSD in 2010, and the Michigan Educational

Assessment Program (MEAP) database. The SRSD and MSDS provide annual information on

student demographics such as race, gender, subsidized meal eligibility, special education status,

limited English proficiency (LEP) status, and migrant status. It also contains information on the

grade level and schools a student attended each year since the 2002-2003 school year. The

MEAP provides information on standardized test scores in a variety of subject-grade

combinations. Students in Michigan are tested in 3rd through 8th grade and again in 11th grade.

       We limit the sample to students who were in 8th grade between the 2010-2011 and 2012-

2013 school years and had valid 8th grade math test scores (341,133 observations). We do not

restrict the sample to first-time 8th graders, so some students may have repeated a grade in a prior

year. We exclude students who did not have a 7th grade math test score (12,974 observations),

which we use to control for prior achievement in some analyses. We also exclude students

without a valid school identifier in 8th grade (9,537 observations). To maximize our sample size,

we make no further restrictions on whether the student was present in the Michigan public school

system for the nine years between kindergarten and 8th grade (Appendix Table 7 shows a

frequency table for the share of 8th graders present in the data for the full nine years, separately

                                                                                                       24
by subsidized meal status in 8th grade). Among all 8th graders in our analysis, 76% were present

in all nine years, and 86% were present for at least eight years. Students eligible for subsidized

meals in 8th grade were slightly less likely to be in the Michigan public school system for nine

years (74% compared to 78% of non-eligible 8th graders).

       In regressions, we include an indicator for whether a student was not in the Michigan

public school system for all nine years. These students typically had lower math test scores, on

the order of 0.01 to 0.06 of a standard deviation. Results are nearly identical if we instead limit

the sample to students present in Michigan public schools in all graded from kindergarten

through 8th grade.




                                                                                                      25
                                                             Figure 1
                                Share of school-aged children experiencing economic disadvantage


                                      MI child poverty                       MI subsidized meal eligibility
                         0.6
                                      US child poverty                       U.S. subsidized meal eligibility
                         0.5          US Income <185% pov
   Share of population




                         0.4

                         0.3

                         0.2

                         0.1

                          0
                               2003   2004   2005   2006    2007 2008 2009 2010       2011    2012    2013
                                                           School Year (spring)



Sources: Michigan subsidized meal eligibility calculated from Single Record Student Database/Michigan
Student Data System files from the Michigan Department of Education. Child poverty rates from
http://datacenter.kidscount.org/data/tables/43-children-in-poverty-100-percent-
poverty.#detailed/2/24/false/868,867,133,38,35/any/321,322. U.S. subsidized lunch from the Common
Core of Data: https://nces.ed.gov/ccd/tables/2000_schoollunch_01.asp. U.S. Income < 185% indicates
share of national population with income below 185% of the federal poverty threshold for given household
size, from the Survey of Income and Program Participation waves 2001 through 2008, based on monthly
income increments, weighted by monthly person weights.
                                                                              Figure 2
                                                  How do test score gaps vary by number of years of disadvantage?



                                           1.00          No Controls          Demographic Controls          + School FE
   Math test score gap relative to never




                                           0.90
                                           0.80
                                           0.70
               disavantaged




                                           0.60
                                           0.50
                                           0.40
                                           0.30
                                           0.20
                                           0.10
                                           0.00
                                                     1       2         3       4       5       6        7         8       9
                                                                 Total number of years in economic disadvantage




Source: Single Record Student Database/Michigan Student Data System and Assessment files
from the Michigan Department of Education. Students who were in 8th grade between 2010-2011
and 2012-2013.

Notes: Plots coefficients from regressions of standardized 3rd and 8th grade math test scores on
set of indicators for number of years eligible for subsidized meals between kindergarten and 8th
grade.Demographic controls consist of race and gender indicators, interactions of race and gender
indicators, whether the student was an immigrant, whether the student was a Michigan native,
whether the student was missing at least one year between kindergarten and 8th grade.
                                                                       Figure 3
                                                               Gaps emerge by third grade



                                             1
    Math test score gap relative to never




                                            0.9
                                            0.8
                                            0.7
               disadvantaged




                                            0.6
                                            0.5
                                            0.4
                                            0.3
                                            0.2                              3rd grade       8th grade
                                            0.1
                                             0
                                                  1   2      3        4         5         6        7       8   9
                                                          Number of ultimate years in disadvantage (K-8)

Source: Single Record Student Database/Michigan Student Data System and Assessment files
from the Michigan Department of Education. Students who were in 8th grade between 2010-2011
and 2012-2013.

Notes: Plots unconditional gaps in standardized 3rd and 8th grade math test scores by number of
years eligible for subsidized meals between kindergarten and 8th grade.
                                                                              Figure 4
                                                            Gaps by grade and years spent in disadvantage



                                               1
                                              0.9
  Math test score gap relative to the never




                                              0.8
                                              0.7
               disadvantaged




                                              0.6
                                              0.5
                                              0.4
                                              0.3
                                                                       3rd grade        4th grade            5th grade
                                              0.2
                                                                       6th grade        7th grade            8th grade
                                              0.1
                                               0
                                                    1   2      3         4        5         6       7          8         9
                                                            Number of ultimate years of disadvantage (K-8)

Source: Single Record Student Database/Michigan Student Data System and Assessment files
from the Michigan Department of Education.

Notes: Plots unconditional gaps in standardized math test scores by number of years eligible for
subsidized meals between kindergarten and 8th grade.
                                                Figure 5
                                  Annual Income by years of disadvantage

                  120000
                                               3rd grade        8th grade
                  100000
  Family Income




                  80000

                  60000

                  40000

                  20000

                       0
                           None




                                         One




                                                      Two




                                                                  Three




                                                                                      Five
                                                                               Four




                                      Number of years eligible for subsidized meals


Source: Early Childhood Longitudinal Study-Kindergarten, class of 1998-99.

Notes: Income measured by assigning the mid-value within each income category in the ECLS-K.
                                       Figure 6
     Shares of 8th graders currently disadvantaged vs. persistently disadvantaged




Source: Single Record Student Database/Michigan Student Data System from the
Michigan Department of Education. Students who were in 8th grade between 2010-
2011 and 2012-2013. Sample limited to schools with at least 10 8th graders.
                                                                                              Table 1
                                                                 Characteristics of Michigan 8th graders by economic disadvantage

                                                                                                      Persistence measures                                Contemporaneous measures
                                                  All 8th         Never
                                                  graders     disadvantaged             Ever             Persistently        Transitorily       Free or Reduced   Free only         Neither
Share of total sample                                    1.00            0.41                  0.59                  0.14                0.45              0.47           0.41                0.53
Share of ever disadvantaged                                                                    1.00                  0.24                0.76

Ever poor                                               0.59            0.00                   1.00                 1.00                1.00               1.00           1.00                0.22
Number of years poor                                    3.59            0.00                   6.10                 9.00                5.18               6.75           6.94                0.75
Proportion of years poor                                0.42            0.00                   0.72                 1.00                0.63               0.80           0.82                0.09

Female                                                 0.49             0.49                   0.50                 0.51                0.49              0.50            0.50                0.49

White                                                  0.72             0.88                   0.60                 0.46                0.64              0.59            0.49                0.86
Black                                                  0.19             0.05                   0.29                 0.39                0.26              0.29            0.37                0.07
Hispanic                                               0.05             0.02                   0.08                 0.12                0.07              0.08            0.10                0.02

Characteristics of home zip code
Median household income (2014$)                     53,146           62,986                 46,257              41,104               47,889            45,224          44,363           60,224

Characteristics of school in 8th grade
Urban                                                  0.17             0.07                   0.24                 0.36                0.19              0.26            0.39                0.09
Suburban                                               0.48             0.58                   0.41                 0.33                0.45              0.41            0.33                0.54
Rural/Town                                             0.35             0.35                   0.35                 0.30                0.37              0.33            0.28                0.36

White                                                  0.72             0.82                   0.65                 0.54                0.69              0.63            0.54                0.80
Black                                                  0.17             0.08                   0.24                 0.33                0.20              0.25            0.35                0.10
Hispanic                                               0.06             0.04                   0.07                 0.09                0.06              0.07            0.08                0.04

Fraction of school eligible for subsidized meal        0.46             0.34                   0.56                 0.65                0.52              0.58            0.59                0.36
50-75%                                                 0.28             0.18                   0.35                 0.38                0.34              0.36            0.29                0.21
75-90%                                                 0.10             0.01                   0.16                 0.23                0.13              0.17            0.19                0.03
over 90%                                               0.04             0.00                   0.07                 0.14                0.04              0.09            0.14                0.00

Number of observations                             328,159          134,979               193,180               46,361              146,819           155,262         134,333          172,897

Source: Single Record Student Database/Michigan Student Data System and Assessment files from the Michigan Department of Education. Students who were in 8th grade between 2010-2011 and 2012-
2013. Median household income from the American Community Survey, 5-year averages, 2010-2014.
                                      Table 2
                    Score gaps vary by definition of disadvantage
                         Michigan 8th graders in 2011-2013


                                                             Math Score Difference
Contemporaneous measures
Currently disadvantaged vs. not currently disadvantaged              0.69
Free vs. not currently disadvantaged                                 0.74
Free vs. reduced                                                     0.33

Persistence measures
Never disadvantaged vs. transitorily disadvantaged                   0.70
Never disadvantaged vs. persistently disadvantaged                   0.94
Persistently disadvantaged vs. transitorily disadvantaged            0.23

Source: Single Record Student Database/Michigan Student Data System and
Assessment files from the Michigan Department of Education.
Notes: Math test scores standardized by grade and year.
                                                               Table 3
                                        OLS regressions of score gaps, 8th graders in 2011-2013
                                                      Panel A. Current disadvantage
                                                 No controls + Demographic + School FE                          + Zip code          + Prior test
                                                                   controls                                       income               scores
Currently disadvantaged                            -0.694           -0.551           -0.393                        -0.389              -0.095
                                                  (0.019)          (0.015)          (0.004)                       (0.004)             (0.002)
Transitorily disadvantaged

Persistently disadvantaged

Not disadvantaged (omitted group)

R-squared                                            0.120             0.174            0.262                      0.263                0.696
                                                       Panel B. Persistent disadvantage
Persistently disadvantaged                           -0.939            -0.759           -0.550                     -0.545               -0.132
                                                    (0.023)           (0.018)          (0.006)                    (0.006)              (0.004)
Transitorily disadvantaged                           -0.703            -0.580           -0.433                     -0.429               -0.107
                                                    (0.021)           (0.016)          (0.004)                    (0.004)              (0.002)
Never disadvantaged (omitted group)
R-squared                                            0.146                0.192               0.270                0.271                0.697
Demographic controls                                                        X                   X                    X                    X
School FE                                                                                       X                    X                    X
Zip code controls                                                                                                    X                    X
Number of Observations                                 313,078              313,078              313,078             313,078              313,078

Source: Single Record Student Database/Michigan Student Data System and Assessment files from the Michigan Department of Education.
Notes: Regressions of standardized 8th grade math test scores on indicators for subsidized meal eligibility. Each column in each panel represents a
separate regression. Demographic controls consist of race and gender indicators, interactions of race and gender indicators, whether the student was
an immigrant, whether the student was a Michigan native, and whether the student was missing at least one year of data between kindergarten and
8th grade. School FE are for 8th grade school. Zip code income is median household incomein 8th grade zip code from American Community
Survey 5-year estimates, 2010-2014. Prior test scores measured in 7th grade. Standard errors clustered at the school level.
                                              Appendix Figure 1
       Variation in test score gaps using different number of years to calculate persistent disadvantage


                                                        No Controls    Demographic Controls     + School FE
                                              1.00
       Math test score gap relative to non-


                                              0.90
                                              0.80
                                              0.70
                  disadvantaged




                                              0.60
                                              0.50
                                              0.40
                                              0.30
                                              0.20
                                              0.10
                                              0.00
                                                       Currently      K-8 chronically   3-8 chronically   5-8 chronically
                                                     disadvantaged    disadvantaged     disadvantaged     disadvantaged


Source: Single Record Student Database/Michigan Student Data System and Assessment files from the
Michigan Department of Education. Students who were in 8th grade between 2010-2011 and 2012-2013.
Notes: From OLS regressions of standardized 8th grade math test scores on indicators for subsidized meal
eligibility. Demographic controls include race and gender indicators, interactions of race and gender
indicators, whether the student was an immigrant, whether the student was a Michigan native, whether the
student was missing at least one year between kindergarten and 8th grade.
                                                                           Appendix Figure 2
                                                                   Score gaps by timing of disadvantage
                                              OLS regression of 8th grade math test scores on lagged indicators of disadvantage

                                           0.25
    Math test score gap relative to non-




                                            0.2
               disadvantaged




                                           0.15


                                            0.1


                                           0.05


                                             0
                                                    t        t-1      t-2      t-3        t-4      t-5       t-6       t-7        t-8
                                                                   Lagged indicators of disadvantage


Source: Single Record Student Database/Michigan Student Data System and Assessment files from the
Michigan Department of Education. Students who were in 8th grade between 2010-2011 and 2012-2013 with
valid school identifier in 8th grade and with valid 7th grade math standardized test scores.

Notes: Plots coefficients on lagged indicators of subsidize meal eligibility Students who are not
economically disadvantaged in a given time period serve as the comparison group.
                                              Appendix Table 1
                            OLS regressions of score gaps, 8th graders in 2009-2010
                                        Panel A. Current disadvantage
                                                               Demographic                         + Prior test
                                              No Controls        Controls         + School FE         scores
Currently disadvantaged                           -0.687           -0.543            -0.381           -0.112
                                                  (0.02)          (0.015)           (0.006)          (0.004)
Not currently disadvantaged (omitted group)
R-squared                                          0.116           0.175              0.269           0.667
                                       Panel B. Persistent disadvantage
Persistently disadvantaged                        -0.908           -0.738            -0.537           -0.155
                                                 (0.024)          (0.019)           (0.008)          (0.006)
Transitorily disadvantaged                        -0.647           -0.534            -0.395           -0.126
                                                  (0.02)          (0.016)           (0.006)          (0.004)
Never disadvantaged (omitted group)
R-squared                                         0.145            0.193              0.278           0.668
Demographic controls                                                 X                  X               X
School FE                                                                               X               X
Number of Observations                              108,360           108,360           108,360         108,360

Source: Single Record Student Database/Michigan Student Data System and Assessment files from the
Michigan Department of Education. Students who were in 8th grade in the 2009-2010 school year.

Notes: Regressions of standardized 8th grade math test scores on indicators for subsidized meal eligibility. Each
column in each panel represents a separate regression. Demographic controls consist of race and gender
indicators, interactions of race and gender indicators, whether the student was an immigrant, whether the student
was a Michigan native, and whether the student was missing at least one year of data between kindergarten and
8th grade. School FE are for 8th grade school. Zip code income is median household incomein 8th grade zip
code from American Community Survey. Prior test scores measured in 7th grade. Standard errors clustered at the
school level.
                                          Appendix Table 2
                        OLS regressions of score gaps, 5th graders in 2011-2013

                                     Panel A. Current disadvantage
                                                            Demographic                      + Prior test
                                             No Controls       Controls        + School FE      scores
Currently disadvantaged                         -0.699           -0.550           -0.392        -0.114
                                               (0.015)          (0.012)          (0.004)       (0.002)
Not currently disadvantaged (omitted group)
R-squared                                       0.123            0.173            0.274        0.671
                                      Panel B. Persistent disadvantage
Persistently disadvantaged                        -0.886           -0.703          -0.511       -0.144
                                                 (0.018)          (0.014)         (0.005)      (0.003)
Transitorily disadvantaged                        -0.638           -0.529          -0.393       -0.120
                                                 (0.016)          (0.013)         (0.004)      (0.003)
Never disadvantaged (omitted group)
R-squared                                         0.144           0.185           0.280        0.672
Demographic controls                                                X               X            X
School FE                                                                           X            X
Number of Observations                            314,092            307,359      307,359      307,359

Notes: See notes to Appendix Table 1.
                                              Appendix Table 3
                           OLS regressions of score gaps, 8th graders in 2011-2013
                         Students in Michigan public schools during every grade, K-8
                                        Panel A. Current disadvantage
                                                               Demographic                      + Prior test
                                              No Controls        Controls       + School FE        scores
Currently disadvantaged                           -0.664           -0.535          -0.389          -0.093
                                                 (0.018)          (0.014)         (0.004)         (0.003)
Not currently disadvantaged (omitted group)
R-squared                                          0.113           0.160           0.248           0.692
                                       Panel B. Persistent disadvantage
Persistently disadvantaged                        -0.922           -0.747          -0.552          -0.131
                                                 (0.022)          (0.018)         (0.006)         (0.004)
Transitorily disadvantaged                        -0.638           -0.547          -0.418          -0.102
                                                 (0.019)          (0.016)         (0.004)         (0.003)
Never disadvantaged (omitted group)
R-squared                                         0.142            0.179           0.257           0.694
Demographic controls                                                 X               X               X
School FE                                                                            X               X
Number of Observations                              255,463           255,426        255,426         253,077


Notes: See notes to Appendix Table 1. Sample limited to students observed in Michigan public schools in every
grade from kindergarten through 8th grade.
                                                           Appendix Table 4
                                       OLS regressions of score gaps, 8th graders in 2011-2013
                                                     Free vs. reduced-price lunch
                                                    Panel A. Current disadvantage
                                                                     + Demographic                      + Zip code    + Prior test
                                                       No controls       controls       + School FE      controls        scores
Currently disadvantaged                                   -0.694          -0.551            -0.393         -0.389        -0.095
                                                         (0.019)         (0.015)           (0.004)        (0.004)       (0.002)
Not currently disadvantaged (omitted group)
R-squared                                                 0.120           0.174             0.262         0.263         0.696
                                      Panel B. Current disadvantage: Free vs. reduced-price lunch
Currently disadvantaged (free lunch)                      -0.739          -0.587            -0.422        -0.418         -0.101
                                                         (0.020)         (0.015)           (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.002)
Currently disadvantaged (reduced-price lunch)             -0.412          -0.357            -0.251        -0.248         -0.064
                                                         (0.020)         (0.017)           (0.007)       (0.007)        (0.004)
Not currently disadvantaged (omitted group)
R-squared                                                 0.126           0.177             0.264         0.264         0.696
Demographic controls                                                         X                X             X             X
School FE                                                                                     X             X             X
Zip code controls                                                                                           X             X
Number of Observations                                     313,078           313,078          313,078       313,078       313,078

Notes: See notes to Appendix Table 1.
                                       Appendix Table 5
          Descriptive statistics from ECLS-K sample, by persistence of disadvantage

                                           Never           Transitorily        Persistently
                                       disadvantaged      disadvantaged       disadvantaged
Child Characteristics
Male                                              0.53                0.52              0.51
White                                             0.77                0.35              0.19
Black                                             0.04                0.23              0.38
Hispanic                                          0.07                0.22              0.35

Family Characteristics
Mother's age at wave 1                           35.03               31.80             31.83
Number of siblings at wave 1                      1.22                1.55              1.94
Single mom at wave 1                              0.06                0.22              0.34
Single mom at wave 7                              0.09                0.24              0.39

Family Structure (wave 1)
Two parents, w/siblings                           0.78                0.57              0.47
Two parents, no siblings                          0.13                0.08              0.04
One parent, w/siblings                            0.04                0.23              0.37
One parent, no siblings                           0.04                0.09              0.07
Other                                             0.01                0.03              0.06

Parent's Highest Education
LTHS                                              0.00                0.15              0.29
HS degree                                         0.12                0.29              0.41
Some College                                      0.31                0.32              0.27
College Degree                                    0.57                0.24              0.02

Family Income
Wave 2 family income                           71,208              31,416             18,459

Number of Observations                            4741                3212               871
Source: Early Childhood Longitudinal Study Kindergarten class of 1998-1999.
Notes: Weighted by 8th grade person weights
                            Appendix Table 6
      OLS regressions of score gaps by disadvantage in lagged grade
                        8th graders in 2011-2013


                                            Demographic Demog+ School
                            No Controls       Controls      FE
Disadvantage in grade:
t                                  -0.175           -0.159           -0.135
                                  (0.011)           (0.01)          (0.007)
t-1                                -0.111           -0.101           -0.078
                                  (0.012)          (0.011)          (0.008)
t-2                                -0.098           -0.083           -0.055
                                   (0.01)          (0.009)          (0.008)
t-3                                -0.081           -0.073           -0.053
                                  (0.009)          (0.009)          (0.008)
t-4                                -0.082           -0.068           -0.049
                                  (0.009)          (0.008)          (0.008)
t-5                                -0.069           -0.058           -0.048
                                  (0.009)          (0.008)          (0.008)
t-6                                -0.073           -0.059           -0.044
                                  (0.008)          (0.008)          (0.008)
t-7                                -0.094           -0.078           -0.063
                                  (0.008)          (0.007)          (0.007)
t-8                                -0.143           -0.090           -0.053
                                  (0.008)          (0.007)          (0.006)

R-squared                          0.155             0.188            0.258
Demographic controls                                     X                X
School FE                                                                 X
Number of Observations          230,803           230,803          230,803

Notes: See notes to Appendix Table 1. Coefficients are on indicators for
subsidized-meal eligibility in listed grade.
                             Appendix Table 7
       8th graders by number of years present in Michigan public schools

Number of years in the data                     Currently    Not currently
(at least)                         All        disadvantaged disadvantaged
                              1        1.00             1.00           1.00
                              2        0.99             0.99           0.98
                              3        0.97             0.97           0.97
                              4        0.95             0.96           0.95
                              5        0.94             0.94           0.93
                              6        0.92             0.92           0.91
                              7        0.89             0.90           0.89
                              8        0.86             0.86           0.86
                              9        0.76             0.74           0.78
Number of Observations             357,457          172,818        184,639
Source: Single Record Student Database/Michigan Student Data System and
Assessment files from the Michigan Department of Education. Students who
were in 8th grade between 2010-2011 and 2012-2013.
