                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE EVOLUTION OF PHYSICIAN PRACTICE STYLES:
                    EVIDENCE FROM CARDIOLOGIST MIGRATION

                                         David Molitor

                                      Working Paper 22478
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22478


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            August 2016, Revised May 2017




This paper is adapted from the first chapter of my dissertation. I am very grateful to my advisors
Amitabh Chandra, Amy Finkelstein, and Jonathan Gruber for their guidance and support. I thank
David Chan, Joseph Doyle, Mark Duggan, Iuliana Pascu, Michael Powell, Jonathan Skinner,
Heidi Williams, and two anonymous referees for helpful comments. I also gratefully
acknowledge feedback from seminar participants at Dartmouth College, Georgia State
University, George Washington University, Harvard University, Northeastern University,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, RAND, Stanford University, the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, the University of Pennsylvania, the University of Warwick, and Yale
University. This research was supported by the National Institute on Aging, grant number T32-
AG000186. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by David Molitor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Evolution of Physician Practice Styles: Evidence from Cardiologist Migration
David Molitor
NBER Working Paper No. 22478
August 2016, Revised May 2017
JEL No. H51,I11,I18

                                          ABSTRACT

Physician treatment choices for observably similar patients vary dramatically across regions. This
paper exploits cardiologist migration to disentangle the role of physician- specific factors such as
preferences and learned behavior versus environment-level factors such as hospital capacity and
productivity spillovers on physician behavior. Physicians starting in the same region and
subsequently moving to dissimilar regions practice similarly before the move. After the move,
physician behavior in the first year changes by 0.6-0.8 percentage points for each percentage
point change in practice environment, with no further changes over time. This suggests
environment factors explain between 60-80 percent of regional disparities in physician behavior.


David Molitor
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
340 Wohlers Hall
1206 S. Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
dmolitor@illinois.edu
1         Introduction
        Health spending per capita varies dramatically across U.S. regions. For example, age,
race, sex, and price adjusted spending in Medicare’s traditional fee-for-service program in
2012 was $13,596 per enrollee in the Miami, FL region compared with $7,998 in the Min-
neapolis, MN region.1 These spending disparities arise primarily from regional differences
in the types and quantities of services patients receive (Skinner and Fisher, 1997; Gottlieb
et al., 2010). Spawned by the classic work of Wennberg and Gittelsohn (1973) finding ten-
fold differences in tonsillectomy rates across Vermont towns, an enormous literature has
consistently documented widespread variability in cross-regional rates of hundreds of medi-
cal interventions within a variety of patient populations and institutional contexts (Phelps,
1992).2
        Despite extensive research documenting regional variations in health care delivery, rela-
tively little is known about their causes. Direct adjustments to reflect apparent differences
in average levels of patient illness, socioeconomic status, or preferences typically resolve lit-
tle of the variations (Barnato et al., 2007; Zuckerman et al., 2010). Moreover, a variety of
evidence suggests that the quality of care and health outcomes in high-use regions are little
better or even worse than in low-use regions (Fisher et al., 2003a,b; Baicker and Chandra,
2004; Sirovich et al., 2006). A common interpretation of this fact is that additional health
spending yields little or no health benefit, implying that moving high-use regions to behave
like low-use regions could lower overall spending by 30 percent without sacrificing quality of
care (Wennberg, Fisher and Skinner, 2002). But in order to address how to change patterns
of care—or to assess whether changes are even desirable—it is essential to understand what
    1
     Price adjustments remove regional differences in Medicare reimbursement rates, such as higher pay-
ments to hospitals with medical training programs. Skinner, Gottlieb and Carmichael (2011) describe
the Medicare regional spending measurement methodology. Regional spending for 2012 accessed from
http://www.dartmouthatlas.org.
   2
     Regional disparities are also prevalent in Medicaid, the centrally budgeted Veterans Affairs health system,
and the private sector (Martin et al., 2007; Congressional Budget Office, 2008; Philipson et al., 2010). The
study of medical practice variations began with Glover (1938), who analyzed regional tonsillectomy rates of
British school children.



                                                       1
drives these regional variations. Because patterns of care ultimately arise from the accu-
mulation of decisions individual physicians make about which procedures to prescribe their
patients, a more fundamental question is what drives physician treatment decisions.
   This paper explores the role of the physician versus his practice environment in explain-
ing regional differences in how physicians treat similar patients. Environment-specific factors
such as financial and legal incentives, hospital capacity, and productivity spillovers extend
influence across local groups of physicians, and therefore may drive practice style differences
across practice settings. On the other hand, physician-specific factors such as preferences,
training, and experience may cause physicians to treat patients differently even under similar
environments. Consistent with this possibility, physicians practicing in the same local health
care market often exhibit large and persistent “style” differences in their tendency to pre-
scribe certain treatments and utilize medical resources (Phelps, 2000; Grytten and Sørensen,
2003; Epstein and Nicholson, 2009). These styles exist even when physicians have access
to the same hospital facilities and ancillary staff and when the patients are randomized to
physician teams (Doyle, Ewer and Wagner, 2010). If physicians agglomerate geographically
based on individual-level factors that drive practice styles (e.g. physicians practicing close to
where they were trained, or physicians in the same region accumulating similar experiences),
physician-specific factors could drive practice style differences across regions.
   At least two conceptual issues have hampered empirical investigations attempting to
separate effects of the environment from those specific to the physician. The first is that
physician factors such as training and experience may form endogenously in response to the
physician’s environment. This issue can be at least partially resolved by looking at factors
such as residency training that pre-date the current environment (Dranove, Ramanarayanan
and Sfekas, 2011). However, even when historical physician information is available, a second
and potentially more substantial identification issue is that physicians may choose a practice
setting based on their individual practice style or otherwise correlated with physician-specific
determinants of practice style. Failure to account for such “positive matching” may yield


                                               2
estimates that overstate the effect of the environment on physician behavior.
   The primary contribution of this paper is to exploit an empirical context providing varia-
tion in a physician’s environment while also allowing explicit controls for physician selection.
Using 15 years of Medicare patient claims, I construct histories of treatment decisions for
individual physicians and identify a set of physicians who move across geographic regions.
I then trace out how migrant behavior changes over time with respect to the move as a
function of the change in environment experienced across the move. Selective migration is
identified by the extent to which physicians who move to higher or lower intensity regions
have differential levels or trends in pre-move behavior relative to their peers. The full envi-
ronment effect is identified by the change in physician behavior across the move as well as
by the subsequent time-pattern of behavior relative to the move date.
   Using this approach, I begin by testing two polar scenarios. First, I test whether physician
practice styles are fully ingrained once physicians have completed medical training and taken
up clinical practice. If this is the case, then changes in a physician’s practice environment
should not affect how the physician treats similar patients. Second, I test the other extreme
of whether physicians completely conform to changes in their environment regardless of
their training or past experiences. Full convergence would point to steady-state differences
in regional practice styles arising from differences in the contemporaneous influences under
which physicians operate. If physicians do not completely conform to environment changes,
however, then physician behavior is persistent and small changes in their early training
or experience could have long-run effects. Finally, an additional advantage of the empirical
approach I employ is that it not only allows me to test whether either of these polar scenarios
holds true but also provides an estimate for where reality lies between the two.
   The specific context of my study is cardiologists treating heart attack patients. The data
include 19,945 cardiologists treating patients over the period 1998-2012. Of these, 3,089
(15.5 percent) are observed to move their practice location across geographic medical mar-
kets. Cardiologists may choose to treat heart attack patients with an “aggressive” approach


                                               3
marked by early patient receipt of an invasive procedure called cardiac catheterization, or
they may follow a “conservative” approach using medical management (drugs). Consistent
with previous studies on geographic variations (e.g. Gatsonis et al., 1995), I find that the
share of heart attack patients receiving aggressive treatment over the sample period varies
considerably across geographic regions, averaging 0.48 with an interquartile range of 0.10.
   In my key empirical analysis, I find that for cardiologists who move, a change in a
physician’s practice environment results in a significant and rapid change in the physician’s
individual practice style. Specifically, if O and D represent the fraction of patients treated
aggressively in a physician’s respective origin and destination practice regions, then the physi-
cian’s individual propensity to treat aggressively changes across the move by 60-80 percent of
the difference (D − O), on average. Moreover, this change in behavior occurs within the first
year after a physician’s move with no additional changes over time, suggesting that further
learning or adaptation is limited. Finally, I fail to find evidence of physician selection—
cardiologists who move to more-aggressive regions appear no more aggressive than their
peers prior to the move. These results reject both polar views discussed above: physicians
respond to changes in their practice environment, but do not completely conform to these
changes. The estimated change in physician behavior implies that both the environment and
the physician influence treatment choices, with the environment playing twice as large a role
as physician-specific factors.
   Next, I explore the nature of physician behavior changes in greater detail to shed light
on the mechanisms underlying regional heterogeneity in practice styles. One predominant
theory used to explain the existence and persistence of regional practice variations is the
Phelps and Mooney (1993) “schools of thought” model of information diffusion in which
physician practice styles initially form during training and evolve over time according to a
Bayesian learning process as physicians are exposed to new environments. In contrast to the
implications of this model, I find that physician behavior responds discretely to changes in
their environment with no further convergence over time. I also find that physicians who


                                               4
move later in their career respond about the same to changes in their environment as those
who move early in their career, suggesting physician practice styles remain elastic over time.
   Finally, I explore whether physicians respond asymmetrically to changes in their en-
vironment and find that physicians moving from a more-intensive region retain more of
their previous practice style (i.e. change behavior less) than physicians moving from a less-
intensive region. This suggests that hard technological capacity constraints, such as lacking
a catheterization laboratory, are not the key driver of physician treatment choices in this
context. Further supporting this view, 89 percent of heart attack patients in the sample are
admitted to hospitals with cath labs, and the estimates of physician response across a move
change little when limiting the analysis to this subsample.
   My approach in this paper is closely related to a growing literature that uses migration
patterns to isolate the effects of culture and past experiences from the current environment
on consumer preferences and choices (Fernández, 2008, provides a review). Finkelstein,
Gentzkow and Williams (2016) exploit migration of Medicare patients to isolate the role of
patient demand in driving geographic variation in health care utilization. Outside the health
care context, Ichino and Maggi (2000) use worker movements across branches in a firm to
identify the impact of group interactions on shirking behavior; Song et al. (2010) use patient
migration across geographic regions to identify regional diagnosis propensities separately
from patient characteristics; and Chetty, Friedman and Saez (2013) track tax payers across
a move to identify local neighborhood effects on worker response to the EITC. My approach is
also closely related to the “brand capital” model of Bronnenberg, Dubé and Gentzkow (2012),
in which consumer purchase choices depend not only on contemporaneous supply factors
but also on brand exposure in the past. Analogously in my context, physicians accumulate
“treatment capital” that may influence their treatment choices holding constant the practice
environment. To the best of my knowledge, this paper is the first to exploit physician
migration patterns to separately identify the role physician-specific and environment-level
factors play in determining physician practice styles.


                                              5
        The organization of the remainder of the paper is as follows. Section 2 describes the
empirical context and key data elements, and Section 3 lays out the empirical strategies and
results. In Section 4 I briefly discuss potential mechanisms, and Section 5 concludes.



2         Setting and Data
2.1        Context: Heart Attack Treatment
        Each year nearly 1 million Americans suffer a heart attack, resulting in more than 130,000
deaths.3 Heart attacks, referred to clinically as acute myocardial infarction (AMI), occur
when part of the heart’s blood supply is blocked, starving the heart of oxygen and caus-
ing muscle cells to die. Heart attacks are an emergency condition and require immediate
hospitalization. While there are a variety of heart attack treatments, all essentially amount
to reducing the heart’s demand for oxygen and increasing blood supply to the muscle. To
increase blood supply, doctors may either use medical management (drugs) or take an in-
vasive approach. In the medical approach, thrombolytic “clot-busting” drugs are used to
dissolve blood clots blocking coronary arteries and are typically most effective when admin-
istered within 3 hours after the heart attack occurs. The primary invasive techniques to
restore blood flow to the heart are angioplasty (balloon dilation of the blocked artery, with
or without stenting) and open-heart bypass surgery (artery graft to “bypass” the blockage).
        To determine whether a patient is a candidate for an invasive procedure, the doctor must
identify the precise location and severity of blockages. This can be accomplished through
a diagnostic technique called angiography. This procedure is usually included as part of a
cardiac catheterization (often referred to simply as a “cath”) in which a thin catheter is
threaded into the coronary arteries. Contrast dye is injected through the catheter into the
blood stream, while x-ray video cameras track the flow of dye to reveal areas where the
coronary arteries are severely restricted or blocked. In this role, cardiac catheterization is
commonly used and well-understood as a marker for invasive heart attack treatment (see
    3
        Source: CDC, http://www.cdc.gov/NCHS/data/nvsr/nvsr58/nvsr58 19.pdf. Death count from 2007.


                                                    6
e.g. McClellan and Newhouse, 1997; Chandra and Staiger, 2007).
   The empirical work in this paper focuses on AMI treatment for four reasons. First, heart
attack treatment is characterized by two competing management approaches: an “early inva-
sive” approach marked by patient catheterization shortly after hospital admission regardless
of the patient’s receipt of or response to thrombolytic therapy, and a conservative “wait-
and-see” approach in which patients are first given thrombolytic drugs and receive cardiac
catheterization only if symptoms persist. Both approaches have been heavily analyzed and
debated in the medical literature (see e.g. Keeley and Grines, 2004; Brophy and Bogaty,
2004; Scanlon et al., 1999). Since early versus delayed cardiac catheterization is typically
defined with reference to a 12- to 48-hour time window (Kushner et al., 2009), I use receipt
of catheterization within 2 days of AMI hospital admission as the measure of early invasive
management. This dichotomy allows both regions and physicians to be characterized by the
management style choices (i.e. cath rate) used for their patients.
   Second, the rate of invasive heart attack management varies significantly across regions,
exposing cardiologists who move to potentially large changes in their practice environment.
Third, the emergency nature of heart attacks generally inhibits patients from traveling long
distances to seek care, making it possible to define geographically distinct markets for AMI
treatment in which physicians practice. Finally, the emergency nature of heart attacks
also plausibly limits the degree to which patients most appropriate for a particular type of
treatment are sorted to cardiologists who specialize in that treatment.


2.2    Data Description
   The primary data for the analysis is Medicare administrative and claims records for
the Medicare fee-for-service population over the period 1998-2012. The data include a 100
percent sample of hospital admissions records, which are used to identify over 4 million
patients with new heart attack episodes (at least one year since any previous heart attack)
based on a principal diagnosis of AMI (ICD-9-CM codes 410.x). While these records cover the
universe of fee-for-service beneficiaries over this period, I cannot observe treatment outcomes

                                              7
for patients in Medicare Advantage plans which are reimbursed on a capitated basis.4 AMI
patient hospital records are matched to physician claims to identify the physicians treating
the patient, which limits the sample to the 20 percent of beneficiaries for whom physician
claims are available. Medicare claims are available beginning in 1992, but I exclude years
prior to 1998 both because physician claims are only available for 5 percent of Medicare
beneficiaries those years and because fewer hospitals had cath labs during that period.

2.2.1      Cardiologist catheterization rates
       Behavior of individual cardiologists over time and across practice settings is identified
in the data using a physician’s Unique Physician Identification Number (UPIN) on billing
claims. A UPIN is given to each physician who treats patients in the Medicare program
and remains with the physician throughout his or her career.5 I link the universe of Medi-
care UPINs to the American Medical Association (AMA) Physician Masterfile and identify
cardiologists as those who have completed a 3-year fellowship in cardiovascular disease.6
       I measure the cath behavior of cardiologists over time by assigning AMI patients to the
first cardiologist treating the patient. While the first cardiologist’s decision is only one of
many in the hospital setting that may affect patient treatment, identifying a patient with
the first cardiologist minimizes concerns of selective sorting of patients to cardiologists—a
typical emergency room protocol is to initially assign a confirmed or suspected AMI patient
to the cardiologist on call. Moreover, due to the emergency nature of heart attacks and high
time-sensitivity of the relative benefits of different treatment paths, the initial cardiologist is
likely to have an important impact as a “gatekeeper” to subsequent care the patient receives,
whether or not this cardiologist actually performs the services.
       To implement the assignment of patients to cardiologists, I focus on the 20 percent ran-
   4
     Over the sample period 1998-2012, Medicare Advantage covered 19.9 percent of Medicare enrollees,
although the share fluctuated over that period. See the Appendix for additional sample details.
   5
     Beginning in 2007, Medicare transitioned from UPINs to the National Provider Identifier (NPI) standard.
I match NPIs to UPINs using a crosswalk developed by the NBER, available at http://www.nber.org/data/
npi-upin-crosswalk.html, and supplemented with Medicare claims that contain both fields.
   6
     The AMA Physician Masterfile includes current and historical data on virtually every Doctor of Medicine
(MD) ever trained or licensed to practice in the United States, regardless of physician AMA membership.


                                                     8
dom sample of Medicare fee-for-service beneficiaries for whom physician claims are available.
I then identify patients with a new AMI episode who see a cardiologist within two days of
hospital admission. For each patient, I identify the cardiologist(s) who treat the patient first.
Because claims only identify the day of service, some patients (34 percent) match to multiple
“first” cardiologists. Seeing more than one cardiologist on the first day may itself depend on
the initial physician’s treatment choice. I therefore use all patient episode-physician pairs in
the baseline analysis and focus on the 66 percent of patients that see a unique first cardiolo-
gist in robustness checks. Over the analysis period 1998-2012, I observe 19,945 cardiologists
treating 669,397 patient heart attacks (see Table 1).7

2.2.2    Cardiologist migration
    To identify movers, I focus on cardiologists who move their practice across Hospital
Referral Regions (HRRs), geographic units developed by the Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care
and commonly used as the regional unit of analysis for heart attack treatment (e.g., Skinner,
Staiger and Fisher, 2006; Chandra and Staiger, 2007). HRRs partition ZIP codes into 306
regions based on where the majority of Medicare beneficiaries are referred for tertiary health
care services, and each HRR contains at least one hospital performing major cardiovascular
procedures.
    I base a cardiologist’s practice location at a point in time on the dates and hospital of
admission for the physician’s patients. I define “practice episodes” to be the first and last
    7
      Physician claims are available for 792,970 (19.7 percent) of the 4.03 million heart attack patients iden-
tified by hospital admissions (See Appendix Table C.1). Of these, 669,397 (84.4 percent) have at least
one cardiologist claim within 2 days. AMI patients are more likely to have cardiologist claims if admit-
ted to a high-volume hospital: among hospitals with fewer than (at least) 1,000 AMI admissions over the
sample—which account for nearly 25 percent of AMI admissions—70.3 percent (89.1 percent) of patients
have cardiologist claims. Among these same hospitals, 61.2 percent (9.8 percent) of AMI admissions occur
when no cardiologist is the admitting physician for any FFS Medicare patient in the hospital within two
days of admission, suggesting that availability of a cardiologist is a key determinant for whether patients
have a cardiologist claim. Moreover, patients with no cardiologist claims are over three times more likely
(8.4 percent vs. 2.7 percent) to die within one day of admission compared to patients with a cardiologist
claim, suggesting that sudden death may also partly explain the lack of cardiologist treatment in some cases.
On other characteristics, patients with cardiologist claims versus those without are similarly likely to be
admitted on a weekend (26.3 percent vs. 26.5 percent), are slightly more likely to be male (52.1 percent vs.
48.9 percent), and are slightly younger in age (76.2 vs. 78.0).



                                                      9
date a cardiologist practiced in a given HRR during 1998-2012 and limit to episodes where
the cardiologist treated two or more AMI patients. I mark the practice episode during which
that physician treated the most patients as the cardiologist’s “primary” episode. Similarly,
I further define a cardiologist’s “secondary” practice episode to be the largest episode (in
terms of patients treated) that does not overlap the primary episode, if such an episode
exists. Movers are those with both primary and secondary practice episodes. Of the 19,945
cardiologists in the baseline analysis file, 3,089 (15.5 percent) are identified as movers.8
       As reported in the last column of Table 1, approximately 1-2 percent of cardiologists
observed each year are also identified as moving that year. Table 2 summarizes the migration
patterns in the sample: nearly 80 percent of migrants move across states, and over 45 percent
move across Census Regions; over half the moves occur within the Midwest and South.
       Table 3 compares the migrant physician population to other physicians, by region and
overall. The first two columns describe the proportion of cardiologists in each census region
that move either out of (emigration) or into (immigration) an HRR in that region, relative
to the total number of cardiologists who ever practice in that region. Even when measured
as a proportion of total physicians, the Midwest and South continue to show the most
migration activity. The highest net emigration occurs out of the Midwest (3.1 percent),
and the highest net immigration occurs into the West (4.5 percent). As shown in the last
four columns, migrants are also slightly more likely to be female and foreign-born than their
non-migrant counterparts.
       Table 3 also compares the time lapse between a migrant’s observed move and completion
of a cardiology fellowship, relative to the distribution of time since cardiology fellowship
completion for non-migrants in the sample. Half of migrants move within 8 years of finishing
cardiology training; comparatively, the median number of years since cardiology training
for non-migrants in the sample is 14 years. The number of years since cardiology training
   8
    This definition of a move requires a clean split in time between the origin and destination HRR. If a
cardiologist practices in HRR A from dates d1 − d2 and HRR B from dates d3 − d4 , this would be considered
a move as long as d2 ≤ d3 . However, if d2 > d3 , which could happen if the cardiologist returns to practice
in HRR A after first switching to HRR B, this would not be marked as a move.


                                                    10
can also be roughly converted to physician age, since cardiologists who go straight through
training typically finish at age 32-33 (after college, physicians must complete 4 years of
medical school, 3 years internal medicine residency, and a 3 year cardiology fellowship).
Thus, the median age in the sample is approximately 41 for migrants (at the time of the
move) and 47 for non-migrants.

2.2.3   HRR and hospital catheterization rates
   The central aim of this paper is to understand how individual physician actions respond to
changes in their environment, where the environment is characterized by the average action
(2-day cath) taken by physicians in that region. As highlighted first by Manski (1993) and
more recently by Angrist (2014), individual actions are highly correlated with group average
actions, potentially leading to spurious conclusions that a causal connection exists.
   To address these concerns, I define regional 2-day cath rates experienced for each cardiolo-
gist using a leave-out average of cath choices that omits the cardiologist’s own patients. This
eliminates any mechanical correlation between a migrant cardiologist’s treatment choices and
experienced regional cath rates. To further minimize the impact any one physician is likely
to have on practice patterns in the region, my preferred definition of a cardiologist’s local
practice region is the hospital market as defined by HRRs. Moreover, the key independent
variable in the analysis is the change in regional cath rates experienced across a cardiologist’s
move. If a cardiologist’s individual impact on the regional average is similar before and after
move, the net effect after taking differences will be small.
   Using HRRs to define local practice environments is preferable to political geographic
divisions, such as states or cities, because HRR boundaries derive empirically from patient
referral patterns. HRRs may also be preferable to finer definitions of a physician’s relevant
practice region such as the hospital for at least three reasons. First, cardiologists frequently
hold operating privileges at multiple hospitals within a region at any point in time. Second,
regional influences outside a physician’s own hospital may also influence a physician’s treat-
ment behavior such as proximity to surgical backup, the ability to refer patients to nearby

                                               11
hospitals for treatment, and peer effects through professional and social interactions. Third,
a broader definition of practice region such as the HRR minimizes the impact of any one
physician on regional practice patterns and the scope for endogenous physician sorting.
   While there are a number of advantages to defining physician practice region at the HRR
level, as a complementary approach I also define hospital-level measures of the practice
environment based on the hospitals where a physician’s patients are admitted. While there
may be less scope for cardiologist sorting at the HRR versus hospital level, using changes
in the hospital environment across a physician’s move may yield more precise estimates in
the regression analysis compared to using changes in the more aggregate HRR environment
measure. The empirical analysis below addresses additional trade-offs between using the
HRR versus the hospital as the physician’s relevant environment.
   To account for potential regional differences in patient severity, I risk-adjust the raw
regional cath rates. As highlighted by (Song et al., 2010), a challenge in risk-adjusting
regional treatment intensity is that diagnostic practices and the comorbidities they indicate
may themselves be a function of regional treatment intensity. To avoid this issue, I adjust
raw regional cath rates using indicators for patient age, race, sex, and first heart attack since
the measurement of these characteristics is plausibly unrelated to regional treatment choices.
   A key simplification I make is to use a time-invariant regional cath intensity measure
over the period 1998-2012. As shown in Table 1, 2-day cath rates increased from an average
rate of 34.0 percent in 1998 to 57.6 percent in 2012. While this secular trend in cath rates
implies that cath rate levels are not directly comparable across years, the relative stability of
the interquartile range over time implies that regional differences in cath rates are roughly
comparable across years. To the extent that the intensity of an HRR relative to the secular
trend remains stable over time, differences in HRR cath propensities over the pooled years
will be the same as the difference in propensity in any given year. Time-invariant rates also
have the advantage of being calculated over a larger sample, reducing sampling error in the
estimates and further minimizing the extent to which the style of any doctor or group of


                                               12
doctors influences the cath rate in that region.
    One disadvantage of using time-invariant regional cath rates is that if the relative in-
tensity of a region changes over time (e.g. if HRRs have different growth rates in their
cath propensities), then the average regional intensity ranking will be a noisy measure of
the actual ranking in any given year. In the appendix, I provide additional details on the
methodology for calculating both HRR and hospital 2-day cath rates, and also show that
results based on time-invariant cath measures are similar to cath rates that vary by time.
    Figure 1 maps the geographic distribution of 2-day cath rates across HRRs, with rates
ranging from less than 41.1 percent in the lowest quintile of regions to more than 53 percent
in the highest quintile. The change in physician j’s practice environment experienced across a
move is calculated as ∆j = (destination region cath intensity)j −(origin region cath intensity)j ,
where physician j’s own patients are omitted when calculating the regional cath rates. Be-
cause a large fraction of cardiologist moves occur in the Midwest and South where there
is rich geographic variation in regional cath rates, the migrants in the sample face a wide
spread of environment changes as shown in Figure 2. Panel A shows the change in HRR
cath intensity across the move, while Panel B shows the change in hospital cath intensity.
Both distributions of changes center close to zero, indicating that roughly equal numbers
of physicians move to more- versus less-intensive regions. The spread in the distribution of
hospital-level changes is roughly twice as large as that of HRR-level changes, consistent with
a significant amount of within-region variation in cath intensity across hospitals.



3       Empirical Evidence
3.1     Difference-in-differences
3.1.1    Empirical specification
    My primary empirical specification is a difference-in-differences “event study” of physician
treatment decisions across a move. The key idea is to follow a physician in a long panel
before and after move, and to trace out the level and time pattern of behavior with respect

                                               13
to the move. By comparing migrants who start out in the same region, I test for selective
migration by observing whether the physicians who move to more intensive regions were
already practicing more intensively than average prior to the move, or whether they started
practicing more intensively shortly before the move. I then look at the change in physician
behavior across a move to identify the effect of a change in environment on a physician’s
behavior. The key identifying assumption here is that nothing other than the environment
changes simultaneously with the move that is correlated with the change in environment and
also affects physician behavior.
   To construct the event study, I measure each migrant cardiologist’s cath behavior with
respect to “event time” t, where t is the number of years since the physician’s move. The event
study is estimated using a regression where the dependent variable (cath)ijt is an indicator for
whether heart attack patient i, treated by cardiologist j in event year t, received a cath within
2 days of hospital admission. The key interest is in how the migrant’s change in environment
∆j explains the physician’s behavior over time. This is calculated by interacting ∆j with
the full set of event time dummies 1(s = t). Each migrant’s behavior is measured relative
to baseline migrants in the same origin HRR by including a full set of physician origin HRR
dummies and event time dummies 1(s = t). Fixed effects for year of patient admission and
patient age, race, sex, and first heart attack control for secular changes in cath propensity
over time and observable differences in patient appropriateness for cath. Observations are
limited to the treatment choices of migrant physicians within 8 years before or after move,
yielding the regression equation

                                                7 
                                                X                                  
            (cath)ijt = {origin HRR FEs}j +            αt 1(s = t) + βt ∆j 1(s = t)
                                                s=−8

                        + {calendar year FEs}i + {patient risk-adjusters}i + ijt ,          (1)


   The main parameters of interest are the βt coefficients. For a given value of t, βt describes
the difference between treatment styles of physicians t years since move per unit difference


                                               14
in ∆j . If there is little selective migration, then physician styles prior to move should not
differ systematically with ∆j , and thus βt should be close to zero for all t < 0. For t ≥ 0, βt
describes how physician styles diverge in relation to ∆j after a move. In combination with
the information on selective migration uncovered in pre-move behavior, post-move behavior
informs us how much physicians respond to changes in the environment. Namely, any break
in the level of βt across the move is informative about the extent of influence that the
environment exerts on an individual physician’s behavior. Moreover, the time pattern of any
environment effect is informative about the mechanisms underlying this effect: immediate
effects suggest that discrete factors such as the local availability of capital or peer effects are
important determinants of physician style, whereas effects that increase over time suggest
that “slow-moving” factors such as learning or adaptation play a role.
   As a supplement to the event study, I also consider a traditional style difference-in-
differences (DD) estimate of how a change in environment affects physician behavior. This
is implemented by replacing the event time dummies in Equation 1 with a single “after”
dummy 1(t ≥ 0). The DD approach requires a parallel trends assumption that, absent a
move, physician trends in behavior would have been the same for physicians who in fact
moved to more-intensive regions as those who moved to less-intensive regions. The event
study can boost the plausibility of this assumption by validating whether the assumption
holds at least during the 8 years prior to a move (i.e. whether βt is roughly flat for t < 0).
   While the DD approach inherits its validity from the event study, there are at least two
reasons for computing the DD estimate in addition to the event study. First, it provides a
single summary measure of the effect of a change in environment. A second reason is that by
lumping observations before and after move, the DD effectively computes the environment
effect over a larger sample, yielding tighter estimates. Thus, the DD provides more power
for adding additional controls, and makes it easier to compare the sensitivity of the results
across different specifications.
   For both the event study and traditional DD specifications, I include origin HRR fixed


                                                15
effects in the baseline specifications that measure changes in HRR cath rates across the move.
A potential weakness of this specification is that it essentially measures physician behavior
within groups defined by origin and destination HRR pairs, which potentially confounds
interpreting measured changes in βt over time as changes in individual physician behavior.
This could occur, for example, if physicians tend to treat a higher volume of patients when
the average practice intensity in their HRR is closer to the physician’s individual preferred
style. In this case, even if individual physicians changed their practice style little across a
move, the average treatment used by a group of physicians who move between the same
origin and destination HRRs could change due to a compositional shift in the fraction of
patients each physician treats.
       I resolve these concerns by considering alternative specifications that include physician
fixed effects. When physician fixed effects are included, all changes in a physician’s behavior
over event time are measured with respect to that physician’s behavior in a baseline period,
chosen to be the year immediately before the move (implying β−1 = 0). I also include
physician fixed effects in all specifications that use changes in the hospital environment
across the move, since a natural origin control group is difficult to define.9 However, because
physician fixed effects normalize β−1 = 0 mechanically, the βt coefficients for years prior
to the move no longer identify selective migration based on levels, though they will still
capture differential trends. Thus, I prefer using origin HRR fixed effects to evaluate selective
migration, but physician fixed effects to measure changes in physician behavior.
       Finally, for both the event study and DD estimates, I compute two-way clustered standard
errors at the physician and HRR levels. This accounts for potential serial correlation at the
physician level and spatial correlation at the hospital market level.
   9
    Since physicians may practice at multiple hospitals within the origin HRR, an “origin” hospital is not
well-defined for many physicians.




                                                   16
3.1.2   Event study results
   Figure 3 plots (solid black line) the sequence of βt estimates from Equation 1, based on
differences ∆HRR
             j   in the HRR cath environment experienced across a move. The pattern
highlighted in this figure is that the sequence of βt estimates is roughly flat and close to zero
before the move (t < 0) and then jumps discretely at t = 0 and thereafter remains roughly
flat near 0.66. Error bars indicate 95 percent confidence intervals constructed from two-way
clustered standard errors at the physician and HRR levels.
   I focus first on the βt coefficients for t < 0. These estimates show whether there is any
pre-move difference either in levels or trends between physician styles as a function of where
the physician moves (as described by the change in environment ∆HRR
                                                                j   ). In both cases the
answer appears to be negative: the values of βt for t < 0 show no particular trend and an
F -test that all eight estimates are jointly equal to zero fails to reject with p = 0.34.
   The lack of observed selective migration greatly facilitates interpreting the changes in
physician behavior across the move for two reasons. First, the jump in physician behavior
across a move is the causal effect of the experienced change in environment under a parallel
trends assumption that differences in migrant behavior would have remained unchanged
absent the treatment. The lack of any trend in this difference in the years leading up to the
move strongly boosts the plausibility of this assumption.
   The pre-move estimates also speak to the possibility that different types of migrants may
sort differentially to higher or lower intensity regions. This could raise the concern that, for
a given treatment, the effect on a migrant who chose that treatment may not be the same
for a migrant who did not choose that treatment. If, however, physicians who started in the
same region and later moved to dissimilar regions practiced no differently before the move,
it would rule out any (perhaps unobserved) sources of selective migration that are correlated
with observed physician practice choices. This is in fact what the results in Figure 3 suggest,
given that βt ≈ 0 prior to the move.
   The change in βt at t = 0, corresponding to the first year after a physician’s move,


                                               17
rejects the null hypothesis that the environment has no effect on physician behavior (e.g.
that physicians are “stuck” in their ways) and shows that there is a significant and immediate
positive physician response to the new environment. The finding that there is no further
physician response to the environment—βt is flat for t ≥ 0—suggests that the nature of the
physician response is not about slow moving factors, such as skill development or learning.
This stands in contrast, for example, to the hypothesis that physician styles evolve according
to a Bayesian-learning process of adaptation (see e.g. Phelps and Mooney, 1993).
   As discussed above, the measured change in behavior across the move could partly reflect
a compositional shift in the fraction of patients treated by different physicians. However,
this does not appear to be a major issue here: estimates controlling for physician fixed effects
(dashed gray line, Figure 3) are very similar to the results that control only for origin HRR.
   Finally, the physician response to a change in the environment is bounded away from
unity, suggesting that physician behavior is not fully determined by the environment. If
HRRs appropriately characterize each physician’s practice environment, βt ≈ 0.66 (2/3) for
t ≥ 0 implies that the environment matters about twice as much as the physician. However, if
HRRs mismeasure a physician’s relevant practice region, the estimated environment impact
may only provide a lower bound. In Section 3.2 I explore this possibility in more detail using
a cross-sectional approach to estimate a lower bound on the physician-specific effect.
   An alternative and more direct approach to alleviating concerns that HRRs miscapture
the relevant environment is to measure changes in environment based on differences ∆hosp
                                                                                    j    in a
physician’s hospital cath environment across the move. Figure 3 Panel A plots the estimates
of βt from Equation 1 based on differences ∆hosp
                                            j    and controlling for physician fixed effects.
The sequence of βt estimates shows no apparent differential trend in behavior before the
move (t < 0), with a discrete jump at t = 0 and remaining roughly flat thereafter near
0.78. The hospital environment results are qualitatively similar but notably more precise
and slightly larger than those in Figure 3 based on changes in the more aggregate HRR
environment measure.


                                              18
   The increase in precision when defining changes in the environment using hospital-level
cath rates is important for detecting heterogeneity in physician response. For example,
Panel B of Figure 3 plots the results of augmenting the regression behind Panel A to allow
for separate effects βtup and βtdown for physicians moving “up” to more-intensive hospitals
(∆hosp
  j    > 0) versus those moving “down” to less-intensive hospitals. While neither group of
physicians shows differential trends in behavior prior to the move, physicians moving to less-
intensive hospitals appear to retain more of their previous practice style (i.e. change behavior
less) than do physicians moving to more-intensive hospitals. I explore the implications of this
result in greater detail below, where I also show that estimating asymmetric responses based
on HRR-level changes in cath rates yields a similar point estimate that is far less-precisely
measured (see Table 6).

3.1.3   Difference-in-differences results
   The event study results documented an absence of differential pretrends in physician
behavior prior to a move, followed by a discrete change in the year immediately following
the move with little additional change over time. As described above, I summarize the event
study estimates using a traditional style difference-in-differences estimate of the physician
response to a change in the environment. The key advantage of the DD estimate is that it
provides a single summary estimate of the physician response, which effectively increases the
statistical precision of that parameter and makes it easier to compare the sensitivity of the
results to different specifications.
   Table 4 presents the difference-in-difference results. Each column reports the DD estimate
from a separate regression. Columns (1-5) and (9-10) report estimates based on the change
∆HRR
 j   in HRR environment, while columns (6-8) report estimates using the change ∆hosp
                                                                                j    in
hospital environment.
   Column (1) reports the DD estimates of physician behavior with respect to a change
∆HRR
 j   in HRR environment, relative to other migrants from the same origin HRR. The
coefficient on ∆HRR
                j   describes the degree of selective migration. If physicians who move to

                                              19
regions that are more intensive than their origin region practice more intensively than their
peers prior to the move, the coefficient on ∆HRR
                                             j   will be positive. In fact, the estimated
coefficient on ∆HRR
                j   is close to zero, consistent with the limited degree of selective migration
based on observed treatment choices documented in the event study (Figure 3).
   The DD environment effect, which measures the degree to which cardiologists alter their
treatment decisions after a move in response to a change in regional norms, is captured by
the coefficient on the interaction of ∆j with an “after” dummy 1(t ≥ 0). The DD estimate
of this effect is 0.63, implying that a 1 percentage point change in a physician’s HRR cath
environment corresponds to a 0.63 percentage point change in that physician’s measured
cath behavior. This estimate rejects both the polar view that physician practice styles are
fully ingrained and do not respond to changes in the environment, and also the other extreme
that physicians change their behavior 1-for-1 in response to a change in environment.
   To account for potential compositional shifts in the fraction of patients treated by different
physicians across a move, the regression result reported in Column (2) includes physician
fixed effects. The resulting DD estimate of 0.65 is very similar to the estimate in Column
(1) that controls only for origin HRR. Modifying the specification from Column (2) using
changes ∆hospital
         j        in the hospital environment across the move yields a DD estimate of 0.80.
Like the results based on changes in the HRR cath intensity, the estimate based on changes in
hospital intensity across a move suggest that physician practice styles are highly responsive
to changes in their environment.

3.1.4   Difference-in-differences robustness
   While the DD estimates above are consistent with the interpretation that the environment
has a large impact on the treatment of a physician’s patients, it is possible that this effect
is driven in part or whole by cases where multiple specialists treat a heart attack patient,
each independently making decisions whether to refer the patient for an early cath. In this
case, even if a migrant cardiologist never changes his or her propensity to recommend an
early cath after a move, their patients would nevertheless receive treatment more in line with

                                              20
the destination region. This would confound the interpretation of results as a change in a
physician’s practice style.
       To investigate whether the multiple specialist hypothesis appears to be a key driver of
the observed change in the treatment of a physician’s patients across a move, I first estimate
the DD effect over the 66 percent of patients who are treated by only a single cardiologist
on the first day. If the first cardiologist is not significantly changing cath recommendations
following a move, the DD estimate over this set of patients should be lower. In fact, as
reported in column (3) of Table 4, the estimated DD effect of 0.71 is actually slightly larger
than in the baseline specification.
       A primary concern with limiting the sample of patients to those who see a single cardi-
ologist is that the number of cardiologists seen on the first day may depend on the treat-
ment choices of the first cardiologist seen. Following a strategy closely related to that of
Doyle (2016), I therefore consider an “only-specialist-there” check which limits the sample
to patients admitted on days when there is only one cardiologist admitting patients at that
hospital.10 Because I am measuring two-day cath rates, I further include patients for whom
only one cardiologist admits any patients at that hospital within two days of the patient’s
admission. The DD effects estimated over this sample, reported in column (4) for changes
in HRR environment and in column (7) for changes in hospital environment, change little
relative to the baseline HRR and hospital estimates in columns (2) and (6), respectively.
This reinforces the interpretation of changes in a cardiologist’s patient treatment across a
move as a change in the physician’s practice style.
       Another potential concern is that the DD estimates may simply reflect the fact that some
patients are admitted to hospitals that do not have catheterization facilities. If a cardiologist
moves from a region with a high share of hospitals with cath labs to a region with a lower
  10
    The set of admitting physicians at a hospital on a given date is based on the date of admission for patients
with any diagnosis, not just AMI patients, and the associated attending physicians. Hospital admissions
are observed for a 100 percent sample of Medicare fee-for-service beneficiaries using the MedPAR data.
While these data do not report the admitting physician, prior literature has documented that the admitting
physician is also usually the attending physician for heart attack patients (Jollis et al., 1996).



                                                      21
share, the change in the cardiologist’s cath behavior may simply reflect that it is hard to
do caths when the initial hospital has no cath lab. The lack of cath facilities seems unlikely
to play a major role over the period of analysis in this paper. 84 percent of heart attack
patients in 1998 were admitted to a hospital with cath facilities, and this share only grew
over time.
   As a direct test, I estimate the DD regression limited to patients admitted to hospitals
with cath lab facilities. To do this, I first measure whether a hospital has a cath lab facility
in a given year based on whether at least two Medicare patients admitted to the hospital that
year (for any condition) received a cardiac catheterization. I also define modified versions
of ∆HRR
    j   and ∆hosp
             j    based only on patients admitted to hospitals with cath facilities. The
DD effects estimated over the cath-lab sample, reported in column (5) for changes in HRR
environment and in column (8) for changes in hospital environment, decrease only slightly
relative to the baseline HRR and hospital estimates in columns (2) and (6), respectively. This
suggests that lacking a cath lab is not the key factor driving changes in physician treatment
choices across a move, at least during this period.
   As a final robustness check, I re-estimate the HRR environment specification using both
migrant and non-migrant physician data. This has two primary benefits. First, it allows
HRR, calendar year, and comorbidity fixed effects to be estimated using all data, providing
more efficient estimates under the condition where these effects are the same for both mi-
grants and non-migrants. The second benefit is that it allows a direct comparison of migrant
and non-migrant behavior. In particular, in a specification without physician fixed effects, I
will estimate whether migrants are more or less intensive on average than non-migrants.
   To estimate this regression, I define the origin and destination HRRs for non-migrants to
be equal to the current HRR in which they are observed practicing and also set their event
time at t = −1 in all periods. Thus, by definition, ∆HRR
                                                     j   = 0 for all non-migrants.
   Results estimated over the full sample of cardiologists are reported in the last two columns
of Table 4. In column (9), which includes both origin and destination HRR fixed effects, the


                                              22
DD estimate is very similar to the same specification estimated over movers only (column
2). As shown by the coefficient on the “mover” dummy, migrant behavior is very similar
to non-migrants on the whole. This suggests that selection into the migrant sample is not
driven by factors that are correlated with a physician’s practice intensity level. Column
(10) reports results controlling for physician fixed effects; the resulting estimate of 0.65 is
essentially identical to estimating the same regression over movers only (column 2).


3.2     Cross-section
3.2.1   Measurement error and estimate bounds
   While the difference-in-differences results (Section 3.1.3) suggest that physicians are
highly responsive to changes in their environment, the results also show less than 1-to-1
conformity to these changes, rejecting the null hypothesis that physician behavior is fully
characterized by the physician’s current practice environment. A valid concern with this
conclusion, however, is whether mis-measurement exists in the key independent variable—
namely, the measured change in a physician’s practice environment across a move—and if so
whether this biases the estimated physician response. Importantly, if the estimated response
is biased toward zero, then we must interpret the estimate as a lower bound of the true
physician response to a change in environment and we can no longer reject the possibility
that physicians fully converge to the new environment. Thus, the goal of this section is to
lay out the conditions under which measurement error does or does not bias the estimated
physician response, and to provide a framework that provides both upper and lower bounds
of the estimates in the presence of pernicious measurement error.
   Throughout the analysis, ∆j has denoted the change in environment a physician expe-
riences across a move. Suppose that instead of observing ∆j directly, we can only measure
∆g(j) where g(.) is the potentially limited set of information available to the econometrician
about a physician’s change in environment. For example, g(.) may include only the origin
and destination HRRs corresponding to a physician’s move. Then linear estimates of physi-


                                              23
cian response to ∆j as in (1) can be consistently estimated by replacing ∆j with ∆g(j) if and
only if the consistency condition ∆g(j) = E[∆j |g] is satisfied.11
    In other words, the consistency condition states that the measured change in environment
∆g need not equal the physician’s actual change in environment ∆j , but it must equal the
conditional expected value of ∆j . An important case satisfying this condition occurs if the
scope of geography relevant for measuring a physician’s practice environment is smaller than
an HRR (e.g. a ZIP code or specific hospital). Then as long as migrant physicians do not
positively select into sub-environments conditional on the choice of HRR (which may not
be an unreasonable assumption given the previously observed limited scope of selection into
HRRs), the expected change in the physician’s own environment across a move is just the
average change in environment across the origin and destination HRRs. For this reason,
misclassifying geographic practice regions too broadly need not bias the resulting estimates.
    There are, however, at least two potential sources of measurement error that could arise
and violate the consistency condition. The first is that even if physicians do not positively
select into more- or less-intensive HRRs as suggested by the main results, there still may be
some scope for them to positively select into sub-environments conditional on HRR. This
could occur, for example, if physicians choose a destination HRR based on reasons unrelated
to practice style, but then sort into a specific practice location within the HRR, such as the
city or hospital that most closely resembles their previous practice setting. In this case, the
measured change in environment based on HRR is systematically larger than the physician’s
expected change (∆g > E[∆j |g]), and estimates of physician response based on ∆g would
be biased toward zero. Empirically, the higher difference-in-differences estimates when using
hospital-level environment changes compared with HRR-level changes (0.75-0.80 versus 0.63-
0.71, respectively; see Table 4) could reflect the presence of this type of measurement error.12
  11
     To see this, suppose the conditional expectation function (CEF) of y given x is given by E[y|x] = xβ.
Then if g contains less-specific information than x, the law of iterated expectations implies E[y|g] = E[x|g]β.
Thus, OLS using E[x|g] in place of x produces consistent estimates of β. This result is analogous to the
well-known result that linear CEFs can be estimated by OLS over grouped means.
  12
     The difference in estimates when using HRR- and hospital-level environment changes could also reflect
direct impacts the physician has on local practice patterns, a problem which is mitigated when focusing on


                                                      24
   A second potential source of mismeasurement is classical measurement error, which
through attenuation bias would also lead to under-estimates of the true physician response
to a change in environment. This type of measurement error might arise, for example, if the
HRR practice environments vary over time.13
   Because these types of error in measured environment changes raise the possibility that
estimates from the baseline analysis should be interpreted as a lower bound on the true
physician response to changes in environment, I adopt an alternative approach that instead
provides an upper bound on the physician response. The key idea underlying this approach is
rather than estimate the degree β to which physicians conform to a (potentially mismeasured)
change in environment as in the event study and DD specifications, instead I estimate the
degree θ to which physicians fail to conform to their new environment, and thus these two
parameters are related by β = 1 − θ. Importantly, obtaining a lower bound on θ provides an
upper bound on β.
   To measure the degree θ of non-conformance, I adopt a “cross-sectional” approach and
estimate non-conformance as the degree to which migrant physicians retain their original
practice style after a move, relative to other physicians practicing in their post-move envi-
ronment. When practice environments are measured without error and physicians do not
positively sort into practice environments, lack of conformance θ is given by

                                                                                  
         (cath)ij = θ (origin HRR cath intensity)j − (current HRR cath intensity)j

                  + {environment FEs}i + {year FEs}i + ijt .                                         (2)


To estimate this regression, I include patient-physician observations for both post-move
migrants and non-migrants, where the origin HRR is defined to be the current HRR for non-
migrants. The coefficient θ describes the degree to which physicians in the same practice
broader definitions of the region such as the HRR. Section 2.2.3 discusses this issue in greater detail.
  13
     While we can perform the analysis using time-varying rates directly as in Appendix B.1, this approach
trades one type of classical measurement error for another as time-varying rates are effectively measured
over smaller samples, potentially introducing statistical noise into the environment measure.



                                                   25
environment (as specified by the choice of environment dummies) differ in their behavior
per unit difference in their previous practice environment. Importantly, the same potential
sources of downward bias in the estimation of β will also result in downward bias in the
estimation of θ. If there exists positive matching of physicians to practice regions, the
estimate of θ will be a lower bound on the true value of the parameter; similarly, any
classical measurement error results in attenuation bias of the estimate. Thus, estimating θ
from equation (2) provides a lower bound on the degree of non-conformance of physician
behavior to changes in practice environment, which as previously noted gives us an upper
bound on the degree of conformance by subtracting this estimate from 1.
   The results from this regression are shown in Panel A of Table 5. Column (1) shows
results when then environment is defined as the HRR, while column (2) defines the en-
vironment as the hospital. Standard errors are calculated using two-way clusters in the
cardiologist’s origin and current HRRs. In both columns (1-2), the point estimates on
(origin HRR cath intensity)j are significantly larger than zero, allowing us to reject at the
0.01 level the null hypothesis that a physician behavior does not vary based on the intensity
of the physician’s previous practice environment. This in turn rejects the hypothesis that
physician practice styles are fully characterized by the current practice environment.
   Finally, I convert this estimate into an upper bound β̄ on the degree of physician response
to a change in practice environment. To be conservative, I take the estimate of θ̂ = 0.17 from
the hospital-level specification in column (2) of Table 5, from which I calculate β̄ = 1−0.17 =
0.83. This result is can be compared to the estimates of β̂ ≈ 0.66 implied by the event study
specification shown in Figure 3 which as previously discussed can be interpreted as a lower
bound on the true value of β. These bounds of 0.66 and 0.83 also include the event study
estimates β̂ ≈ 0.78 based on hospital-level changes in cath intensity shown in Figure 4. That
the upper and lower bounds are relatively similar suggests that the difference-in-differences
results are quite reliable as an estimate of the degree to which physicians conform to changes
in their practice environment.


                                              26
3.2.2   Doctor-patient sorting
   The cross-section results just described show that physicians systematically differ (even
within the same hospital) in their treatment decisions based on prior experience. However,
a potential concern is that these results are driven by patients being sorted to doctors based
on (potentially unobservable) clinical appropriateness in a way that is correlated with a
physician’s background. In this section, I test the plausibility of this concern by evaluating
whether physicians from different backgrounds see patients with observably different levels
of clinical appropriateness for intensive heart attack management.
   To do this, I first construct an index of patient clinical appropriateness for intensive
management. Similar to Chandra and Staiger (2007), I define clinical appropriateness using
logistic regression of patient catheterization within 2 days of a heart attack, as

                                                                    
                                            
                              P r cathiht       = G θh + θh t + Xit Φ .                      (3)


Here, θh is an indicator for the HRR h in which patient i was treated. This indicator enters
directly and also interacted with continuous calendar year t to allow for arbitrary linear
trends by HRR. Xit includes calendar year dummies, patient comorbidities, and comorbidities
interacted with calendar year. The empirical index of patient clinical appropriateness is
obtained as the fitted values from (3) evaluated at a baseline year and HRR.
   Given the index of patient clinical appropriateness, I test whether two physicians with
different backgrounds but currently practicing in the same hospital systematically see pa-
tients with different levels of appropriateness. Specifically, I estimate the same regressions
                                                                                     ˆ
reported in Table 5, except to replace the original dependent variable (cath)ij with Pr(cath)ij .

   The results are reported in Panel B of Table 5. When using HRRs to define the current
environment, the resulting estimate of θ (column 1) is small but statistically significant at the
5 percent level, indicating some scope for selective matching of patient and physician types
within HRRs. Specifically, the point estimate of θ̂ = 0.025 implies that for a 10 percentage


                                                    27
point difference in the cath backgrounds of two physicians now practicing in the same HRR,
the physician with the more intensive background sees patients whose empirical propensity
to be cathed is 0.25 percentage points higher, on average. Controlling for the hospital rather
than the HRR as the current environment reduces the estimate of θ to 0.018 (column 2),
which is not statistically different from zero. The reduction in θ when controlling for the
hospital environment suggests that some sorting within an HRR is due to differences in
patient and physician characteristics across hospitals within the HRR.
   As a final specification, column (3) repeats the specification from column (2), but limited
to the same “only-specialist-there” check described in Section 3.1.4. This check limits the
sample to patients admitted when there is only one cardiologist admitting patients at that
hospital. Plausibly, any within-hospital sorting of patients to cardiologists is likely to be
minimized on such days. In fact, no sorting is detected: θ̂ = −0.0002.
   In combination, the limited or no sorting results in columns (2-3) support two conclusions.
First, cardiologists currently practicing in the same hospital do differ in their treatment
choices based on their prior environment, and this difference does not appear to be driven by
patient sorting within the hospital. Second, sorting of AMI patients is plausibly negligible on
days when only one cardiologist is admitting patients at the hospital. This latter conclusion
reinforces the usefulness of the “only-specialist-there” robustness check of the DD estimates
discussed and reported in Section 3.1.4.


3.3    Characterizing Physician Behavior Changes
   In this section, I aim to characterize in more detail the nature of physician response to
changes in the physician’s environment. This is useful for evaluating prevailing theories of
how physician styles are formed by testing the distinct implications these theories have for
how physician behavior should respond to changes in the environment.




                                              28
3.3.1   “Schools of thought” theory
   A predominant theory used to explain the existence and persistence of regional practice
variations is the Phelps and Mooney (1993) model of information diffusion and physician
learning. In this model, uncertainty and complexity regarding the efficacy of various medical
interventions ultimately lead to regional “schools of thought” concerning what constitutes
best practice. Physicians form initial practice styles based on where they train in medical
school. Over time, these practice styles evolve according to a Bayesian learning process, as
physicians update their beliefs based on local community norms. In this model, variations in
health care delivery arise from incomplete information. Deviations from the fully informed
provision of care either through over- or under-provision result in welfare losses. Determining
whether this learning model appears to explain variations in AMI care is thus important for
whether we should rely on its welfare implications.
   An obvious implication of the learning model is that physicians will change behavior
following a move across environments (as I find), but the model has two further implications
which I am able to test directly in my empirical context. First, migrant behavior should
evolve smoothly over time, eventually converging to the new school of thought regardless
of where they came from. However, the patterns of behavior following a physician’s move
as measured by the event study in Figure 3 show that physicians partially conform their
behavior to a new environment nearly immediately. This very rapid change in behavior
across the move, with no further convergence even after 8 years, together are difficult to
explain in a learning context.
   A second implication of this learning model is that physicians who move later in their
career should change their behavior less than physicians who move early in their career.
I test this by testing for heterogeneity in the DD estimator from Section 3.1.1 based on
whether the physician was more than 8 years post-fellowship completion (the median among




                                              29
migrants) at the time of the move. The specific regression I estimate takes the form

                                     
     (cath)ijt = {physician FEs}j + β ∆j × 1(t ≥ 0) × 1(tsfj > 8)
                   
                 + main effects and two-way interactions of ∆j , 1(t ≥ 0), 1(tsfj > 8)   j

                + {calendar year FEs}i + {patient risk-adjusters}i + ijt .                  (4)


The estimates of β when ∆j is based on HRR and hospital changes in cath environment
across a move are reported in Table 6 columns (1) and (5), respectively. In both cases, β̂,
is negative but small, and not significant at the 5 percent level. The small point estimates
imply that physicians who move later in their career respond about the same to changes
in their environment as those who move early in their career, suggesting physician practice
styles—at least among those who chose to move—remain elastic over time.

3.3.2   Asymmetries
   Depending on the primary environment-level mechanisms that drive physicians to change
behavior across a move, physician responses to an increase in the environment’s intensity may
differ from the response to a decrease in intensity. For example, if hard capacity constraints
such as lacking catheterization facilities are a predominant factor driving physician cath
decisions, a move to a region that is less intensive because of restricted access to hospital
capacity could plausibly have a larger impact on the physician’s practice style than a move to
a region that is more intensive because of expanded capacity. On the other hand, defensive
medicine in the face of medical malpractice risk and locality rules may lead physicians to
respond more to increases in the local diagnostic cath environment than to decreases.
   Panel B of Figure 4 plots the results of the event study of physician behavior across a
move with respect to a change ∆hosp
                               j    in hospital cath intensity, with separate effects βtup and
βtdown for physicians moving “up” to more-intensive hospitals (∆hosp
                                                                j    > 0) versus those moving
“down” to less-intensive hospitals. Averaging the βtup and βtdown parameters separately for
t ≥ 0 implies that a physician moving to a 1pp more-intensive hospital changes behavior by

                                              30
about 0.21pp more than a physician moving to a 1pp less-intensive hospital.
   To directly summarize this result for changes in HRR or hospital cath intensity, I es-
timate Equation 4 above, replacing 1(tsfj > 8) by an indicator for whether the physician
moved to a more-intensive region (∆j > 0). The results from HRR and hospital changes in
cath environment across a move are reported in Table 6 columns (2) and (6), respectively.
The point estimate based on changes in HRR cath rates is 0.20 (though not statistically sig-
nificant), and the estimate based on hospital cath rates is 0.27 (significant at the 1 percent
level). Both these estimates are very similar to the 0.22 estimate implied by the event study
in Figure 3 and imply that physicians respond more to increases in environment intensity.

3.3.3   Heart attack type
   Guidelines for heart attack treatment generally distinguish between two types of heart
attacks, characterized by their electrocardiogram tracings. The first type is an ST-elevation
myocardial infarction (STEMI), caused by complete blockage of an artery in the heart.
The second type is a non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI), caused by partial
blockage. Current clinical evidence and guidelines generally support treating most STEMI
patients invasively by diagnostic catheterization with an intent to perform revascularization
(O’Gara et al., 2013). In contrast, medical guidelines for NSTEMI patients suggest a more
nuanced risk-management strategy to determine patient appropriateness for early invasive
treatment (Amsterdam et al., 2014). Consistent with medical practice broadly following
these guidelines, Appendix Table C.1 (column 14) shows that in 2012, the 2-day STEMI
cath rate was 26.9 percentage points (52 percent) higher than the NSTEMI cath rate.
   The higher degree of medical uncertainty regarding the benefits of early invasive man-
agement of NSTEMI vs. STEMI patients over the sample period provides an opportunity
to test whether physicians are more responsive to changes in their environment based on
the degree of medical uncertainty. I code each heart attack patient as NSTEMI if they
were diagnosed with a subendocardial infarction (ICD-9-CM codes 410.7), labeling all other
heart attacks as STEMI. I estimate Equation 4 above, replacing 1(tsfj > 8) by an indicator

                                             31
for a STEMI heart attack. The results from HRR and hospital changes in cath environ-
ment across a move are reported in Table 6 columns (3) and (7), respectively. The point
estimate based on changes in HRR cath rates is -0.132 (significant at the 1 percent level),
and the estimate based on hospital cath rates is -0.032 (though not statistically significant).
Taken together, these estimates suggest that physicians change their treatment of patients
more when medical benefits are less certain. Given that STEMI cath rates are higher than
NSTEMI cath rates, this result also suggests that hard capacity constraints (such as intra-
day or -week availability in a non-24/7 cath lab setting) that are orthogonal to patient cath
appropriateness are not the exclusive factor driving changes in physician behavior in this
setting.

3.3.4      Long moves
   A primary aim of this paper is to shed light on the role environmental factors play
in shaping a physician’s practice choices. Physician moves can be used estimate the role
environment factors play on shaping migrant physician behavior, but an important con-
sideration is whether these results are externally valid for the non-mover population. The
previous analysis showed that migrants and non-migrants look similar in terms of pre-move
behavior (as captured by approximately zero coefficient on the “mover” dummy in column
10 of Table 4). However, if changing one’s practice style requires costly adjustments, it is
possible that movers are selectively more elastic to changes in their environment.
   Since by definition it is not possible to examine the change in behavior for non-migrants
across a move, I instead consider whether physicians who move a long distance demonstrate a
different response to changes in the environment compared with physicians moving a shorter
distance. I do this by estimating Equation 4 above, replacing 1(tsfj > 8) by an indicator
for whether the physician was among the 45 percent of migrants who moved across Census
Regions (Table 2). As reported in Table 6, columns (4) and (8), physicians who move across
Census Regions respond about the same to changes in their environment as those who do
not.

                                              32
4     Mechanisms
    The results in Section 3 provide evidence that the environment plays an important role in
how physicians treat patients. There are a variety of ways in which a physician’s environment
could influence treatment decisions. Here, I briefly discuss three possible mechanisms that
are likely to be important in the current context, including how the results in this paper
shed light on how these factors are likely to play a role.
    Because invasive treatment of a heart attack requires the use of a specialized laboratory
setting and access to other hospital resources, the availability of these capital resources may
be an important driver of how cardiologists treat heart attack patients. Evidence from
Gatsonis et al. (1995) finds that states with more extensive on-site availability of cardiac
catheterization have higher catheterization rates after adjusting for patient characteristics.
However, while hard capacity constraints such as lack of catheterization facilities are likely
to greatly limit early cath rates for heart attack patients admitted to those hospitals, this
does not appear to be a primary mechanism driving the changes in physician behavior I
observe in this setting where over 89 percent of heart attack patients in the sample are
admitted to hospitals with cath labs and the estimates of physician response across a move
change little when limiting the analysis to this subsample. An interesting question that
merits further exploration is the role played by softer “intensive” capacity constraints, such
as whether a hospital’s cath lab is staffed nights or weekends. Since a two-day window
for cath always overlaps with regular business hours on at least one weekday, these types of
capacity constraints are unlikely to prohibit early caths, but may change the relative benefits
of medical management if they increase the time to cath.
    Chandra and Staiger (2007) find evidence that the environment may also influence physi-
cian decisions through productivity spillovers. These spillovers could occur at the regional
level, such as from knowledge spillovers across physicians practicing in the same region or by
attracting physicians who have specialized in certain types of treatments. Spillovers could
also occur at the physician level, through learning-by-doing and skill specialization (perhaps

                                              33
as a function of the underlying patient population). The current paper does not rule out
physician-level spillover effects—physicians change their behavior less than one-for-one in
response to a change in the environment, which could be a result of embedded habits or
skills. However, the results in this paper do speak to how regional-level spillovers are likely
to occur. First, given the very limited degree of physician sorting that I find, it appears
that the attraction of specialized physicians to particular regions (at least at the level of the
HRR) is quite small in this context.14 To the degree that knowledge spillovers occur across
physicians, these appear to occur in a manner that changes physician behavior immediately
after a move with no further effect. Finally, it is worth noting that capacity constraints
can be related to regional productivity spillovers: hospitals or regions may induce physician
specialization by accumulating a stock of capital that targets a particular treatment.
       Finally, I consider how the environment may influence physician behavior through “team”
effects. It seems plausible that the first cardiologist treating a heart attack patient plays a
key role in deciding on cardiac care options especially in cases that are not clear-cut. The
robustness of the key estimates in this paper to situations where there is only one cardiologist
suggests the change in treatment patterns across a move does not simply reflect new car-
diologists passively deferring to other cardiologists also treating the patient. However, this
does not rule out a possibly key role played by other team members. Due to the emergency
nature of heart attacks and the time-sensitivity of the relative benefits of different treatment
paths, optimal patient treatment may depend on the speed and accuracy of preliminary di-
agnoses by the triage and emergency room staff. Moreover, the probability of complications
from invasive treatment and the ability to identify and cope with such complications could
depend on the skill of cardiac catheterization lab technicians, hospital nurses, and surgical
staff. Thus, the factors specific to the team of physicians and hospital staff involved in the
care of the heart attack patient may play an important role in a cardiologist’s treatment be-
havior. Moreover, due to their discrete nature across practice settings, team factors are also
  14
    This limited selective migration applies to physicians moving later in their career. It is unknown whether
the degree of selective migration differs for cardiologists moving directly out of their cardiology fellowship.


                                                      34
consistent with the observed level-shift in physician behavior across a move. An important
direction for future work is to understand the role of specialists on teams for influencing
patient care and to understand the factors that shape team practice patterns.



5     Conclusion
    Cardiologists vary widely across U.S. regions in their propensity to intensively manage
heart attacks, even after adjusting for apparent differences in average patient characteristics
and illness severity across regions. Such variation could result from differences in local
practice environments, such as access to hospital capacity, the availability of specialists, and
medical malpractice exposure. On the other hand, the regional differences could be driven
entirely by physician-specific factors such as training, preferences, and experience as a result
of positive matching of physicians to other physicians with similar practice styles.
    This paper attempts to identify the role of the environment on a cardiologist’s behavior
relative to physician-specific factors by exploiting changes in practice environment resulting
from cardiologist migration. Using 15 years of Medicare data, I trace migrant treatment
choices in a long panel before and after a move. Positive sorting is identified by the degree
to which physicians starting in the same region and later moving to dissimilar regions already
practiced dissimilarly before the move. The environment effect is identified by the change
in physician behavior across the move. I find that both environment and physician-specific
factors impact practice style, but the role of the environment is at least twice as large. Also,
the pattern of physician behavior changes observed across a move is not consistent with the
“schools of thought” model often used to describe regional differences in medical practice.
    The results in this paper capture how individual physicians adapt to a new environment
following a move. This environment consists of all things not embedded in that physician,
including physical hospital capacity and systems processes, as well as the human capital of
other (possibly non-randomly selected) medical providers also practicing in that environ-
ment. I find that physician practice styles even mid-career are highly “elastic” with respect


                                              35
to environment changes. Understanding the components primarily responsible for this en-
vironment effect is essential for policy makers challenged with changing provider behavior.
While the analyses in the paper shed new light on the roles of certain environment-level
factors, there is significant scope for more work to be done in this important area.


References
Amsterdam, Ezra A., Nanette K. Wenger, Ralph G. Brindis, Donald E. Casey,
 Theodore G. Ganiats, David R. Holmes, Allan S. Jaffe, Hani Jneid, Rose-
 mary F. Kelly, Michael C. Kontos, et al. 2014. “2014 AHA/ACC guideline for the
 management of patients with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes: Executive sum-
 mary.” Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 64(24): 2645.
Angrist, Joshua D. 2014. “The Perils of Peer Effects.” Labour Economics, 30: 98–108.
Baicker, Katherine, and Amitabh Chandra. 2004. “Medicare Spending, The Physician
 Workforce, And Beneficiaries’ Quality Of Care.” Health Affairs, W4: 184–197.
Barnato, Amber E., M. Brooke Herndon, Denise L. Anthony, Patricia M. Gal-
 lagher, Jonathan S. Skinner, Julie P. W. Bynum, and Elliott S. Fisher. 2007.
 “Are Regional Variations in End-of-Life Care Intensity Explained by Patient Preferences?
 A Study of the US Medicare Population.” Medical care, 45(5): 386.
Bronnenberg, Bart J, Jean-Pierre H Dubé, and Matthew Gentzkow. 2012. “The
 Evolution of Brand Preferences: Evidence from Consumer Migration.” American Eco-
 nomic Review, 102(6): 2472–2508.
Brophy, James M., and Peter Bogaty. 2004. “Primary Angioplasty and Thrombol-
 ysis Are Both Reasonable Options in Acute Myocardial Infarction.” Annals of Internal
 Medicine, 141(4): 292–297.
Chandra, Amitabh, and Douglas O. Staiger. 2007. “Productivity Spillovers in Health
 Care: Evidence from the Treatment of Heart Attacks.” The Journal of Political Economy,
 115(1): 103–140.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Emmanuel Saez. 2013. “Using Differences in
 Knowledge Across Neighborhoods to Uncover the Impacts of the EITC on Earnings.” The
 American Economic Review, 103(7): 2683–2721.
Congressional Budget Office. 2008. “Geographic Variation in Health Care Spending.”
Doyle, Joseph J. 2016. “Physician Characteristics and Patient Survival: Evidence from
 Physician Availability.” Working Paper.
Doyle, Joseph J., Steven M. Ewer, and Todd H. Wagner. 2010. “Returns to physician
 human capital: Evidence from patients randomized to physician teams.” Journal of Health
 Economics.

                                             36
Dranove, David, Subramaniam Ramanarayanan, and Andrew Sfekas. 2011. “Does
 the Market Punish Aggressive Experts? Evidence from Cesarean Sections.” B.E. Journal
 of Economic Analysis & Policy, 11(2).

Epstein, Andrew J., and Sean Nicholson. 2009. “The formation and evolution of physi-
 cian treatment styles: An application to cesarean sections.” Journal of Health Economics,
 28(6): 1126–1140.

Fernández, Raquel. 2008. “Culture and Economics.” In The New Palgrave Dictionary
  of Economics. , ed. Steven N. Durlauf and Lawrence E. Blume. Basingstoke:Palgrave
  Macmillan.

Finkelstein, Amy, Matthew Gentzkow, and Heidi Williams. 2016. “Sources of geo-
  graphic variation in health care: Evidence from patient migration.” The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 131(4): 1681–1726.

Fisher, Elliott S., David E. Wennberg, Thérèse A. Stukel, Daniel J. Gottlieb,
  F.L. Lucas, and Étoile L. Pinder. 2003a. “The implications of regional variations
  in Medicare spending. Part 1: the content, quality, and accessibility of care.” Annals of
  Internal Medicine, 138(4): 273–287.

Fisher, Elliott S., David E. Wennberg, Thérèse A. Stukel, Daniel J. Gottlieb,
  F.L. Lucas, and Étoile L. Pinder. 2003b. “The implications of regional variations
  in Medicare spending. Part 2: health outcomes and satisfaction with care.” Annals of
  Internal Medicine, 138(4): 288–298.

Gatsonis, Constantine A., Arnold M. Epstein, Joseph P. Newhouse, Sharon-Lise
 Normand, and Barbara J. McNeil. 1995. “Variations in the Utilization of Coronary
 Angiography for Elderly Patients with an Acute Myocardial Infarction: An Analysis Using
 Hierarchical Logistic Regression.” Medical Care, 33(6): 625–642.

Gawande, Atul. 2009. “The Cost Conundrum.” The New Yorker.

Glover, J. Alison. 1938. “The Incidence of Tonsillectomy in School Children.” Indian
 Journal of Pediatrics, 5(4): 252–258.

Gottlieb, Daniel J., Weiping Zhou, Yunjie Song, Kathryn Gilman Andrews,
 Jonathan S. Skinner, and Jason M. Sutherland. 2010. “Prices Don’t Drive Regional
 Medicare Spending Variations.” Health Affairs, 29(3): 537.

Grytten, J., and R. Sørensen. 2003. “Practice variation and physician-specific effects.”
 Journal of Health Economics, 22(3): 403–418.

Ichino, Andrea, and Giovanni Maggi. 2000. “Work Environment and Individual Back-
  ground: Explaining Regional Shirking Differentials in a Large Italian Firm*.” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 115(3): 1057–1090.




                                            37
Jollis, James G., Elizabeth R. DeLong, Eric D. Peterson, Lawrence H. Muhlbaier,
  Donald F. Fortin, Robert M. Califf, and Daniel B. Mark. 1996. “Outcome of
  Acute Myocardial Infarction According to the Specialty of the Admitting Physician.”
  New England Journal of Medicine, 335(25): 1880–1887.
Keeley, Ellen C., and Cindy L. Grines. 2004. “Primary Percutaneous Coronary Inter-
 vention for Every Patient with ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction: What Stands
 in the Way?” Annals of Internal Medicine, 141(4): 298–304.
Kushner, Frederick G., Mary Hand, Sidney C. Smith, Spencer B. King, Jef-
 frey L. Anderson, Elliott M. Antman, Steven R. Bailey, Eric R. Bates, James C.
 Blankenship, Donald E. Casey, Lee A. Green, Judith S. Hochman, Alice K. Ja-
 cobs, Harlan M. Krumholz, Douglass A. Morrison, Joseph P. Ornato, David L.
 Pearle, Eric D. Peterson, Michael A. Sloan, Patrick L. Whitlow, and David O.
 Williams. 2009. “2009 Focused Updates: ACC/AHA Guidelines for the Management of
 Patients With ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction (Updating the 2004 Guideline and 2007
 Focused Update) and ACC/AHA/SCAI Guidelines on Percutaneous Coronary Interven-
 tion (Updating the 2005 Guideline and 2007 Focused Update).” Circulation, 120(22): 2271–
 2306.
Manski, Charles F. 1993. “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection
 Problem.” The Review of Economic Studies, 60(3): 531.
Martin, Anne B., Lekha Whittle, Stephen Heffler, Mary Carol Barron, Andrea
 Sisko, and Benjamin Washington. 2007. “Health spending by state of residence, 1991-
 2004.” Health Affairs, 26(6): 651–663.
McClellan, Mark, and Joseph P. Newhouse. 1997. “The marginal cost-effectiveness of
 medical technology: A panel instrumental-variables approach.” Journal of Econometrics,
 77(1): 39–64.
O’Gara, Patrick T, Frederick G Kushner, Deborah D Ascheim, Donald E Casey,
 Mina K Chung, James A De Lemos, Steven M Ettinger, James C Fang, Fran-
 cis M Fesmire, Barry A Franklin, et al. 2013. “2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the
 management of ST-elevation myocardial infarction.” Circulation, 127(4): 362–425.
Phelps, Charles E. 1992. “Diffusion of Information in Medical Care.” The Journal of
 Economic Perspectives, 6(3): 23–42.
Phelps, Charles E. 2000. “Information Diffusion and Best Practice Adoption.” Handbook
 of Health Economics, 1: 223–264.
Phelps, Charles E., and Cathleen Mooney. 1993. “Geographic Variation in Health
 Care: The Role of Private Markets.” Competitive approaches to health care reform, 139–
 175.
Philipson, Tomas J., Seth A. Seabury, Lee M. Lockwood, Dana P. Goldman,
 and Darius N. Lakdawalla. 2010. “Geographic Variation in Health Care: The Role of
 Private Markets.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 325–361.

                                           38
Scanlon, Patrick J., David P. Faxon, Anne-Marie Audet, Blase Carabello, Gre-
  gory J. Dehmer, Kim A. Eagle, Ronald D. Legako, Donald F. Leon, John A.
  Murray, Steven E. Nissen, Carl J. Pepine, Rita M. Watson, James L. Ritchie,
  Raymond J. Gibbons, Melvin D. Cheitlin, Kim A. Eagle, Timothy J. Gardner,
  Jr Garson, Arthur, Jr Russell, Richard O., Thomas J. Ryan, and Jr Smith,
  Sidney C. 1999. “ACC/AHA guidelines for coronary angiography: A report of the Amer-
  ican College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines
  (Committee on Coronary Angiography) developed in collaboration with the Society for
  Cardiac Angiography and Interventions.” J Am Coll Cardiol, 33(6): 1756–1824.

Sirovich, Brenda E., Daniel J. Gottlieb, H. Gilbert Welch, and Elliott S. Fisher.
  2006. “Regional Variations in Health Care Intensity and Physician Perceptions of Quality
  of Care.” Annals of Internal medicine, 144(9): 641–649.

Skinner, Jonathan, and Elliot Fisher. 1997. “Regional disparities in Medicare expendi-
  tures: an opportunity for reform.” National Tax Journal, 50(3): 413–25.

Skinner, Jonathan S., Daniel J. Gottlieb, and Donald Carmichael. 2011. “A New
  Series of Medicare Expenditure Measures by Hospital Referral Region: 2003-2008.” The
  Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy and Clinical Practice.

Skinner, Jonathan S., Douglas O. Staiger, and Elliott S. Fisher. 2006. “Is Techno-
  logical Change In Medicine Always Worth It? The Case Of Acute Myocardial Infarction.”
  Health Affairs, 25(2): W34–W47.

Song, Yunjie, Jonathan Skinner, Julie Bynum, Jason Sutherland, John E.
  Wennberg, and Elliott S. Fisher. 2010. “Regional Variations in Diagnostic Practices.”
  NEJM, 363(1): 45–53.

Wennberg, John, and Alan Gittelsohn. 1973. “Small Area Variations in Health Care
 Delivery.” Science, 182(4117): 1102–1108.

Wennberg, John E., Elliott S. Fisher, and Jonathan S. Skinner. 2002. “Geography
 and the debate over Medicare reform.” Health Affairs.

Zuckerman, Stephen, Timothy Waidmann, Robert Berenson, and Ph.D.
 Jack Hadley. 2010. “Clarifying Sources of GeographicDifferences in Medicare Spending.”
 New England Journal of Medicine, 363(1): 54–62.




                                           39
                                              Figure 1: Distribution of 2-day cath rates by HRR




                                                                                                                                       Legend
                                                                                                                                             No data
                                                                                                                                             24.1% - <41.1% (61)
                                                                                                                                             41.1% - <45.1% (61)
                                                                                                                                             45.1% - <48.2% (61)
                                                                                                                                             48.2% - <53.1% (61)
                                                                                                                                             53.1% - <73.3% (62)

     Notes: Map shows the geographic distribution of 2-day cardiac catheterization rates among Medicare heart
     attack (AMI) patients across the 306 Hospital Referral Regions (HRRs). Cath rates are calculated over
     pooled years 1998-2012 and weighted by the number of AMI patients treated in each region during this
     period. Rates are risk-adjusted for patient age, race, sex, and first heart attack.
   Figure 2: Cardiac Catheterization Rates
                              Figure 2: Distribution of changes in 2-day cath environment across move
                .15
                .1
     Fraction
                .05
                0




                      ‐.5   ‐.4   ‐.3   ‐.2   ‐.1   0     .1    .2   .3      .4     .5     ‐.5    ‐.4     ‐.3    ‐.2    ‐.1     0      .1     .2     .3     .4     .5
                              Panel A: Change in HRR Cath Rate Across Move                         Panel B: Change in Hospital Cath Rate Across Move
   Notes:
     Notes:This figure  shows shows
                   Figure      the distribution of the change in regional
                                          the distribution                  cardiac catheterization
                                                                     of changes                     rates among cardiologists
                                                                                     in cath environment                amongwho      move HRRs. In Panel
                                                                                                                                   cardiologists       whoA,move changes in
   regional cath rates are defined as Δ = Destination HRR Rate – Origin HRR Rate, using the risk‐adjusted cath rates shown in Figure 1. Panel B shows the analogous
     HRRs. ofIn
   distribution    the Panel
                        change inA,   the cath
                                   hospital  change      for
                                                 intensity    cardiolgist
                                                           across              j change
                                                                   the move. The  is defined      as ∆
                                                                                         in cath rates       = the
                                                                                                        atjboth  (destination       HRR
                                                                                                                     HRR and hospital levelscath                     −
                                                                                                                                                    intensity)j “leave‐
                                                                                                                                             are physician‐specific
     (origin
   out”          HRR
         differences,      cath aintensity)
                       excluding                j , defined
                                    physician’s own             as acalculating
                                                     patients when      physician-leave-out         mean that
                                                                                 that physician’s experienced   change omits
                                                                                                                         across physician     j’s cardiologists
                                                                                                                                a move. Because     own patients frequently
   practice
     fromatthe multiple  hospitals within HRR
                     risk-adjusted        an HRR, acath
                                                     cardiologist’s
                                                           rates hospital
                                                                     showncathinrate before and
                                                                                   Figure    1. after  the move
                                                                                                   Panel          is the average
                                                                                                             B shows        the cath rate across distribution
                                                                                                                                 analogous       all hospitals at which
                                                                                                                                                                    of the
   physician’s patients were admitted, weighted by patient volume from each hospital. In both panels, the distribution is weighted by the number of sample heart
     changes
   attack patientsin   hospital
                    treated         cath intensity
                            by cardiologist movers.      across the move based on the hospitals where the physician’s patients were
     admitted. In both panels, the distribution is weighted by the number of sample heart attack patients treated
     by cardiologist movers.
UPDATED
                                                                                   40
                                                                                                                                        Cardiologist Mover Event Study
                                                                                                                   Figure 3: Event study—change in HRR environment
                                                                                               1



                                                                                             0.8
                                                   Mover behavior per  in HRR Environment




                                                                                             0.6



                                                                                             0.4



                                                                                             0.2



                                                                                               0



                                                                                             ‐0.2



                                                                                             ‐0.4
                                                                                                    ‐9      ‐8    ‐7     ‐6    ‐5       ‐4       ‐3       ‐2       ‐1       0       1        2        3        4   5          6        7        8
                                                                                                                                                               Years since move
          Notes: Graph plots (solid black) estimates of physician practice style t years since move as a function of
          the change in HRR cath environment experienced across the move (see Figure 2, Panel A). These estimates
          come from a regression that includes fixed effects for origin HRR, calendar year of patient admission, years
          since physician move, and patient age, race, sex, and first heart attack. Results controling for physician
          fixed effects instead of origin HRR are plotted by the dashed gray line. Bands indicate 95 percent confidence
          intervals constructed from two-way clustered standard errors at the physician and HRR levels.


                                                                                                                  Figure 4: Event study—change in hospital environment
                                                                                                         Panel A: Average Physician Response                                      Panel B: Asymmetric Physician Response
                                                      1
                                   Environment




                                                                                                                                                                    1
                          HospitalEnvironment




                                                 0.8                                                                                                               0.8


                                                 0.6                                                                                                               0.6
                       in Hospital




                                                 0.4                                                                                                               0.4
                      in
                 per 




                                                 0.2                                                                                                               0.2
        behaviorper
      behavior




                                                      0                                                                                                             0
  Mover




                                                 ‐0.2                                                                                                          ‐0.2
Mover




                                                 ‐0.4                                                                                                          ‐0.4
                                                                                      ‐9 ‐8 ‐7 ‐6 ‐5 ‐4 ‐3 ‐2 ‐1 0                  1   2    3    4   5    6   7        8‐9 ‐8 ‐7 ‐6 ‐5 ‐4 ‐3 ‐2 ‐1 0              1     2    3    4    5   6       7   8
                                                                                                                       Years since move                                                              Years since move
                                                                                                                                                                                Move to less‐intensive hospitals       Move to more‐intensive hospitals

          Notes: Graph plots estimates of physician practice style t years since move as a function of the change
          in hospital cath environment experienced across the move (see Figure 2, Panel B). Panels A and B plot
          estimates from separate regressions that include the same controls as the physician fixed effects regression
          behind Figure 3 (dashed gray line). Bands indicate 95 percent confidence intervals constructed from two-way
          clustered standard errors at the physician and HRR levels. For Panel B, the regression allows for separate
          effects by whether the physician moved to more-intensive (∆ > 0) or less-intensive (∆ ≤ 0) hospitals.
          Physician behavior is normalized to zero in the year immediately prior to the move (t = −1).

UPDATED
                                                                                                                                                               41
                                            Table 1: Sample summary statistics
                   HRR charactersitics                           Patient characteristics                 Cardiologist characteristics
                         2‐day cath rate                 admitted to
   year       N      p25     mean        p75        N    cath hospital      age        male      white        N          # movers
   1998      306    0.275    0.340      0.398     43,929     0.840          75.8       0.523     0.895      11,617           55
   1999      306    0.287    0.347      0.398     46,427     0.841          76.2       0.515     0.888      12,259          154
   2000      306    0.308    0.364      0.417     48,730     0.841          76.3       0.516     0.891      12,750          221
   2001      306    0.334    0.389      0.443     50,260     0.852          76.3       0.515     0.885      13,098          239
   2002      306    0.364    0.417      0.472     51,705     0.867          76.2       0.518     0.883      13,694          261
   2003      306    0.391    0.440      0.493     52,689     0.874          76.4       0.515     0.880      14,033          262
   2004      306    0.413    0.467      0.519     50,870     0.889          76.3       0.520     0.879      14,337          290
   2005      306    0.446    0.488      0.542     48,226     0.897          76.3       0.520     0.874      14,456          264
   2006      306    0.463    0.510      0.563     44,712     0.908          76.3       0.519     0.875      14,596          323
   2007      306    0.463    0.510      0.558     42,902     0.915          76.4       0.522     0.875      14,405          287
   2008      306    0.472    0.510      0.557     41,405     0.916          76.4       0.522     0.873      13,809          201
   2009      306    0.485    0.535      0.581     38,799     0.926          76.0       0.530     0.868      13,112          164
   2010      306    0.506    0.552      0.595     38,198     0.927          76.1       0.526     0.863      12,560          164
   2011      306    0.521    0.572      0.619     36,481     0.934          75.8       0.538     0.855      11,895          128
   2012      306    0.533    0.576      0.619     34,064     0.935          75.9       0.532     0.856      11,197           76
1998‐2012    306    0.431    0.479      0.530    669,397     0.888          76.2       0.521     0.877      19,945         3,089

Notes: The first set of columns describes the distribution of cath rates across the 306 HRRs for each year separately, as well as
for the pooled sample 1998-2012 (final row). These rates are based on patients treated by the non-mover cardiologist sample
and are risk-adjusted for patient age, race, sex, and first heart attack. The second set of columns describe the characteristics
of patients with new heart attack episodes who form the primary analysis sample used to measure cardiologist practice styles.
Reported characteristics include whether the patient was first admitted to a hospital with a cardiac cath lab in operation
that year, average age, and fraction male and white. The final two columns report the number of cardiologists observed that
year treating at least one heart attack patient within two days of hospital admission, as well as the fraction of physicians
who moved that year. Of the 19,945 unique cardiologists in the sample, 15.5 percent (3,089) moved between 1998-2012.




                                                Table 2: Migration patterns
                   Origin Census Region                     Destination Census Region
                                                Northeast     Midwest          South           West      Total
                              Northeast           298            86             189             58         631
                               Midwest             78           484             272            124         958
                                  South           118           170             725            147       1,160
                                   West            31            58              67            184         340
                                    Total         525           798            1,253           513       3,089
                                                   N        (% of movers)
                            Same State            663          (21.5%)
                   Same Census Division          1,218         (39.4%)
                    Same Census Region           1,691         (54.7%)

Notes: The top panel shows the number of sample cardiologists moving across HRRs, by Census Region of the origin and
destination HRRs. The bottom panel shows the number of migrants for whom the move across HRRs remains within various
geographic regions.




                                                                42
                                  Table 3: Comparison of migrant cardiologists to non-migrants
                           Geography†                      Years since cardiology fellowship‡                      Female                  US Born
                                                           migrants                     non‐migs            migrants non‐migs         migrants non‐migs
    Census Region         % out          % in       p25 median p75                 p25 median p75
       Northeast          10.7%       8.9%             4      8        16           8     15       21          11.5%         6.9%      65.3%      72.0%
        Midwest           18.3%      15.2%             4      8        16           8     14       21          7.5%          5.7%      53.2%      64.1%
           South          14.5%      15.6%             4      8        14           7     13       20          7.4%          4.8%      57.0%      67.5%
            West           9.0%      13.5%             4      8        16           8     15       22          7.1%          7.1%      59.8%      64.2%
            Total         13.5%      13.5%             4      8        15           8     14       21          8.1%          5.8%      57.7%      67.4%

Notes: † The geography comparison describes the fraction of emigrants (percentage out) and immigrants (percentage in) to
total cardiologists in each region, weighted by total patients each physician treated in that region from 1998-2012. These
totals are slightly less than the fraction of sample cardiologists moving between 1998-2012 (15.5 percent; see Table 1) since
some non-migrants practice in multiple hospitals across regional boundaries.
‡
  Years-since-fellowship for migrants is defined as the time between year of move and cardiology fellowship completion. For
non-migrants, years-since-fellowship is defined as the time between a given patient’s admission date and the cardiologist’s
fellowship completion date. Statistics are calculated over physician-patient pairs, and region is that of hospital admission.




Difference‐in‐difference estimates         Table 4: Difference-in-differences                      estimates
Dependent variable: (cath )i ϵ {0,1}, indicating cath within 2 days

                                                            Cardiologist movers only                                                  All cardiologists

                                        in HRR environment                                    in hospital environment              in HRR environment
                    Full            Full     Single first One admit Cath lab                Full      One admit Cath lab                Full       Full
                  sample          sample      specialist specialist hospitals             sample      specialist hospitals           sample      sample
                    (1)              (2)          (3)         (4)       (5)                 (6)            (7)        (8)                (9)       (10)
                0.037             ‐‐           ‐‐          ‐‐        ‐‐                   ‐‐            ‐‐         ‐‐                 ‐‐           ‐‐
                 (0.057)
*(after)       0.628***          0.652***      0.712***    0.626***        0.643***      0.796***      0.770***      0.754***      0.591***    0.652***
                 (0.055)           (0.059)       (0.073)     (0.089)         (0.056)       (0.031)       (0.050)       (0.034)       (0.062)     (0.059)
mover              ‐‐               ‐‐            ‐‐          ‐‐              ‐‐            ‐‐            ‐‐            ‐‐            0.002       ‐‐
                                                                                                                                     (0.006)

HRR1 FEs              X                                                                                                                X
HRR2 FEs                                                                                                                               X
Physician FEs                        X             X              X            X               X           X             X                          X

Observations        124,650        124,650        59,337       41,209        111,429       124,650        41,209       111,429       932,543     932,543

Notes: Table presents difference-in-differences estimates of the change in a physician’s practice style across a move as a
function of the change ∆ in cath environment. Each column presents results from a separate regression. Columns (1-8) are
estimated over physician-patient observations limited to migrant physicians only. Columns (9-10) include non-movers for
whom Origin HRR = Destination HRR, and thus ∆ = 0. The change ∆ in cath environment is as defined in Figure 2 except
for columns (5,8) where HRR and hospital cath rates are calculated over the subset of patients treated at hospitals with cath
lab facilities that year. All regressions include fixed effects for calendar year of patient admission, years since physician move,
and patient age, race, sex, and first heart attack. Two-way clustered standard errors at the physician and HRR levels shown
in parentheses. *: p < 0.10; **: p < 0.05; ***: p < 0.01.




                                                                               43
                Cross‐section estimates             Table 5: Cross-sectional estimates
                                                          Full sample                  Full sample           One admit specialist
                                                              (1)                          (2)                         (3)

                                      Panel A: Dependent variable = 1(2‐day cardiac catheterization ) ϵ {0,1}
                Origin ‐ Current HRR cath rate            0.265***                  0.165***                         0.112**
                                                           (0.053)                   (0.042)                         (0.054)

                                 Panel B: Dependent variable = Predicted Pr(2‐day cardiac catheterization ) ϵ (0,1)
                Origin ‐ Current HRR cath rate             0.025**                    0.018*                       ‐0.0002
                                                           (0.011)                   (0.009)                      (0.0138)


                HRR FEs                                        X
                Hospital FEs                                                               X                            X
                Observations                               882,912                      882,912                      275,496

Notes: Panel A presents estimates of how patient treatment within a region or hospital depends on the treating cardiologist’s
prior environment, defined as the origin HRR cath rate for movers and the current HRR cath rate for non-movers. Panel B
tests for potential sorting, using an empirical measure Pˆr(cath) of patient appropriateness for 2-day cath as the outcome.
Each table column corresponds to a separate specification or sample; Panels A and B differ only in the dependent variable. All
regressions include calendar year fixed effects and a mover indicator. Two-way clustered standard errors at the cardiologist’s
origin and current HRRs shown in parentheses. *: p < 0.10; **: p < 0.05; ***: p < 0.01.




Difference‐in‐difference heterogeneity      Table 6: Difference-in-differences           heterogeneity
Dependent variable: (cath )i ϵ {0,1}, indicating cath within 2 days

                                         Change in HRR environment                                       Change in hospital environment
                         Above‐median Move to higher‐                                     Above‐median Move to higher‐
                                                                        Cross‐Census                                                    Cross‐Census
                        (>8) years since    cath HRR         STEMI                       (>8) years since   cath hospital       STEMI
                                                                        Region move                                                     Region move
        VAR =              fellowship         ( > 0)                                       fellowship         ( > 0)
                                (1)             (2)            (3)          (4)                  (5)              (6)             (7)        (8)
*(after)*VAR                ‐0.078            0.198       ‐0.132***       0.050              ‐0.053          0.265***          ‐0.032      0.013
                            (0.113)          (0.188)         (0.045)      (0.111)            (0.056)           (0.093)         (0.027)     (0.062)

{, after, VAR} one‐
                               X                X             X               X                  X               X               X           X
and two‐way effects
Physician FEs                  X                X             X               X                  X               X               X           X

Observations                124,650          124,650       124,650        124,650           124,650          124,650           124,650    124,650

Notes: Table presents augmented versions of the difference-in-differences estimates (see Table 4) to explore heterogeneity
in physician response to a change in cath environment across a move. This is implemented by adding a triple interaction
∆∗(af ter)∗VAR, which describes how the difference-in-difference estimate ∆∗(af ter) changes as VAR increases. All regressions
include fixed effects for calendar year of patient admission, years since physician move, and patient age, race, sex, and first
heart attack. Two-way clustered standard errors at the physician and HRR levels shown in parentheses. *: p < 0.10; **:
p < 0.05; ***: p < 0.01.




                                                                         44
Appendices
Contents
A Sample and variable construction                                                           45
    A.1 AMI cardiac catheterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    46
         A.1.1 Cardiologist catheterization rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    48
         A.1.2 HRR catheterization rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     49
         A.1.3 Hospital catheterization rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    51
    A.2 Cardiologist migration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   51

B Robustness                                                                                 52
    B.1 Time-Varying Cath Rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      52
         B.1.1 Rank-order preservation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     52
         B.1.2 Difference-in-differences with time-varying cath environments . . . . .       56
    B.2 Other robustness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   57
         B.2.1 Balanced migrant panel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      57
         B.2.2 Physician volume across moves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       58

C Additional Tables and Figures                                                              61


A      Sample and variable construction
    This section provides additional details on the data, sample selection, and variable mea-
surement in the paper. The primary health care data consist of Medicare administrative and
claims records from 1992-2012. These include demographic and enrollment characteristics
for 100 percent of beneficiaries, hospital (MedPAR) records for a 100 percent sample of the
fee-for-service population, and physician (carrier) claims for a 5 percent sample over years
1992-1997 and for a 20 percent sample of fee-for-service beneficiaries over the period 1998-
2012. The analysis in the paper only relies on claims data from 1998-2012, the period over


                                              45
which physician claims are available for the 20 percent sample, but this appendix describes
summary statistics for the full period 1992-2012 to provide additional historical context on
heart attack (AMI) and cardiac catheterization rates in the Medicare population.
   Table C.1 provides a variety of summary statistics related to the sample construction.
Column (2) shows the number of unique Medicare beneficiaries eligible for Medicare in each
year 1992-2012. The number of enrollees grew from 36.9 million in 1992 to 53.4 million
by 2012. Over that same period, the share of beneficiaries enrolled in traditional fee-for-
service Medicare dropped from 93.3 percent in 1992 to 72.4 percent in 2012 (see column
3). This is important because claims are generally not available for the non-fee-for-service
beneficiaries who are enrolled in Medicare Advantage plans which are reimbursed by Medicare
on a capitated basis. As a result, the characterization of physician behavior and practice
environments in this paper is based on treatment patterns among the Medicare fee-for-service
population only.


A.1     AMI cardiac catheterization
   The central measure of regional intensity in this paper is the rate of 2-day cardiac
catheterization (“cath”) among heart attack (AMI) patients in that region. To create this
measure, I use 100 percent MedPAR hospital admission data to identify a “master” sample
of new heart attack episodes based on patients admitted to the hospital with a principal
diagnosis of AMI (ICD-9-CM codes 410.x) and who had no other AMI hospital admission
in the data within the previous year. I code each heart attack patient as NSTEMI if they
were diagnosed with a subendocardial infarction (ICD-9-CM codes 410.7), labeling all other
heart attacks as STEMI. Column (4) of Table C.1 shows the number of heart attack episodes
identified each year, with 5.8 million episodes identified over the period 1992-2012.
   For each heart attack patient, I measure whether the patient received a cardiac catheter-
ization within two days of hospital admission. To identify cardiac catheterizations, I use
ICD-9 procedure codes and dates submitted on the hospital claim, closely following the



                                             46
well-established methodology used by the Dartmouth Atlas.15 Specifically, the procedure
codes used to indicate cath include 3722-3 (left and combined right and left heart cardiac
catheterization); 8855-7 (angiography); 3601-2, 3605, 3609, and 0066 (percutaneous coro-
nary intervention); 3606-7 (coronary stent insertion); and 3610-3619 (coronary artery bypass
graft). Column (12) of Table C.1 reports the raw 2-day cath rate each year from 1992-2012
over the 100 percent heart attack sample. Over the 6-year period 1992-1997, 2-day cath
rates doubled from 16.3 percent to 32.7 percent. While they continued to rise in subsequent
years, they did so at a much slower rate, increasing only 71 percent over the 15-year period
1998-2012.
      Cardiac catheterizations are invasive procedures performed in a specialized examination
room referred to as a cardiac catheterization (cath) lab. If a heart attack patient is first
admitted to a hospital without a cath lab, the patient must be transferred to another hospital
in order to receive the procedure. Thus, lack of cath facilities at the hospital of initial
admission is likely to be a high barrier to early catheterization. Column (10) of Table C.1
reports the share of all heart attack patients first admitted to a hospital with a cath lab
in operation that year. A hospital is defined to have a cath lab in a given year if at least
two cardiac catheterization procedures are performed in that hospital that year (based on
the 100 percent MedPAR sample of Medicare patients admitted for any condition, not just
AMI). Even in early sample years 1992-1997 when cath rates were low, over 70 percent of
patients were admitted to hospitals with cath facilities. By 2012, nearly 92 percent of all
heart attack patients were admitted to hospitals with cath facilities. As shown in column
(7) of Table 1, the fraction of patients admitted to a hospital with a cath lab is even higher
among patients seeing a cardiologist within two days of hospital admission. Especially over
the period 1998-2012, these results suggest that whether a heart attack patient receives an
early cath in most cases is not driven by lack of a cath lab at the hospital of initial admission.
 15
      See http://www.dartmouthatlas.org/downloads/methods/research methods.pdf.




                                                 47
A.1.1      Cardiologist catheterization rates
      Beginning in 1992, Medicare required that physicians billing Medicare for services per-
formed must provide their Unique Physician Identification Number (UPIN) on the claim
form. Because UPINs uniquely identify individual physicians and remain with the physician
throughout their career, it is possible to create histories of the patients a physician treats
using the physician billing claims. Beginning in 2007, Medicare transitioned from UPINs to
the National Provider Identifier (NPI) standard. I match NPIs to UPINs using a crosswalk
developed by the NBER, and supplemented with Medicare physician claims that contain
both UPIN and NPI fields.16
      To identify histories of cardiologist treatment decisions, I first identify which UPINs cor-
respond to cardiologists. I link the universe of Medicare UPINs to the American Medical
Association (AMA) Physician Masterfile and identify cardiologists as those who have com-
pleted a 3-year fellowship in cardiovascular disease. The AMA Physician Masterfile includes
current and historical data on virtually every Doctor of Medicine (MD) ever trained or li-
censed to practice in the United States, regardless of physician AMA membership. However,
because the merge to the AMA Masterfile was based on UPINs, the set of cardiologists
I identify in the sample period 1992-2012 does not include cardiologists first enrolling in
Medicare after the transition to the NPI standard in 2007.
      As described in Section 2.2.1 of the paper, I measure cardiologist practice styles by linking
heart attack patients to the cardiologist(s) who treat them. Because physician claims identify
the set of physicians providing services to each patient, I first limit the “master” set of AMI
patient episodes to those patients for whom physician claims are available (5 percent of
patients from 1992-1997, and 20 percent of patients from 1998-2012). I refer to this as the
“physician” sample of AMI patients. The number of patients in this sample each year is
shown in column (5) of Table C.1. Of the 792,970 AMI patients in the physician sample over
the period 1998-2012, 88.2 percent see at least one cardiologist within two days of hospital
 16
      The NBER NPI to UPIN crosswalk is available at http://www.nber.org/data/npi-upin-crosswalk.html.



                                                  48
admission. These patients are matched to the first cardiologist(s) who treat them to form the
basis of the patient-cardiologist observations in the primary regression analysis in the paper.
The number of unique cardiologists treating at least one heart attack patient as the first
cardiologist in a given year is shown in column (15) of Table C.1, and the average number
of AMI patients treated by each cardiologist that year is shown in column (16).

A.1.2    HRR catheterization rates
   One of the primary measurement issues in the paper involves constructing 2-day cath
rates at the Hospital Referral Region (HRR) level. Because the analysis aims to measure
how changes in HRR cath rates across a move drive changes in a migrant’s own behavior, it
is important to purge the change in region-level cath rates of a mechanical relationship with
the migrant’s own treatment choices. To do this, I calculate for each cardiologist “leave-out”
measures of risk-adjusted regional cath rates that omit the cardiologist’s own patients.
   Specifically, I first calculate the raw leave-out 2-day cath rate for physician j in HRR h
and year t as

                                                 1                 X               
                    P (j, h, t) =                                             cathi ,
                                    |i : i ∈ H, i ∈ T, i ∈
                                                         / J|
                                                                i∈H,i∈T,i∈J
                                                                         /


where (cathi ) is an indicator for whether patient i received a cath within two days of hospital
admisssion, and where H, T , and J reflect sets of AMI patients treated in HRR h, in year
T , and by cardiologist j within two days of hospital admission, respectively.
   To risk-adjust the leave-out rates, I calculate the clinical cath appropriateness for each
patient by estimating a logistic regression of patient cath within 2 days of a heart attack as
a function of calendar year dummies, patient comorbidities (age, race, sex, and first heart
attack), and comorbidities interacted with calendar year. Once estimated, the model is used
to predict cath receipt for each patient in the sample and these patient-level predictions are
averaged at the HRR-year-level to form a new variable Pˆr(h, t) which describes the predicted
cath rate in HRR h in calendar year t. The risk-adjusted leave-out rate for physician j in


                                                  49
HRR h and year t is then calculated as


                                     P̃ (j, h, t) = P (j, h, t) − Pˆr(h, t).


   P̃ (j, h, t) is a risk-adjusted physician-leave-out mean of the degree to which HRR h is
more intensive than the national average in year t, omitting cardiologist j’s patients. Using
this measure, I define the physician-leave-out difference in risk-adjusted cath rates between
any two HRRs h1 and h2 in a given year t as


                             ∆j (h1 , h2 , t) = P̃ (j, h2 , t) − P̃ (j, h1 , t).                       (A.1)


   A key simplification used throughout the paper is to use time-invariant physician-leave-
out differences in cath rates between HRRs over the sample period 1998-2012. To calculate
the time invariant differences, I first average P̃ (j, h, t) across years, using as weights the share
w(j, h, t) of patients treated each year in that HRR, not counting physician j’s patients.
This weighted average is a time-invariant physician-leave-out mean of the degree to which a
given HRR’s cath rate deviated from the national average over the sample period, omitting
cardiologist j’s patients. The time-invariant physician-leave-out difference between HRRs h1
and h2 is then defined as

                                 X                                   X
               ∆j (h1 , h2 ) =        P̃ (j, h2 , t)w(j, h2 , t) −       P̃ (j, h1 , t)w(j, h1 , t).   (A.2)
                                 t                                   t


   In the paper, I use time-invariant physician-leave-out differences in cath rates ∆j (h1 , h2 )
over the period 1998-2012 to describe differences in HRR cath environments. Later in this
appendix, I explore the relationship between the time-invariant and year-specific cath rates,
and also evaluate robustness to using the year-specific differences in cath rates ∆j (h1 , h2 , t)
to measure physician behavior response to a change in the HRR environment.




                                                       50
A.1.3    Hospital catheterization rates
   As an alternative to the HRR definition of a physician’s practice environment, I also
measure 2-day cath rates at the hospital level. As with the HRR cath rate measures, I
calculate hospital cath rates for each physician using a leave-out average that excludes the
physician’s own patients. Because there are many more hospitals than HRRs, precisely
measuring year-specific hospital cath rates using the 20 percent physician sample of AMI
patients is difficult. For this reason, I only consider time-invariant measures of cath intensity
at the hospital level, defined analogously to the time-invariant HRR-level cath intensities
described above.


A.2     Cardiologist migration
   I define movers to be cardiologists who are observed to move their practice location across
Hospital Referral Regions (HRRs). I identify movers, along with their origin and destination
HRRs, as follows.
   First, I use the “physician” sample of heart attack patients (defined in Section A.1.1)
over the period 1998-2012 to identify the first and last dates a cardiologist practices in each
HRR (as defined by the date and HRR of hospital admission for each of the cardiologist’s
patients). I also measure the total number of patients treated by the cardiologist in the
HRR. Together, the first/last dates and total number of patients treated characterize the
cardiologist’s “practice episode” in that HRR. Note that by this definition, it is only possible
for a physician to have at most one practice episode per HRR. If a physician moves away
from an HRR early in the sample and returns later in the sample, all observations are part
of a single practice episode.
   Next, I identify in which HRR a physician treats the most patients in the sample, and call
this the physician’s “primary” practice episode. Similarly, I further define a cardiologist’s
“secondary” practice episode to be the largest episode (in terms of patients treated) that
does not overlap the primary episode, if such an episode exists. Movers are those with both
primary and secondary practice episodes, with at least two patients in each episode.

                                               51
    This definition of a move has two additional implications. First, I only identify one move
per migrant. Second, the move must involve a clean split in time between the origin and
destination HRR, with no overlap in time. If a cardiologist practices in HRR A from dates
d1 − d2 and HRR B from dates d3 − d4 , this would be considered a move as long as d2 ≤ d3 .
However, if d2 > d3 , which could happen if the cardiologist returns to practice in HRR A
after first switching to HRR B, this would not be marked as a move.
    Finally, for each mover and corresponding primary and secondary episodes, I mark the
earlier practice episode (in terms of practice dates) to be the “origin” HRR and the later
episode to be the “destination” HRR. Some of the specifications in the paper also include non-
migrants, which are all cardiologists not identified as movers. For non-migrant cardiologists,
I define the origin and destination HRRs to be the same, and equal to the HRR where the
cardiologist is treating patients at that point in time. Column (17) of Table C.1 shows the
number of cardiologists moving in each year from 1998-2012. Section 2.2.2 of the paper
describes additional summary statistics for the migrant sample.


B       Robustness
B.1     Time-Varying Cath Rates
B.1.1    Rank-order preservation
    In the paper, time-invariant regional cath rates were used to measure the change in
intensity a physician experiences across a move. To the extent that the intensity of a
region relative to the secular trend remains stable over time, differences in regional cath
propensities averaged over a pooled period of time will be the same as the difference in
propensity in any given year. However, if regional intensity with respect to the national
secular trend changes over time, then measuring regions as having a time-invariant inten-
sity may introduce measurement error into the key independent variable in the analysis
∆j = (destination region cath intensity)j − (origin region cath intensity)j , potentially bias-
ing the estimated environment effects.


                                              52
HRR cath trends by quartile of average intensity I begin by evaluating the stability
of HRR cath intensities relative to the national average over time. As a first approach,
I partition the 306 HRRs into quartiles based on each HRR’s average risk-adjusted 2-day
cath intensity over the period 1998-2012. For each quartile, Figure C.1 plots the average
year-specific cath rate across HRRs in that quartile. In 1998, the most intensive quartile
of HRRs had a cath rate of 46.4 percent, compared to 24.9 percent for the least intensive
quartile. This difference of 21.5 percentage points in 1998 had shrunk to 13.1 percentage
points in 2012, indicating that absolute differences in cath rates between these groups are
not perfectly stable over time. Importantly, this figure implies that migrants moving, say,
from a top-quartile HRR to a bottom-quartile HRR early in the sample period on average
experienced somewhat larger changes in regional cath environments across a move than a
migrant moving later in the sample.


Rank preservation among top/bottom HRRs Table C.2 sheds light more directly on
the stability of rankings of individual HRRs over time. I first assign each HRR a rank order
from 1 (most intensive) to 306 (least intensive) based on each HRR’s average 2-day cath
intensity over the period 1998-2012. I also rank each HRR based on 1998 cath rates and
again on 2012 cath rates. Panels A and B of Table C.2 list the top and bottom 10 HRRs,
respectively, based on the average cath rate ranking. While the rank-order of these HRRs
was not perfectly preserved from 1998 through 2012, there does appear to be a substantial
amount of rank persistence. All regions in Panel A were in the top-25 percent of regions in
both 1998 and 2012, and all but one were in the top-15 percent both years. Similarly, and
regions in Panel B were in the bottom-33 percent both years, and all but two were in the
bottom-10 percent.
   Panels C and D show the top and bottom 10 regions, respectively, based on ranking
in 1998. While the most (least) intensive regions sill tended to be more (less) intensive
than average in 2012, there is quite a bit of movement in the rank-order for some regions.



                                            53
Perhaps most prominently, McAllen, Texas was the second-most intensive region in 1998,
with a 2-day cath rate of nearly 70 percent, but was the 12th least-intensive region by 2012
with a cath rate of 46.1 percent. McAllen is an exceptional case in many respects, and was
profiled as one of the most expensive health care markets in an influential New Yorker article
in 2009 that even highlighted the propensity in McAllen to perform cardiac catheterization
(Gawande, 2009). The cath rate in McAllen was already trending downward in McAllen
prior to 2009, but this example highlights that it is possible for regions to change relative
intensity over time.


Non-parametric rank correlation While Table C.2 is useful for summarizing the degree
of rank preservation for the most and least intensive regions in the sample, it is less useful
for providing a summary measure of rank preservation across all regions. To provide such
a summary, I use the year-specific cath rates for each HRR and investigate whether the
annual rank-order given by each of these annual intensity measures is preserved over time.
If rank-order is preserved, then the intensity measures for any two years should be positively
monotonically related.
   Table C.3 reports non-parametric Kendall τa and Spearman correlation measures for
pair-wise comparisons of the annual HRR cath rate measures. When two rankings have a
monotonic and positive relationship, both the Kendall and Spearman coefficients are equal
to 1, whereas they are both zero when the rankings are independent. The Kendall τa also
has a convenient interpretation for any value not equal to zero or 1: for any two rank-order
measures, the corresponding τa coefficient describes how much more likely (in percentage
points) the two orderings will agree than disagree for any two randomly selected observations.
The estimated correlation coefficients show that rank-order in cath intensity is not fully
preserved across years; the fact that the non-parametric correlations drop over time suggests
that regions really do change their intensity relative to the secular trend over time, rather
than being driven entirely by sampling error (which would result in correlations less than



                                             54
one, but stable over time).


Contemporaneous cath environment trends across move Finally, I investigate how
the contemporaneous difference in cath intensity between a migrant’s origin and destination
HRRs (as defined in Equation A.1) evolves relative to the average difference in cath intensity
between the two HRRs (as defined in Equation A.2). In other words, how well does the
time-invariant difference in cath environment capture the year-specific difference in cath
environment in the year of the move, as well as the years before and after the move?
   I investigate this relationship by estimating a difference-in-differences event study similar
to Equation 1, except where the outcome variable is ∆tj ≡ ∆j (origin HRR, destination HRR, t),
the contemporaneous difference in cath intensity between migrant j’s origin and destination
HRRs t years since the cardiologist moves, omitting physician j’s own patients (see Equa-
tion A.1). Because the year-specific HRR cath rates are calculated over the patients of
non-migrants only, trends in ∆tj describe how the migrant’s origin and destination environ-
ments are differentially evolving across the move, exclusive of the migrant’s own choices.
   The results of estimating this regression are shown in Figure C.2. In the year of a
migrant’s move, each unit difference in the time-invariant measure of ∆j corresponds to just
slightly less than 1 unit different in the contemporaneous difference ∆tj . This suggests that
at least on average, using the time-invariant difference in cath intensity is appropriate for
evaluating the change in cath intensity experienced at the time of a physician’s move.
   Figure C.2 highlights another important consideration. Changes in ∆tj around the time
of a physician’s move are useful for either reinforcing or casting doubt on the validity of
the parallel trends assumption underlying the difference-in-differences estimates of physician
behavior response which are central to this paper. Specifically, abrupt changes in ∆tj at
the time of a migrant’s move that are driven by abrupt changes in cath rates in the origin
environment would suggest that it may not be plausible to assume that the migrant’s own
behavior absent the move would have continued to follow the abruptly changing trend of



                                              55
cardiologists remaining in the origin region. On the other hand, it would reinforce the
plausibility of the parallel trends assumption if ∆tj evolved smoothly across migrant moves,
which in fact appears to be the case.

B.1.2    Difference-in-differences with time-varying cath environments
   In this section, I explore whether the main estimates in the paper that rely on time-
invariant differences in HRR cath intensity are sensitive to performing the analysis using
year-specific differences in HRR cath intensity.
   I begin by re-estimating the event study from Equation 1 in the paper, but replacing
the time-invariant difference ∆j (Equation A.2) in cath intensity between the destination
and origin HRRs with the year-specific difference ∆tj (Equation A.1). To reduce annual
fluctuations in ∆tj driven by sampling error, I first smooth the values of ∆tj using separate
linear trends for each physician-HRR pair. Smoothing this way requires that changes in ∆tj
across a physician’s move are in fact smooth and approximately linear, an assumption that
Figure C.2 supports.
   The results of this regression, plotted in solid black in Figure C.3, are very similar to the
results obtained using the time-invariant HRR cath rates reported in Figure 3 (also plotted
in dashed gray in Figure C.3 for comparison). The main parameters of interest are the βt
coefficients. For a given value of t, βt describes the difference between treatment styles of
physicians t years since move per unit difference in ∆tj . The lack of any apparent pre-trend or
level difference in physician behavior prior to the move indicates that physicians starting in
the same region but moving to different regions practiced similarly before the move, quickly
changed their behavior to partially conform to the new practice environment within one year
of moving, and experience little to no additional convergence over the next 7 years.
   The “step” pattern of physician behavior across a move revealed by the event study sug-
gests that a traditional difference-in-difference (DD) estimate is appropriate for summarizing
the change in physician behavior in response to a change in practice environment. The DD
estimate comes from replacing the event time dummies in Equation 1 with a single “after”

                                              56
dummy 1(t ≥ 0). The DD results are shown in Table C.4, columns (4-8). For compari-
son, columns (1-3) show DD estimates based on the time-invariant measure of ∆j . Note
that columns (1-2) are the baseline DD estimates from Table 4 based on origin HRR and
physician fixed effects, respectively, and repeated here for continuity.
   I consider a number of different DD specifications using the year-specific difference ∆jt
in cath rates between the destination and origin HRRs. First, column (5) repeats the same
regression as column (1), except replacing the time-invariant ∆j with the year-specific ∆tj .
The resulting estimate changes little across these two specifications.
   Columns (5-8) of Table C.4 explore whether the DD estimate appears to meaningfully
differ between the first and second half of years in the sample. Since 1998-2012 are the
15 years used to estimate the DD regressions, I partition migrants into those moving prior
to 2005 (the “early sample”) and migrants moving in or after 2005 (the “late sample”). I
estimate the DD regression over the early sample movers, first using only patients admitted
to the hospital prior to 2005 (column 5) and second using only patients admitted to the
hospital within 3 years of the cardiologists move year (column 6). Columns (7-8) estimate
the DD regression over analogous samples for the late sample movers. The DD estimate
remains fairly stable across both the early and late samples, suggesting that environment
effects on cardiologist behavior over the period 1998-2012 remained relatively stable.


B.2     Other robustness
B.2.1   Balanced migrant panel
   One issue that arises in the difference-in-differences approach estimated using the treat-
ment choices of migrants for up to 8 years before and after a move is that not all migrants
are observed for all years in this window. For example, physicians who move in 2000 have at
most 2 years of pre-move behavior in the 1998-2012 sample. The trends in pre-move behavior
in years 3-8 before the move are therefore only estimated over physicians who move later in
the sample. An issue with this imbalance is that trends in measured behavior across a move
may partly reflect changes in the composition of which migrants remain in the sample.

                                              57
   I therefore estimate a “balanced panel” DD specification where I estimate the same
specification as in column (1) of Table C.4, but with two sample restrictions. First, I limit
to the set of 1,358 migrants who are observed treating patients in the sample at least 3 years
before and after a move. Second, I further limit the regression sample to patients treated
within the same window 3-years before and after the move. The DD estimate from this
balanced panel specification, reported in column (3), is again very similar to the other DD
estimates in columns (1-2).

B.2.2   Physician volume across moves
   As a final robustness check, I explore how the patient volume of migrant physicians
changes around the time of the move. If volume changes abruptly across a move, this could
raise concerns that something other than a change in a physician’s environment is occur-
ring contemporaneously with the move. While the difference-in-differences framework can
account for time-of-move shocks that are common to all physicians who move (as captured
by the event time fixed effects), it would be problematic if the size of these shocks were cor-
related with the change in intensity experienced at the time of the move. In that case, the
difference-in-differences estimates would falsely attribute the differential time-of-move shock
to the change in regional intensity experienced across the move, even if regional intensity
played no role on physician behavior.
   I begin by showing summary statistics of the number of sample patients each migrant
treats in each of the 8 years before and after a move. I aim to capture how volume may change
asymmetrically for physicians who move to more- versus less-intensive regions, and also how
volume may change differentially for physicians experiencing a “large” versus ”small” change
in environment across a move. For ease of analysis, I first normalize the time-invariant
cath difference ∆j between a physician j’s origin and destination HRRs into a z-score ∆z ,
standardized to have mean zero and variance of 1 across all migrants. This normalization
is useful, because ∆z > 0 essentially captures physicians moving to more-intensive regions
(since mean(∆j )=0.007 is very close to zero), and |∆z | > 1 captures physician’s facing a

                                              58
change in cath environment greater than 1 standard deviation.
   Figure C.4a plots raw summary statistics of the average number of sample patients each
physician treats in the 8 years before and after moving. In the left figure, the statistics
are reported separately for physicians moving to more-intensive regions (∆z > 0, in orange)
and those moving to less-intensive regions (∆z <= 0, in blue). There appears to be a slight
increase in patient volume following the move, but there does not appear to be any meaningful
asymmetry in either levels or trends between the two physician groups. The right column
plots the same volume statistics, but separately for physicians experiencing a “large” change
in environment (|∆z | > 1|) versus those facing a small change. Here, patient volume prior
to the move appears to be about 15 percent higher among physicians facing a large change
in environment, with the gap closing and possibly reversing slightly contemporaneous with
the move. This differential change in patient volume between the two physician groups may
reflect shocks that differentially affect physicians experiencing larger moves, or may simply
reflect differential patient volumes common to all cardiologists in the origin and destination
HRRs.
   Because a cardiologist’s patient volume depends not only on shocks to the specific physi-
cian, but also depend on characteristics of the HRR, I aim to isolate the physician-specific
shocks over time by measuring cardiologist volume relative to the average patient volume
across all cardiologists practicing in the same HRR. This is also useful for evaluating whether
migrant cardiologists look systematically different in terms of patient volume than non-
migrants in the same region.
   Figure C.4b plots the same summary statistics as in Figure C.4a, except for relative
physician volume. Both the left and right columns tell a similar story: prior to moving,
migrants treat a similar number of patients each year compared to non-migrants in the
origin HRR. After the move, migrants treat roughly 10 percent more patients each year than
non-migrants in the destination HRR. However, there do not appear to be differential levels
or trends in relative patient volume for cardiologists moving to more- versus less-intensive


                                              59
regions, or for cardiologists facing larger versus smaller absolute changes in intensity.
   To evaluate more rigorously whether volume changes differentially across a move based
on the size of the move, I estimate an event study of the form

                                                   7 
                                                   X                                        
    (relative volume)jt = {origin HRR FEs}j +             αt 1(s = t) + βt size(∆z )1(s = t)
                                                   s=−8

                          + {calendar year FEs}i + jt ,                                    (B.1)


where an observation is a cardiologist-year over the 8 years before and after a move. The
outcome variable relative volume)jt is cardiologist j’s volume relative to the current HRR
average, and is defined each year where the cardiologist treats at least one patient. The key
independent variable of interest is size(∆z ), which either takes on the value ∆z to evaluate
the asymmetric effect changes in cath environment on relative volume, or |∆z | to evaluate
the volume effect of larger versus smaller absolute changes in the environment.
   The results of the volume event study are reported in Figure C.4c. Consistent with the
relative volume summary trends shown in Figure C.4b, the event study does not reveal any
volume shocks specific to the time of the move that are also correlated with differences in the
size of the change in environment. This result further supports the plausibility that changes
in physician practice styles across a move are driven by changes in the HRR environment,
rather than by idiosyncratic shocks at the time of the move that correlate with the change
in environment.




                                              60
 C                                         Additional Tables and Figures
                                                Annual
                                              Figure   2-Day
                                                     C.1:    Cardiac
                                                          Annual     Catheterization
                                                                  2-day              Among Heart
                                                                        cath rates among   heart Attack
                                                                                                 attack(AMI)
                                                                                                        (AMI)Patients
                                                                                                               patients
                                                                 by Quartiles of Average
                                                                     by quartiles        HRR Cath
                                                                                    of average HRRIntensity
                                                                                                      cathover 1998-2012
                                                                                                            intensity
                                     70%

                                                                Botton 25%          Second 25%               Third 25%        Top 25%

                                     60%
2‐Day Cardiac Catheterization Rate




                                     50%



                                     40%



                                     30%

                                                                                                             Quartile # HRRs HRR Average Cath Rates over 1998‐2012
                                                                                                                                Min         Mean           Max
                                     20%
                                                                                                             Bottom      76    23.6%        38.0%         42.9%
                                                                                                             Second      77    42.9%        45.0%         47.6%
                                     10%                                                                      Third      77    47.6%        49.8%         52.4%
                                                                                                               Top       76    52.6%        56.2%         75.3%
                                                                                                              Total     306    23.6%        45.7%         75.3%
                                     0%
                                           1998   1999   2000       2001     2002    2003        2004        2005    2006   2007    2008   2009   2010   2011   2012
                                                                                             Year of Hospital Admission


 Notes: Figure plots representative cath rates for high and low cath regions by quartile of regional intensity.
 HRRs are partitioned into quartiles based on average cath rates over all years, such that the composition of
 HRRs in each quartile remains constant across years. The table shows the distribution of average HRR cath
 rates over all years, which define the quartiles.




                                                                                                        61
                                                                            Contemporaneous versus Average Difference Between Destination and Origin HRR
 Figure C.2: Contemporaneous vs. average  difference
                                  Cath Rates          between migrant HRR environments
                                             Across Move
                                                          1.20
 Contemporaneous difference per  average difference


                                                          1.15


                                                          1.10


                                                          1.05


                                                          1.00


                                                          0.95


                                                          0.90


                                                          0.85


                                                          0.80


                                                          0.75
                                                                 ‐9    ‐8      ‐7    ‐6    ‐5    ‐4    ‐3    ‐2     ‐1      0        1   2   3   4   5     6   7   8
                                                                                                            Years since physician move
Notes: Graph shows how the year-specific cath difference ∆tj between a migrant physician’s origin and
destination HRRs evolves over time as a function of the time-invariant average cath difference ∆j between
the HRRs. These estimates come from a regression where an observation is a migrant-year and controls
include fixed effects for origin HRR, calendar year, and years since physician move. Both ∆tj and ∆j are
based on leave-out means that exclude physician j’s own patients. Bands indicate 95 percent confidence
intervals constructed from two-way clustered standard errors at the physician and HRR levels.
                                                                                                Cardiologist Mover Event Study
                                                                      Figure C.3: Event  contemporaneous  in HRR
                                                                                    with study–year-specific      environment
                                                                                                               change   in HRR environment
                                                           1
 Mover behavior per year‐specific  in HRR environment




                                                         0.8


                                                         0.6


                                                         0.4


                                                         0.2


                                                           0


                                                         ‐0.2


                                                         ‐0.4
                                                                ‐9    ‐8      ‐7    ‐6    ‐5    ‐4    ‐3    ‐2     ‐1      0       1     2   3   4   5     6   7   8
                                                                                                                  Years since move
Notes: Graph plots estimates of physician practice style t years since move as a function of the year-
specific difference in cath environments ∆tj between a migrant physician’s destination and origin HRRs.
These estimates come from a regression that includes fixed effects for origin HRR, calendar year of patient
admission, years since physician move, and patient age, race, sex, and first heart attack. For comparison, the
dashed gray line repeats the baseline results based on time-invariant differences in HRR cath rates (Figure 3).
Bands indicate 95 percent confidence intervals constructed from two-way clustered standard errors at the
physician and HRR levels.


                                                                                                                  62
                                                                                                       Figure C.4: Physician volume across a move, by size of move
                                                                                                                         (a) Physician volume: sample means by size of move
                                                                                  Move size: HRR intensity difference z                                                                                                  Move size: absolute HRR intensity difference |z|
                                                                                                      Δ >0
                                                                                                      Dz        0             ΔDz £ 0 0                                                                                                                |Δ  |1 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |Dz|>                     |Dz|| £ 11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |Δ
                                                                   6                                                                                                                                                7


                                                                   5                                                                                                                                                6
                                       Annual physician volume




                                                                                                                                                                                       Annual physician volume
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                   4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                   3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3
                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2

                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1

                                                                   0                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                        ‐9   ‐8   ‐7   ‐6   ‐5   ‐4   ‐3     ‐2     ‐1    0   1    2      3   4   5   6   7   8                                                          ‐9   ‐8   ‐7   ‐6   ‐5   ‐4    ‐3    ‐2       ‐1   0   1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8
                                                                                                            Years since move                                                                                                                                 Years since move


                                                                                                            (b) Relative physician volume: sample means by size of move
                                                                                  Move size: HRR intensity difference z                                                                                                  Move size: absolute HRR intensity difference |z|
                                                                                                      Δ
                                                                                                      Dz > 0   0              ΔDz £ 00                                                                                                                 |Δ | 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |Dz|>       1            |Dz|| £ 1 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |Δ
     Physician volume relative to current HRR




                                                                                                                                                                   Physician volume relative to current HRR
                                                                 1.30                                                                                                                                             1.30

                                                                 1.20                                                                                                                                             1.20

                                                                 1.10                                                                                                                                             1.10

                                                                 1.00                                                                                                                                             1.00

                                                                 0.90                                                                                                                                             0.90

                                                                 0.80                                                                                                                                             0.80

                                                                 0.70                                                                                                                                             0.70
                                                                        ‐9   ‐8   ‐7   ‐6   ‐5   ‐4   ‐3     ‐2     ‐1    0   1    2      3   4   5   6   7   8                                                          ‐9   ‐8   ‐7   ‐6   ‐5   ‐4    ‐3    ‐2       ‐1   0   1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8
                                                                                                            Years since move                                                                                                                                 Years since move


                                                                                                                               (c) Relative physician volume: event study
                                                                                  Move size: HRR intensity difference z                                                                                                  Move size: absolute HRR intensity difference |z|
                                                                 0.15                                                                                                                                            0.20
                                                                                                                                                                     Relative physician volume per |z|
Relative physician volume per z




                                                                 0.10                                                                                                                                            0.15

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.10
                                                                 0.05

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.05
                                                                 0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.00
                                                           ‐0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ‐0.05

                                                           ‐0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ‐0.10

                                                           ‐0.15                                                                                                                                                 ‐0.15
                                                                        ‐9   ‐8   ‐7   ‐6   ‐5   ‐4    ‐3      ‐2   ‐1    0   1    2      3   4   5   6   7   8                                                          ‐9   ‐8   ‐7   ‐6   ‐5   ‐4    ‐3    ‐2       ‐1   0   1    2    3   4   5   6   7   8
                                                                                                            Years since move                                                                                                                                 Years since move

Notes: This figure describes how physician volume, in terms of the number or relative number of AMI sample patients treated
each year, varies by time across a move and also by the size of the move. ∆z is equal to the time-invariant difference in cath
between the origin and destination HRRs for each migrant, standardized to have mean zero and a standard deviation of 1
across all migrants. Thus, ∆z > 0 means an above-average move, while |∆z | > 1 indicates a move where the experienced
change in cath environment is greater than one standard deviation.

                                                                                                                                                                  63
                                                                     Table C.1: Sample summary statistics
                       Medicare
                                           AMI Patient Episodes                                   AMI Patient Characteristics                                 Cardiologist Characteristics
                      Beneficiaries
                                                                                                         Admitted                       2‐Day Cath Rate                    AMI
                    Total    Fraction in    Total in   Physician                                                  Cardiologist                                                      HRR
        year                                                        STEMI      Age     White     Male     to Cath                    Any                      Total    patients as
                  (Millions)    FFS           FFS       Sample                                                    within 2 days            NSTEMI STEMI                            Moves
                                                                                                         Hospital                   AMI                                 first card
         (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)           (6)      (7)      (8)      (9)        (10)        (11)        (12)   (13)   (14)        (15)       (16)      (17)
                                                       Panel A: Years in which physician claims available for 5% of Medicare beneficiaries
        1992        36.9       93.3%         288,663     14,505     69.8%      75.3    89.3% 53.5%          69.6%       65.6%      16.3% 15.1% 16.8%           4,955      1.8         ‐
        1993        37.7       92.6%         282,437     14,173     68.0%      75.3    89.1% 53.6%          71.1%       69.1%      19.3% 17.9% 20.0%           5,293      1.7         ‐
        1994        38.7       91.6%         289,514     14,332     66.6%      75.3    90.5% 52.9%          73.3%       77.7%      23.0% 21.2% 24.0%           6,360      2.0         ‐
        1995        39.3       89.7%         290,493     14,233     64.7%      75.4    90.2% 52.7%          74.4%       80.5%      27.0% 24.2% 28.6%           6,751      2.0         ‐
        1996        39.8       87.3%         291,093     14,432     62.1%      75.6    89.9% 52.4%          75.6%       82.1%      30.6% 27.0% 32.7%           7,170      2.0         ‐
        1997        40.2       84.5%         285,060     14,205     59.4%      75.8    89.5% 52.2%          77.1%       82.1%      32.7% 28.8% 35.3%           7,417      2.0         ‐
                                                       Panel B: Years in which physician claims available for 20% of Medicare beneficiaries
64




        1998        40.6       82.3%         285,601     56,174      55.7%     76.1     89.2% 51.7%         77.9%       84.1%      34.2%      29.9%   37.6%   11,790      5.0        55
        1999        40.9       81.6%         291,399     58,102      52.1%     76.4     88.7% 51.3%         78.3%       85.6%      35.0%      30.6%   39.1%   12,397      5.1        154
        2000        41.4       82.1%         300,255     59,131      48.3%     76.5     89.0% 51.0%         79.3%       87.3%      36.8%      31.8%   42.2%   12,842      5.2        221
        2001        41.9       83.9%         306,328     60,139      45.8%     76.6     88.7% 51.1%         80.4%       87.3%      39.3%      34.1%   45.6%   13,160      5.3        239
        2002        42.4       85.7%         313,879     61,670      44.0%     76.5     88.2% 51.2%         82.4%       87.9%      42.2%      36.6%   49.3%   13,735      5.4        261
        2003        43.0       86.6%         308,448     61,016      42.4%     76.6     87.9% 51.3%         83.5%       89.9%      44.1%      38.1%   52.3%   14,047      5.4        262
        2004        43.6       86.4%         294,555     58,287      40.6%     76.5     87.6% 51.4%         85.4%       90.2%      47.0%      40.8%   56.1%   14,339      5.2        290
        2005        44.5       84.9%         277,937     54,691      38.9%     76.6     87.5% 51.7%         86.4%       90.5%      48.6%      42.2%   58.6%   14,456      4.9        264
        2006        45.3       81.4%         257,325     50,593      37.1%     76.4     87.4% 52.0%         88.0%       90.4%      51.2%      44.2%   63.0%   14,598      4.6        323
        2007        46.3       79.1%         246,053     48,551      34.4%     76.5     87.2% 52.1%         88.9%       90.4%      51.4%      44.4%   64.8%   14,472      4.4        287
        2008        47.5       76.8%         242,494     47,396      31.4%     76.5     86.9% 52.0%         88.9%       89.8%      51.3%      44.2%   66.7%   13,973      4.3        201
        2009        48.7       75.3%         229,787     44,881      29.9%     76.2     86.3% 52.7%         90.1%       89.4%      53.4%      46.3%   69.8%   13,443      4.2        164
        2010        49.9       74.6%         229,947     45,317      28.7%     76.1     86.1% 53.0%         90.7%       88.4%      55.2%      47.9%   73.3%   13,030      4.2        164
        2011        51.5       74.0%         227,058     44,438      27.4%     75.9     85.6% 53.6%         91.4%       86.7%      57.4%      50.3%   76.0%   12,488      4.2        128
        2012        53.4       72.4%         217,829     42,584      26.3%     76.0     85.6% 53.6%         91.8%       85.0%      58.4%      51.3%   78.2%   11,903      4.1        76
      1998‐2012     45.4       80.1%       4,028,895    792,970      39.8%     76.4     87.6% 51.9%         85.0%       88.2%      46.2%      41.1%   54.0%   19,945      4.8       3,089

     Notes: Table shows summary statistics related to the sample and variable construction, as discussed in appendix Section A.
Top and Bottom HRRs, by Cath Intensity Ranking    Table C.2: HRR cath rank
  HRR                                                        HRR Intensity Rank                HRR Cath Rate           Annual AMI
 Number              HRR City           HRR State       1998       2012      Average     1998      2012      Average    Patients
   (1)                 (2)                  (3)          (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)      (8)         (9)       (10)
                                        Panel A: Top 10 HRRs, by 1998‐2012 Average Cath Rate
   101   Boulder                            CO            4           4          1       62.4%    74.6%       75.3%      100.0
   422   Provo                              UT            9           1          2       57.4%    82.8%       74.8%      229.7
   421   Ogden                              UT            6           3          3       59.1%    76.3%       70.1%      211.6
   104   Fort Collins                       CO            3          75          4       67.1%    63.8%       66.0%      228.3
   324   Minot                             ND            47           8          5       46.8%    73.2%       65.1%      184.1
    69   Palm Springs/Rancho Mira           CA           17          22          6       55.2%    69.8%       64.8%      305.7
   142   Albany                             GA           22           9          7       52.5%    72.6%       64.1%      239.5
   190   Cedar Rapids                       IA           14          35          8       56.4%    68.4%       63.6%      305.1
   370   Rapid City                         SD           27           7          9       51.8%    73.3%       62.8%      234.3
    14   Sun City                           AZ            1          15         10       71.5%    70.9%       62.7%      333.7
                                     Panel B: Bottom 10 HRRs, by 1998‐2012 Average Cath Rate
   289   Newark                           NJ           291        297       297        18.6%      45.9%      32.9%       1314.4
   367   Florence                         SC           205        306       298        31.5%      32.3%      32.0%        670.6
   350   Danville                         PA           305        286       299        11.7%      49.6%      31.7%        751.2
   221   Bangor                          ME            302        304       300        14.9%      38.4%      31.4%        925.7
   230   Springfield                     MA            299        298       301        16.9%      45.2%      31.3%        853.8
   443   Charleston                      WV            294        293       302        17.8%      48.5%      30.9%       1491.9
   347   Altoona                          PA           301        252       303        15.0%      53.3%      30.9%        364.9
   296   Binghamton                      NY            303        305       304        14.1%      34.5%      27.9%        533.0
   297   Bronx                           NY            297        301       305        17.1%      41.1%      27.2%        716.8
   299   Buffalo                         NY            304        303       306        12.1%      40.2%      23.6%       1405.6
                                               Panel C: Top 10 HRRs, by 1998 Cath Rate
    14   Sun City                         AZ              1         15         10        71.5%    70.9%      62.7%       333.7
   402   McAllen                          TX              2        295         68        69.7%    46.1%      53.0%       518.3
   104   Fort Collins                     CO              3         75          4        67.1%    63.8%      66.0%       228.3
   101   Boulder                          CO              4          4          1        62.4%    74.6%      75.3%       100.0
   154   Aurora                           IL              5         90         21        59.7%    62.8%      59.5%       157.2
   421   Ogden                            UT              6          3          3        59.1%    76.3%      70.1%       211.6
   456   Wausau                           WI              7         14         13        58.7%    70.9%      61.5%       280.0
   400   Lubbock                          TX              8         64         30        58.0%    64.7%      57.5%       750.7
   422   Provo                            UT              9          1          2        57.4%    82.8%      74.8%       229.7
   152   Idaho Falls                      ID             10          5         11        57.0%    74.6%      62.4%       141.1
                                           Panel D: Bottom 10 HRRs, by 1998 Cath Rate
   297   Bronx                            NY          297       301        305           17.1%    41.1%      27.2%        716.8
   420   Wichita Falls                    TX          298       239        200           17.0%    54.5%      44.8%        289.5
   230   Springfield                      MA          299       298        301           16.9%    45.2%      31.3%        853.8
   360   Scranton                         PA          300       251        290           16.1%    53.5%      34.9%        517.5
   347   Altoona                          PA          301       252        303           15.0%    53.3%      30.9%        364.9
   221   Bangor                           ME          302       304        300           14.9%    38.4%      31.4%        925.7
   296   Binghamton                       NY          303       305        304           14.1%    34.5%      27.9%        533.0
   299   Buffalo                          NY          304       303        306           12.1%    40.2%      23.6%       1405.6
   350   Danville                         PA          305       286        299           11.7%    49.6%      31.7%        751.2
   242   Muskegon                         MI          306       125        283           11.3%    60.4%      37.1%        308.4

Notes: Table describes the top 10 and bottom 10 HRRs by average cath ranking over the period 1998-2012 (Panels A and B)
and by 1998 ranking (Panels C and D). Columns (4-6) list the intensity ranks based on 1998, 2012, and average cath rates,
respectively, where a rank of 1 indicates the highest-cath HRR and a rank of 306 indicates the lowest-cath HRR. Columns
(7-9) show the cath rates from which the respective ranks in columns (4-6) derive.




                                                                 65
     Non‐parametric rank correlations for annual HRR intensity measures           Table C.3: HRR cath rank
                                                                                         Panel A: Kendall  Rank‐Order Coefficient
     year   1998          1999          2000          2001          2002          2003         2004         2005        2006       2007                 2008          2009        2010        2011        2012
     1998   1.00 ()
     1999   0.78 (0.02)   1.00 ()
     2000   0.72 (0.02)   0.77 (0.02)   1.00 ()
     2001   0.68 (0.02)   0.71 (0.02)   0.78 (0.02)   1.00 ()
     2002   0.62 (0.03)   0.65 (0.03)   0.72 (0.02)   0.77 (0.02)   1.00 ()
     2003   0.55 (0.03)   0.58 (0.03)   0.65 (0.02)   0.70 (0.02)   0.77 (0.02)   1.00 ()
     2004   0.50 (0.03)   0.52 (0.03)   0.59 (0.03)   0.63 (0.02)   0.68 (0.02)   0.74 (0.02)   1.00 ()
     2005   0.47 (0.03)   0.49 (0.03)   0.56 (0.03)   0.61 (0.02)   0.66 (0.02)   0.73 (0.02)   0.76 (0.02)   1.00 ()
     2006   0.46 (0.03)   0.48 (0.03)   0.52 (0.03)   0.57 (0.03)   0.62 (0.02)   0.68 (0.02)   0.70 (0.02)   0.76 (0.02)   1.00 ()
     2007   0.42 (0.03)   0.43 (0.03)   0.48 (0.03)   0.53 (0.03)   0.58 (0.03)   0.63 (0.02)   0.63 (0.02)   0.71 (0.02)   0.73 (0.02)   1.00 ()
     2008   0.40 (0.03)   0.40 (0.03)   0.45 (0.03)   0.49 (0.03)   0.54 (0.03)   0.58 (0.02)   0.61 (0.02)   0.66 (0.02)   0.70 (0.02)   0.71 (0.02)   1.00 ()
     2009   0.41 (0.03)   0.43 (0.03)   0.47 (0.03)   0.51 (0.03)   0.55 (0.03)   0.60 (0.02)   0.60 (0.02)   0.66 (0.02)   0.70 (0.02)   0.72 (0.02)   0.72 (0.02)   1.00 ()
     2010   0.39 (0.04)   0.40 (0.03)   0.44 (0.03)   0.48 (0.03)   0.53 (0.03)   0.56 (0.03)   0.54 (0.03)   0.63 (0.02)   0.63 (0.02)   0.69 (0.02)   0.68 (0.02)   0.71 (0.02) 1.00 ()
     2011   0.40 (0.03)   0.40 (0.03)   0.44 (0.03)   0.47 (0.03)   0.52 (0.03)   0.56 (0.03)   0.55 (0.03)   0.60 (0.02)   0.62 (0.02)   0.64 (0.02)   0.64 (0.02)   0.69 (0.02) 0.70 (0.02) 1.00 ()
     2012   0.41 (0.03)   0.40 (0.04)   0.43 (0.03)   0.46 (0.03)   0.53 (0.03)   0.55 (0.03)   0.54 (0.03)   0.59 (0.03)   0.61 (0.03)   0.63 (0.02)   0.62 (0.03)   0.65 (0.02) 0.68 (0.02) 0.71 (0.02) 1.00 ()
66




                                                                                         Panel B: Spearman Rank‐Order Coefficient
     year   1998          1999          2000          2001          2002          2003          2004       2005       2006        2007                  2008          2009        2010        2011        2012
     1998   1.00 ()
     1999   0.93 (0.02)   1.00 ()
     2000   0.89 (0.03)   0.92 (0.02)   1.00 ()
     2001   0.85 (0.03)   0.88 (0.03)   0.93 (0.02)   1.00 ()
     2002   0.80 (0.03)   0.83 (0.03)   0.89 (0.03)   0.92 (0.02)   1.00 ()
     2003   0.73 (0.04)   0.75 (0.04)   0.83 (0.03)   0.87 (0.03)   0.92 (0.02)   1.00 ()
     2004   0.68 (0.04)   0.69 (0.04)   0.77 (0.04)   0.82 (0.03)   0.86 (0.03)   0.91 (0.02)   1.00 ()
     2005   0.65 (0.04)   0.67 (0.04)   0.74 (0.04)   0.80 (0.03)   0.84 (0.03)   0.91 (0.02)   0.92 (0.02)   1.00 ()
     2006   0.63 (0.04)   0.65 (0.04)   0.70 (0.04)   0.76 (0.04)   0.81 (0.03)   0.86 (0.03)   0.88 (0.03)   0.92 (0.02)   1.00 ()
     2007   0.59 (0.05)   0.59 (0.05)   0.66 (0.04)   0.71 (0.04)   0.77 (0.04)   0.82 (0.03)   0.82 (0.03)   0.88 (0.03)   0.90 (0.03)   1.00 ()
     2008   0.56 (0.05)   0.56 (0.05)   0.62 (0.04)   0.67 (0.04)   0.73 (0.04)   0.78 (0.04)   0.80 (0.03)   0.84 (0.03)   0.87 (0.03)   0.88 (0.03)   1.00 ()
     2009   0.58 (0.05)   0.59 (0.05)   0.65 (0.04)   0.70 (0.04)   0.73 (0.04)   0.79 (0.04)   0.79 (0.03)   0.84 (0.03)   0.88 (0.03)   0.89 (0.03)   0.89 (0.03)   1.00 ()
     2010   0.55 (0.05)   0.56 (0.05)   0.61 (0.05)   0.66 (0.04)   0.71 (0.04)   0.76 (0.04)   0.73 (0.04)   0.81 (0.03)   0.81 (0.03)   0.87 (0.03)   0.85 (0.03)   0.88 (0.03) 1.00 ()
     2011   0.56 (0.05)   0.56 (0.05)   0.62 (0.05)   0.65 (0.04)   0.70 (0.04)   0.75 (0.04)   0.73 (0.04)   0.79 (0.04)   0.81 (0.03)   0.82 (0.03)   0.82 (0.03)   0.87 (0.03) 0.88 (0.03) 1.00 ()
     2012   0.57 (0.05)   0.56 (0.05)   0.60 (0.05)   0.63 (0.04)   0.70 (0.04)   0.73 (0.04)   0.72 (0.04)   0.78 (0.04)   0.79 (0.04)   0.81 (0.03)   0.80 (0.03)   0.84 (0.03) 0.85 (0.03) 0.88 (0.03) 1.00 ()

     Notes: Table gives the Kendall τa (Panel A) and Spearman (Panel B) coefficients corresponding to each pair of annual HRR 2-day cath intensity
     measures (standard errors in parentheses). When two rankings have a monotonic and positive relationship, both the Kendall and Spearman coefficients
     are equal to 1, whereas they are both zero when the rankings are independent. The Kendall τa also has a convenient interpretation for any value not
     equal to zero or 1: for any two rank-order measures, the corresponding τa coefficient describes how much more likely (in percentage points) the two
     orderings will agree than disagree for any two randomly selected observations.
                                        Table C.4: Difference-in-differences robustness
Difference‐in‐difference estimates
Dependent variable: (cath )i ϵ {0,1}, indicating cath within 2 days

                  Time‐invariant in HRR environment                                Year‐specific in HRR environment
                                          bal panel: 3                    early sample: move yr  2004        late sample: move yr 2005
                                          years before/                                  admits within 3                    admits within 3
                  all movers   all movers after move          all movers admit yr  2004 years of move      admit yr  2005 years of move
                       (1)          (2)        (3)                 (4)         (5)             (6)                 (7)             (8)
                  0.037           ‐‐         ‐‐                 ‐0.026      0.097            0.035               0.089          ‐.005
                   (0.057)                                      (0.047)     (0.064)          (0.058)             (0.103)        (0.097)
*(after)         0.628***      0.652***       0.622***        0.652***    0.696***        0.681***            0.569***        0.680***
                   (0.055)       (0.059)        (0.080)         (0.053)     (0.073)          (0.066)             (0.105)        (0.098)

Fixed Effects
          HRR1        X                                               X          X                X                X               X
      Physician                     X              X

Observations       124,650      161,944         38,852          161,944        44,492          50,389            31,588         29,233

Notes: Table presents additional difference-in-differences estimates of the change in a physician’s practice style across a move
as a function of the change ∆ in cath environment. Each column presents results from a separate regression. Columns
(1-3) use the time-invariant change in cath rates between the origin and destination HRRs, as defined by Equation A.2.
Columns (4-8) use the year-specific difference in cath rates between HRRs, as defined by Equation A.1. The balanced panel
specification in column (34) restricts to physicians who treat patients at least 3 years before and after the move, and also
restricts to patients treated during that time window. All regressions include fixed effects for years since physician move, as
well as for patient age, race, sex, and first heart attack. Two-way clustered standard errors at the physician and HRR levels
shown in parentheses. *: p < 0.10; **: p < 0.05; ***: p < 0.01.




                                                                          67
