                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            INTERNATIONAL EVIDENCE ON LONG RUN MONEY DEMAND

                                          Luca Benati
                                       Robert E. Lucas, Jr.
                                       Juan Pablo Nicolini
                                         Warren Weber

                                       Working Paper 22475
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22475


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2016




We wish to thank Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde, Helmut Luetkepohl, Albert Marcet, Ed Nelson and
Pedro Teles for useful discussions. Special thanks to Joao Ayres, and Nicole Gorton, Eva Werner
and Junji Yano for invaluable help with the data. Usual disclaimers apply.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22475.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Luca Benati, Robert E. Lucas, Jr., Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Warren Weber. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
International Evidence on Long Run Money Demand
Luca Benati, Robert E. Lucas, Jr., Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Warren Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 22475
July 2016
JEL No. E4,E41

                                          ABSTRACT

We explore the long-run demand for M1 based on a dataset comprising 31 countries since 1851.
In many cases cointegration tests identify a long-run equilibrium relationship between either
velocity and the short rate, or M1, GDP, and the short rate. Evidence is especially strong for the
United States and the United Kingdom over the entire period since World War I, and for high-
inflation countries such as Israel. For low-inflation countries the data often prefer the
specification in the levels of velocity and the short rate originally estimated by Selden (1956) and
Latané (1960) to either the log-log, or the semi-log ones. This is especially clear for the United
States.


Luca Benati                                                Juan Pablo Nicolini
Department of Economics                                    FRB Minneapolis
University of Bern                                         and Universidad Di Tella
Schanzeneckstrasse 1                                       juanpa@minneapolisfed.org
CH-3001 Bern, SWITZERLAND
luca.benati@vwi.unibe.ch                                   Warren Weber
                                                           Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
Robert E. Lucas, Jr.                                       wew@webereconomics.com
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
relucas@midway.uchicago.edu




A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22475
1     Introduction
The idea that the quantity of money in an economy can be measured and analyzed
with some accuracy, and that changes in this quantity can be related in systematic
ways to changes in interest rates, output and prices has had a long but checkered
history. The postwar work of Friedman, Schwartz, Brunner, Meltzer, and others led
to a common vocabulary for diﬀerent definitions of money, and well-documented data
sets covering many countries over long time periods. Theoretical models proposed
by Baumol, Tobin and others described well how changes in the money supply aﬀect
other variables, and their predictions conformed well to evidence, at least at the low
frequencies. Yet, over recent decades many economists have come to the view that
monetary aggregates convey no useful information, and have turned to macroeco-
nomic models in which measures of money do not appear at all. One driver of this
change was the alleged instability of the relationship between these macroeconomic
series.
    Our own conclusions in this paper are almost an exact opposite of this widespread
view. We review the evidence on empirical money demand functions, using annual
data on money (1 , for us), nominal GDP, and short term interest rates from 31
countries over periods that range in some cases to over 100 years. We find remarkable
stability in long run money demand behavior in many countries, and an equally
surprising sameness across diﬀerent countries. In some cases of instability, anomalies
have straightforward explanations. We describe these cases, and others that are less
easy to dismiss, in some detail below.
    In Section 2 we develop a generalized version of the Baumol-Tobin model that
will guide our empirical investigation. We set up the model and then work out its
main predictions. We draw the conclusions described above in two steps. The first is
described in Section 3, where we simply plot the implied predictions of a particular
case of the model against the data for all countries we have. We find this informal
visual evidence quite remarkable. The second is described in Sections 4 to 8, were we
describe the econometric analysis of this evidence, based on cointegration methods,
and we provide formal statistical tests that forcefully support the hypothesis of a
stable long run money demand.


2     A Model of Money Demand
We begin by developing a simple model that will guide our empirical investigation. We
study a labor-only, representative agent economy with uncertainty in which making
transactions is costly. We let  be the state at time  and let  = {0  1    }
The preferences of the representative agent are
                                         X
                                         ∞
                                    0            (( ))
                                         =0


                                                2
where ( ) is his consumption given history up through date , and the function 
is diﬀerentiable, increasing and concave. The goods production technology is given
by
                              ( ) = ( ) = ( )( )
where ( ) is time devoted to the production of the consumption good and ( ) is
an exogenous stochastic process. The agent is endowed in each period with a unit
of time, with ( ) allocated to goods production and 1 − ( ) used to carry out
transactions.
    We assume that households choose the number  of ‘trips to the bank’ in the
manner of the classic Baumol-Tobin (BT) model. At the beginning of a period, a
household begins with some nominal wealth that can be allocated to the transactional
asset ( ), or to non-transactional assets, risk-free government bonds or other state-
contingent assets (  +1 ). During the first of the  subperiods, one member of the
household uses money to buy consumption goods. During this same initial sub-period
another member of the household produces and sells goods in exchange for money.
At the end of the subperiod, producers transfer to the bank the proceeds from their
transactions. The situation at the beginning of the second subperiod thus replicates
exactly the situation at the beginning of the first. This process is repeated  times
during the period. The choice of this variable  will be the only economically relevant
decision made by households. Purchases over a period are then subject to a cash in
advance constraint
                                  ( )( ) ≤ ( )( )
BT assumed that the cost of carrying out these transactions increases linearly in
the number of trips. We will consider this case here, and also allow for other forms
for this cost function. Specifically, we describe the total cost of making transac-
tions, measured in units of time, by a non-negative, increasing and smooth function
(( ) ( )) where ( ) is an exogenous stochastic process. The variable ( )
thus introduces some unobserved randomness into the model. This is essential to
motivate the econometric analysis that is the core of the paper. It can be interpreted
as changes over time in the technology to adjust portfolios available to households.
We assume that (0 ( )) = 0 so the time involved in no trips to the banks is zero.
    Equilibrium in the labor market then implies that
                                   1 = ( ) + (( ) ( ))
and the equality of production and consumption implies
                              ( ) = ( )(1 − (( ) ( )))
The real wage is equal to ( ) and the nominal wage is ( ) ( )
   Note that the only resources not used for production are the ones described by the
function (( ) ( ))1 Thus (( ) ( )) amounts to time taken away from the
   1
    We have referred to ‘banks’, but we are implicitly assuming that their operations do not require
the use of labor. This assumption is inessential and made for simplicity.

                                                 3
production of final goods, the only relevant component of utility. Optimal monetary
policy would try to minimize the term (( ) ( )) ideally, setting ( ) as close to
zero as possible. The term (( ) ( )) is thus directly associated with the welfare
cost of transactions, which will clearly depend on monetary policy.
    At the beginning of each period, an agent starts with nominal wealth  ( ), which
can be allocated to ( ), interest bearing bonds, ( ), or state-contingent assets
(  +1 ). Let   (  +1 ) be the price of an Arrow-Debreu security, bought at 
in state  , which pays oﬀ one unit of money in state +1 . The agent’s allocation of
these assets is then restricted by
                                        X
                  ( ) + ( ) +        (  +1 )  (  +1 ) ≤  ( )
                                        +1


It will be convenient to divide both sides by  ( ), writing

             ( ) ( ) X (  +1 )  (+1 )               ( )
                     +        +                      (  +1 ) ≤
              ( )    ( )   (+1 )  ( )                   ( )
                                  +1



which restates agents’ choices in units of consumption. If we let e (  +1 ) denote
the price of the state contingent asset divided by the probability of the state, we can
write this constraint as
                                h                                          i
             ( ) + ( ) +  (  +1 )(  +1 )e (  +1 ) ≤ ( ) (1)

where lower case letters are real values and where (  +1 ) ≡  (+1 ) ( ) denotes
the gross inflation rate between period  in sate  and period +1 in state (  +1 ).
    We treat the gross nominal return on short term bonds, ( ), as an exogenous
process determined by monetary policy.2 The assumption that the short-term interest
rate is determined by policy implies restrictions on the behavior of the growth rate
of the money supply, as is well known and as we show in Appendix A.
    So far, we have been silent with respect to what our measure of money, ( ),
accounts for. For the theoretical analysis, we allow for money to pay a nominal
return, lower than the one paid by bonds, which we call  ( ). As we will show, this
is an important aspect of the theory. We explain our choices for both the particular
monetary aggregate and its return in detail below, when discussing the empirical
analysis.
    We can now determine the agent’s wealth next period, contingent on the actions
taken in the current period and the realization of the exogenous shock +1  In nominal
units, this is
   2
    When policy is described as a sequence of interest rates, there may be indeterminacy of the
price level. Real money balances will however be unique. In this paper we ignore issues regarding
the determination of the price level.


                                               4
 (  +1 ) ≤ ( ) ( ) + ( )( ) + (  +1 )
                  £                     ¤
                 + 1 − (( ) ( )) ( ) ( ) +  (  +1 ) (+1 ) −  ( )( )

where  (  +1 ) is the real value of the monetary transfer the government makes to
the representative agent. Dividing by the price level  (+1 ), we obtain

                          ( ) ( ) + ( )( )
            (  +1 ) ≤            
                                                           + (  +1 )
                                   (  +1 )
                             [1 − (( ) ( ))] ( ) − ( )
                           +                 
                                                                     +  (  +1 )       (2a)
                                          (  +1 )
Finally, the cash in advance constraint can be written in real terms as

                                     ( ) ≤ ( )( )                                   (3)

We now consider the decision problem of a single, atomistic agent who takes as given
the prices e (  +1 ), the inflation rate (  +1 ), the interest rate ( ) the real
wage ( ) and the shock ( ). Given the initial wealth ( ), this agent chooses
his consumption  ( ), the number of bank trips  ( ), and the assets  ( ),  ( ),
and (  +1 ) that he chooses to hold. These choices then determine the wealth
(  +1 ) that he carries into the next period conditional on +1  These choices are
restricted by equations (1), (2a), and (3).
    The Bellman equation describing the decision problem is
                                       h           h                     i     i
                                                         0      0 e 0
    () =          max  () −   +  +  ( )( ) ( ) −  −  [ − ]
                 (0 )
                        ∙                                                        ¸
                                 +  + [1 − ()]  −           0       0
                 +  (                                       +  ( ) + ( ))
                                         (0 )
where, for simplicity, we omitted the dependence of current variables on the state,
and where 0 denotes the future state.
   The first order conditions are
                                             ∙ 0 0 ¸
                                  0              ( )
                            :  () =                   +                   (4)
                                                 (0 )
                                          ∙ 0 0 ¸
                                            ( )
                            :  =                   ()                  (5)
                                            (0 )
                                         ∙ 0 0 ¸
                                            ( )
                            :  +            0
                                                       =                     (6)
                                            ( )
                                       ∙ 0 0 ¸
                                         ( )
                                :               =                          (7)
                                         (0 )

                                                5
                                 (0 ) :  0 ( 0 ) = (0 )  (0 )                         (8)
and the envelope condition is
                                                 0 () =                                       (9)
Note that (6) and (7) imply
                                        ∙       ¸
                                      0 ( 0 )
                                                ( −  ) = 
                                      (0 )
which combined with (5) yields
                                           
                                                ( −  ) = 
                                         ()
In equilibrium
                                          (1 − ())
                                        =
                                        =
                                               
so, if we replace the value of  in the previous equation and let ∗ ≡ ( −  ), we
obtain
                                                     ()
                             ∗ ≡ ( −  ) = 2                                (10)
                                                  1 − ()
which gives an extended squared root formula for the equilibrium value of .3
   Note first that, using just sub-indexes to indicate the dependency on the state,
the solution for real money balances relative to output is
                                               (∗    )               1
                          (    ) =     ∗             ∗
                                                                     =                
                                          (    )  (    )    (∗    )
which does not depend on  .
    There are several empirical implications of this solution which do not depend
on the particular functional form assumed for the function () we would like to
discuss now. First, the theory implies an income elasticity equal to one. This is the
specification we will study for much of the paper. In Appendix G, we allow for a more
general specification which does not restrict the income elasticity to be one, and where
we are able to test this unitary income elasticity implication. Second, as (    ) is
diﬀerentiable with a strictly positive derivative, some of its properties are inherited
by the function  (∗    ). In particular, up to a linear approximation the stochastic
properties of  are inherited from the stochastic properties of ∗ and    This has
testable implications, as long as   is stationary as we will assume throughout the
paper. Specifically, if ∗ is stationary, so should be   while if it is the case that ∗
has a unit root,  should have a unit root too. As it turns out, for the specifications
of the function (    ) that we explore in the theory and on the empirical section
these properties hold exactly, not only in a linear approximation.
  3
      The squared root formula is the by now classic solution of the Baumol-Tobin formulation.



                                                       6
2.1    Analysis of the solution
As equation (10) makes clear, the equilibrium relationship between real money de-
mand (the inverse of ) and the spread between the return on bonds and the return
on money (∗ ) critically depends on the characteristics of the cost function (    ).
We now consider three cases that deliver approximations to functional forms which
have been used in empirical work, and which we will explore in the following Sections.

The exponential case Consider first the following function

                                    (   ) =    

In this case, equation (10) becomes
                                            
                                  +1
                                                     = ∗ 
                                         1 −   
Note that    is the cost of inflation in units of time and that 1 −    is time
devoted to GDP, so the ratio can be interpreted as the welfare cost of inflation on
output. When the interest rate ∗ is arbitrarily close to zero, so is the number of trips
to the bank  , so the term    is arbitrarily close to zero, and the denominator in
the expression above is equal to one.
    For moderate interest rates, the welfare cost is negligible. Still, even for relatively
high interest rates, estimates of the welfare cost of inflation are hardly above 4%.
Thus, the denominator in the expression above would range from 1 to 0.96. It there-
fore seems reasonable to use the approximation 1 −    ' 1 and write the solution
as
                                       +1
                                             ' ∗ 
Taking logs we then obtain

                           ln  + ln   + ( + 1) ln  = ln ∗                     (11)

which is the log-log function typically used in the literature. The BT case is the one
obtained by assuming that the function ((∗ )) is linear, or  = 1 which implies an
interest rate elasticity of 12

The Selden-Latané specification A less well know specification is obtained for
the following cost function
                                                         µ                   ¶
                                                +                +  
                (    ) =  ln( +  ) +          −  ln  +
                                                +                   
                ¡                   ¢
where the term  ln  + +   
                                  
                                      guarantees that (0 0) = 0 and    so the function
is increasing. The function is concave, so it means that the marginal cost of making

                                               7
transactions is decreasing with the number of transactions (or, what is the same,
decreasing with the nominal interest rate).
   In this case the solution is given by
                                 1
                                    2   [( +  ) −  −   ]
                           2 ( +)
                                                                 = ∗
                                        1 − (    )
If, as before, we proceed with the approximation 1 − (   ) ' 1, we obtain
                               2                               ∗
                                   2 [( +  ) −  −   ] ' 
                           ( + )
Thus, for small values of , the solution can be approximated by

                                           −   ' ∗                             (12)

which implies a linear relationship between velocity and the interest rate.
    This empirical specification was used by Richard Selden (1956) over half a century
ago, and, to the very best of our knowledge, it has been used again in the literature
only once, by Henry Allen Latané (1960). The main reason for considering this long-
forgotten specification is that, as we will discuss in Section 8, for several low-inflation
countries–first and foremost, the United States–the data seem to quite clearly prefer
it over the traditional log-log one discussed above and the semi-log specification that
we discuss next.

The semi-log Finally, consider the following specification
                                                   µ               ¶
                              ln( +  )  +       ln   +  
            (    ) = −            −        +      +
                                 +       +            
where again the term in the right-hand side implies (0   ) = 0
   In addition, we assume
                                 +     (1 − ln )
so that the function is always increasing in  . This function is also concave as the
one before. The main diﬀerence between this function and the two studied above is
that it asymptotes a constant (the term in parenthesis on the right hand side) as the
number of trips grow arbitrarily large.
    In this case, the solution is given by
                           2   [ (ln( +  ) − 1) +  +   ]
                               2                                  = ∗
                       ( + )           1 − (     )

If, as before, we ignore the term 1 − (   ), and also consider relatively low values
for ,we obtain a linear relationship between the log of velocity and the interest rate,
which corresponds to the well known semi-log specification.

                                                 8
Figure 1 The raw data: short rate, ratio between nominal M1 and nominal GDP,
         and fitted Baumol-Tobin specification


                                  22
Figure 2 The raw data: short rate, ratio between nominal M1 and nominal GDP,
         and fitted Baumol-Tobin specification

                                 23
Figure 3 The raw data: short rate, ratio between nominal M1 and nominal GDP,
         and fitted Baumol-Tobin specification


                                24
3       A First Look at the Data
The functional forms considered in the previous Section deliver expressions that can
be suitably taken to the data. The formal econometric analysis is presented in the
following Sections.
     As a first step, in this Section we present the data and compare them to the
theory. In order to do so, we will focus on the particular case in which the function 
is linear in  which corresponds to the BT case of the log-log specification in which
the elasticity is constant and equal to 12.
     Before doing that, we need to address the issue of how we map our theoretical
construct  to the data. As the model makes clear, the choice of the natural
aggregate comes associated to the discussion of the nominal return of that particular
aggregate  , since real money balances in the model depend not on the interest rate
on bonds, but rather on the spread between that rate and the rate paid by money.
Since we do not have data on the interest rate paid by deposits, we choose to work with
1 , which in most countries includes cash and checking accounts. We will proceed
under the assumption that, in the countries we study, checking accounts do not pay
interest. Although this is a questionable assumption, it is certainly more appropriate
for 1 that for broader aggregates, which typically include interest-paying deposits.4
As for cash, we follow Alvarez and Lippi (2009) and assume that it entails a negative
return, associated with the risk of being lost or stolen. Alvarez and Lippi (2009)
estimate the cost of holding cash to be close to 2% using detailed individual data
from Italy. In addition, and to simplify, we assume that cash is about half of total
money so that  = 0.99.
     This is a very important assumption when considering the log-log specification,
since it implies that real money balances have a satiation point when the interest rate
on bonds is zero, as is the case for some countries in the sample. Indeed, if on the
contrary we assume that  = 0, the log-log curve goes to infinity as  → 1. As
it can be seen in the evidence we show in this Section, this does not seem to be the
case for countries that did experience several periods of almost zero interest rates,
like the U.S. and Japan. This assumption also plays an important role in the formal
econometric tests, as it often improves the performance of the empirical version of
the log-log model.5
     A caveat must be made explicit. Payments in this model are for household pur-
chases of final goods, so they ignore other transactions where cash and deposits are
used, as paying employees and suppliers of intermediate goods and to clear asset ex-
    4
     It is the case, for instance, that deposits did pay interest in the U.S. after Regulation Q was
modified in the early 1980s. It is also the case that some deposits included in 1 did pay interest
in very high-inflation countries as Argentina and Brazil.
   5
     For example, as we will see, for Switzerland for the period 1851-1906, the bootstrapped p-values
for Johansen’s trace and maximum eigenvalue tests of no cointegration between the logarithm of
1 velocity and the short rate are 0.160 and 0.113 without the Alvarez-Lippi 1% correction to the
short rate, but they fall to 0.094 and 0.057 with the correction.


                                                 9
changes. We are implicitly treating all these payments–way larger than final goods
payments–as proportional to final goods payments. This will require introducing
a constant of proportionality as another free parameter in the model, that will be
country specific.
    In other words, the theory we developed is not aimed at matching levels of 1
over GDP, but rather changes on this ratio as the interest rate changes. One way
to see our descriptive exercise therefore is as using one free parameter per country,
to allow for a country-specific intercept, while the slope will be given by the BT
assumption of a linear technology, so that the elasticity is equal to 0.5.
    Figures 1 to 3 show scatterplots of the short rate and of the ratio between nom-
inal 1 and nominal GDP (that is: the inverse of 1 velocity), together with the
theoretical curve which corresponds to an approximation of equation (11), namely,
the BT case so
                                            
                                       =                                         (13)
                                       ( + 1)12
where  is nominal income at time  in country  and  is a country-specific
constant. As mentioned above, we let      ∗
                                                 =  − 099 where  is the gross short
term interest rate at time  in country . In three cases in which we could not find a
(suﬃciently long) interest rate series,6 we use inflation as a proxy for the opportunity
cost of money. For a detailed description of the data and the sources for each country,
see Appendix B.
    The grouping of countries has been largely arbitrary. The first row of Figure 1
contains countries which belonged, at some point, to the Commonwealth. The second
row contains countries which experienced very high inflation rates, and the interest
rate (i.e., the horizontal) axis, is in a logarithmic scale, due to the magnitudes reached
by inflation and interest rates in these countries. In the second row of Figure 1 there
are two countries, Argentina and Brazil, for which we highlight the most recent period
(since 1991, and since 1995, respectively). These are the two countries in our sample
which experienced recurrent periods of very high inflation that lasted over a decade.
The blue points correspond to the periods which followed the successful stabilization
years, 1991 for Argentina and 1995 for Brazil. These points are highlighted since in
both cases, the points following a successful stabilization lie below the theoretical
curve that matches the previous period.
    Figure 2 reports countries for which the theoretical curve is visually a still decent
approximation to the data. The first row of Figure 3 shows countries for which the
fit gets worse,7 but still there seems to be some relationship between the theory and
the data, while the second row of Figure 3 shows countries for which there seems to
be no connection between theory and data.
   6
    Specifically, Mexico, Chile (for the period 1941-2012), and Brazil (for the period 1934-2012).
   7
    For the Netherlands, the two World Wars and their aftermaths had been characterized by an
anomalous behaviour of velocity, which in some cases reached values ranging between 50 and almost
200. Because of this, in our econometric analysis we will uniquely focus on the period 1950-1992.


                                               10
     In all of these figures, the data are shown with diﬀerent colors under four cir-
cumstances: () data for the Gold Standard, up until 1913,8 are always shown with
a diﬀerent color than that used for subsequent years; () when we have data for
non-consecutive sub-periods (this is the case, e.g., for France); () when we have
diﬀerent series for the short rate which cannot be linked (this is the case, e.g., for
Venezuela); and () when we want to highlight drastic changes in the relationship
between velocity and the short rate (this is the case, e.g., for the Netherlands and
Portugal). Finally, for the United States we show with a diﬀerent color the ‘standard’
1 aggregate for the period since 1984, in order to highlight how failure to correct 1
as in Lucas and Nicolini (2015) leads to the apparent breakdown of the relationship
between velocity and the short rate documented by several authors.9 In our view, it
is remarkable how well this simple theory performs in this first inspection for a large
set of countries, in spite of a few apparent failures.
     When presenting plots, diﬃcult trade-oﬀs arise. In the main text we opted for
these scatterplots. In Figures 1 to 7 of the online appendix we provide an alternative
set of plots showing the time series for 1 velocity and the short rate, which we have
been standardized by dividing the demeaned observations by its standard deviation,
in order to better highlight the relationship between them. We find that alternative
way of looking at the data equally interesting.
     Despite the attractiveness of looking at simple plots, however, the previous analy-
sis has severe limitations. One would like to formally test if, as some of our simple
technologies imply, the ratio between real money balances and output inherit a unit
root when the short term interest rate exhibits a unit root. We also want to formally
test if, indeed, the estimated elasticities are equal to 1/2, as the simple BT specifi-
cation suggests, when using the log-log specification. In addition, we would also like
to let the data indicate which of the three specifications appear to provide a better
fit, and therefore learn something regarding the shape of the function (    ). To
the extent that the interest rate and velocity exhibit a unit root–which, as we dis-
cuss in Section 5, appears to be overwhelmingly the case–we can use cointegration
techniques to test whether there is a statistical long-run relationship between the two
series, and therefore between the interest rate and the ratio of money balances to
GDP. This is a particularly important question, since the distinction between short-
run and long-run has always been at the center of the discussion in empirical studies
of the money demand. Cointegration techniques are particularly suited to address
this distinction formally, with the advantage that the cointegration residual provides
a measure of the short-run deviations.
   8
     Although we take the Gold Standard to have ended in August 1914, with the outbreak of WWI,
in fact, marking the exact date of its end is all but impossible, as Richard Nixon’s closing of the
‘gold window’ in August 1971 was the culmination of a decades-long unravelling process which had
started with WWI. (For a fascinating discussion of such progressive unravelling, see e.g. Barro
(1982).) We take August 1914 as the date marking the end of the Gold Standard mostly because we
regard WWI as the single most important shock to the system.
   9
     See, first and foremost, Friedman and Kuttner (1992).


                                                11
    The remainder of the paper contain the formal econometric analysis of our data
set.


4      Main Features of Our Approach
In this paper we explore the long-run demand for 1 via cointegration methods. The
main reason is that, as we will show, the hypothesis that the short term interest rate
(in levels or in logs) exhibits a unit root is clearly supported by the data for most
countries. At the same time, the debate over the stability of the money demand
has long made the distinction between the short and the long run. This distinction
is totally absent in our model, but a large theoretical literature developed to try to
understand the large and sustained deviations of observed real money balances from
their theoretical counterparts: the ‘short-run’ deviations of money demand.10
     The entire notion of cointegration boils down to the existence of a long-run rela-
tionship between series driven by permanent shocks. And those permanent shocks are
the main source of identification of the relationship between the short term interest
rate and real money balances to output that we will discuss in what follows. The ex-
istence of the cointegration relationship implies that, in the long-run, any permanent
increase in the interest rate maps into a corresponding permanent decrease in real
money balances: the exact amount will be described by the estimated cointegrating
vector. In addition, any deviation of the two series from their long-run relationship–
i.e., what is technically known as the cointegration residual–is transitory, and it is
bound to disappear in the long-run. Accordingly, the persistence of this cointegration
residual become an explicit measure of the ‘short-run’ deviations. This is why, since
the early 1990s, cointegration has become the standard approach for searching for a
long-run money demand.11
     It is important to highlight two aspects of our empirical strategy. First, we will
perform tests which take either cointegration, or no cointegration, as the null hypothe-
sis (specifically, Shin’s, and Johansen’s). Although the overwhelming majority of the
papers in the literature have been based on Johansen’s procedure, there is no rea-
son why–especially within the present context–no cointegration should be regarded
as the ‘natural null hypothesis’. Rather, it might reasonably be argued that, since
we are here searching for the presence of a long-run money demand for transaction
purposes, cointegration should be regarded as the natural null,12 so that tests should
just be based on Shin’s (1994) procedure. A key reason for not eschewing Johansen’s
  10
     See Grossman and Weiss (1983) or Rotemberg (1984) for early contributions or Alvarez and
Lippi (2015) for a recent one.
  11
     See in particular Friedman and Kuttner (1992), Stock and Watson (1993), and Ball (2001).
  12
     The reason why, when dealing with a money demand for transaction purposes, cointegration
should be regarded as the ‘natural null hypothesis’ is that basic economic logic suggests that–up
to fluctuations in the opportunity cost of money–the nominal quantity of money demanded should
be proportional to the nominal volume of transactions (i.e., to nominal GDP).


                                               12
approach altogether, however, is that, as we document via Monte Carlo simulations,
Johansen’s procedure exhibits an overall better performance, and it produces more
informative results. This is why, in the end, we decided to use both approaches.
    Second, we perform our analysis separately for the Gold Standard and for the
subsequent period. As it has been extensively documented,13 the stochastic properties
of inflation in the former period had been radically diﬀerent from the latter, with
inflation being most of the times statistically indistinguishable from white noise. By
the Fisher equation, this implies that, unless the natural rate of interest had contained
a sizeable permanent component (due, e.g., to permanent shifts in trend productivity
growth), nominal interest rates should be expected to have been stationary, too, which
would preclude them from being entered in any cointegrated system, or cointegrating
regression.14 The integration properties of nominal interest rates during the Gold
Standard period ought therefore be separately checked, or otherwise we would run the
risk of performing cointegration analysis based on a series which had been stationary
for a significant portion of the sample period.
    In the next section, we study the integration properties of the data, where we
show that the presence of unit roots seems very robust. The following one discusses
the boostraping procedures that are involved in the cointegration tests and in the
estimations procedures. We then discuss the Monte Carlo evidence, that provides
measures of the performance of the tests. Finally, we discuss how to interpret the
outcome of the tests, in view of the Monte Carlo evidence, before analyzing the
results.


5      Integration Properties of the Data
As previously mentioned, a necessary condition for using cointegration methods is
that all series feature a unit root. In this section we therefore briefly summarize the
main results from the extensive investigation of the integration properties of the data
reported in the online Appendix A.
    Although in the main text we will only study bivariate systems with 1 velocity
and the short-term interest rate, we now discuss the integration properties of all
variables, since in the online Appendix E we report estimates of systems including
money balances and GDP separately, in order to test the hypothesis of unitary income
elasticity.
    Tables A.1a-A.1b in the online appendix report, for the series in our dataset,
bootstrapped p-values for Elliot, Rothenberg, and Stock (1996) tests.15 For nominal
  13
     See Barsky (1987) and Benati (2008).
  14
     A key assumption underlying both Johansen’s and Shin’s cointegration tests is that all of the
variables entering either the multivariate system (in the former case), or the single-equation coin-
tegrating regression (in the latter case) are integrated of order one. See Hamilton (1994, very first
sentence of p. 636) and Shin (1994, p. 92).
  15
     For either series, p-values have been computed by bootstrapping 10,000 times estimated


                                                 13
GDP and nominal 1 , which exhibit obvious trends, the tests are based on models
including an intercept and a time trend.16 For the short rate and velocity, on the
other hand, they are based on models including an intercept, but no time trend. For
the short rate, the rationale for not including a time trend is obvious: The notion
that nominal interest rates may follow an upward path,17 in which they grow over
time, is manifestly absurd.18 For 1 velocity, on the other hand, things are, at first
sight, less obvious. The reason for not including a time trend originates from the fact
that what we are here focusing on is a demand for money for transaction purposes
(so this argument holds for 1 , but it would not hold for broader aggregates). The
resulting natural assumption of unitary income elasticity logically implies that, if the
demand for 1 is stable, 1 velocity should inherit the stochastic properties of the
opportunity cost of money. In turn, this implies that the type of unit root tests we
run for 1 velocity should be the same as those we run for the nominal rate.
    For both velocity and the short rate we report results for either the levels or
the logarithms of the series. For GDP and 1 , on the other hand, we only consider
tests based on the logarithms of the series. The reason for this is that the level of
either series is manifestly characterized by exponential-type growth, which is why
these series are never considered in levels, and they are rather always considered in
logarithms. For our purposes, this would not be a problem if Elliot et al.’s unit root
tests allowed for the alternative of stationarity around an exponential time trend,
rather than a linear one. Since this is not the case, for both GDP and 1 we are
necessarily compelled to only consider tests based on their logarithms.
    Finally, for the short-term rate we report results based on both the simple series
(either in levels, or in logarithms), and the simple series corrected along the lines of
Alvarez and Lippi (2009), by adding to it a 1% cost of either losing cash, or having
it stolen.

5.1     1 velocity and the short rate
Evidence of a unit root in 1 velocity and the short rate is typically strong, with
the bootstrapped p-values being almost uniformly greater than the 10 per cent sig-
nificance level we take as our benchmark throughout the entire paper, and often
ARIMA(p,1,0) processes. In all cases, the bootstrapped processes are of length equal to the se-
ries under investigation. As for the lag order, p, since, as it is well known, results from unit root
tests may be sensitive to the specific lag order which is being used, for reasons of robustness we
consider two alternative lag orders, either 1 or 2 years.
   16
      The reason for including a time trend is that, as discussed e.g. by Hamilton (1994, pp. 501),
the model used for unit root tests should be a meaningful one also under the alternative.
   17
      The possibility of a downward path is ruled out by the zero lower bound.
   18
      This does not rule out the possibility that, over specific sample periods in which inflation ex-
hibits permanent variation (such as post-WWII samples dominated by the Great Inflation episode),
nominal interest rates are I(1), too. Rather, by the Fisher eﬀect, we should expect this to be the
case. Historically, however, a unit root in inflation has been the exception, rather than the rule–see
Benati (2008).


                                                 14
significantly so. The following exceptions ought to be briefly discussed:
    First, in a few cases results based on the two alternative lag orders we consider
produce contrasting evidence.19 In these cases we regard the null of a unit root as not
having been convincingly rejected, and in what follows we therefore proceed under
the assumption that these series are I(1).
    Second, under the Gold Standard a unit root is rejected for both the level and the
logarithm of the short rate (either with, or without the 1% correction) for Canada,
Finland, France, and Spain, and it is rejected for Switzerland based on the logarithm
of the short rate with the 1% correction. In all of these cases, stationarity of the
short rate precludes it from being entered in any cointegrated system, or cointegrating
regression.20 By the same token, a unit root in the level of the short rate is rejected
for Argentina, Brazil for the period 1934-2012, and Chile for the period 1941-2012,
whereas in neither case it is rejected based on the logarithms. For all these three cases
we will therefore eschew the Selden-Latané specification. Under the Gold Standard
a unit root in either the level or the logarithm of velocity is rejected for Italy: In this
case we will therefore uniquely consider unrestricted specifications for GDP, 1 , and
the short rate.
    Third, for Taiwan a unit root in velocity is rejected based on the level, but not
based on the logarithm. In this case we will eschew the Selden-Latané specification.

5.2      GDP and 1
Evidence of a unit root in the logarithms of nominal GDP and nominal 1 is, like-
wise, typically strong.21 For GDP, a unit root is rejected only for Bolivia, and for
France under the Gold Standard (the latter rejection is ultimately irrelevant, since, as
previously mentioned, for France the interest rate is stationary, so that it is not possi-
ble to analyze cointegrated systems). As for 1 , it is rejected only for Israel, Canada
(1967-2013), and Finland (1914-1985). For Bolivia, Israel, Canada (1967-2013), and
Finland (1914-1985) we will therefore eschew unrestricted specifications for GDP, 1 ,
and the short rate, and we will uniquely focus on bivariate systems with velocity and
the short rate.

5.3      Are the series under investigation I(2)?
A necessary condition for performing either Johansen’s or Shin’s cointegration tests
is that the series under investigation contain a unit root, and that their order of
integration is not greater than one. Tables A.2a-A.2b in the online appendix report
  19
     This is the case, e.g., for the logarithms of velocity and the short rate for Israel; for log velocity
for Chile for the period 1940-1995; and for the short rate for West Germany.
  20
     See footnote 12.
  21
     Again, in those few cases in which results based on the two alternative lag orders produce
contrasting evidence, we regard the null of a unit root as not having been convincingly rejected, and
we proceed under the assumption that the series is I(1).


                                                    15
bootstrapped p-values for Elliot et al.’s (1996) unit root tests with an intercept, but
no time trend, for either the log- or the first-diﬀerences of 1 velocity and the short
rate, and for the log-diﬀerences of nominal 1 and nominal GDP.
    For Morocco, and for Portugal under the Gold Standard, it is not possible to
reject the null of a unit root in either the log-diﬀerences or the first-diﬀerences of 1
velocity and the short rate. By the same token, for Hong Kong a unit root can be
rejected only for either the log- or the first-diﬀerence of the short rate. This implies
that for these three cases it is not possible to run any cointegration test, and in what
follows we will therefore ignore them.
    For Italy over the post-WWII period, and for Turkey, a unit root can be re-
jected only for the first-diﬀerences of 1 velocity and the short rate, and for the
log-diﬀerence of velocity. In these two cases we will therefore only run cointegration
tests based on the semi-log and the Selden-Latané specifications. On the other hand,
for West Germany we cannot run cointegration tests based on the Selden-Latané
specification, as the null of a unit root cannot be rejected for the level of 1 velocity.
    Finally, there are several countries for which it is not possible to reject the null of
a unit root in the log-diﬀerences of nominal GDP and/or nominal 1 . In all of these
cases we will eschew unrestricted specifications for GDP, 1 , and the short rate, and
we will uniquely focus on bivariate systems featuring (the logarithms of) velocity and
the short rate.
    We now turn to a brief discussion of methodological issues pertaining bootstrap-
ping cointegrated processes.


6      Issues Pertaining Bootstrapping
Everything in this paper is bootstrapped22 –specifically, both the p-values for the
cointegration tests, and, more generally, all of the objects of interest, such as the
coeﬃcients on the short rate in the estimated long-run money demand functions. In
this section we therefore briefly discuss () details of the bootstrapping procedures
we use, and () how such procedures perform, in particular in terms of comparative
performance. In our discussion we will extensively refer to Appendices B and C in
the online appendix, which contain the Monte Carlo evidence motivating both some
of our choices, and the way we will interpret the empirical evidence.
  22
    As for Johansen’s tests, the rationale for bootstrapping critical and p-values was provided by
Johansen (2002) himself, who showed how, in small samples, trace and maximum eigenvalue tests
based on asymptotic critical values typically tend to perform poorly. Since this is a small-sample
issue, as a matter of logic we should expect Shin’s (1994) tests to suﬀer from an analogous poor per-
formance, thus justifiying the use of a bootstrapping procedure. Appendix B in the online appendix
provides an additional rationale for bootstrapping Shin’s tests: As we show there, even in very large
samples the distributions of Shin’s test statistics coincide with the asymptotic distribution reported
in Shin’s (1994) Table 1 only if the cointegration residual has no persistence.




                                                 16
6.1     Details of the bootstrapping procedures
We bootstrap Johansen’s tests via the procedure proposed by Cavaliere et al. (2012;
henceforth, CRT). In a nutshell, CRT’s procedure is based on the notion of computing
critical and p-values by bootstrapping the model which is relevant under the null
hypothesis.23 All of the technical details can be found in CRT, which the reader is
referred to. We select the VAR lag order as the maximum24 between the lag orders
chosen by the Schwartz and the Hannan-Quinn criteria25 for the VAR in levels.
    As for Shin’s tests, to the very best of our knowledge nobody has yet provided
anything comparable to what CRT did for Johansen’s procedure (in fact, we were
not even able to find a single paper discussing how to bootstrap Shin’s test statistic).
The bootstrap procedure we propose in Appendix C in the online appendix is based
on exactly the same idea underlying CRT, that is: Computing critical and p-values
by bootstrapping the process which is relevant under the null hypothesis. Within
the present context, this implies that the process to be bootstrapped is the VECM
estimated under the null of one cointegration vector. Apart from this, and with the
exception of two comparatively less important technical issues we discuss in Section
C.2.1 of Appendix C in the online appendix, the procedure we are proposing for Shin’s
tests is very similar to the one proposed by CRT for Johansen’s ones.

6.2     Monte Carlo evidence
Tables 1 and 2 report Monte Carlo evidence on the performance of the two bootstrap-
ping procedures, which is discussed in detail in Sections C.3.1 and C.3.2 of Appendix
C in the online appendix, respectively. In either case, we perform the Monte Carlo
simulations based on two types of DGPs, featuring no cointegration and cointegra-
tion, respectively. For either DGP, we consider five alternative sample lengths,  =
50, 100, 200, 500, and 1,000.

6.2.1    Cavaliere et al.’s (2012) procedure for Johansen’s tests
The main findings emerging from Table 1 can be summarized as follows:
  23
     This means that for tests of the null of no cointegration against the alternative of one or more
cointegrating vectors the model which is being bootstrapped is a simple, non-cointegrated VAR
in diﬀerences. For the maximum eigenvalue tests of h versus h+1 cointegrating vectors, on the
other hand, the model which ought to be bootstrapped is the VECM estimated under the null of h
cointegrating vectors.
  24
     We consider the maximum between the lag orders chosen by the SIC and HQ criteria because
the risk associated with selecting a lag order smaller than the true one (model mis-specification) is
more serious than the one resulting from choosing a lag order greater than the true one (over-fitting).
  25
     On the other hand, we do not consider the Akaike Information Criterion since, as discussed
(e.g.) by Luetkepohl (1991), for systems featuring I(1) series the AIC is an inconsistent lag selection
criterion, in the sense of not choosing the correct lag order asymptotically.




                                                  17
   If the true DGP features no cointegration, CRT’s procedure performs very well ir-
respective of the sample size, with empirical rejection frequencies (henceforth, ERFs)
very close to the 10 per cent significance level. This is in line with the Monte Carlo ev-
idence reported in CRT’s Tables I, p. 1731, and with the analogous evidence reported
in Benati (2015).

       Table 1 Monte Carlo evidence on the performance of Cavaliere et
       al.’s (2012) bootstrapping procedure for Johansen’s tests of the null
       of no cointegration: fractions of replications for which no cointegra-
       tion is rejected at the 10 per cent level
                                                        Sample length:
                                     T = 50 T = 100 T = 200 T = 500 T = 1000
                                         True data-generation process: no cointegration
                                      0.116     0.098      0.105       0.107       0.119
            Persistence of the
          cointegration residual:          True data-generation process: cointegration
                               = 0 0.774         1.000      1.000       1.000       1.000
                            = 0.25 0.584         0.993      1.000       1.000       1.000
                             = 0.5 0.350         0.882      1.000       1.000       1.000
                            = 0.75 0.184         0.433      0.937       1.000       1.000
                             = 0.9 0.117         0.167      0.328       0.958       1.000
                            = 0.95 0.114         0.120      0.164       0.533       0.966
       
         Based on the trace test of the null of no cointegration against the alternative of
       1 or more cointegrating vectors.  Based on 1,000 Monte Carlo replications, and,
       for each of them, on 5,000 bootstrap replications.

    If, however, the true DGP does feature cointegration, the procedure performs
well only if the persistence of the cointegration residual is suﬃciently low, and/or
the sample size is suﬃciently large. (It is to be noticed that CRT did not explore
how the persistence of the cointegration residual aﬀects the performance of their
procedure.) If however the cointegration residual is persistent, and the sample size
is small, the procedure fails to detect cointegration a non-negligible fraction of the
times.26 This is conceptually in line with some of the evidence reported by Engle
and Granger (1987), and it has a straightforward explanation: As the cointegration
residual becomes more and more persistent, it gets closer and closer to a random walk
(in which case there would be no cointegration), and the procedure needs therefore
larger and larger samples to detect the truth (i.e.: that the residual is highly persistent,
but ultimately stationary).
  26
    For example, with  = 100, cointegration will be detected, at the 10 per cent level, 43.3 per
cent of the times if  = 0.75, and just 12.0 per cent of the times if  = 0.95.




                                               18
Table 2 Monte Carlo evidence on the performance of the proposed bootstrapping
procedure for Shin’s test of the null of cointegration: fractions of replications for
which cointegration is rejected at the 10 per cent level
                                                                         Sample length:
                                                        T = 50 T = 100 T = 200 T = 500 T = 1000
       Persistence of the cointegration residual:           True data-generation process: cointegration
                         =0
           based on Shin’s asymptotic critical values    0.092    0.087       0.082      0.096      0.091
                   based on the bootstrapped p-values    0.093    0.113       0.131      0.130      0.114
                         = 0.25
           based on Shin’s asymptotic critical values    0.056    0.082       0.110      0.125      0.117
                   based on the bootstrapped p-values    0.080    0.121       0.134      0.131      0.111
                         = 0.5
           based on Shin’s asymptotic critical values    0.066    0.143       0.193      0.236      0.253
                   based on the bootstrapped p-values    0.094    0.136       0.135      0.137      0.113
                         = 0.75
           based on Shin’s asymptotic critical values    0.132    0.336       0.491      0.574      0.613
                   based on the bootstrapped p-values    0.133    0.172       0.153      0.138      0.115
                         = 0.9
           based on Shin’s asymptotic critical values    0.198    0.618       0.835      0.952      0.967
                   based on the bootstrapped p-values    0.154    0.227       0.193      0.150      0.133
                         = 0.95
           based on Shin’s asymptotic critical values   0.232     0.721       0.932      0.994       1.000
                   based on the bootstrapped p-values   0.177     0.251       0.233      0.176       0.151
                                                          True data-generation process: no cointegration
      Based on Shin’s asymptotic critical values        0.274     0.819       0.985      1.000       1.000
          Based on the bootstrapped p-values            0.175     0.308       0.372      0.342       0.378

    Based on 1,000 Monte Carlo replications, and, for each of them, on 5,000 bootstrap replications.
6.2.2    Our proposed procedure for Shin’s tests
Turning to Shin’s tests, the main findings emerging from Table 2 can be summarized
as follows:
    If the true DGP features cointegration, then, the greater the persistence of the
cointegration residual, the more the proposed bootstrap procedure improves upon
Shin’s asymptotic critical values.27
    If the DGP features no cointegration, however, even in large samples the proposed
bootstrapped procedure produces ERFs far from the ideal of 100 per cent. For  =
1000, for example, cointegration is rejected only about 38 per cent of the times, and
based on smaller sample lengths, much less than that.

6.2.3    Summing up
What precedes can be summarized as follows:
    If Johansen’s tests do detect cointegration, we should have a reasonable presump-
tion that cointegration is indeed there. If, on the other hand, they do not detect it, a
possible explanation is that the sample period is too short, and/or the cointegration
residual is highly persistent.
    Lack of rejection of the null of cointegration based on Shin’s tests and our boot-
strapping procedure does not represent strong evidence that cointegration truly is
there. Further, rejection of the null of cointegration does not appear to be especially
informative about the true nature of the DGP, as the ERFs are not significantly
diﬀerent conditional on the two possible states of the world. Another way to put
all this is that results from Shin’s tests appear, overall, as less informative than the
corresponding results produced by Johansen’s tests bootstrapped as in CRT.
    We now turn to the issue of what we should expect to obtain from cointegration
tests before running them, based on () the persistence of the cointegration residuals,
and () the just-discussed Monte Carlo evidence on how such persistence aﬀects the
performance of the tests for a given sample length.


7       What Should We Expect from Cointegration Tests?
In Section 8 we will perform cointegration tests based on about three dozen samples.
Performing such a large number of tests implies that, even if cointegration truly is
there in all samples, and ever under ideal conditions (e.g., Shin’s tests incorrectly
rejecting the null of cointegration  per cent of the times at the  per cent level), a
certain number of fluke results is to be expected. Further, the Monte Carlo evidence
we discussed in the previous section suggests that–in line with Engle and Granger
  27
    For example, for  = 100, if  = 0.95, tests based on asymptotic critical values would lead
a researcher to reject the null of cointegration at the 10 per cent level 72.1 per cent of the times,
whereas the bootstrap-based procedure only rejects 25.1 per cent of the times.


                                                 19
(1987)–detecting a cointegration relationship can be extremely diﬃcult when the
sample period is comparatively short, and/or the cointegration residual is highly
persistent. In this section we therefore start by exploring how persistent ‘candidate
cointegration residuals’ (defined below) actually are. Based on this, and on the series’
actual sample lengths, we then discuss what we should reasonably expect to obtain
from cointegration tests before running them.

7.1     How persistent are the ‘candidate cointegration residu-
        als’ ?
Table 3 reports Hansen (1999) ‘grid bootstrap’ median-unbiased (henceforth, MUB)
estimates of the sum of the AR coeﬃcients in AR(2) representations for the ‘candi-
date cointegration residuals’ in our dataset.28 By ‘candidate cointegration residual’
(henceforth, CCR) we mean the linear combination of the I(1) variables in the system
which will indeed be regarded as a cointegration residual if cointegration is detected.
The reason why we label it as ‘candidate’ is because, as the Monte Carlo evidence
in the previous section has shown, if a cointegration residual is highly persistent,
cointegration might well not be detected even if it is there, which would prevent the
candidate from being identified as a true cointegration residual. For reasons of ro-
bustness, we report results based on two alternative estimators of the cointegration
vector, Johansen’s, and Stock and Watson’s (1993). The results reported in Table 3
are based on the log-log specification (with Alvarez and Lippi’s (2009) 1% correction
for the short rate) for the six high-inflation countries, and on the Selden-Latané spec-
ification for all other countries. The full set of results based on either specification
for all countries is reported in Tables SELA.1, SL.1, LL.1, and LLCO.1 of the online
appendix.
     Results based on either estimator, and either specification, are qualitatively sim-
ilar, and point towards a non-negligible extent of persistence of the CCRs. At the
same time, our dataset exhibits a wide extent of heterogeneity in terms of the esti-
mated persistence, with the MUB estimate–let’s label it as ̂   –ranging (based
on Johansen’s estimator of the cointegration vector) from a minimum of 0.30 for Aus-
tralia, to a maximum of 1.00 for Portugal for the period 1966-1998. By classifying the
̂  ’s, in an admittedly quite arbitrary fashion, as ‘highly persistent’ (̂  ≥0.8);
‘moderately persistent’ (0.4 ̂  0.8); and ‘not very persistent’ (̂  ≤0.4), we
end up with sixteen ̂ ’s in the first group, fifteen in the second, and three in the
third. Results based on Stock and Watson’s estimator point towards an even greater
extent of persistence, with the number of MUB estimates in the three groups being
equal to twenty-one, ten, and three, respectively.
  28
   Results are based on 2,000 bootstrap replications for each possible value of the sum of the AR
coeﬃcients in the grid. Bootstrapping has been performed as in Diebold and Chen (1996).




                                               20
Table 3 Assessing the persistence of candidate cointegration residuals: Hansen (1999) ‘grid
bootstrap’ estimates of the sum of the autoregressive coeﬃcients based on AR(2) models
(median, and 90 per cent bootstrapped confidence interval)
                            I: Based on Johansen’s estimator of the cointegration vector
Argentina, 1914-2009                   0.82 [0.72; 0.92] Korea, 1970-2014                             0.56 [0.32; 0.81]
Australia, 1969-2014                   0.30 [0.01; 0.59] Israel, 1983-2013                            0.69 [0.57; 0.81]
Bolivia, 1980-2013                     0.73 [0.55; 0.92] Italy, 1949-1996                             0.98 [0.80; 1.03]
Brazil                                                     Mexico, 1985-2014                          0.46 [0.26; 0.68]
                          1934-2012 0.94 [0.79; 1.02] Netherlands, 1950-1992                          0.61 [0.37; 0.89]
                          1974-2012 0.92 [0.82; 1.02] New Zealand, 1934-2004                          0.75 [0.62; 0.89]
Canada                                                     Norway, 1946-2013                          0.97 [0.89; 1.02]
                          1934-2006 0.77 [0.63; 0.92] Portugal
                          1967-2013 0.33 [0.13; 0.54]                                 1914-1965       0.67 [0.48; 0.90]
Chile                                                                                 1966-1998       1.00 [0.90; 1.02]
                          1940-1995 0.78 [0.63; 0.94] South Africa, 1967-2014                         0.86 [0.73; 1.01]
                          1941-2012 0.83 [0.72; 0.97] Spain, 1941-1989                                0.59 [0.39; 0.80]
Colombia, 1959-2011                    0.85 [0.68; 1.02] Switzerland, 1948-2005                       0.74 [0.56; 0.95]
Finland, 1914-1985                     0.93 [0.83; 1.01] Turkey, 1968-2014                            0.92 [0.75; 1.03]
Germany, 1876-1913                     0.59 [0.32; 0.95] United Kingdom, 1922-2014                    0.64 [0.49; 0.81]
Guatemala, 1980-2012                   0.63 [0.34; 1.02] United States, 1915-2014
Japan                                                                              standard M 1       0.92 [0.84; 1.01]
                          1885-1913 0.45 [0.08; 0.89]                 Lucas-Nicolini ‘New M 1 ’       0.61 [0.47; 0.75]
                          1955-2013 0.81 [0.68; 0.97] Venezuela, 1962-1999                            0.91 [0.74; 1.03]

  Based on 2,000 bootstrap replications for each value of  in the grid (for details see Hansen, 1999). Candidate
cointegration residuals have been computed based on bivariate models for either the logarithms of velocity and
the short rate (for high-inflation countries), or their levels (for all other countries). The full set of results based
on the three alternative specifications (Selden, semi-log, and log-log) is available in the online appendix.
Table 3 (continued) Assessing the persistence of candidate cointegration residuals: Hansen
(1999) ‘gridbootstrap’ estimates of the sum of the autoregressive coeﬃcients based on AR(2)
models (median, and 90 per cent bootstrapped confidence interval)
                       II: Based on Stock and Watson’s estimator of the cointegration vector
Argentina, 1914-2009                   0.86 [0.77; 0.99] Korea, 1970-2014                              0.57 [0.34; 0.82]
Australia, 1969-2014                   0.31 [0.03; 0.61] Israel, 1983-2013                             0.65 [0.46; 0.84]
Bolivia, 1980-2013                     0.72 [0.55; 0.91] Italy, 1949-1996                              0.98 [0.85; 1.03]
Brazil                                                     Mexico, 1985-2014                           0.52 [0.31; 0.72]
                          1934-2012 0.91 [0.77; 1.02] Netherlands, 1950-1992                           0.71 [0.48; 1.01]
                          1974-2012 1.00 [0.93; 1.03] New Zealand, 1934-2004                           0.81 [0.68; 0.95]
Canada                                                     Norway, 1946-2013                           1.00 [0.96; 1.02]
                          1934-2006 0.81 [0.69; 0.96] Portugal
                          1967-2013 0.34 [0.13; 0.56]                                 1914-1965        0.67 [0.47; 0.91]
Chile                                                                                 1966-1998        1.02 [0.99; 1.10]
                          1940-1995 0.80 [0.66; 1.00] South Africa, 1967-2014                          1.01 [0.96; 1.03]
                          1941-2012 0.83 [0.71; 0.98] Spain, 1941-1989                                 0.61 [0.41; 0.82]
Colombia, 1959-2011                    0.87 [0.70; 1.02] Switzerland, 1948-2005                        0.84 [0.67; 1.02]
Finland, 1914-1985                     0.97 [0.91; 1.01] Turkey, 1968-2014                             0.94 [0.76; 1.03]
Germany, 1876-1913                     0.99 [0.87; 1.03] United Kingdom, 1922-2014                     0.69 [0.54; 0.84]
Guatemala, 1980-2012                   0.65 [0.34; 1.02] United States, 1915-2014
Japan                                                                              standard M 1        1.00 [0.96; 1.02]
                          1885-1913 1.01 [0.87; 1.06]                 Lucas-Nicolini ‘New M 1 ’        0.64 [0.51; 0.79]
                          1955-2013 0.87 [0.74; 1.01] Venezuela, 1962-1999                             0.89 [0.69; 1.03]

  Based on 2,000 bootstrap replications for each value of  in the grid (for details see Hansen, 1999). Candidate
cointegration residuals have been computed based on bivariate models for either the logarithms of velocity and
the short rate (for high-inflation countries), or their levels (for all other countries). The full set of results based
on the three alternative specifications (Selden, semi-log, and log-log) is available in the online appendix.
7.2     Implications
Under these circumstances, statistical tests will often have a hard time in detecting
cointegration even if it truly is there. This will be especially so in those cases in
which ̂   is high and the sample period is comparatively short, such as Turkey. As
we discuss in the next Section, based on neither of the three specifications (Selden-
Latané, semi-log, and log-log) do Johansen’s tests detect any evidence of cointegration
between velocity and the short rate for this country (on the other hand, based on
either specification Shin’s tests do not reject the null of cointegration). Such a failure
of Johansen’s tests to detect evidence of cointegration is especially startling in the
light of the the evidence reported either Figure 2, or Figure 7 of the online appendix,
highlighting very strongly correlated fluctuations in velocity and the short rate, and
it has a straightforward explanation: Given the comparatively short sample period
(46 years), and the high persistence of the CCR (with ̂   in Table 3 equal to either
0.92 or 0.94), it is not surprising that Johansen’s procedure does not reject the null
of no cointegration. Rather, based on the evidence reported in Table 1, this is to
be expected: When the true DGP features cointegration, with  = 50 and  = 0.9
Cavaliere et al.’s (2012) bootstrapping procedure for Johansen’s tests correctly rejects
the null of no cointegration only 11.7 per cent of the times. This is qualitatively and
even quantitatively in line with the Monte Carlo evidence reported by Engle and
Granger (1987) for cointegration tests based on the Dickey-Fuller test statistic. This
means that if cointegration were truly there in Turkish data, given the sample length
we are working with, and the specific characteristics of the DGP, we would have a
nearly 90 per cent chance of not detecting it.
    So what a reader should take away from all this is that the results from cointe-
gration tests we are going to discuss in the next section should not be taken strictly
at face value: Rather, they ought to be interpreted in the light of the Monte Carlo
evidence on the performance of cointegration tests reported in Tables 1 and 2, and of
the evidence on the persistence of the CCRs reported in Table 3.29
    Let us now turn to the results from cointegration tests.


8      Searching for a Long-Run Money Demand
Tables 4.a to 4.c report results from either Johansen or Shin tests for cointegration
between log velocity (the inverse of the ratio of real money balances to output) and
the log of the short rate, which corresponds to the basic Baumol-Tobin constant-
elasticity specification. As mentioned above, following Alvarez and Lippi (2009), the
short rate has been corrected by adding to it the expected cost of either losing cash,
or having it stolen, which we calibrate to 1 per cent. In Tables 5a-5b we report the
  29
    This is very much in the spirit of Lucas’ (1988) interpretation of econometric results which,
taken at face value, appeared to contradict the findings of Meltzer (1963).



                                               21
results for the Selden-Latané specification, which corresponds to an elasticity that is
increasing over time.
    The corresponding set of results based on the semi-log specification for all countries
are reported in Tables SL2a-SL.2b in the online appendix, and they are discussed
in Appendix E in the online appendix. We do not discuss them here because they
are typically weaker than those based on either the log-log or the Selden-Latané
specifications: In a nutshell, as we will see, the data seem to prefer the Selden-Latané
specification at comparatively low interest rates (i.e., those associated with countries
such as the United States, or the United Kingdom), and the log-log specification at
high, or very high interest rates (e.g., for countries such as Argentina, or Israel),
whereas evidence based on the semi-log specification is never strong.
    Figures 4 to 9 report the estimation results for the log-log specification.30 In the top
rows, we report the candidate cointegration residuals produced by either Johansen’s
or Stock and Watson’s (1993) estimators, and in the bottom rows the bias-corrected
bootstrapped distributions31 of the corresponding estimates of the coeﬃcient on the
log of the short rate (i.e., the interest rate elasticity of money demand). For each
bootstrapped distribution we also report the mean, the median, and the 5th and
95th percentiles. Figures 10 to 15 report the corresponding set of results based on
the Selden-Latané specification, whereas Figures SL.1 to SL.6 of the online appen-
dix report results for the semi-log specification. For the reasons discussed above,
in all cases we report both candidate cointegration residuals, and estimates of the
coeﬃcients on the short rate, for all countries, rather than only for those for which
statistical tests detect evidence of cointegration.

8.1     Evidence from cointegration tests
8.1.1    Unrestricted tests of the null of cointegration
Although this paper mostly focuses on the results produced by bivariate systems,
we want to briefly discuss those produced by Shin’s tests of the null of cointegration
applied to unrestricted specifications featuring (the logarithm of) the short rate, and
the logarithms of nominal GDP and 1 . The reason for doing so is that they represent
one ‘extreme end’ of the spectrum within the full set of results: As we discuss in
Appendix E.1 in the online appendix, based on unrestricted three-variables systems
  30
      Again: These results are based on the ‘corrected’ short rate, incorporating the expected cost of
either losing cash, or having it stolen.
   31
      Bootstrapping has been implemented as in Cavaliere et al. (2012) based on the estimated
VECM conditonal on one cointegration vector. The bias-correction has been implemented as in
Kilian (1998). The only diﬀerence between what Kilian did, and what we are doing here, is that
whereas he applied his proposed methodology to bias-correcting impulse-response functions, we are
here using it to bias-correct the elements of the cointegration vector (this is conceptually in line with
Cavaliere, Taylor, and Trenkler (2015)). In general, however, the extent of the bias was small (the
non-bias-corrected estimates are available upon request), so that bias-correcting does not make any
material diﬀerence to the results.


                                                   22
it is almost impossible to reject the null of cointegration.32 For the reasons discussed
in Sections 6.2.2 and 6.2.3,33 however, these results should be downplayed: As we
stressed there, lack of rejection of the null of cointegration based on Shin’s tests and
our bootstrapping procedure does not represent strong evidence that cointegration
truly is there34
    Let’s now turn to bivariate systems for velocity and the short rate.

8.1.2     Evidence from bivariate systems for velocity and the short rate
The log-log specification Based on the log-log specification, evidence of cointe-
gration is uniformly very strong for all of the high-inflation countries with the single
exception of Bolivia, as well as for Canada (1967-2012), Guatemala, New Zealand,
Norway, Portugal and Switzerland: In all of these cases, p-values for Johansen’s tests
are below 10%, and p-values for Shin’s tests are above 10%.35
    On the other hand, in four cases–Finland, Venezuela, West Germany, and Japan
under the Gold Standard–the opposite is true, with Johansen’s tests not rejecting
the null of no cointegration, and Shin’s tests instead rejecting cointegration.
    Finally, in almost all of the other cases neither Johansen’s nor Shin’s tests do
reject the null, thus producing contradictory evidence (this is the case, e.g., for both
the United States and the United Kingdom). Under this respect, and based on our
previous discussion in Sections 6 and 7, two things ought to be stressed: on the one
hand, as we showed via Monte Carlo, Johansen’s procedure exhibits an overall better
performance, and it produces more informative results; on the other hand, however,
even bootstrapping critical and p-values as in CRT (2012), Johansen’s tests still
suﬀer, in small samples, from the problem highlighted by Engle and Granger (1987).
The former issue suggests to give more weight to the results from Johansen’s tests–
pointing towards no cointegration–whereas the latter one suggests that this result
might well be the figment of a comparatively short sample period, and/or of a highly
persistent cointegration residual.36 So, in the end, evidence for this group of countries
is not clear-cut. Based on the discussion in Sections 6 and 7; on the respective sample
  32
     Specifically, at the 10 per cent level we obtain just four rejections of the null out of 33 tests based
on the semi-log specification, whereas based on the log-log specification with the 1% correction to
the short rate we obtain only one rejection.
  33
     See also Section E.3.2 in Appendix E.
  34
     There is no need to remind the reader that using the asymptotic critical values reported in
Shin’s (1994) Table 1 is a non-starter. On this, see the extended discussion in Appendix B in the
online appendix.
  35
     To be precise, for Portugal (1966-1998) the p-value for the maximum eigenvalue tests is 0.125.
The overall picture for this country, however, clearly points towards cointegration. For Switzerland,
the p-value for Shin’s test for the period 1948-2005 is 0.064, but once again, overall evidence clearly
points towards cointegration.
  36
     E.g., for the United States (based on the Lucas-Nicolini aggregate) ̂  in Table LLCO.1 in
the online appendix is equal to either 0.77 or 0.79, whereas the corresponding figures for the United
Kingdom are 0.81 and 0.83.


                                                    23
Table 4a Results from cointegration tests between the logarithms of M 1
velocity and of a short-term rate for very high inflation countries
                        I: Johansen’s tests of the null of no cointegration
                       Trace tests of the null of no
                        cointegration against the      Maximum eigenvalue       II: Shin’s tests
                         alternative of 1 or more       tests of 0 versus 1      of the null of
                           cointegrating vectors:      cointegrating vectors:    cointegration
Argentina, 1914-2009           21.303 (0.032)              18.866 (0.023)        0.567 (0.288)
Bolivia, 1980-2013             15.480 (0.255)              15.134 (0.154)        0.156 (0.249)
Brazil
            1974-2012         20.904 (0.049)              15.221 (0.093)      0.325 (0.104)
            1934-2012         20.270 (0.034)              16.842 (0.037)      2.043 (0.011)
Chile
            1940-1995         26.453 (0.013)              18.953 (0.033)      0.178 (0.244)
            1941-2012         18.541 (0.059)              13.224 (0.119)      0.127 (0.725)
Israel, 1983-2013              41.66 (0.001)              40.773 (0.000)      0.135 (0.350)
Mexico, 1985-2014             15.569 (0.230)              14.027 (0.205)      0.132 (0.285)

  The short rate has been corrected along the lines of Alvarez and Lippi (2009), by adding
to it 1 per cent. Bootstrapped p-values (in parentheses) are based on 10,000 bootstrap
replications.
Table 4b Results from cointegration tests between the logarithm of M 1 velocity and of a short-term rate
                                               I: Johansen’s tests of the null of no cointegration
                                              Trace tests of the null of no
                                               cointegration against the      Maximum eigenvalue               II: Shin’s tests
                                                alternative of 1 or more       tests of 0 versus 1              of the null of
                                                  cointegration vectors:     cointegration vectors:             cointegration
Australia, 1969-2014                                  10.268 (0.506)              9.373 (0.405)                 0.245 (0.395)
Canada
                                 1934-2006           17.093 (0.125)              14.506 (0.110)                 0.259   (0.400)
                                 1967-2012           27.310 (0.010)              27.262 (0.003)                 0.079   (0.705)
Colombia, 1959-2011                                  6.603 (0.830)                4.896 (0.872)                 0.225   (0.502)
Finland, 1914-1985                                   7.225 (0.736)                5.019 (0.839)                 1.447   (0.023)
Germany, 1876-1913                                   9.947 (0.559)                8.689 (0.532)                 0.522   (0.177)
Guatemala, 1980-2012                                 18.939 (0.077)              17.261 (0.052)                 0.072   (0.737)
Japan
                                 1885-1913            11.938 (0.408)             10.737 (0.331)                 0.435 (0.099)
                                 1955-2013            13.502 (0.199)             13.502 (0.120)                 0.098 (0.975)
Korea, 1970-2014                                      6.698 (0.746)               6.075 (0.715)                 0.282 (0.269)
Italy, 1949-1996                                      17.352 (0.099)             13.747 (0.117)                 0.439 (0.198)

  The short rate has been corrected along the lines of Alvarez and Lippi (2009), by adding to it 1 per cent.   Bootstrapped p-values
(in parentheses) are based on 10,000 bootstrap replications.
Table 4b (continued) Results from cointegration tests between the logarithm of M 1 velocity and of a
short-term rate
                                                             I: Johansen’s tests of the null of no cointegration
                                                            Trace tests of the null of no
                                                             cointegration against the      Maximum eigenvalue        II: Shin’s tests
                                                              alternative of 1 or more       tests of 0 versus 1       of the null of
                                                                cointegration vectors:     cointegration vectors:      cointegration
Netherlands, 1950-1992                                              15.054 (0.166)               9.309 (0.401)         0.216 (0.413)
New Zealand, 1934-2004                                              17.535 (0.087)              16.340 (0.049)         0.500 (0.327)
Norway, 1946-2013                                                   24.004 (0.016)              20.698 (0.015)         0.736 (0.157)
Portugal
                                                1914-1965             20.699 (0.061)             19.887 (0.032)       0.120    (0.360)
                                                1966-1998             19.392 (0.086)             14.975 (0.125)       0.074    (0.546)
South Africa, 1967-2014                                               16.776 (0.131)             15.686 (0.080)       0.336    (0.160)
Spain, 1941-1989                                                      7.850 (0.642)               7.632 (0.537)       0.261    (0.256)
Switzerland
                                                1851-1906             15.520 (0.094)             15.377 (0.057)       0.780    (0.192)
                                                1948-2005             31.284 (0.001)             27.586 (0.001)       0.975    (0.064)
Taiwan, 1962-2013                                                     6.108 (0.816)               5.508 (0.794)       0.387    (0.131)
Turkey, 1968-2014                                                     8.010 (0.721)               5.829 (0.792)       0.172    (0.521)
United Kingdom, 1922-2014                                             15.684 (0.159)             15.361 (0.077)       0.951    (0.058)
United States, 1915-2014
                       based on the standard M 1 aggregate            11.224 (0.342)              9.563 (0.320)        3.021   (0.015)
        based on Lucas and Nicolini’s ‘New M 1 ’ aggregate            14.623 (0.187)             13.107 (0.137)        0.369   (0.290)
Venezuela, 1962-1999                                                  6.616 (0.771)               4.389 (0.888)        0.364   (0.094)
West Germany, 1960-1989                                               12.243 (0.419)             12.194 (0.261)        0.442   (0.076)

  The short rate has been corrected along the lines of Alvarez and   Lippi (2009), by adding to it 1 per cent. Bootstrapped    p-values
(in parentheses) are based on 10,000 bootstrap replications.
Figure 4 Log-log specification with the 1% correction to the short rate, imposing unitary income
         elasticity: cointegration residuals and bootstrapped distributions of the coefficients on
         the log of the short rate

                                              25
Figure 5 Log-log specification with the 1% correction to the short rate, imposing unitary income
         elasticity: cointegration residuals and bootstrapped distributions of the coefficients on
         the log of the short rate

                                               26
Figure 6 Log-log specification with the 1% correction to the short rate, imposing unitary income
         elasticity: cointegration residuals and bootstrapped distributions of the coefficients on
         the log of the short rate


                                            27
Figure 7   Log-log specification with the 1% correction to the short rate, imposing unitary income
           elasticity: cointegration residuals and bootstrapped distributions of the coefficients on
           the log of the short rate
                                               28
Figure 8   Log-log specification with the 1% correction to the short rate, imposing unitary income
           elasticity: cointegration residuals and bootstrapped distributions of the coefficients on
           the log of the short rate

                                              29
Figure 9   Log-log specification with the 1% correction to the short rate, imposing unitary income
           elasticity: cointegration residuals and bootstrapped distributions of the coefficients on
           the log of the short rate


                                              30
lengths, and on the estimated persistence of the CCRs reported in Table LLCO.1 in
the online appendix; and on the CCRs themselves–which are shown in Figures 4 to
9, and which in several cases appear quite clearly to be stationary (this is the case,
in particular, for the United States and the United Kingdom)–our own reading of
the overall evidence is that in many cases it is at the very least compatible with the
existence of a cointegration relationship between velocity and the short rate.

The Selden-Latané specification Turning to the Selden-Latané specification
(Tables 5a-5b), evidence of cointegration is, once again, almost uniformly strong
for high-inflation countries. As for other countries, it is strong for Australia, Canada,
Guatemala, Korea, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal (1914-1965), and the United
States based on Lucas and Nicolini’s (2015) 1 aggregate.37
    On the other hand, in three cases–Finland, Japan under the Gold Standard,
and Portugal (1966-1998)–evidence clearly points towards no cointegration, with
Johansen’s tests do not rejecting the null of no cointegration, and Shin’s tests instead
rejecting cointegration.
    In several other cases neither Johansen’s nor Shin’s tests reject the null, thus
producing contradictory evidence: This is the case, e.g., of Colombia, Japan (1955-
2013), the Netherlands, Spain, and Switzerland under the Gold Standard. For all
of these countries, the same considerations we made in the previous sub-section still
apply, so that in these cases the overall evidence is typically compatible with the
presence of cointegration between velocity and the short rate. Symmetrically, for
Canada (1934-2006), Norway, Switzerland (1948-2005) and the United Kingdom both
Johansen’s and Shin’s tests reject the null. For Canada, Switzerland, and the United
Kingdom, our own reading of the overall evidence (not to mention that, as discussed
in Section 6, Johansen’s procedure is more reliable than Shin’s) suggests that it is
compatible with cointegration between velocity and the short rate. As for Norway
things are less clear-cut: In particular, the CCR shown in Figure 13 does not appear
as manifestly stationary.

8.1.3    Unrestricted tests of the null of no cointegration
Turning to specifications in which we do not impose unitary income elasticity, Tables
SL.4, LL.4, and LLCO.4 in the online appendix report results from Johansen’s tests
of no cointegration based on unrestricted specifications for the logarithms of GDP
and 1 , and (the logarithm of) the short rate. As we discuss more extensively in
Appendix E.3 in the online appendix, based on the log-log specification with the
1% correction to the short rate, cointegration is detected based on both the trace
and the maximum eigenvalue tests for Argentina, Brazil (1974-2012), Canada (1967-
2013), Japan (1955-2013), Korea, Israel, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal (1914-
  37
    To be precise: For both Australia and New Zealand the p-values for Johansen’s trace tests, at
0.116 and 0.106, are borderline.


                                               24
Table 5a Results from cointegration tests between M 1 velocity and a short-
term rate for very high inflation countries
                     I: Johansen’s tests of the null of no cointegration
                    Trace tests of the null of no
                     cointegration against the      Maximum eigenvalue       II: Shin’s tests
                      alternative of 1 or more       tests of 0 versus 1      of the null of
                        cointegrating vectors:      cointegrating vectors:    cointegration
Bolivia, 1980-2013          19.339 (0.089)              18.519 (0.053)        0.090 (0.976)
Brazil, 1974-2012           30.987 (0.005)              25.024 (0.008)        0.640 (0.018)
Chile
         1940-1995          24.191 (0.024)            14.026 (0.133)         0.696 (0.024)
         1941-2012          23.304 (0.020)            18.084 (0.035)         0.411 (0.307)
Israel, 1983-2013          154.166 (0.000)           154.098 (0.000)         0.137 (0.282)
Mexico, 1985-2014          47.085 (3.0e-4)            29.609 (0.007)         0.110 (0.312)

  Bootstrapped p-values (in parentheses) are based on 10,000 bootstrap replications.
Table 5b Results from cointegration tests between M 1 velocity and a short-term rate
                                              I: Johansen’s tests of the null of no cointegration
                                             Trace tests of the null of no
                                              cointegration against the      Maximum eigenvalue      II: Shin’s tests
                                               alternative of 1 or more       tests of 0 versus 1     of the null of
                                                 cointegration vectors:     cointegration vectors:    cointegration
Australia, 1969-2014                                 16.903 (0.116)              15.890 (0.063)       0.278 (0.227)
Canada
                                1934-2006           23.157 (0.017)             21.380 (0.009)        0.545   (0.039)
                                1967-2013           26.139 (0.016)             25.195 (0.007)        0.090   (0.558)
Colombia, 1959-2011                                 8.435 (0.673)               6.439 (0.717)        0.251   (0.433)
Finland, 1914-1985                                  6.825 (0.742)               6.765 (0.622)        1.391   (0.071)
Germany, 1876-1913                                  9.882 (0.571)               8.996 (0.503)        0.490   (0.197)
Guatemala, 1980-2012                                20.282 (0.058)             18.014 (0.049)        0.053   (0.872)
Japan
                                1885-1913           11.870 (0.408)             10.834 (0.333)        0.455   (0.094)
                                1955-2013            9.846 (0.511)              9.240 (0.427)        0.141   (0.888)
Korea, 1970-2014                                    18.407 (0.074)             16.909 (0.060)        0.175   (0.351)
Italy, 1949-1996                                    15.767 (0.145)             12.474 (0.171)        0.457   (0.230)

  Bootstrapped p-values (in parentheses) are based on 10,000 bootstrap replications.
Table 5b (continued) Results from cointegration tests between M 1 velocity and a short-term rate
                                                          I: Johansen’s tests of the null of no cointegration
                                                         Trace tests of the null of no
                                                          cointegration against the      Maximum eigenvalue      II: Shin’s tests
                                                           alternative of 1 or more       tests of 0 versus 1     of the null of
                                                             cointegration vectors:     cointegration vectors:    cointegration
Netherlands, 1950-1992                                           14.491 (0.211)              10.052 (0.349)       0.253 (0.381)
New Zealand, 1934-2004                                           16.696 (0.106)              15.823 (0.060)       0.647 (0.291)
Norway, 1946-2013                                                22.770 (0.021)              17.992 (0.031)       0.932 (0.084)
Portugal
                                            1914-1965           26.827   (0.012)           25.749 (0.004)        0.086   (0.495)
                                            1966-1998           11.733   (0.422)            8.818 (0.511)        0.278   (0.004)
South Africa, 1967-2014                                         17.877   (0.117)           16.635 (0.068)        0.489   (0.109)
Spain, 1941-1989                                                14.260   (0.183)           13.569 (0.120)        0.272   (0.272)
Switzerland
                                            1851-1906           15.883 (0.109)             12.625 (0.158)        0.635   (0.225)
                                            1948-2005           38.892 (0.000)             35.289 (0.000)        0.985   (0.033)
Turkey, 1968-2014                                               6.817 (0.814)               4.614 (0.896)        0.164   (0.523)
United Kingdom, 1922-2014                                       23.261 (0.019)             21.680 (0.011)        0.900   (0.046)
United States, 1915-2014
                   based on the standard M 1 aggregate          7.152 (0.767)               4.822 (0.870)        3.507 (0.007)
    based on Lucas and Nicolini’s ‘New M 1 ’ aggregate         20.769 (0.038)              16.557 (0.048)        0.554 (0.121)
Venezuela, 1962-1999                                            7.635 (0.724)               5.836 (0.776)        0.412 (0.112)

  Bootstrapped p-values (in parentheses) are based on 10,000 bootstrap replications.
Figure 10 Selden-Latané specification, imposing unitary income elasticity: cointegration
          residuals and bootstrapped distributions of the coefficients on the short rate

                                           31
Figure 11 Selden-Latané specification, imposing unitary income elasticity: cointegration
          residuals and bootstrapped distributions of the coefficients on the short rate


                                          32
Figure 12 Selden-Latané specification, imposing unitary income elasticity: cointegration
          residuals and bootstrapped distributions of the coefficients on the short rate


                                        33
Figure 13 Selden-Latané specification, imposing unitary income elasticity: cointegration
          residuals and bootstrapped distributions of the coefficients on the short rate

                                          34
Figure 14 Selden-Latané specification, imposing unitary income elasticity: cointegration
          residuals and bootstrapped distributions of the coefficients on the short rate

                                         35
Figure 15 Selden-Latané specification, imposing unitary income elasticity: cointegration
          residuals and bootstrapped distributions of the coefficients on the short rate



                                          36
1965), and Switzerland (1948-2005), whereas the two tests produce opposite results
for Bolivia, Germany (1876-2013), New Zealand, and South Africa.

8.2     The estimated coeﬃcients on the short rate
We now turn our discussion to the bottom rows of Figures 4 to 9–showing the
estimated interest rate elasticities, which according to the Baumol-Tobin specification
ought to be equal to -1/2–and to Table LLCO.3 in the online appendix, reporting
bootstrapped p-values for testing the null hypothesis that the elasticity be equal to
-1/2. Overall results are mixed, with the null being rejected in 17 cases out of 32
based on Johansen’s estimator of the cointegration vector, and in 21 cases based on
Stock and Watson’s estimator.
    The bottom rows of Figures 10 to 15 show minus the estimated coeﬃcients on
the short rate38 based on the Selden-Latané specification, whereas Table SELA.3 in
the online appendix reports bootstrapped p-values for testing the null hypothesis
that the coeﬃcients be equal to -0.4. Since, diﬀerent from Baumol-Tobin, theory
does not provide us with a numerical benchmark which can be used in order to
perform statistical tests, we have set such benchmark to -0.4, which is roughly equal
to the median or modal estimates we obtain for the United States based on the
Lucas-Nicolini aggregate (see Figure 15). (This is why Table SELA.3 does not report
results for the United States based on the Lucas-Nicolini aggregate.) The null of -0.4
is rejected in 19 cases out of 33 based on Johansen’s estimator of the cointegration
vector, and in 25 cases based on Stock and Watson’s.

8.3     Towards a unified framework?
Is there any way to learn from this exercise which specification–log-log, or Selden-
Latané–better fits the data? The econometric approach used herein does not nest
the two specifications, and it therefore does not allow us to formally test which of
them is better. Visual inspection, however, might favor the log-log specification. To
see this, we compare the point estimates of the parameters of both specifications for
two sets of countries. Both sets provide good visual evidence and for all countries in
both sets there is strong evidence of cointegration in at least one of the specifications.
The first set comprises the United States, the United Kingdom, Australia, Canada
and New Zealand: All of these countries experienced important variations on their
nominal interest rates, but they are low-inflation countries. The second group is
composed by Brazil, Bolivia, Chile, and Israel, all high-inflation countries.39 In the
case of the log-log specification, the estimates are very similar, and around 1/2, as
  38
     We report minus the coeﬃcient on the short rate in order to make these results as comparable
as possible to those based on the log-log and semi-log specifications.
  39
     For Argentina, the Selden-Latané specification could not be estimated, since, as explained in
the text, the necessary conditions were not fulfilled.


                                               25
Baumol-Tobin linear technology implies, for most countries: Sometimes they are a bit
smaller (as for the U.S., Chile or Brazil), and sometimes a bit higher (as for the U.K.,
New Zealand or Israel), depending on the specific details of the statistical procedures
used, but overall, the sense that ‘one size fits all’ dominates the estimates.
    When considering the Selden-Latané specification, on the other hand, the first set
of countries consistently delivers estimates between -0.5 and -0.4, whereas for some
countries belonging to the second group the coeﬃcient on the short rate can get to
values such as -0.009 for Brazil, or -0.06 for Chile, and very precisely estimated.
    Thus, if we are in search of a unified framework, the Baumol-Tobin specification
should be the preferred one. On the other hand, when focusing on the experience of
low-inflation countries, such as the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada and
Australia, the Selden-Latané specification appears as the preferred one.
    One possible interpretation therefore is that the technology that relates number of
transactions to total costs exhibits decreasing marginal cost for low values of interest
rates, as implied by the Selden-Latane functional form but that it eventually becomes
constant, as implied by Baumol-Tobin specification.


9    Conclusions
We use a simple model of a transaction demand for money to guide a thorough
investigation of the stability of the long run relationship between the ratio of money
to output and a short term nominal interest rate. The model we use generalizes the
standard Baumol-Tobin model by allowing for general functions relating the total
cost of making transactions and the number of portfolio adjustments. We show
how alternative assumptions regarding this function delivers alternative empirical
specifications that have been used in the literature. We then take these specifications
to the data.
    Our data set comprises 31 countries for periods that range from 35 to 100 years.
The log-log specification, which roughly corresponds to the linear cost function as-
sumed by Baumol and Tobin, with an income elasticity of 1 and an interest rate
elasticity close to 0.5 performs remarkably well for all the countries. It is also the
case, however, that a specification in which the ratio of money to output is inversely
related to a linear function of the short term nominal interest rate is a better descrip-
tion of the data if we focus on countries in which the inflation rate has been in the
low range, like the U.S. or the U.K.
    Overall, while there are a few countries for which the relationship cannot be
detected, we find very strong evidence of a stable long run money demand.




                                           26
References
Alvarez, F., and F. Lippi (2009): “Financial Innovation and the Transaction De-
  mand for Cash,” Econometrica, 77(2), 363—402.

Baffigi, A. (2011): “Italian National Accounts: A Project of Banca d’Italia, ISTAT
 and University of Rome Tor Vergata,” Economic History Working Papers, Banca
 d’Italia, n. 18.

Ball, L. (2001): “Another Look at Long-Run Money Demand,” Journal of Monetary
 Economics, 47, 31—44.

Banca d'Italia (2013): “Tavole Storiche, Indicatori Monetari e Finanziari,” Dicem-
 bre 2013.

Barciela-López, C., A. Carreras, and X. Tafunell (2005): Estadísticas
 Históricas de España: Siglos XIX-XX, Volume III. Fundacion BBVA.

Barkai, H., and N. Liviatan (2007): The Bank of Israel Volume 1: A Monetary
 History. Oxford University Press.

Barro, R. (1982): “United States Inflation and the Choice of a Monetary Standard,”
 in Hall, R.E., ed., ’Inflation: Causes and Eﬀects’, University of Chicago Press.

Barsky, R. (1987): “The Fisher Hypothesis and the Forecastability and Persistence
 of Inflation,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 19(1), 3—24.

Benati, L. (2008): “Investigating Inflation Persistence Across Monetary Regimes,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(3), 1005—1060.

        (2015): “The Long-Run Phillips Curve: A Structural VAR Investigation,”
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 76(November), 15—28.

Bernanke, B., M. Gertler, and M. Watson (1997): “Systematic Monetary
  Policy and the Eﬀects of Oil Price Shocks,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
  1997(1), 91—157.

Boeschoten, W. (1992): Hoofdlijnen van de economische geschiedenis van Neder-
 land 1900-1990. Amsterdam: NIBE.

Braun-Llona, J., M. Braun-Llona, I. Briones, J. Diaz, R. Luders, and
 G. Wagner (1998): “Economia Chilena 1810-1995. Estadisticas Historicas,” Pon-
 tificia Universidad Catolica de Chile, documento de trabajo.

Bundesbank (1976): Deutsches Geld- und Bankwesen in Zahlen 1876-1975.
 Deutsche Bundesbank.


                                        27
Capie, F., and A. Webber (1985): A Monetary History of the United Kingdom,
 1870-1982. London, Allen and Unwin.

Cavaliere, G., A. Rahbek, and R. Taylor (2012): “Bootstrap Determination of
  the Co-Integration Rank in Vector Autoregressive Models,” Econometrica, 80(4),
  1721—1740.

Cavaliere, G., R. Taylor, and C. Trenkler (2015): “Bootstrap Co-Integration
  Rank Testing: The Eﬀect of Bias-Correcting Parameter Estimates,” Oxford Bul-
  letin of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming, —.

de Jong, A. (1967): “Geschiedenis van de Nederlandsche Bank,” Volume 3, pp.
  644—645.

Diebold, F., and C. Chen (1996): “Testing Structural Stability with Endogenous
  Breakpoint: A Size Comparison of Analytic and Bootstrap Procedures,” Journal
  of Econometrics, 70(1), 221—241.

Elliot, G., T. Rothenberg, and J. H. Stock (1996): “Eﬃcient Tests for an
  Autoregressive Unit Root,” Econometrica, 64(4), 813—836.

Engle, R., and C. Granger (1987): “Cointegration and Error Correction: Rep-
  resentation, Estimation, and Testing,” Econometrica, 55, 251—276.

Fratianni, M., and F. Spinelli (1997): A Monetary History of Italy. Cambridge
  University Press.

Friedman, B. M., and K. N. Kuttner (1992): “Money, Income, Prices, and
  Interest Rates,” American Economic Review, 82(3), 472—492.

Furlong, K. (2001): “The Montreal Gazette Call Loan Rate, 1871-1907,” Canadian
  Journal of Economics, 34(1), 165—173.

Grossman, S., and L. Weiss (1983): “A Transactions-Based Model of the Mone-
 tary Transmission Mechanism,” American Economic Review, 73(5), 871—80.

Haavisto, T. (1992): Money and Economic Activity in Finland, 1866-1985. Lund
 Economic Studies.

Hansen, B. (1999): “The Grid Bootstrap and the Autoregressive Model,” Review
 of Economics and Statistics, 81(4), 594—607.

Hills, S., and R. T. N. Dimsdale (2010): “The UK Recession in Context: What
  Do Three Centuries of Data Tell Us?,” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, (2010
  Q4), 277—291.



                                       28
Homer, S., and R. Sylla (2005): A History of Interest Rates. John Wiley and
 Sons.

Johansen, S. (2002): “A Small Sample Correction of the Test for Cointegrating
  Rank in the Vector Autoregressive Model,” Econometrica, 70, 1929—1961.

Junguito, R., and H. Rincón (2007): “La política fiscal en el siglo XX en Colom-
  bia,” in J. Robinson and M. Urrutia (eds.), Economía Colombiana del Siglo XX:
  Un Análisis Cuantitativo, Banco de la República y Fondo de Cultura Económica,
  Colombia, pp. —.

Kilian, L. (1998): “Small-Sample Confidence Intervals for Impulse-Response Func-
  tions,” Review of Economics and Statistics, pp. 218—230.

Klovland, J. T. (2004): “Monetary aggregates in Norway 1819-2003,” in Øyvind
 Eitrheim, Jan T. Klovland and Jan F. Qvigstad, eds., Historical Monetary Statis-
 tics for Norway 1819Ű2003, Norges Bank, Occasional Paper N. 35/2004.

Latané, H. A. (1960): “Income Velocity and Interest Rates: A Pragmatic Ap-
  proach,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 42(4), 445—449.

Lucas Jr., R. E. (1988): “Money Demand in the United States: A Quantitative
  Review,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 29, 137—168.

Lucas Jr., R. E., and J.-P. Nicolini (2015): “On the Stability of Money Demand,”
  Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.

Luetkepohl, H. (1991): Introduction to Multiple Time Series Analysis, II edition.
  Springer-Verlag.

Mata, E., and N. Valerio (2011): The Concise Economic History of Portugal: A
 Comprehensive Guide.

Meltzer, A. H. (1963): “The Demand for Money: The Evidence from the Time
 Series,” Journal of Political Economy, 71(3), 219—246.

Metcalf, C., A. Redish, and R. Shearer (1996): “New Estimates of the Cana-
 dian Money Stock: 1871-1967,” University of British Columbia Discussion Paper
 No. 96-17, July 1996.

Muscatelli, A., and F. Spinelli (2000): “The Long-Run Stability of the Demand
 for Money: Italy 1861,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 45, 717—739.

Officer, L. H., and S. H. Williamson (2015): “The Annual Con-
 sumer Price Index for the United States, 1774-2014,” available at:
 http://www.measuringworth.com/uscpi/.


                                       29
Rolnick, A. J., and W. Weber (1997): “Money, Inflation, and Output Under Fiat
 and Commodity Standards,” Journal of Political Economy, 105(6), 1308—1321.

Rotemberg, J. J. (1984): “A Monetary Equilibrium Model with Transactions
 Costs,” Journal of Political Economy, 92(1), 40—58.

Saint-Marc, M. (1983): Histoire Monetarie de la France, 1880-1980. Paris, Presses
  Universitaires de la France.

Selden, R. T. (1956): “Monetary Velocity in the United States,” in Milton Fried-
  man, editor, ŚStudies in the Quantity Theory of MoneyŠ, University of Chicago
  Press, pp. 405—454.

Stock, J. H., and M. W. Watson (1993): “A Simple Estimator of Cointegrating
  Vectors in Higher Order Integrated Systems,” Econometrica, 61(4), 783—820.

Tamaki, N. (1995): Japanese Banking: A History (1859-1959). Cambridge Univer-
  sity Press.




                                      30
A      Interest Rate Rules and Money Rules
Note that (7) and (6) imply                   ∙          ¸
                                               0 ( 0 )     
                                                  0
                                                           =
                                               ( )         
and                                             ∙      ¸
                                                   
                                           =    1−
                                                   
Replacing on equation (4) implies
                                             ∙      ¸
                                   0           
                                  () = +    1−
                                               
or
                                                  0 ()
                                  = £1        1         1 
                                                               ¤
                                           
                                             + 
                                                 (1   −  
                                                             )
                                                0 ()
                                       = £                   ¤
                                          1 + 1 ( −  )

Now, combining (7) and (9) we obtain
                                   ∙ 0 0 ¸
                                     ( )
                                          =
                                     (0 )

or, using the result above and noting that  = (1 − ())
               ⎡                                         ⎤
                    0  0         0            0
                 ( ) [(( )(1 − (( )))] 1 ⎦              0 ((1 − ()))
            ⎣ h                                 i         = £                ¤
                                                      0
                  1 + (1 0 ) ((0 ) −  (0 )) ( )        1 + 1 ( −  )

                                                   (0 )(0 ) 
But, replacing the inflation rate (0 ) =                   (0 )
                                                                      ,   we obtain
          ⎡                                             ⎤
                 0     0               0
                [(( )(1 − (( )))]           ⎦      (1 − ()) 0 ((1 − ()))
       ⎣ h                                   i       =      £                ¤      
                                                   0
               1 + (1 0 ) ((0 ) −  (0 )) ( )           1 + 1 ( −  )

Now, if we let
                                    0 ((1 − ()))(1 − ())
                              Ω=         £                ¤
                                          1 + 1 ( −  )
we can write the expression above as
                                  ∙      ¸
                                     0 
                               Ω( )      = Ω
                                       ´

                                                   31
But
                                       (0 ) =  + (0 )
so                                                   µ                                   ¶
                            (0 )                                (0 )(0 )
                     = 1 −              =             1−
              (0 )       (0 )(0 )                    (0 )(0 )(1 − ((0 )))
Replacing above
                     ∙     µ                                             ¶¸
                         0                         (0 )(0 )
                    Ω( ) 1 −                                                = Ω
                                           (0 )(0 )(1 − ((0 )))
or                 µ            ¶          µ                                    ¶
                       Ω(0 )                  Ω(0 )     (0 )(0 )                  1
                                  −                                             =     
                        Ω                       Ω (0 )(0 )(1 − ((0 )))           
In general, there are many solutions for the growth rate of money stochastic sequence
(0 ) that is consistent with a given interest rate. This is so, since the nominal
interest rate pins down (weighted) expected inflation, but there are many distributions
of future price levels that are consistent with the same expected value of inflation.
Notice, however, that there exists a unique growth rate of money that is consistent
with the interest rate sequence, and that is predetermined the period before, the
solution, ∗  satisfying
                 µ         ¶      µ                                ¶
                   Ω(0 )     ∗    Ω(0 )          (0 )             1
                            −              0    0           0
                                                                     = 
                      Ω               Ω ( )( )(1 − (( )))       

B     The Data
Here follows a detailed description of the dataset. All of the data used in this paper are
from original sources. Specifically, they are from either (i) original hard copy (books,
or, in the case of West Germany’s 1 , scanned PDFs of the Bundesbank’s Monthly
Reports, which are available from the Bundesbank’s website), in which case we have
entered the data manually into Excel; or (ii) central banks’ or national statistical
agencies websites (these data are typically available in either Excel or simple text
format). There are only four exceptions (that is: four series, not four countries)
to this, which we discuss below. In those cases we were not able to find the data
we were looking for in original documents, and we therefore took them from the
International Monetary Fund’s International Financial Statistics (henceforth, IMF
and IFS, respectively). Some of the data (detailed below) had been previously used by
Rolnick and Weber (1997), to which the reader is referred to for specific details about
the original sources. The Rolnick-Weber (henceforth, RW) dataset is available at the
‘Warren Weber Collection’ at the website of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.




                                                     32
B.1     Argentina
With the single exception of an 2 series available for the period 1884-1994, which
is from the RW dataset, all other series are from the Banco Central de la República
Argentina (the central bank, henceforth, Banco Central). Specifically, two series
for 1 and 3 , available for the periods 1900-2004 and 1863-2004, respectively, are
from Banco Central’s Table 7.1.4 (‘Agregados Monetarios’). A series for a short-term
nominal interest rate, available for the period 1821-2004, is from Banco Central’s
Table 7.1.4 (‘Tasas activas’). Interestingly, among all of the countries we consider
in this paper, Argentina is the only one which directly provides an estimate of the
(inverse of) the velocity of circulation of monetary aggregates. Specifically, Banco
Central’s Table 7.1.4 provides the ratios between either 1 and 3 and nominal
GDP (‘1 % PBI’ and ‘3 % PBI’, respectively; ‘PBI’ is the Spanish acronym for
GDP). The two sample periods are the same as for 1 and 3 , respectively. Based
on the ratio between 1 and GDP, and the series for 1 , we then reconstructed a
nominal GDP series.

B.2     Australia
An 1 series for the period 1900-2014 has been constructed in the following way.
An annual series for the period 1900-1973 has been kindly provided by Cathie Close
of the Reserve Bank of Australia (henceforth, RBA). A monthly seasonally unad-
justed series, available since 1975, is from the RBA’s website (‘1 , $ billion, RBA,
42216’; the series’ acronym is DMAM1N), and it has been converted to the annual
frequency by taking annual averages (since for the year 1975 the series is available
from February, the average for that year has been computed for the period February-
December). The missing observation for 1974 has been interpolated as in Bernanke,
Gertler, and Watson (1997), using as interpolator series the IMF ’s IFS series labelled
as ‘Money’, which, over the periods of overlapping, closely co-moves with both 1
series. A 90-day nominal interest rate for bank accepted bills and negotiable cer-
tificates of deposit is from the RBA’s website (‘90-day BABs/NCDs, Bank Accepted
Bills/Negotiable Certificates of Deposit-90 days, Monthly, Original, Per cent, AFMA,
42156, FIRMMBAB90’). It is available since 1969. A series for nominal GDP, avail-
able since 1960, is from the Australian Bureau of Statistics (‘Gross domestic product:
Current prices; A2304617J; $ Millions’).

B.3     Bolivia
Series for nominal GDP, the GDP deflator, the monetary base, 0 , 1 , and a short-
term nominal interest rate, all available for the period 1980-2013, are from the Unidad
de Analisis de Politicas Sociales y Economicas (Bolivia’s national statistical agency,
known as UDAPE for short).


                                          33
B.4     Brazil
Series for nominal GDP, 0 , 1 , and GDP deflator inflation, all available for the
period 1901-2000, are from IBGE’s (the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Sta-
tistics) Estatisticas do Seculo XX (Statistics of the XX Century). The internet link
is: http://seculoxx.ibge.gov.br/economicas. A series for nominal GDP for the period
2000-2012 is also from IBGE. Series for 0 and 1 for the period 2000-2012 are
from the Banco Central do Brasil (Brazil’s central bank). A series for a short-term
nominal interest rate for the period 1974-2012 is from the Banco Central do Brasil.
Two series for a nominal Government bond yield (period: 1901-1913 and 1929-1959)
and the Banco Central do Brasil’s Discount rate (period: 1948-1989) are both from
Homer and Sylla (2005)’s Table 81, pages 629-631.

B.5     Canada
An annual series for nominal GDP, available since 1870, has been constructed by link-
ing the Urquhart series (available from Statistics Canada, which is Canada’s national
statistical agency), for the period 1870-1924; series 0380-0515, v96392559 (1.1) from
Statistics Canada, for the period 1925-1980; and series 0384-0038, v62787311 (1.2.38)
from Statistics Canada, for the period 1981-2013. A series for the GDP deflator
available since 1870 is from Statistics Canada (the series’ code is 3830027, v55080518
(1.11)). An annual series for the CPI starting in 1870 is from the RW dataset until
1914, and from Statistics Canada after that. A short-term interest rate for the period
1871-1907 (specifically: the ‘Montreal call loan rate’) is from Furlong (2001). As for
the later period, we use a series for the 3-month Treasury bill rate which has been
constructed by linking the series from the Historical Statistics of Canada, available
for the period 1934-1935, to the series ‘Treasury Bill Auction - Average Yields - 3
Month, Per cent / en pourcentage’ from the Bank of Canada (Canada’s central bank).
Monthly series for 0 , 1 , and 2 starting in January 1872 are from Metcalf, Redish,
and Shearer (1996), and they have been extended as follows. As for 0 , we use the
series from Metcalf et al. (1996) until December 1954. Then, starting from January
1955, we use the series labelled as ‘Monetary base (notes and coins in circulation,
chartered bank and other Canadian Payments Association members’ deposits with
the Bank of Canada) (x 1,000,000)’ from Statistics Canada. As for 2 , we use the
series from Metcalf et al. (1996) until December 1967. Then, starting from January
1968, we use the series labelled as ‘M2 (net) (currency outside banks, chartered bank
demand and notice deposits, chartered bank personal term deposits, adjustments to
M2 (net), v37198’ from Statistics Canada. Finally, as for 1 , we use the series from
Metcalf et al. (1996) until December 1952; after that, we link it via splicing to the
series labelled as ‘Currency and demand deposits, 1 (x 1,000,000), v37213’ until
November 1981 from Statistics Canada; finally, from December 1981 until December
2006, we use the series from Statistics Canada labelled as ‘1 (net) (currency outside
banks, chartered bank demand deposits, adjustments to 1 (continuity adjustments

                                         34
and inter-bank demand deposits) (x 1,000,000), v37200’. An important point to stress
is that over the periods of overlapping, the three series are near-identical (up to a scale
factor), which justifies their linking. On the other hand, for the period after December
2006 we were not able to find an 1 series which could be reliably linked to the one
we use for the period December 1981-December 2006 (over the last several decades,
Canada’s monetary aggregates have undergone a number of redefinitions, which com-
plicates the task of constructing consistent long-run series for either of them). As a
result, for the most recent period we have decided to consider another series which
we consider in isolation (that is: without linking it to any other 1 aggregate). The
series is ‘M1B (gross) (currency outside banks, chartered bank chequable deposits,
less inter-bank chequable deposits) (x 1,000,000), v41552787’, which is available since
January 1967 from Statistics Canada. Finally, we convert the monthly series to the
annual frequency by taking simple annual averages.

B.6     Chile
Annual series for nominal GDP, the GDP deflator, 1 , and 2 are from Braun-Llona,
Braun-Llona, Briones, Diaz, Luders, and Wagner (1998) for the period 1940-1995. As
for the period 1996-2012 they are from the Banco Central de Chile, Chile’s central
bank (specifically, nominal GDP and the GDP deflator are from the Banco Central’s
Anuarios de Cuentas Nacionales, whereas 1 and 2 are from Banco Central’s Base
Monetaria y Agregados Monetarios Privados. A short-term nominal interest rate
(‘1-day interbank interest rate, financial system average (annual percentage)’) from
the Banco Central de Chile is available for the period 1940-1995. In order to extend
our analysis to the present as much as possible, we therefore also consider, as an
alternative measure of the opportunity cost of money, GDP deflator inflation.

B.7     Colombia
Data for Colombia have been kindly provided by David Perez Reyna. Annual series
for nominal GDP, the monetary base, and a short term nominal interest rate for the
period 1905-2003 are from Junguito and Rincón (2007). As for the period 2004-2012,
they are from Colombia’s Ministerio de Hacienda y Credito Publico. Annual series
for the monetary base, 1 , and 3 for the period 1905-2012 are from the Banco de
la Republica, Colombia’s central bank.

B.8     Denmark
Long-run data for Denmark have been kindly provided by Kim Abildgren of Danmarks
Nationalbank (the Danish Central Bank, henceforth, DNB). A series for nominal GDP
(million kroner, current prices) is available for the period 1856-2012. A series for the
DNB’s lending rate (per cent per annum) is available for the period 1819-2012. A


                                            35
quarterly series for 2 is available for the period 1923Q1-2011Q4, and it has been
converted to the annual frequency by taking annual averages. An annual series for 1
for the period 1875-2012 has been constructed as follows. From the financial balance
sheets of the central bank, of the central government, and of private commercial and
savings banks (all available for the period 1875-2005), we have extracted three series
for central bank currency, Treasury currency, and deposits at private commercial and
savings banks. The 1 aggregate has been constructed as the simple sum of the
three series. It is to be noticed that the series for deposits at private commercial
and savings banks also includes long-term deposits, and may therefore not be exactly
comparable to the other 1 series we use in this paper. Unfortunately, there is no way
to eliminate this problem, because the financial balance sheets of private commercial
and savings banks do not possess an extent of disaggregation suﬃcient to allow us
to uniquely focus on short-term deposits. We have performed two checks on the
reliability of the 1 aggregate we have constructed. First, we have compared it to the
1 series from the OECD’s Main Economic Indicators, which is available since 1970.
Over the period of overlapping, the evolution of the two 1 aggregates is very similar.
Second, we have compared it to the annual 1 series we constructed by taking annual
averages of the monthly 1 series from the DNB’s website (‘DNM1KOR’), which is
available for the period January 1991-October 2013. Once again, over the period of
overlapping the evolution of the two 1 aggregates is very similar, which provides
some reassurance on the reliability of our long-run reconstructed series. Finally, we
have linked the long-run reconstructed series to the DNB’s one (available since 1991)
by splicing.

B.9     Finland
Long-run monthly data for 1 for the period January 1866-December 1985 have
been generously provided by Tarmo Haavisto. The data come from his Ph.D. dis-
sertation (see Haavisto (1992)), and have been converted to the annual frequency by
taking simple annual averages. A series for Bank of Finland’s monetary policy rate
(labelled as the ‘Base rate’), available since January 1867, is from Suomen Pankki
Finlands Bank, i.e., Finland’s central bank (henceforth, Suomen Pankki). To be pre-
cise, Suomen Pankki does not provides the actual time series for the base rate, but
rather the dates at which the rate had been changed (starting from January 1 , 1867),
together with the new value of the base rate prevailing starting from that date. Based
on this information, we constructed a daily series for the base rate starting on January
1 , 1867 via a straightforward MATLAB program, and we then converted the series
to the annual frequency ba taking annual averages. Finally, annual series for nominal
GDP, real GDP, and the GDP deflator, available since 1860, are from Finland’s His-
torical Statistics, which are available from the web page of Statistics Finland, which is
Finland’s national statistical agency. (To be precise, from the homepage of Statistics
Finland, look at Home  Statistics  National Accounts  Annual national accounts


                                           36
 Tables.) Specifically, the nominal GDP series is B1GMHT (‘Gross domestic product
at current prices, 1860-1960, million. mk’).

B.10      France
Annual series for nominal GDP, nominal 1 , and the short rate are all from SaintMarc
(1983). Specifically, the series for nominal GDP is the Toutain Index from Annexe
I: Revenu national, Produit Interieur Brut, pages 99-100 of Saint Marc (1983), and
it is available for the period 1815-1913. The series for 1 is from the table ‘Vitesse-
Revenu, Vy, et taux de liquidite, TL’, pages 74-75 of Saint Marc (1983), and it is
available for the period 1807-1913. The series for the short rate is from Section 7,
‘Evaluation des taux de l’interet’, pages 93-96, of Saint Marc (1983), and it is available
for the period 1807-1913. In our analysis, however, we focus on the period 1851-1913
because for the entire period 1820-1851 the short rate had been fixed at 4 per cent.

B.11      Germany
B.11.1    Germany under the Gold Standard
An annual series for nominal GDP for the period 1876-1913 is from the RW dataset.
An annual series for 1 for the period 1876-1923 has been reconstructed based on
the disaggregated monetary data reported in the Bundesbank publication Bundesbank
(1976), which has been kindly provided by Martin Mandler of the Bundesbank. An
annual series for the central bank’s monetary policy rate is from the NBER Historical
Database. Specifically, the series is the ‘Oﬃcial Bank Discount Rate for Germany’
(acronym is M13015DEM156NNBR).

B.11.2    West Germany
Although data for post-WWII Germany are available, in principle, for the entire
period 1950-1998, in the empirical work we have decided to only use data for West
Germany for the period 1960-1989. The reason is that we are skeptical about the
possibility of meaningfully linking the various series for nominal GDP in order to
create a single series for the period 1950-1998, because (i) before 1960, GDP data
did not include West Berlin and the Saarland, which, in 1960, jointly accounted for
about 6% of overall GDP; and (ii) the reunification of 1990 created discontinuities in
both GDP and 1 (we thought the problem could be side-stepped by focusing on 1
velocity, but in fact this series also seems to exhibit a discontinuity around the time of
reunification). Entering into details, an annual series for the Bundesbank’s monetary
policy rate for the period 1949-1998 has been constructed by taking annual averages
of the monthly series ‘BBK01.SU0112, Diskontsatz der Deutschen Bundesbank /
Stand am Monatsende, % p.a.’, which is available from the Bundesbank’s website. As
for nominal GDP, the original annual series are from Germany’s Federal Statistical


                                           37
Oﬃce, and they are available for the period 1950-1960 (‘Gross domestic product at
current prices, Former Territory of the Federal Republic excluding Berlin-West and
Saarland’); 1960-1970 (‘Gross domestic product at current prices, Former Territory
of the Federal Republic’); and 1970-1991 (‘Gross domestic product at current prices,
Former Territory of the Federal Republic, (results of the revision 2005)’). There is
also a fourth series available for reunified Germany, but, as we already mentioned,
it cannot be meaningfully linked to the series for the period 1970-1991 because of
the discontinuity induced by the 1990 reunification. The second and third series can
be linked because the diﬀerence between them is uniquely due to changes in the
accounting system, rather than to territorial redefinitions. Linking the first and second
series, on the other hand, is problematic because, as previously mentioned, before 1960
GDP data did not include West Berlin and the Saarland. Our decision has been to
ignore the first GDP series, and therefore to start the sample in 1960, for the following
two reasons. First, the dimension of West Berlin and the Saarland was not negligible.
The value taken by nominal GDP in 1960 according to the first and second series
was equal to 146.04 and 154.77, respectively, a diﬀerence equal to 6 per cent. Second,
this problem might be ignored if we had good reasons to assume that, during those
years, West Berlin and the Saarland’s nominal GDP was growing exactly at the same
rate as in the rest of Germany. This, however, is pretty much a heroic assumption–
especially for West Berlin. As a result, in the end we just decided to ignore the
first series. Finally, turning to 1 , this turned out to be the single most excruciating
piece of data collection in the entire enterprise (it took about one day and a half).
German 1 data, which are available at the monthly frequency since 1948, can only
be recovered from the Bundesbank’s original Monthly Reports, which are available
in scanned form at the Bundesbank’s website. So what we did is the following. We
downloaded the scanned PDFs of the Monthly Reports, and we manually inputted
the data in Excel, one ‘chunk’ (that is: one Monthly Report) at a time. An important
point to notice is that as it is in (e.g.) the U.S., German monetary aggregates are not
revised, so that it is indeed possible to link the figures coming from successive issues
of the Monthly Report. With a few exceptions in the 1940 and early 1950s, each report
contains about one year-one year and a half of data. There are a few discontinuities
in the series, but other than that, the overlapping portions coming from successive
issues are identical (over the entire sample we noticed about 4-5 exceptions, which
means that those months were revised, and in those cases we took the values coming
from the most recent Monthly Report). The discontinuities were just level shifts:
we checked the log-diﬀerences of the two series pertaining to each discontinuity, and
they were near-identical. So in the end we linked the various pieces coming from the
diﬀerent issues of the Monthly Report, thus obtaining a single monthly series for the
period up to December 1998. Finally, we converted the series to the annual frequency
by taking annual averages.




                                           38
B.12     Guatemala
All of the data are from the Banco de Guatemala’s website. A series for nominal
GDP is available for the period 1950-2012. A series for 1 (‘M1 Medio Circulante-
Millones de quetzales’) is available for the period 1980-2014. A series for a nominal
short rate (‘Interest rate 1/Domestic currency, passive’) is available for the period
1980-2013.

B.13     Hong Kong
An annual series for nominal GDP for the period 1961-2012 is from the Hong Kong
Monetary Authority’s (henceforth, HKMA) website (the series is labelled as ‘Nominal
GDP, HK$ million, Table031: GDP and its main expenditure components at current
market prices’). An annual series for 1 for the period 1985-2014 is from the HKMA’s
website (the series is labelled as ‘1 , Total,l HK$’). An annual series for the 1 for
the period 1982-2014 is from the HKMA’s website (the series is labelled as ‘Overnight
rate, Table 6.3 : Hong Kong Interbank Oﬀered Rates’).

B.14     Japan
Sources for Japanese data are as follows. A monthly series for the Bank of Japan’s
(henceforth, BoJ ) discount rate, available since January 1883, is from the BoJ ’s long-
run historical statistics, which are available at its website (the series is labelled as:
‘BJ’MADR1M: The Basic Discount Rate and Basic Loan Rate’). Annual series for
nominal GNP and 1 for the period 1885-1940 are from Table 48 of Tamaki (1995).
As for the period since 1955 , data for nominal GDP and 1 are as follows. Se-
ries for nominal and real GDP, and the GDP deflator, are from the Economic and
Social Research Institute (henceforth, ESRI ), Cabinet Oﬃce, Government of Japan.
(The key internet links are: http://www.stat.go.jp/english/data/chouki/03.htm and
http://www.stat.go.jp/english/data/nenkan/1431-03.htm) An important point to stress
here is the following. For the period before 1970, ESRI only provides tables for gross
domestic expenditure, rather than gross domestic product. However, over the pe-
riod of overlapping (that is: 1970-1998), the relevant series coming from Table 3-1
(‘Gross Domestic Expenditure (At Current Prices, At Constant Prices, Deflators) -
68SNA, Benchmark year = 1990 (C.Y.1955—1998, F.Y.1955—1998), Value in billions
of yen’) and Table 3-3b (‘3-3-b Gross Domestic Product Classified by Economic Ac-
tivities (Medium Industry Group), (At Current Prices, At Constant Prices, Deflators)
- 68SNA, Benchmark year = 1990 (1970—1998), Value in billions of yen’) are either
numerically identical (in the case of nominal GDP), or numerically identical up to
a scale factor (for the other two series). This means that–as it should be expected
based on just simple economic logic–the series which in Table 3-1 is labelled as
‘Gross Domestic Expenditure’ (Column Y in the Excel spreadsheet 03-01.xls) is, in
fact, nominal gross domestic product, and the same holds for its real counterpart and

                                          39
the deflator. As for 1 , a monthly series for the period January 1955-December 2014
was constructed by linking, via splicing, the following thre series from the BoJ ’s
website: MA’MAMS1EN01 (‘(discontinued)_M1/Amounts Outstanding at End of
Period/(Reference) Money Stock (Based on excluding Foreign Banks in Japan, etc.,
through March 1999)’); MA’MAMS3EN01 (‘(discontinued)_M1/Amounts Outstand-
ing at End of Period /(Reference) Money Stock (from April 1998 to March 2008)’);
and MA’MAM1NEM3M1MO (‘M1/Amounts Outstanding at End of Period/Money
Stock’). An important point to stress is that, over the periods of overlapping, the
series are essentially identical (up to a scale factor), which justifies their linking.
Finally, the resulting monthly 1 series was converted to the annual frequency by
taking annual averages.

B.15     Korea
A series for 1 (‘1 , Narrow Money, Average, Bil.Won’) is available since 1970 from
the website of the Central Bank of Korea (henceforth, BOK ). A series for nominal
GDP (‘Gross domestic product, current prices, Bil.Won’) is available since 1953, again
from the BOK ’s website. A series for the central bank’s discount rate (‘Republic of
Korea, Interest Rates, Discount Rate, Percent per Annum’) is available since 1948
from the IMF ’s IFS.

B.16     Israel
Series for nominal and real GDP, available for the period 1950-2013, are from Israel’s
Central Bureau of Statistics (henceforth, CBS ; special thanks to Svetlana Amuchvari
of the CBS for help with the data). Specifically, starting from 1995, the data are
from Table 17 of the ‘National Accounts, 1995-2013’. For the period 1950-1994, they
are from the CBS ’s Statistical Abstract of Israel (see columns D and J of Table 6.1,
‘National Income and Expenditure: Resources and Uses of Resources’). The GDP
deflator has been computed as the ratio between the two series. An annual CPI
inflation series (‘Change in Level of Price Indices, Percentages, Annual, average’),
available since 1971, is from the CBS ’ website (specifically, the series is from Table
13.1 of Statistical Abstract of Israel). For the period 1966-1975 the series for 1 is
from Table 4.6, page 120, of Barkai and Liviatan (2007). For the period since April
1981, a monthly 1 series is from the Bank of Israel’s website (special thanks to
Aviel Shpitalnik of the Bank of Israel for help with the data). The series is M1.M
(‘M1 = Money supply, Monthly (M), NIS, million, Current prices’), and it has been
converted to the annual frequency ba taking annual averages. A short-term interest
rate for the period 1966-1974 is the ‘Nominal rate of return on MAKAM (3-month
bills)’ from Table 4.9, page 129, of Barkai and Liviatan (2007). Since 1989 it is the
Bank of Israel’s ‘Actual eﬀective rate of interest’, from the Bank of Israel’s website.
For the period 1983-1988 we use the ‘Discount Rate’ from the IMF ’s IFS. Over the


                                          40
period of overlapping (i.e., since 1989) the Bank of Israel’s actual eﬀective rate of
interest and the discount rate from the IMF are virtually identical, which justifies
their linking.

B.17     Italy
Series for nominal GDP at current market prices, real GDP in chained 2005 Euros, and
the implied GDP deflator, all available for the period 1861-2010, are from the sheet
‘Tab_03’ in the Excel spreadsheet ‘Data_Na150-1.1.xls’, which is available at the
Banca d’Italia’s website at: http://www.bancaditalia.it/statistiche/tematiche/stat-
storiche/index.html. The spreadsheet contains the estimates of the Italian National
Accounts’ aggregates which are extensively discussed in Baﬃgi (2011). A series
for 0 , available for the period 1947-1993, respectively, is from the Rolnick-Weber
dataset. A series for 1 , available for the period 1861-1991, is from the Data Ap-
pendix, pp. 49-52 of Fratianni and Spinelli (1997). Series for 1 and 2 , available
for the period 1948-1998 are from the table ’Componenti della moneta dal 1948 al
1998’ of BancadItalia (2013). In our analysis we use the 1 series from Fratianni and
Spinelli (1997) for the Gold Standard period, and the one from Banca d’Italia for the
post-WWII period (over the period of overlapping, however, the two series are very
similar, so that in practice this choice does not entail material implications). Short-
and long-term interest rates for the period 1861-1996 are from Muscatelli and Spinelli
(2000). A series for the ‘Tasso Uﬃciale di Sconto’–that is: Banca d’Italia’s oﬃcial
discount rate–is from the tables ‘Tassi d’interesse delle principali operazioni della
banca centrale’ and ‘Variazione dei tassi uﬃciali della Banca d’Italia, 1936-2003’ of
BancadItalia (2013).

B.18     Mexico
A monthly interest rates series for the period January 1978-present is from the Banco
de Mexico’s ‘Indicadores de tasas de interes de Valores Publicos’ (Banco de Mexico,
henceforth BdM, is Mexico’s central bank). It has been converted to the annual fre-
quency by taking annual averages. Two annual interest rates series (‘Interest Rate
(%) Commercial loans’ and ‘Interest Rate (%), Oﬃcial discount rate’, respectively)
are from Table 83, pages 639-640, of Homer and Sylla (2005). The first series is avail-
able for the periods 1942-1963 and 1978-1989. The second is available for the period
1936-1978. Annual series for 0 , 1 , and 2 for the period 1925-2014 are from the
Instituto Nacional de Estadistica y Geografia (Mexico’s national statistical agency,
henceforth INEGI ), ‘Estadisticas Historicas de Mexico, 2014’, whereas for the period
1985-2014 they are from the BdM ’s website. The series from the BdM are available
at the monthly frequency, and we converted them to the annual frequency by taking
annual averages. Annual series for nominal GDP are from INEGI, ‘Estadisticas His-
toricas de Mexico 2014’, for the period 1925-1970; from the IMF ’s IFS for the period


                                          41
1970-1988; from BdM for the period 1988-2004; and from INEGI for the period 2004-
2013. The four series have been linked via splicing. An annual CPI inflation series
available since 1949 is from the IMF ’s IFS (‘Mexico, Consumer Prices, All items,
Percent Change over Corresponding Period of Previous Year’).

B.19     Morocco
A monthly seasonally unadjusted series for 1 , available since January 1985, is from
the website of Bank Al-Maghrib ( the Central Bank of Morocco, henceforth, BAM ).
The annual series has been computed by taking simple annual averages of the original
monthly data. An annual series for nominal GDP, available for the period 1980-
2010, is from the ‘Comptes Nationaux’ (National Accounts) from the website of the
High Commission for Planning of Morocco. A series for the minimum rate applied to
notebook accounts, available since January 1983, is from the website of BAM. BAM
sets the interest rate two times a year, on January 1, and on July 1. The table at
the central bank’s website reports the values for the interest rate which have been set
every January 1 and July 1 starting from 1983. From this information we computed
the annual average rates by taking a simple average within the year.

B.20     Netherlands
A series for the discount rate of De Nederlandsche Bank (the Dutch central bank,
henceforth, DNB) for the period 1900-1992 is from Table 65 of Homer and Sylla
(2005) until 1989, and from DNB’s website after that. Series for nominal and real
Net National Income (NNI), and for the NNI deflator, for the period 1900-1992 are
from Table 1, pages 94-95 of Boeschoten (1992). A series for 2 , available for the
period 1900-1992, is from the Rolnick-Weber dataset. A series for 1 , available since
1864, has been constructed by linking the series from deJong (1967) and one from
DNB.

B.21     New Zealand
A series for 1 , available since 1934, is from the Reserve Bank of New Zealand
(henceforth, RBNZ ). A series for nominal GDP in millions of Australian dollars is
from Statistics New Zealand. A series for a short-term nominal interest rate starting
in 1934 has been constructed in the following way. Homer and Sylla’s (2005) Table
79 contains a series for the RBNZ ’s oﬃcial discount rate for the period 1934-1989.
Since 1999, the RBNZ has been using, as its monetary policy rate, the ‘Oﬃcial Cash
Rate’, which is available from the RBNZ ’s website. Since these two short-term rates
have been used by the RBNZ as its oﬃcial monetary policy rate for the periods 1934-
1989 and 1999-present, respectively, they are in fact conceptually the same, and can
therefore be linked. For the period in-between (1990-1998), for which no monetary


                                          42
policy rate is available, we have used the ‘Overnight Interbank Cash Rate’ from the
RBNZ. The rationale for doing so is that since 1999, this rate has been very close to
the Oﬃcial Cash Rate, which justifies the linking of the two series.

B.22      Norway
A series for 1 , available since 1919, and two series for 0 and 2 , available since
1819, are from the Historical Statistics of Norges Bank (Norway’s central bank), which
are available at its website. Specifically, all historical statistics for Norway’s monetary
aggregates are from Klovland (2004). Series for nominal GDP and the GDP deflator;
and for real GDP, real private consumption expenditures, and real gross investments
(in millions of 2005 NOKs), all available since 1830, are from Norges Bank’s Historical
Statistics (for all series the period 1940-1945 is missing). As for the short-term nominal
interest rate, ideally we would have liked to use Norges Bank’s discount rate. The
problem with this is that, although the discount rate is available (from Norges Bank’s
website) since 1819, it has missing observations for the period 1987-1990. As a result,
we have resorted to using the Average Deposit Rate (again, from Norges Bank’s
website), which is available since 1822, it has no missing observations, and over the
period which is analyzed herein has been quite close to the discount rate.

B.23      Portugal
An annual series for 1 for the period 1854-1998 is from Table 5 of Mata and Valerio
(2011). Annual series for real and nominal GDP for the period 1868-2008 are from
Table 4 of Mata and Valerio (2011). A series for the oﬃcial discount rate of the Banco
de Portugal (the Portuguese central bank), available for the period 1930-1989, is from
Table 74 of Homer and Sylla (2005). Series for the consumer price index, 0 , and 2
for the period 1932-1989 are from the Rolnick-Weber dataset.

B.24      South Africa
All of the data for South Africa are from the website of its central bank, the South
African Reserve Bank (SARB). Specifically, a series for the ‘Bank rate’ (‘Lowest
rediscount rate at SARB’; code is KBP1401M) is available since 1923. A series for
1 (‘Monetary aggregates / Money supply: M1, R millions’; code is KBP1371J) is
available since 1967. A series for nominal GDP (‘Gross domestic product at market
prices, R millions’; code is KBP6006J) is available since 1946.

B.25      Spain
Annual series for 0 and 2 for the period 1874-1980 are from the RW dataset (the
years 1936-1940 are missing). An annual series for 1 for the period 1865-1998 is


                                            43
from Cuadro 9.16 ‘Agregados Monetarios, 1865-1998’ of Barciela-López, Carreras,
and Tafunell (2005), pp. 697-699 (the series is labelled as ‘M1, datos a fin de ano,
en millones de pesetas’; the years 1936-1940 are missing). An annual series for nomi-
nal GDP for the period 1850-2000 is from Cuadro 17.7 of Barciela-López, Carreras,
and Tafunell (2005), pp. 1338-1340 (the series is labelled as ‘El PIB a precios cor-
rientes, 1850-2000, millones de pesetas’; PIB is the Spanish acronym of GDP). An
annual series for the ‘Descuento comercial’ of the Banco de Espana (Spain’s central
bank, henceforth, BdE) is from Cuadro 9.17 of Barciela-López, Carreras, and Tafu-
nell (2005), pp. 699-701. The series is available for the periods 1874-1914, 1920-1935,
and 1942-1985. An annual series for the oﬃcial discount rate of the BdE, available for
the period 1930-1989, is from Table 74, pp. 541-542, of Homer and Sylla (2005). A
monthly series for the 3-month Treasury bill rate available since March 1988 (‘Tipo
de interese hasta 3 meses. Conjunto del mercado. Op. simples al contado. Letras
del Tesoro.’), is from the BdE’s website, and it has been converted to the annual
frequency by taking annual averages (the data for 1988 have been ignored, since the
series starts in March of that year).

B.26     Switzerland
Annual series for the consumer price index, 0 , 1 (based on the 1995 definition),
3 (based on the 1995 definition), and the Swiss National Bank’s (henceforth, SNB)
oﬃcial discount rate, all available at least since 1929, are from the SNB’s website.
Specifically, the series for 0 , 1 , and 3 from the SNB’s Historical Statistics, which
are available up until 2006, have been extended up to 2014 by applying the annual
growth rates of the corresponding monetary aggregate from the SNB’s Monthly Sta-
tistical Bulletin of July 2015 (see section ‘Monetary base and liquidity, B2 Monetary
aggregates M1, M2 and M3, Level (annually)’. The series for the discount rate is
available up until 2007. An annual series for nominal GDP available for the period
1948-2005 is from the website of the project Economic history of Switzerland during
the 20th century–see at: http://www.fsw.uzh.ch/histstat/main.php. (Q.16b Gross
domestic product (expenditure approach) in real 1990 prices and nominal, 1948-2005
in Million Swiss Francs).

B.27     Taiwan
All of the data are from the Central Bank of the Republic of China (Taiwan), i.e., Tai-
wan’s central bank (henceforth CBRCT ). An annual series for nominal GDP (‘GDP
by expenditures at current prices’) is available for the period 1951-2013. An annual
series for the CBRCT ’s discount rate is available for the period 1962-2014. Two an-
nual series for 1 (‘M1A (End of Period), M1A = Currency in circulation(currency
held by the public)+Checking accounts and passbook deposits of enterprises, individ-
uals and non-profit organizations held in banks and community financial institutions’


                                           44
and ‘M1B (End of Period), M1B = M1A + Passbook savings deposits of Individuals
and non-profit organizations in banks and community financial institutions’) are both
available for the period 1962-2014. In order to be sure that the series we use in this
paper does not include components which go beyond a transaction purpose, we used
the first one, M1A.

B.28     Turkey
A monthly series for 1 , available since January 1964, is from the website of the
Turkey’s central bank, Turkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankasi (henceforth, TCMB).
The annual series used in the paper has been constructed by taking simple annual
averages of the original monthly data. A series for the central bank’s discount rate is
from Homer and Sylla’s (2005) Table 74, pages 541-542, until 1990. After that, it is
from TCMB. Specifically, TCMB’s website reports the dates in which the discount
rate was changed, together with the new values taken by the discount rate at each
date. Based on this information, for each year since 1990 we have calculated the
number of days in the year for which each value of the discount rate has been in eﬀect,
and based on this we have computed, for every year, a simple weighted average of
the individual values of the discount rate. A series for the Gross Domestic Product
in current prices, available since 1967, is from the website of TurkStat (Turkey’s
statistical oﬃce).

B.29     United Kingdom
All of the U.K. data are from version 2.2 of the Bank of England’s dataset of long-
run historical statistics, which is available from the Bank of England’s website. The
Excel spreadsheet, called threecenturies_v2.2.xlsx (henceforth, TC), was dowloaded
on August 5, 2015. The first version of the dataset was discussed in detail in Hills
and Dimsdale (2010). A series for 0 for the period 1870-present is from column N of
sheet 12 of TC. A series for 3 for the period 1870-1969 is from column S of sheet 12
of TC (the series is originally from Capie and Webber (1985)). A series for 4 for the
period 1963-present is from column Z of sheet 12 of TC. A series for 1 for the period
1922-present has been constructed in the following way. For the period 1922-1969,
we take annual averages of Capie and Webber’s (1985) monthly 1 series, which is in
column G of sheet 29 of TC. As for the period 1969-present, we take annual averages
of the quarterly aggregate ‘Non-interest bearing 1 ’ from column F of sheet 30 of
TC. Finally, we link the resulting two annual series by splicing. A series for the Bank
of England’s monetary policy rate (known as the ‘Bank Rate’) available since 1694 is
from column B of sheet 15 of TC. A series for a long-term interest rate (the ‘Consol
yield’) is from sheet 15 of TC. A series for real GDP (‘Chained composite measure of
GDP at market prices. Chained volume measure £mn, reference year 2011 ’) available
since 1700 is from column D of sheet 2 of TC, whereas the corresponding series for


                                          45
nominal GDP (‘Composite estimate of UK nominal GDP at market prices £mn’) is
from from column D of sheet 3. A series for real consumption (‘Real consumption,
Chained Volume measure, £mn, 2011 prices’) is from sheet 2 of TC.

B.30     United States
The series for the 3-month Treasury Bill rate, nominal GDP, and both the ‘standard’
1 aggregate and the ‘New 1 ’ one, all available for the period 1915-2008, are
from Lucas and Nicolini (2015). All series have been updated based on either series’
updated original data sources. The original source for the 3-month Treasury Bill
rate is the Economic Report of the President (henceforth, ERP), whereas the ones
for nominal GDP are Kuznets and Kendrick’s Table Ca184-191 before 1929, and
Table 1.1.5 of the National Income and Product Accounts (henceforth, NIPA) after
that. The series for the St. Louis adjusted monetary base (the acronym is AMBSL),
available since 1918, is from FRED II, at the St. Louis FED’s website. A series for
2 , and a discontinued series for 3 , available since 1959, and for the period 1959-
2005, respectively, are from FRED II (acronyms are M2SL and M3SL, respectively).
A series for 2 available for the period 1878-2003 is from the RW dataset. Annual
series for nominal GDP at current prices, real GDP in millions of 2009 dollars, and
the GDP deflator (Index: 2009=100) are from Oﬃcer and Williamson (2015).

B.31     Venezuela
Annual data for nominal GDP (‘Producto Interno Bruto, Millones de Bolívares a
Precios Corrientes’), 1 (‘Circulante, (M1), I.1, Circulante, Liquidez Monetaria y
Liquidez Ampliada, Saldos al final de cada período en millones de bolívares’), and a
short-term rate (‘Tasas de Interes Activas Anuales Nominales Promedio, Ponderadas
de los Bancos Comerciales y Universales, Porcentajes’) are from the Banco Central de
Venezuela. GDP is available for the period 1957-2007. 1 is available for the period
1940-2014. The interest rate is available for the period 1962-1999. An alternative
monthly interest series, available since July 1997 (‘Tasa de Interés Aplicable al Cálculo
de los Intereses Sobre Prestaciones Sociales (Porcentajes)’) has been converted to
the annual frequency by taking averages within the year. It has been used for the
scatterplot in Figure 1, but it cannot be linked to the other interest rate series as,
over the period of overlapping, the two series are diﬀerent.




                                           46
