NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

START-UP NATION? SLAVE WEALTH AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP IN CIVIL
WAR MARYLAND
Felipe González
Guillermo Marshall
Suresh Naidu
Working Paper 22483
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22483

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016

We would like to thank seminar participants at the NBER, PUC-Chile, Stanford, and UC
Berkeley for many helpful comments. Special thanks to Joseph Ferrie for support in the early
stages of the project. John Clegg, Ellora Derenoncourt, Christopher Muller, and Stanley
Engerman all provided valuable feedback. Jacob Moscona-Skolnik provided outstanding research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Felipe González, Guillermo Marshall, and Suresh Naidu. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Start-up Nation? Slave Wealth and Entrepreneurship in Civil War Maryland
Felipe González, Guillermo Marshall, and Suresh Naidu
NBER Working Paper No. 22483
August 2016
JEL No. N31
ABSTRACT
Slave property rights yielded a source of collateral as well as a coerced labor force. Using data
from Dun and Bradstreet linked to the 1860 census and slave schedules in Maryland, we find that
slaveowners were more likely to start businesses prior to the uncompensated 1864 emancipation,
even conditional on total wealth and human capital, and this advantage disappears after
emancipation. We assess a number of potential explanations, and find suggestive evidence that
this is due to the superiority of slave wealth as a source of collateral for credit rather than any
advantage in production. The collateral dimension of slave property magnifies its importance to
historical American economic development.

Felipe González
Dept of Economics
U.C. Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
fagonza4@gmail.com

Suresh Naidu
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
sn2430@columbia.edu

Guillermo Marshall
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
214 David Kinley Hall
1407 W Gregory St
Urbana, IL 61801
gmarshll@illinois.edu

A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22483

Introduction
Slave property rights were a key institution in American economic development. The
4 million enslaved people at the beginning of the Civil War were an unwilling workforce that made Southern agriculture the immensely lucrative and dynamic system that
the Confederacy sacrificed much to defend. Whether by gang labor and pace of work
or frictionless movement to new territories on the frontier, the advantages of slavery in
Southern agriculture are well-documented (Fogel and Engerman 1974, Wright 2006).
However, even as the bulk of the economics literature on slavery has focused on slaves
as an agricultural labor force, many of the other contributions of slave property to American economic development have been neglected. This is despite the injunctions of prominent economic historians. Wright (2006, p. 69) notes that “An important component of
planter mobility was the capacity to establish and maintain credit relationships across
long distances, arrangements ultimately based on the asset value and liquid character of
slave property.” Slaves were financial assets, readily sold on ubiquitous auction markets
(Tadman, 1990), pledged as collateral for loans (Martin, 2010) and used to settle payments
and debts over long-distances (Kilbourne, 1995). Slaves, as chattel property and not real
estate, were exempt from entail laws that shielded assets from creditors in the event of a
default (Priest, 2015). Given the presence of relatively more liquid markets in slave assets,
slave wealth could have allowed access to finance on better terms than real estate or other
major types of wealth present in the antebellum Southern economy, facilitating business
startup. This paper examines this role of slave wealth in business formation in Maryland
during the Civil War, using the 1864 uncompensated abolition as a shock to slaveowner
wealth.
We find that 1860 slave wealth, conditional on total wealth, was significantly correlated with business formation in Maryland between 1860 and 1863, and this relationship
disappeared following the 1864 constitutional abolition. While there are a number of explanations for this, we use historical evidence together with economic theory to assess
various competing accounts. We find evidence that this was due to the high quality of
slave wealth as collateral, rather than any advantage in production, and this is confirmed
in specifications that focus on the fraction of wealth held in enslaved people. We discuss
a simple model showing that the collateral channel affected business formation, while
the cost of production channel affected both business formation and business destruc-

2

tion. Consistent with this, we find that there was no effect of abolition on differential
destruction of businesses owned by slaveowners. We present qualitative evidence that
the slave rental market was active through 1864, and that wages did not abruptly change
with abolition, further suggesting that there was little productive advantage conferred by
slave ownership in Maryland. We see that slaveowners had an advantage in starting businesses even in non-agricultural, urban sectors, which were much less slave-intensive in
production, and take this as further evidence of the financial channel. Indeed, we see the
largest effects in the merchant sector, which was particularly credit dependent and where
enslaved people were unlikely to confer much productive advantage. In sum, our paper
provides evidence of a credit market advantage for American slave property holders.
The importance of wealth and liquidity for entrepreneurship is well documented in
both developed and developing economies.1 However, little of this literature has considered differences in the composition of wealth, although Calomiris et al. (2015) and
Campello and Larrain (2015) are recent exceptions. A common source of identification is
exogenous housing price shocks (Hurst and Lusardi 2004, Fairlie and Krashinsky 2012),
as well as inheritances or cash windfalls. These types of wealth differ in their liquidity,
which may affect their ability to be pledged as collateral to obtain start-up funding. We
take advantage of one of the largest destructions of wealth in U.S. history, abolition of
slavery, to obtain estimates not only of the effect of wealth, but also its composition, on
business formation.
A recent qualitative literature investigates the role of slaves in financial contracts.
Richard Kilbourne’s “Debt, Investment, Slaves” is perhaps the most detailed monograph
on credit networks in the slave economy. He shows that slaves were extensively deployed
in credit market relationships. By inspecting credit relations in East Feliciana Parish in the
nineteenth century, Kilbourne finds that slaves were sold for cash, while land was sold
on credit, and this fact made slaves much more liquid and thus preferred as collateral.
Kilbourne concludes that “The liquidity evident in the slave market at all times dwarfed
that of the land market. . . the slave market accounted for almost 80 percent of the total
cash market for both land and slaves.” (Kilbourne, 1995, p. 50)
Historians have suggested that these credit relationships were important to the func1 See

also Evans and Jovanovic (1989), Evans and Leighton (1989), Meyer (1990), Holtz-Eakin et al.
(1994), Lindh and Ohlsson (1996), Blanchflower and Oswald (1998), Fairlie (1999),Holtz-Eakin and Rosen
(2004), Lindh and Ohlsson (1998), Dunn and Holtz-Eakin (2000), Johansson (2000), Taylor (2001),Zissimopolous and Karoly (2007), and Nykvist (2008).

3

tioning of the larger Southern, and even the Atlantic economy. Johnson (2013) discusses
the chains of credit that linked Mississippi planters to cotton factors in New Orleans,
who in turn relied on credit from New York bankers and Liverpool merchants.2 Martin
(2010) shows, using a sample of mortgages, that the money raised by slaves mortgaged
in Louisiana, South Carolina, and Virginia was often larger than the amount raised on
the non-slave mortgages. Martin reports that 88, 82, and 33 percent of funds raised via
mortgages in Louisiana, South Carolina, and Virginia, respectively, in the national era
was raised with slave mortgages. But quantitative estimates of the effect of slave wealth
on business formation have been absent.
The liquidity of the slave market throughout the South is also well documented. Tadman (1990) shows that the speculative market for slaves was extremely active, with planters
regularly selling their slaves to traders at local auctions. Slave traders, acting as speculators and arbitraging price differences, helped maintain liquidity in the slave markets.
A large literature has explored to what extent the interstate transport of slaves was conducted by traders (rather than slaveowner migration). The recent literature concludes that
this number is high, with Tadman (1990), Pritchett (2001), Deyle (2005), and Steckel and
Ziebarth (2013) all documenting that between 50 and 70 percent of interstate slave movements was due to traders. The liquidity of the market is also supported by other financial
instruments that underwrote slave property rights, such as insurance contracts and warranties. Insurance contracts allowed slaveowners to hedge against slave illnesses and
death (Murphy, 2005), and tended to be used more by industrial and urban slaveowners
(Levy, 2012). Warranties for slave defects (Wahl, 1996) mitigated, although likely did not
eliminate, adverse selection problems in the slave market (Greenwald and Glasspiegel,
1982). One curious case in Lynchburg, VA involves a slave, Burwell, given the power of
attorney to mortgage himself for $1400, keep $50 and forward the rest of the money to his
master.
This modern understanding of slavery as a sophisticated system of property rights
and financial contracts contrasts with an older literature that held that slaveowners were
less likely to pursue modern business activities. But the implication that slaves could be
a source of collateral would not be surprising to economists. A well-known argument by
2 For

example, the 1837 Financial register wrote “Everyone knows that the cotton planters of the Southwestern states procure large supplies of clothing for their slaves, of every article required for their own
consumption, upon credit from neighboring merchants in anticipation of next year’s crop.” Johnson (2013,
p. 261).

4

De Soto (2003), held that formal property rights in land were important for transforming
informal assets into sources of collateral. Besley and Ghatak (2010) provide a comprehensive model and a survey of the literature on property rights and development, and
this particular effect of secure property rights has received mixed empirical confirmation.Galiani and Schargrosky (2010) find no effects of squatter titling on credit access in
Argentina, and Field and Torero (2008) find that property rights in Peru led to increased
public sector credit, but no increase in private sector credit. Slavery, by giving formal title
to other people’s labor, allowed human bodies to be pledged as collateral, which should
allow slaveowners access to capital for many different kinds of activities, not just those
involving slave labor.

Slavery, Credit, and Abolition in Maryland
By 1860, Maryland was the archetypical “middle ground” (Fields, 1984). The northern
part of the state was urban, industrialized, and overwhelmingly free. Baltimore had just
over 2000 slaveowners and almost 5500 slaves in 1860, with slaveowners roughly 1 percent of its population. Southern Maryland and the Chesapeake area, however, were still
very much slave country, and slaveowners exerted influence well beyond their share of
the state’s economic activity (Fields, 1984). Politically and socially, Maryland’s holders
of human property exercised substantial sway over politics, passing an 1851 constitution
that took the right of abolition out of legislative jurisdiction. Rural Maryland elites took
full advantage of the inclusion of slaves in the legislature seat allocation3 and the territorial allocation of the state senate to dominate Baltimore and the North politically. One
symptom of this was that slave values were capped at $400 for the purpose of tax assessment, giving a tax advantage to slave assets relative to land and other forms of property.
As we will see, the political defense of slave property was not purely ideological. Despite their relatively small holdings and low agricultural profits, Maryland slaveowners
benefited from their property via the extensive slave markets and contracts available.4
The total value of Maryland slaves at the time of emancipation was roughly 30 million
dollars, a relatively small fraction (just over 7 percent) of total state wealth in 1860. How3 Maryland

approportioned seats in the state legislature counting slaves as full citizens, not three-fifths,
for the purpose of representation.
4 Besides lifetime slaves, Maryland also had free blacks on indentured labor contracts (Morris, 1948) and

“term slaves” who were owned and traded until a fixed age or date.

5

ever, the sale market for slaves was quite active. Calderhead (1972) documents roughly
one sale for every 10 slaves between 1830 and 1840 in slaveholding Maryland counties.
Grivno (2007) writes of the national demand for slaves substituting for weak local demand: “By the 1850s, slave prices in northern Maryland were largely underwritten by
the interstate trade.” “A prime able-bodied slave is worth three times as much to the cotton or sugar planter as to the Maryland agriculturalist,” observed the Frederick Examiner
newspaper in November 1858. And it was observed that “The principal interest of the
Maryland slaveowner is . . . production for the southern market; for if that demand
were cut off, the value of this property would depreciate from sixty to seventy percent”
(Grivno, 2007, p. 95).
Importantly for our analysis, slave ownership was not a prerequisite for using slave labor. As Barbara Fields writes “The small size of holdings in Maryland combined with the
variability of labor requirements, especially on the part of urban employers and farmers
engaged in mixed or cereal agriculture, to make slave hiring a ubiquitous phenomenon,
much more common than sale.” (Fields, 1984, p. 27). The active slave rental market,
together with its relatively sophisticated economy, make Maryland an ideal location to
study the financial dimension of slavery. Slave ownership did not necessarily force one
to engage in slave-intensive activities. Instead, one could pledge a slave as collateral for
a loan, use the loan to start a business that did not use slave labor, and then rent out the
slave for additional income. But slave ownership in the presence of thick rental and resale
markets could facilitate a wide variety of business activities potentially far removed from
slave labor. Even in the relatively advanced urban economy of Baltimore, slaveowners,
while relatively few in number, had an advantage in starting businesses in the pre-1864
period.
The abolition of slavery in Maryland was idiosyncratic as well. The state as a whole
was quite anti-abolition, voting less than 5% for Lincoln and refusing even compensated
emancipation in 1862. However, as a result of this neutrality, Maryland was exempted
from the Emancipation proclamation of 1863. Instead, there was a referendum on a new
constitution in late 1864 to determine whether slavery would continue in the state. This
referendum was quite close, with the constitution passing by less than 1% of the vote.
In addition, a few months before the referendum, the war department allowed all slaves
to enlist, emancipating those that did. This, as much as the new constitution, destroyed
slavery in Maryland. In the appendix, we show evidence that Maryland was relatively
optimistic about the value of slave wealth from slave purchase prices paid by Maryland
6

participants in the New Orleans slave market.

Background and Data
Credit Market and Reports
Our main data source are credit reports from the R.G. Dun & Company Collection (R.D.
Collection, Harvard Business vol. 2, 7, 8 and 9). These reports were prepared by local attorneys who were instructed to “record all facts that come to your knowledge, of persons
changing their business, failing, moving away, new partnerships, etc.,... The name of every trader in your district should be reported, with all necessary particulars, whether they
have ever purchased in this city or not.”5 (Lewis Tappan, circular, December 20 [1842])
(Olegario, 2006).
Using these reports, we measure business formation in Maryland. Throughout the
paper we refer to individuals mentioned in these reports as “entrepreneurs” or “business
owners.”6 We focused on entrepreneurs with a first report between January 1860 and December 1865. Following the agency’s guidelines, we interpret the date of first report as
the date when the agency identified a new business. The agency tracked entrepreneurs
approximately twice a year, although less frequently during the Civil War, until the entrepreneurs went out of business. Similarly, we interpret the date of last report as a measure of business exit.7
There were a total of 1,580 entrepreneurs who created a business between 1860 and
1865 in Maryland. These entrepreneurs produced and sold a variety of goods, including
fancy goods, groceries, and dry goods. Figure 1 presents an example of a report included
5 As

Lewis Tappan said: “a ’good collecting’ attorney would be selected in each county to report on local entrepreneurs who visited New York to purchase goods. The attorney would assess each storekeeper’s
character, habits, business capacity, and capital, would gather other pertinent information, and would revise his report every six months. In return he would handle all subscribers’ debt collections in his district”
(Norris, 1978). Further information about the history of R.G. Dun & Company can be found in Norris (1978).
Further information about credit reporting agencies in the nineteenth-century can be found in Madison
(1974) and about Lewis Tappan in Wyatt-Brown (1966).
6 As

stated by Madison (1974), Tappan’s idea was to create “a national agency that would gather information on potential seekers of credit and disseminate the data to wholesalers and others extending credit”
(our italics). Some of these entrepreneurs are merchants, and we will exploit this fact in the results section.
7 Brennecke (2014) provides more information about Antebellum U.S. credit markets and the information issues associated with it. The author uses the Mercantile Agency records for New Orleans.

7

in our final dataset. From the reports, we collected the (i) name of entrepreneur, (ii) year
and month of first record, (iii) year and month of last report, (iv) county, and (v) activity
(e.g., fancy goods).
To expand our information about these entrepreneurs, we searched for these 1,580
individuals in the 1860 U.S. Population Census and found 620 of them. From the 1860
U.S. Population Census, we obtained each entrepreneur’s year and place of birth, sex,
race, literacy, county of residency, and the value of personal and real estate. We also
use the IPUMS 1% sample of the 1860 U.S. Population Census (Ruggles et al., 2010) as a
comparison group of individuals who did not appear in the credit reports. More about
the data construction process, including comparisons with other data to check selection,
can be found in the appendix.
Finally, we use the 1860 U.S. Federal Census Slave Schedules to obtain information
about the number of slaves owned by each individual in 1860 for both entrepreneurs and
the IPUMS sample in Maryland. Using the Slaves Schedules, we are able to separate
the slave wealth part of the personal estate value from the non-slave personal wealth.
We calculate slave wealth by multiplying the number of slaves by $1350, which is the
average appraised value of a 25-year old male slave in 1860 using data from Fogel and
Engerman (1976). When using average sale price instead of average appraised value, or
using the New Orleans slave sale prices (even restricted to Maryland sellers and buyers)
in Calomiris and Pritchett (2016), all results remain qualitatively unchanged.
In our analysis, we restrict attention to white males between 14 and 89 years old without missing data for the covariates that we use in our empirical analysis. This gives us a
sample of 526 entrepreneurs, among which 70 (∼ 13 percent) are classified as slaveowners.

Descriptive Statistics
In Table 1 we present descriptive statistics for the two samples of interest: (1) the Maryland IPUMS sample and (2) our sample of entrepreneurs. We present the mean and standard deviation of observable variables that we will use throughout the empirical analysis,
as well as a column with the statistical difference between both samples. In the final column, we show the coefficient on slaveowner in a bivariate regression within the sample
of entrepreneurs.

8

In the upper panel, we present measures of wealth, including three variables of slave
wealth: an indicator function that takes the value of one if the individual is classified
as a slaveowner in 1860, the logarithm of slave wealth, and share of slave wealth over
personal wealth.8 Our theoretical framework and the ability to perform robustness checks
motivate us to use three slave wealth variables throughout the analysis.9
In the middle panel, we present two measures of human capital: an indicator for illiteracy and age. Following the literature on self-employment and credit access, we use an
individual’s total wealth and human capital as control variables in our main regressions.
An extensive literature has documented the effect of an individual’s wealth and human
capital on the likelihood of starting a business and gaining access to credit. The theoretical framework we present below also takes into account these intuitive findings. By
including these variables as controls in the subsequent analysis, we assure a comparison
between individuals with similar wealth and human capital levels.
The final three variables (Baltimore, agro-business, merchant) measure geographic
and sectoral composition of the different samples. These variables will be used as controls
as well as to perform sub-sample analyses that inform us about the role of slave wealth
on business formation in non-slave intensive sectors of the economy.
Table 1 shows some expected patterns. Entrepreneurs are on average richer, have
higher human capital, are more likely to be located in Baltimore, tend to work relatively
more in non-agricultural sectors, and half of them are merchants (while 25 percent of the
IPUMS sample is merchants). The table also shows that approximately 4 percent of the
Maryland IPUMS sample is classified as slaveowner, while 13 percent of entrepreneurs
are in this category. For comparison with historical accounts of Maryland, it is useful to
discuss absolute numbers. A total of 61 individuals in the Maryland IPUMS sample are
classified as slaveowner. An average slaveowner in this sample had 7.5 slaves (median
of 4). A total of 70 entrepreneurs, on the other hand, are classified as slaveowners. An
average slaveowner entrepreneur had 2.5 slaves (median of 2). These numbers imply that
a total of 621 slaves are implicitly included in our dataset, around 12 percent of all slaves
located in Baltimore, as measured by the 1860 Slave Schedules. Slaveowner entrepreneurs
are older, likelier to have more real estate wealth, less likely to be in the lowest wealth bin,
8 More

specifically, we use log(1 + wealth measure), as many individuals have recorded values of zero
for the different wealth measures.
9 In

particular, using these three variables provides a clear link between the predictions of the model
and the empirical results.

9

and more likely to be in the highest wealth bin. Slaveowner entrepreneurs are also less
likely to live in Baltimore. Given these significant differences between slaveowner and
non-slaveowner entrepreneurs, we control for all these variables in our empirical analysis
in order to isolate the effect of slave wealth.
Another important aspect of our dataset is that the majority of entrepreneurs are located in Baltimore, the economic and financial center of Maryland. To offer a sense of
their spatial distribution, and their relationship to the overall state slave-economy, Figure 2 presents a map of counties in 1860 Maryland, with the total number of slaves, and
the spatial distribution of slaveowner and non-slaveowner entrepreneurs.10 This map
clearly shows that most of our entrepreneurs are located in the northern part of the state,
a pattern that is similar for both slaveowners and non-slaveowners in our sample.
Finally, Figure 3 shows the distribution of the dates of first (entry) and last (exit) reports. The y-axis shows the number of entrepreneurs with a first/last report in the date
specified in the x-axis. Overall, there is a decline in entry after the beginning of the war
(1861) and a subsequent increase at the end of it (1865) for both 1860 slaveowners and
non-slaveowners, highlighting the importance of the difference relative to overall time
effects. We will discuss how the Civil War affects our analysis in the results section, and
we already discussed how the slave market did not collapse during this time period. In
addition, in the appendix we show that the nominal value of slave sales did not decrease
significantly before 1864, suggesting that the slave market was still quite active, and closeby markets, such as the one in Alexandria, were still operating. The high slave price might
be surprising if slaveowners anticipated emancipation without compensation. Calomiris
and Pritchett (2016) show, however, that while slave prices in New Orleans fell in anticipation of war, the fall was not heterogeneous by slave age and gender, suggesting that
this was not due to fear of emancipation in particular so much as fear of war in general.
Consistent with this, we would expect to see less of a fall in border states that anticipated
not seceding, as shown in Appendix Figure A.3, which uses the Calomiris and Pritchett
data. The figure shows that prices for buyers in the border states do not seem to fall in
1860, while prices for slave sales to other states do. As we observe a significant number of
first reports after abolition of slavery, this sample serves as a good falsification exercise,
which we discuss in the empirical framework section. Panel B is the analogue of Panel A
using the last (instead of the first) report. The vast majority of exit occurs after abolition
10 As

we do not have the exact location of most entrepreneurs, we simply locate them in approximately
the centroid of each county for presentation purposes.

10

of slavery, and we can actually observe a spike in exit a couple of months after this event.
We will use this time variation later on to inform us about mechanisms at work.

Theoretical Framework
In this section, we discuss a simple model that is presented in detail in the appendix. The
model includes two sets of agents: (1) entrepreneurs seeking start-up funding, and (2)
suppliers or lenders. An entrepreneur can be either a slaveowner or a non-slaveowner.
Slave wealth is allowed to play two different roles: (1) slaveowners could have a relative advantage in using coercion to increase slave productivity (as in Acemoglu and
Wolitzky (2011), which we call the “cost of production” channel), and (2) suppliers could
prefer slave wealth over other pledgeable assets (e.g., land) due to its higher liquidity
(the “collateral” channel). There is a large literature studying how asset liquidity (or redeployability or market tightness) affects the terms of a loan (Williamson 1988, Hart and
Moore 1994, citealtshleifer-92), arguing that loan conditions (e.g., maturity, debt-to-value,
promised debt yield) improve with the liquidity of the collateral asset. Benmelech et al.
(2005) provide evidence from the commercial real estate market that supports these predictions. We examine how business entry and exit decisions are affected when either or
both of these channels are active.
In the model, entrepreneurs must exert effort (i.e., complete labor tasks) for their businesses to be successful. Because exerting effort is costly, the loan contract must provide
entrepreneurs with sufficient incentives to exert effort. Namely, the loan contract must
allow entrepreneurs to keep a sufficiently large fraction of future profits. Providing entrepreneurs with incentives, as a consequence, limits the amount of future profits that
entrepreneurs can credibly pledge to suppliers, which forces entrepreneurs to pledge assets in addition to future profits for lenders to be willing to supply funds.

Slave Wealth and Business Entry
In the model, slave wealth may have affected project funding outcomes through both the
production and collateral channels. When the cost of production channel is active, the
relative advantage in using coercion reduces the cost of effort for slaveowners, allowing
slaveowners to credibly pledge more of their future profits, as they require less compen11

sation for exerting effort. Slaveowners, as a result, are required to pledge fewer assets for
obtaining project funding because assets and future profits are substitutes. This implies
that a slaveowner will obtain project funding with a higher probability than that of an
equally-wealthy non-slaveowner when the production channel is active.
When the collateral channel is active, slave wealth is deemed as better collateral by
lenders. This is based on the premise that while two assets may have similar “fundamental” values, their relative resale price will be a function of the liquidity (or market tightness) of these assets. The collateral channel implies that a slaveowner will obtain project
funding with a higher probability than that of an equally-wealthy non-slaveowner, since
the latter must pledge relatively more wealth due to the lower resale value of non-slave
wealth.

Abolition and Business Exit
The model also provides predictions of how the rate of business failure is affected by
abolition. In the model, businesses fail with certainty when entrepreneurs do not exert
effort. Loan agreements are designed to provide entrepreneurs with sufficient incentives
(through a share of the future profits) to exert effort.
We note that loan agreements that were signed before abolition, and that did not make
the incentives provided to slaveowners contingent upon abolition, may have failed to provide sufficient incentives to exert effort. This happens because, if the cost of production
channel is active, exerting effort becomes more costly to slaveowners after abolition as coerced slaves are no longer available to slaveowners. These lower incentives to exert effort
affect the rate of business exit among slaveowners but not among non-slaveowners.
In sum, we obtain three insights from the model. First, both the cost of production and
collateral channels imply that, conditional on total wealth, slaveowners are more likely to
enter the market because they are required to pledge less wealth than non-slaveowners
to obtain project funding. Second, since abolition eliminates any potential benefits from
slave wealth, slaveowners and non-slaveowners enter with equal probability after this
event. Finally, abolition has an effect on the likelihood of business exit among slaveowners only if the cost of production channel is active. We use these insights to guide our
interpretation of the relative importance of these mechanisms.

12

Empirical Framework
Following our theoretical framework, we explore the hypothesis of slave wealth having
a positive effect on business formation. To test this hypothesis, we compare the rate of
business formation among slaveowners and non-slaveowners using (i) individuals who
created businesses between January of 1860 and December of 1865 and (ii) a representative sample of people living in Maryland in 1860. We interpret the first set of individuals
as entrepreneurs and the second set as a comparison group. We estimate different versions of the following cross sectional regression:
yi = α + β · Slave Wealthi,1860 + f (Total Wealthi,1860 , Real Estate Wealthi,1860 ) + γ0 Xi,1860 + ε i (1)
where yi is an indicator that takes the value of one if individual i created a business before
abolition of slavery, and zero otherwise. In addition, α is a constant term, Slave Wealthi
is a measure of slave wealth, f (Total Wealthi,1860 , Real Estate Wealthi,1860 ) is a (flexible)
parametric function of total wealth and real estate wealth. The Xi vector includes control
variables for human capital (literacy, age, and age-squared) and a Baltimore fixed effect,
and ε i is an error term robust against heteroscedasticity. Under the hypothesis that slave
wealth facilitated access to credit, we should observe a higher rate of business formation
among individuals with higher levels of slave wealth, even conditional on human capital,
total wealth, and real estate wealth, i.e., β > 0.
In some empirical exercises we repeat the analysis above using data on business formation after abolition. As slave wealth was destroyed after abolition, we expect not to
observe an effect of pre-abolition slave wealth on business formation after abolition, i.e.,
β = 0.
We also perform a sub-sample analysis by restricting attention to (i) individuals located in Baltimore, (ii) individuals working in non-agricultural sectors, and (iii) merchants. This sub-sample analysis emphasizes the importance of slaves in Maryland’s
non-agricultural sectors. While we take this as evidence of the collateral channel, the cost
of production channel bears on an old debate in the economic history of slavery, on the
suitability of slave labor for non-agricultural sectors (Goldin 1976, Bateman and Weiss
1981, Wade 1964). Running the same cross sectional regression in equation (1) in the subsamples allows us explore the role of the collateral channel in these non-slave intensive
sectors.
13

We address identification concerns in several parts of the results section. Overall, our
strategy includes controlling for measures of human capital and all observed differences
between slaveowner and non-slaveowner entrepreneurs as well as using a differencein-differences estimator to control for unobserved differences between slaveowners and
non-slaveowners that are time invariant. We also discuss the plausibility of alternative
interpretations that cannot be tested directly in our dataset.

Results
Slave Wealth and Business Formation
What is the effect of slave wealth on business entry? Our first approach to answer this
question is to estimate equation (1) using an indicator for slaveowner as our measure of
slave wealth. Columns 1 and 2 in Table 2-A show that, conditional on total wealth and real
estate wealth, slaveowners were more likely to create businesses than non-slaveowners
before abolition. Although this result is consistent with slave wealth being a better form
of collateral, it is also consistent with alternative explanations.
A first competing hypothesis is that slaveowners may have had different human capital. However, our controls for human capital do not change the differences in business
formation (column 3).11 Another competing hypothesis is that, rather than being a good
form of collateral, slaves may have given slaveowners a competitive advantage in their
cost of production. To address this, we restrict attention to sectors of the economy where
slaves are less likely to provide a competitive advantage: non-agricultural businesses
(column 5) and merchants (column 6). We find that, if anything, the effect increases in
magnitude in these subsamples, suggesting that the cost of production hypothesis alone
is unlikely to explain the empirical relation between slave wealth and business formation.
A third concern is that there were systematic, unobserved differences between slaveowners and non-slaveowners. For example, slaveowners may have differed in political
and social connections, saving behavior, and investment opportunities. To address this,
we study the link between business formation after abolition and slaveownership in 1860.
This analysis should help us understand whether (former) slaveowners were more likely
11 We also found that including family size as another human capital control does not affect the differences in business formation among slaveowners and non-slaveowners.

14

to create businesses even after abolition destroyed their slave wealth. In Table 2-B we see
that the statistical relationship between slaveownership in 1860 and business formation
disappears after abolition, suggesting that slave wealth is more relevant than unobserved
differences between slaveowners and non-slaveowners.
Another, related, concern is that individuals may have chosen to become slaveowners
because of the credit market advantage. However, we note that the appraised value of
a 25 year-old male slave in Maryland in 1860 ($1350) was more than 50 percent of the
total wealth of the median entrepreneur—much of which was (illiquid) real estate wealth.
Then, it is likely that the median entrepreneur would have required a loan to purchase a
slave, giving little reason to believe that the median entrepreneur would have first sought
a loan to purchase a slave to then request a different loan to start a business.
We also present the comparison between panels A and B using a differences-in-differences
estimator before and after abolition. This tests our specific hypothesis that the difference
in the coefficients is significant, which is weaker and somewhat different than the test that
the coefficients in panel A is positive and the coefficient in panel B is zero. We present
these results in Table 2-C and find that most of the effect of slaveownership on business
entry disappears after abolition; further suggesting that unobserved heterogeneity alone
is not driving the result.12
In summary, Table 2 shows a robust positive relationship between slaveownership
and business formation before abolition and that the relationship disappears after abolition. These results, however, do not exploit heterogeneity in the intensive margin of slave
holdings. Our theory suggests that if slave wealth was a better form of collateral, then
we should see more business formation among entrepreneurs holding more slave wealth
than other equally-wealthy entrepreneurs.
In Table 3 we exploit variation in the amount of slave wealth to explore the relationship
between business formation and slave wealth. In columns 1-3 we use the logarithm of
slave wealth, while in columns 4-6 we use slave wealth as a fraction of personal wealth.
Table 3-A studies business formation before the abolition and shows that, conditional
on total wealth, an entrepreneur with a higher share of slave wealth is more likely to
create a business. As in Table 2, we find that the relationship is robust to controlling for
measures of human capital (columns 3 and 6) and to restricting the sample to sectors of
the economy where slaves are less likely to provide a competitive advantage (see Table
12 See

Table A.2 in the appendix for a replication of the results using probit regressions.

15

A.3 in the appendix).
In Table 3-B we again study business formation after abolition using the slave wealth
measures, finding that the positive relationship disappears after abolition. The only exception is in column 6, where the effect remains statistically significant after abolition,
although it decreases in magnitude. The difference-in-differences estimates are presented
in Table 3-C, and again suggest that it is slave wealth itself, rather than an unobserved
characteristic correlated with slave wealth, that is driving the positive relationship between slave wealth and business formation.

Effect of Civil War
Despite delayed formal abolition, the Civil War challenged Maryland slavery. Confederate sympathizers fled following passage of martial law in 1861, and those that did not
leave were politically persecuted by the occupying Northern army. But they were persecuted as rebels and secessionists, not slaveowners. The Union army did not repress the
slave economy during the early years of the occupation, despite widespread dislike of
slavery among the troops. In fact, the Union army assisted in returning fugitive slaves
and even conducted its own slave auctions during the Civil War in Maryland, as well
as using slaves owned by loyal slaveowners to assist in the construction of fortifications.
Despite this official policy, slaves believed the presence of Union troops slackened slaveowner property rights, and slave insubordination and flight increased with Union army
presence. In October 1863, the federal war department passed General Order 329, allowing enlistment of free-blacks, rebel-owned slaves and slaves volunteered by their owners
in the border states. However, the enlistment of free-blacks, who were often on indentured labor contracts, raised labor costs enough that many slaveowners began to rely on
slaves even more for labor. In addition, owners of enlisted slaves were generously compensated at $800 a slave in 1863, giving them even more liquid stores of wealth.
The interstate slave market thus weakened, but did not collapse during the Civil War.
“In 1862, a Frederick County editor was shocked when six young slaves brought a meager
total of $400 at auction. ‘Less than two years ago servants of this description would have
commanded $2500,’ he fumed. ‘The reader will remember that [we] admonished the
sympathizers with the rebellion, in advance, that this would be the consequence of the
crime and folly of rebellion”’ (Grivno, 2007, p. 108). The opportunity for slaveowners to
sell or mortgage their human chattel still remained after the beginning of the Civil War,
16

albeit at lower prices.
In particular, the rental and hire market for slaves remained active through emancipation. Indeed, even as late as December 24, 1864 , the Frederick Examiner newspaper
published an ad (paid from July 9th) that stated “To hire: a Negro woman, slave, who is a
good cook, washer and ironer and can milk. One preferred without children.” While we
do not have surviving rental rate data from Maryland, in the appendix we present data
from Fogel and Engerman showing volume and price in the Virginia slave hiring market
through 1865.13
As previously discussed, there are reasons to worry about a differential impact of the
Civil War on business formation by slave ownership status. However, historical evidence
and data on slave sales shown in the appendix (Figure A.1) suggest the slave market was
active even in 1863, two years after the beginning of the war. In order to analyze the effect
of the Civil War on the differential rates of business formation, we divide the sample in
three periods and repeat the analysis in the previous subsection.
The three periods we use are defined as follows. The before period includes all businesses created between January 1860 and April 1861, before the beginning of the Civil
War. The during period includes all businesses created between April 1861 and November 1864, after the beginning of the Civil War but before abolition of slavery. Finally,
the after sample includes all businesses created between December 1864 and December
1865, after abolition. We pool the years between 1861 and 1863 for precision, as Figure
3 shows that there are many fewer businesses started per year, by both slaveowners and
non-slaveowners, in these war years.
Table 4 presents results of our main estimating equation using business formation in
each period as dependent variable. The relationship between slave wealth and business
formation during the Civil War remained as strong as before the beginning of the Civil
War. The coefficient on slave wealth after the Civil War decreases in magnitude relative
to the before estimate in Panels A-C, suggesting that most of the decline in the differential
rate of business formation was a consequence of abolition rather than of the beginning
of the Civil War. The positive, if unstable, point estimate of slave wealth after abolition
might reflect the importance of unobservable variables correlated with slave wealth (e.g.,
network connections). As discussed above, the Civil War did not destroy slavery in Mary13 The correlation between residualized rental rates in Maryland and Virginia in the decade before the
Maryland data ends (1845-1855) is 0.66, which suggests the markets were integrated to some degree.

17

land until 1864, and indeed the payment for enlisted slaves may have kept slave wealth
even more valuable than the 1860 price would indicate even through the war.

Indirect Evidence
In this final subsection we complement our analysis providing indirect evidence that the
collateral channel, and not the cost of production channel, was the mediating factor behind the observed empirical relation between slave wealth and business formation.
Slave wealth and exit
One of the insights from our theoretical framework is that if entrepreneurs had a relative
advantage in coercing slaves to lower their cost of production, then we should observe a
higher rate of exit among slaveowners after abolition of slavery. This is due to abolition
increasing the cost of production for slaveowners and, consequently, reducing the incentives to exert effort. Comparing post-abolition attrition rates, therefore, provides a test
for the cost of production channel. One could argue, however, that this is not a perfect
test because pledging assets may have been as important for establishing credit relations
than for keeping those relations active. We argue that this is not the case as we find that
higher levels of total wealth are not significantly correlated with the probability of exit
after abolition but they are so for the probability of entry (both before and after abolition).
Based on these ideas, we test for whether slave property rights provided a cost of
production advantage by comparing the post-abolition attrition rate between (former)
slaveowners and non-slaveowners. We make use of the subsample of businesses that
were created before abolition and that were operating immediately after abolition (i.e.,
the date of business exit is after November 1864).14 Using this sample, we ran regressions
similar to those reported in Table 2, but replacing the dependent variable for an indicator
that takes the value of one if the date of business exit was within a year after abolition.15
Table 5 presents regression results from these exercises using the same table taxonomy
we have been using throughout our analysis. Panel A shows that there was no statistically
significant relationship between slaveownership and exiting following abolition. In fact,
14 There

are a total of 331 businesses that meet these criteria.

15 Approximately 11 percent of operating businesses have a last report in this window of time. In Table
A.5 in the appendix we repeat this exercise with exit during 1864 or 1865 as our dependent variable.

18

if anything, slaveowners were less likely to exit during this time period. Importantly, note
that we are controlling for total wealth, so this result cannot be attributed to the fact that
slaveowners were wealthier. Panels B and C use our alternative measures of slave wealth
and the results are similar, suggesting that slave and non-slaveowner entrepreneurs did
not present differential exit rates within one year of abolition.
Finally, since one may be concerned that some of these exits may be relocation of
businesses across state lines rather than business failures, we restrict the sample to entrepreneurs that were living in Maryland both in 1860 and 1870 (column 7).16 We find
that restricting attention to this subsample does not affect the result.
Overall, using the insights gained from the model, we can take both the business formation and exit results to conclude that the collateral mechanism was more likely to be
the channel at work. Although we acknowledge that analyzing differential rates of exit is
by no means a perfect test for the cost of production channel, we believe this is suggestive
evidence of the collateral mechanism being relatively more important.
Wages
We next examine the labor market in Maryland to complement our evidence that the
collateral channel was the relevant channel through which slave wealth affected business
formation. In particular, we study how wages changed before and after abolition using
a sample of workers from the Weeks report (Weeks 1886, Meyer 2004). The data include
white male and female workers in Maryland. We normalize wages to be expressed in
daily units.
To analyze the evolution of wages over time, we regress log daily wage on a gender indicator, a child indicator, city fixed effects, and year fixed effects. We restrict our analysis
to the years after 1855 and report the coefficients for the year fixed effects in Figure 4. As
can be seen, we find no significant changes in the first years after abolition. This evidence
suggests that abolition did not significantly change the labor market equilibrium.
A potential explanation for this pattern of unaltered wages is that slaves were already
working for market wages prior to abolition, except the wages were paid as rent to the
slaveowner. If this was the case, the supply of workers seeking wages should have re16 The

subsample in column 7 is the set of entrepreneurs with a name–county–age match in Maryland in
the 1870 U.S. Population Census.

19

mained unchanged after abolition, leaving the equilibrium wage unaffected. We argued
above that the rental market was functioning well into 1864 in Maryland. In the appendix
we also show that there was no significant trend in the monthly rental rates of slaves in
nearby Virginia, suggesting a stable hiring market equilibrium there despite the threats
to adjacent Maryland slave property, the ongoing Civil War, and even the 1863 emancipation proclamation. All together, we interpret these findings as additional evidence that
the collateral channel was how slave wealth affected business formation. That is, ownership of slaves was not necessary to obtain the productive advantages of slave labor.
Narrative Evidence
We can also find qualitative evidence that the collateral channel was important in Maryland. An example of private credit collateralized with slaves can be found in DePuydt
(2013), which discusses the case of politician Outerbridge Horsey and John Lee, two
Maryland slaveowners who, in 1828, mortgaged 65 of their slaves to the Linton household
and Mr. Johnson in an effort to purchase a Louisiana sugar plantation. Their anticipated
sugar profits failed to materialize, however, and the pair wound up mortgaging even
more slaves to finance their losing operation. Surviving mortgage documents allow us
to see the slaves mortgaged, and Appendix Figure A.5 shows the distribution by age and
sex, and shows that prime age males formed the bulk of the collateral. In the end, Linton and Johnson successfully sued Horsey and Lee for the debts owed, which resulted in
forced sales of the mortgaged people and purchased plantation by the court.
Another source of evidence for the importance of slavery to credit relationships in
Maryland is court records. Wahl (1996) argues that antebellum southern slave law converged on efficient rules for renting and selling slaves. Legislation in Maryland explicitly
classified slaves as personal property and gave standards for mortgages that pledged
such property as collateral. In Wahl’s data, a large share of the cases in Maryland are for
“transfer”: either inheritance, divorce, or for repayment of an obligation—such as a debt
or a loan. Many Maryland cases appearing in the records of higher courts, such as Lee vs
Pindle (1842) and Denton vs Griffith (1861), where five slaves were mortgaged for $1500, pit
widows against creditors in courts over ownership of estate slaves. In Bruce vs Levering
(1865), an 1861 mortgage, worth $1066 in 1865, was foreclosed. The total value of the collateral posted was $981 but the two slaves pledged, worth $180, had been emancipated,
so the court ruled that the creditor only held rights to $781.
20

The negative effect expropriation of collateralized slave wealth would have on financial contracts was well-understood at the time. Slave mortgages were invoked as an argument against abolition during the Maryland Constitutional Convention of 1864. Given
legal precedents that ruled that exempting property pledged as collateral annulled the
mortgage contract, one representative argued that the constitutional protection of contracts implied that abolition was unconstitutional, declaring “there is no security for the
debt in the mortgage except Negroes. They are emancipated. The contract is that the Negroes shall pay the debt. The act of the legislature destroys that contract.” (Lord, 1864, p.
734).
Alternative Explanations
Of course, slaveowners are potentially different in many dimensions, even conditional
on wealth. Political power, social connections and prestige, savings behavior, and access
to investment opportunities may all have been different for slaveowners in 1860. This
highlights the usefulness of our differences in differences approach, which compares 1860
slaveowners before and after abolition. But this does not rule out potentially time-varying
sources of heterogeneity. While we think slaveowner social connections are unlikely to
suddenly change immediately after emancipation, an important unobservable variable is
slaveowner political power, which may have been altered with the destruction of slave
property. While the next election after 1864 was not until 1866, after our sample period,
the political fall of ex-slaveowners may have begun earlier. But this is unlikely, both
because slaveowners owned a considerable amount of land, and because there was no
political revolution in Maryland. As a member of the Union, Maryland was spared any
forced Reconstruction and associated franchise extension. Indeed, the legislature rejected
extending the franchise to blacks in 1867, and indeed was only forced to do so in 1870 by
the 15th Amendment.
Another concern is that there is general economic turmoil associated with the Civil
War that is differentially affecting slaveowners before and after 1864. We document that
slaveowner entry remains significantly higher through 1864 and the coefficient on fraction slave wealth remains large and positive during the war. In addition, by focusing on
slave wealth as conditional on other real wealth such as land, we can rule out differential
inflation effects. It still could be the case that the much larger inflation in the South may
have affected the market for slaves differentially. The financial shocks of the National
21

Banking Act and the large number of bank closures induced may have also affected slave
wealth differentially, but banks had little to do with smaller entrepreneurial businesses.
Of course, there are shocks we cannot rule out, for example that the anticipated collapse
of the South in 1865 may have mattered more than emancipation in reducing the value of
slaves, but this is broadly consistent with the mechanisms in our paper.
A final concern is differential out-migration. Tables A.5-A.7 in the appendix also show
that our results are not driven by differential outmigration from Maryland. We restrict attention to individuals we can link to the full-count 1870 census, and who are in Maryland
in both 1860 and 1870. While our sample size and precision necessarily falls, the coefficients remain positive and large on entry, with again no differences in exit (column 7 in
Table A.7).

Conclusion
This paper explores a new dimension of the economic effects of slavery. While most of
the economic literature has focused on slaves as labor force, we explore how slave wealth
facilitated business start-ups as a liquid, high-quality source of collateral.
Our main empirical result is that entrepreneurs with more slave wealth were more
likely to enter into the market than equally-wealthy entrepreneurs with other types of
wealth, suggesting that wealth composition and wealth liquidity were relevant factors behind business start-ups. We find that this relationship disappears post-abolition, suggesting that slave wealth, as opposed to unobserved characteristics of former slaveowners, is
what drives this result. While our context is not representative of the bulk of the slave
economy, and emancipation was during a volatile period, Maryland’s relatively sophisticated economy and unique position during the Civil War makes our empirical finding an
informative first step in exploring the collateral dimensions of the slave economy.
Our results are relevant for many debates around slavery. An interesting implication
is that some of the returns to scale believed to be the source of slave productivity may
have been due to improved access to credit rather than solely the gang-labor production
process. A financial perspective on slavery also adds a new dimension to the costs of the
Civil War and the long period of subsequent economic backwardness experienced in the
postbellum South. Slaveowners lost not just the war and the extra hours of uncompensated black toil, but also their primary store of value. In Maryland, one of the largest
22

insurance sellers, the Baltimore Life Insurance company, specialized in slave life insurance, and was forced out of business in 1867 (Murphy, 2005). Kilbourne (1995) shows
a drastic credit contraction in East Feliciana, and an increased reliance on cotton liens
as a credit instrument. Assessing the long-term damage wreaked by emancipation on
regional Southern balance sheets and credit networks (including the rise of the general
store as a substitute credit mechanism as in Ransom and Sutch (1988)) may be a useful
direction for future research.17 If settling financial obligations, including via foreclosure
and court-ordered sales, increased the incidence of slave trading, then the human costs of
family separation borne by African Americans under slavery loom even larger. Indeed,
Upper South slaves likely lived in heightened fear of forced sale to the Deep South when
their owners were highly indebted.
Enslaved people themselves understood the role creditors played in the system. Moses
Grandy’s brother and wife were both sold because their owners found themselves in debt.
Grandy subsequently wrote that “proprietors, though they live in luxury, generally die in
debt....At the death of a proprietor, it commonly happens that his coloured people are sold
towards paying his debts. So it must and will be with masters, while slavery continues.”
(Grandy, 1843)
The financial role of slaves is also informative for recent debates about “capital” as a
physical input versus capital as a financial asset. For example, Piketty (2014) discusses the
question of whether slaves should be considered a component of capital, or just a financial
obligation owed by the slaves to the slaveowners. But the business collateral channel suggests that slave property rights may have been productive, facilitating projects that would
have not otherwise secured financing, and thus may not simply be financial obligations
that net out to zero at the social level.18 The bodies and skills of African-Americans were,
in the antebellum South, capital in virtually all economically relevant dimensions, including financial dimensions.
Finally, our results emphasize that slave property rights were relevant to much more
than plantation agriculture alone. Maryland, economically much closer to the free states
than the slave states, still made use of slaves in ways that were complementary to modern,
17 A

Brazilian analogue can be found in Schulz (2008), who describes the effects of abolition in Brazil on
credit and money supply, arguing that the government inflated the economy and allowed loose financial
regulation for rural banks as a way to placate the slaveowners after abolition.
18 Piketty

argues that slaves were indeed capital, and not “human capital”, because slave labor could be
alienated and sold on markets.

23

industrial activities. While slaves employed in industry were likely still rare, the role
slaves played as collateral suggests that slaves may have been pledged in even more
complex and extensive financial contracts, extending onto the balance sheets of Northern
institutions. Slavery had economic consequences far beyond plantation agriculture, and
may be a larger contributor to national economic development than previously thought.

References
Acemoglu, D. and Wolitzky, A. (2011). The economics of labor coercion. Econometrica,
79(2):555–600.
Bateman, F. and Weiss, T. J. (1981). A Deplorable Scarcity: The Failure of Industrialization in
the Slave Economy. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Benmelech, E., Garmaise, M. J., and Moskowitz, T. J. (2005). Do liquidation values affect
financial contracts? Evidence from commercial loan contracts and zoning regulation.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3):1121–1154.
Besley, T. and Ghatak, M. (2010). Property rights and economic development. In Rodrik,
D. and Rosenzweig, M., editors, Handbook of Development Economics, Vol. 5, pages 4525–
4595. Elsevier.
Blanchflower, D. G. and Oswald, A. J. (1998). What makes an entrepreneur? Journal of
Labor Economics, 16(1):26–60.
Brennecke, C. (2014). Information acquisition in antebellum U.S. credit markets.
Calderhead, W. (1972). How extensive was the border state slave trade? A new look. Civil
War History, 17:42–55.
Calomiris, C. W., Larrain, M., Liberti, J., and Sturgess, J. (2015). How collateral laws shape
lending and sectoral activity.
Calomiris, C. W. and Pritchett, J. (2016). Betting on secession: Quantifying political events
surrounding slavery and the civil war. American Economic Review, 106(1):1–23.
Campello, M. and Larrain, M. (2015). Enlarging the contracting space: Collateral menus,
access to credit, and economic activity.

24

De Soto, H. (2003). The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails
Everywhere Else. Basic Books.
DePuydt, P. J. (2013). The mortgaging of souls: Sugar, slaves, and speculation. Louisiana
History, 54(4).
Deyle, S. (2005). The domestic slave trade in America: The lifeblood of the southern slave
system. In Johnson, W., editor, The Chattel Principle: Internal Slave Trades in the Americas.
Yale University Press.
Dunn, T. and Holtz-Eakin, D. (2000). Financial capital, human capital, and the transition
to self-employment: Evidence from intergenerational links. Journal of Labor Economics,
18(2):287–305.
Evans, D. S. and Jovanovic, B. (1989). An estimated model of entrepreneurial choice under
liquidity constraints. Journal of Political Economy, 97(4):808–827.
Evans, D. S. and Leighton, L. S. (1989). Some empirical aspects of entrepreneurship. American Economic Review, 79(3):519–535.
Fairlie, R. W. (1999). The absence of the African American owned business: An analysis
of the dynamics of self-employmet. Journal of Labor Economics, 17(1):80–108.
Fairlie, R. W. and Krashinsky, H. A. (2012). Liquidity constraints, household wealth, and
entrepreneurship revisited. Review of Income and Wealth, 58(2):297–306.
Field, E. and Torero, M. (2008). Do property titles increase credit access among the urban
poor?
Fields, B. J. (1984). Slavery and Freedom on the Middle Ground. Yale University Press.
Fogel, R. W. and Engerman, S. L. (1974). Time on the Cross: The Economics of American Negro
Slavery. Boston: Little, Brown and Company.
Fogel, R. W. and Engerman, S. L. (1976). Slave Sales and Appraisals, 1775-1865. Rochester,
NY: University of Rochester [producer]. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-University Consortium
for Political and Social Research [producer and distributor].
Galiani, S. and Schargrosky, E. (2010). Property rights for the poor: Effects of land titling.
Journal of Public Economics, 94(9-10):700–729.
25

Goldin, C. (1976). Urban Slavery in the American South 1820-1860: A Quantitative History.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Grandy, M. (2011 (1843)). Narrative of the life of Moses Grandy, late a slave in the United States
of America. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina.
Greenwald, B. C. and Glasspiegel, R. R. (1982). Adverse selection in the market for slaves:
New orleans, 1830-1860. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 98(3):479–499.
Grivno, M. L. (2007). “There Slavery Cannot Dwell”: Agriculture and Labor in Northern Maryland, 1790-1869. PhD thesis, University of Maryland.
Hart, O. and Moore, J. (1994). A theory of debt based on the inalienability of human
capital. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(4):841–879.
Holtz-Eakin, D., Joulfaian, D., and Rosen, H. S. (1994). Sticking it out: Entrepreneurial
survival and liquidity constraints. Journal of Political Economy, 102(1):53–75.
Holtz-Eakin, D. and Rosen, H. S., editors (2004). Public Policy and the Economics of Entrepreneurship. The MIT Press.
Hurst, E. G. and Lusardi, A. (2004). Liquidity constraints, household wealth, and entrepreneurship. Journal of Political Economy, 58(2):279–306.
Johansson, E. (2000). Self-employment and liquidity constraints: Evidence from Finland.
The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 102(1):123–134.
Johnson, W. (2013). River of Dark Dreams: Slavery and Empire in the Cotton Kingdom. Belknap
Press.
Kilbourne, R. H. (1995). Debt, Investment, Slaves: Credit Relations in East Feliciana Parish,
Louisiana, 1825-1885. University Alabama Press; 1st Edition.
Levy, J. (2012). Freaks of Fortune: The Emerging World of Capitalism and Risk in America.
Harvard University Press.
Lindh, T. and Ohlsson, H. (1996). Self-employment and windfall gains: Evidence from
the Swedish lottery. The Economic Journal, 106(439):1515–1526.
Lindh, T. and Ohlsson, H. (1998). Self-employment and wealth inequality. Review of
Income and Wealth, 44(1):25–41.
26

Lord, W. B. (1864). Debates of the Constitutional Convention of the State of Maryland, volume 1.
Richard P. Bayly.
Madison, J. H. (1974).

The evolution of commercial credit reporting agencies in

nineteenth-century America. Business History Review, XLVIII(2):164–186.
Martin, B. (2010). Slavery’s invisible engine: Mortgaging human property. Journal of
Southern History, LXXVI(4).
Maryland, Vol.2, 7, 8 and 9, R.G. Dun & Company Collection, Baker Library Historical
Collections, Harvard Business School (no date).
Meyer, B. (1990). Why are there so few black entrepreneurs? NBER Working paper, (No.
3537).
Meyer, P. B. (2004). The weeks report database.
Morris, R. B. (1948). Labor controls in Maryland in the nineteenth century. Journal of
Southern History, 14:385–400.
Murphy, S. A. (2005). Securing human property: Slavery, life insurance, and industrialization in the upper south. Journal of the Early Republic, 25(4):615–652.
Norris, J. D. (1978). R.G. Dun and Co. 1841–1900, The Development of Credit-Reporting in the
Nineteenth Century. Greenwood Press.
Nykvist, J. (2008). Entrepreneurship and liquidity constraints. Scandinavian Journal of
Economics, 110(1):23–43.
Olegario, R. (2006). A Culture of Credit: Embedding Trust and Transparency in American
Business. Harvard University Press, 2006.
Piketty, T. (2014). Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Belknap Press.
Priest, C. (2015). The end of entail: Information, institutions, and slavery in the american
revolutionary period. Law and History Review, 33(02):277–319.
Pritchett, J. B. (2001). Quantitative estimates of the United States interregional slave trade,
1820-1860. Journal of Economic History, 61:467–475.
Ransom, R. and Sutch, R. (1988). Capitalists without capital: The burden of slavery and
the impact of emancipation. Agricultural History, 62(3):133–160.
27

Ruggles, S., Alexander, J. T., Genadek, K., Goeken, R., Schroeder, M. B., and Sobek, M.
(2010). Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0 [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
Schulz, J. (2008). The Financial Crisis of Abolition. Yale University Press.
Steckel, R. and Ziebarth, N. L. (2013). A troublesome statistic: Traders and the westward
movement of slaves. Journal of Economic History, 73:792–809.
Tadman, M. (1990). Speculators and Slaves: Masters, Traders, and Slaves in the Old South.
University of Wisconsin Press.
Taylor, M. P. (2001). Self-employment and windfall gains in Britain: Evidence from panel
data. Economica, 68(272):539–565.
Tirole, J. (2006). The Theory of Corporate Finance. Princeton University Press.
Wade, R. C. (1964). Slavery in the Cities: The South, 1820-1860. Oxford University Press.
Wahl, J. B. (1996). American slavery and the path of the law. Social Science History,
20(2):281–316.
Wang, S.-Y. (2011). State misallocation and housing prices: Theory and evidence from
China. American Economic Review, 101(5):2081–2107.
Weeks, J. D. (1886). Report on the statistics of wages in manufacturing industries. Government
Print. Off.
Williamson, O. E. (1988). Corporate finance and corporate governance. Journal of Finance,
43(3):567–591.
Wright, G. (2006). Slavery and American Economic Development. Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana
State University Press.
Wyatt-Brown, B. (1966). God and Dun & Bradstreet, 1841-1851. Business History Review,
XL(4):432–450.
Zissimopolous, J. and Karoly, L. (2007). Transitions to self-employment at older ages: The
role of wealth, health, health insurance and other factors. Labour Economics, 14:269–295.

28

Figure 1: Reports

Notes: This is a credit report for Stephen L. Bird, classified as slaveowner in 1860,
who owned a dry goods store in Baltimore. His first report is from September of
1863 and his last report is from September of 1870.

Figure 2: Location of Entrepreneurs and Slaves

Notes: This map shows the location of slaveowner (green) and non-slaveowner
(blue) entrepreneurs in our dataset. The size of circles represents the relative
number of entrepreneurs. Most entrepreneurs (approximately 80 percent) are
located in Baltimore (marked with ). In addition, counties with darker colors
had more slaves than counties with lighter colors. The source for the number of
slaves is the 1860 Slave Schedules.

?

29

Fraction of businesses

Fraction of businesses

Figure 3: Business Entry and Exit

Entry

.3
.2
.1
0

1860 1861 1862 1863 1864 1865

1860 1861 1862 1863 1864 1865

.1

Exit

.05

0

1860

1870

1880

Non-slaveowners

1890

1860

1870

1880

Slaveowners

1890

Notes: Upper panels show the fraction of businesses that entered between 1860
and 1865. Lower panels show the fraction of businesses that exited between 1860
and 1890. The total number of businesses in our dataset is 526.

30

Figure 4: Evolution of Wages
.5

0

-.5

-1

-1.5
1860

1862

1864

1866

1868

1870

Notes: In this figure we report coefficients on year fixed effects from a regression
of log daily wages in Maryland on gender, age, city, and year fixed effects using
data from Meyer (2004).

31

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
Maryland Entrepreneurs
(1)

Difference

Entrepreneurs
by slave-ownership

(2)

(2)–(1)

2.45

5.57

3.12***

-0.38

(0.08)

(0.16)

(0.18)

(0.58)

Wealth
Log personal wealth
Log real estate wealth
Log slave wealth
Indicator for wealth < 200
Indicator for wealth ∈ [200, 1700)
Indicator for wealth ∈ [1700, 10000)
Indicator for wealth ≥ 10000
Indicator for slaveowners
Fraction slave wealth

1.73

3.43

1.70***

2.31***

(0.08)

(0.19)

(0.21)

(0.60)

0.34

1.04

0.69***

–

(0.04)

(0.12)

(0.12)

0.56

0.25

-0.32***

0.09

(0.01)

(0.02)

(0.02)

(0.06)

0.28

0.23

-0.05**

-0.23***

(0.01)

(0.02)

(0.02)

(0.03)

-0.03

0.10

0.28

0.18***

(0.01)

(0.02)

(0.02)

(0.06)

0.05

0.24

0.19***

0.17***

(0.01)

(0.02)

(0.02)

(0.06)

0.04

0.13

0.09***

–

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.02)

0.04

0.08

0.04***

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

–

Human capital
Indicator for illiteracy
Age

0.06

0.01

-0.05***

0.01

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

33.08

38.44

5.36***

3.3***

(0.37)

(0.49)

(0.62)

(1.4)

0.44

0.79

0.35***

-0.22***

(0.01)

(0.02)

(0.02)

(0.06)

0.25

0.04

-0.21***

0.02

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.03)

Subsamples
Indicator Baltimore
Indicator agro-business
Merchant
Individuals

0.25

0.56

0.31***

0.11

(0.01)

(0.02)

(0.03)

(0.07)

1,554

526

2,080

526

Notes: Maryland representative sample from IPUMS 1% sample. Entrepreneurs is our
construction from the R.G. Dun & Company Collection. Slave wealth was calculated using the number of slaves and the appraised value ($1350) of a 25 year-old male slave in
Maryland in 1860 (Fogel and Engerman, 1976). The thresholds for the wealth indicators
are the 50th, 75th, and 90th percentiles of the empirical distribution of total wealth. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Significance level: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, *
p < 0.1.
32

Table 2: Slaveowners and Business Formation
Dependent variable is an indicator for first report before/after abolition of slavery
All

Baltimore

Non-agri

Merchants

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.259***
(0.044)

0.224***
(0.042)

0.240***
(0.041)

0.233***
(0.072)

0.296***
(0.050)

0.375***
(0.070)

0.041
(0.028)

0.035
(0.030)

0.046
(0.028)

0.110
(0.068)

0.052
(0.039)

-0.071
(0.054)

0.218***
(0.060)

0.189***
(0.057)

0.194***
(0.058)

0.123
(0.134)

0.244***
(0.079)

0.446***
(0.110)

No
No
No
2,080

Yes
No
No
2,080

Yes
Yes
Yes
2,080

Yes
Yes
No
1,109

Yes
Yes
Yes
1,663

Yes
Yes
Yes
493

Panel A: Before
Slaveowner

Panel B: After
Slaveowner

Panel C
Diff-in-diff

Flexible wealth control
Human capital controls
Baltimore
Individuals

Notes: Flexible wealth control include the logarithm of real estate wealth and indicators
for the following categories: wealth ∈ [200, 1700] (50th and 75th percentile of the empirical distribution), wealth ∈ [1700, 10000] (75th and 90th percentile), and wealth > 10000
(the omitted category is wealth ∈ [0, 200]). Human capital controls include an indicator variable for illiterate individuals, age, and age squared. Robust standard errors are
reported in parentheses (bootstrapped for diff-in-diff estimates). Significance level: ***
p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

33

Table 3: Slave Wealth and Business Formation
Dependent variable is an indicator for first report before/after abolition of slavery
(1)

(2)

(3)

0.029***
(0.005)

0.025***
(0.005)

0.027***
(0.005)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.143***
(0.048)

0.172***
(0.049)

0.196***
(0.047)

0.035
(0.032)

0.047
(0.033)

0.064**
(0.032)

Panel A: Before
Log slave wealth
Fraction slave wealth

Panel B: After
Log slave wealth

0.004
(0.003)

0.003
(0.003)

0.005
(0.003)

Fraction slave wealth

Panel C
Diff-in-diff

Flexible wealth control
Human capital controls
Baltimore
Individuals

0.025***
(0.007)

0.022***
(0.007)

0.022***
(0.007)

0.108*
(0.061)

0.125*
(0.066)

0.132**
(0.065)

No
No
No
2,080

Yes
No
No
2,080

Yes
Yes
Yes
2,080

No
No
No
2,080

Yes
No
No
2,080

Yes
Yes
Yes
2,080

Notes: Flexible wealth control include the logarithm of real estate wealth and indicators
for the following categories: wealth ∈ [200, 1700] (50th and 75th percentile of the empirical distribution), wealth ∈ [1700, 10000] (75th and 90th percentile), and wealth > 10000
(the omitted category is wealth ∈ [0, 200]). Human capital controls include an indicator variable for illiterate individuals, age, and age squared. Robust standard errors are
reported in parentheses (bootstrapped for diff-in-diff estimates). Significance level: ***
p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

34

35
0.064
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.095***
(0.035)

0.012***
(0.004)

0.108***
(0.034)

0.116
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.097**
(0.039)

0.014***
(0.004)

0.127***
(0.037)

(2)

(1)

After Abolition

0.073
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.067**
(0.032)

0.005
(0.003)

0.048*
(0.028)

(3)

(Nov ’64 - Dec ’65)

–
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.002
(0.057)

-0.002
(0.007)

-0.019
(0.058)

(1)–(2)

–
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.028
(0.050)

0.007
(0.005)

0.060
(0.049)

(1)–(3)

–
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.030
(0.056)

0.009
(0.006)

0.079
(0.052)

(2)–(3)

Differences-in-differences

Notes: Flexible wealth control include the logarithm of real estate wealth and indicators for the following categories: wealth
∈ [200, 1700] (50th and 75th percentile of the empirical distribution), wealth ∈ [1700, 10000] (75th and 90th percentile),
and wealth > 10000 (the omitted category is wealth ∈ [0, 200]). Human capital controls include an indicator variable for
illiterate individuals, age, and age squared. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses (bootstrapped for diff-in-diff
estimates). Significance level: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

Mean of dep. variable
Flexible wealth controls
Human capital controls
Baltimore

Fraction slave wealth

Panel C

Log slave wealth

Panel B

Slaveowner

Panel A

During Civil War
(May ’61 - Nov ’64)

Before Civil War
(Jan ’60 - Apr ’61)

Dependent variable is an indicator for first report in period X

Table 4: Slave Wealth and Business Formation Before and During the Civil War

Table 5: Slave Wealth and Exit After Abolition
Dependent variable is an indicator for last report one year within abolition of slavery
All

Baltimore

Non-agri Merchants MD 1870

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

-0.049
(0.042)

-0.043
(0.043)

-0.034
(0.044)

-0.058
(0.058)

-0.036
(0.046)

-0.039
(0.052)

0.003
(0.025)

-0.007
(0.005)

-0.006
(0.005)

-0.005
(0.005)

-0.007
(0.007)

-0.005
(0.006)

-0.005
(0.0067)

0.001
(0.003)

-0.021
(0.064)

-0.031
(0.066)

-0.003
(0.067)

0.017
(0.109)

-0.001
(0.071)

0.029
(0.097)

-0.030
(0.036)

No
No
No
331

Yes
No
No
331

Yes
Yes
Yes
331

Yes
Yes
No
259

Yes
Yes
Yes
319

Yes
Yes
Yes
159

Yes
Yes
Yes
43

Panel A
Slaveowner

Panel B
Log slave wealth

Panel C
Fraction slave wealth

Flexible wealth control
Human capital controls
Baltimore
Observations

Notes: Flexible wealth control include the logarithm of real estate wealth and indicators
for the following categories: wealth ∈ [200, 1700] (50th and 75th percentile of the empirical distribution), wealth ∈ [1700, 10000] (75th and 90th percentile), and wealth > 10000
(the omitted category is wealth ∈ [0, 200]). Human capital controls include an indicator variable for illiterate individuals, age, and age squared. Robust standard errors are
reported in parentheses. Significance level: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

36

