NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNDERSTANDING THE GAINS FROM WAGE FLEXIBILITY:
THE EXCHANGE RATE CONNECTION
Jordi Galí
Tommaso Monacelli
Working Paper 22489
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22489

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016

We have benefited from comments by Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé, Emmanuel Farhi, Marty
Eichenbaum (editor), two anonymous referees, and participants at seminars and conferences at
CREI-UPF, NBER Summer Institute (IFM), Bonn, Pavia, Banco de Portugal, London Business
School, and UC Berkeley, Irish Economic Association, CEMFI, Jerusalem, National Bank of
Slovakia, National Bank of Serbia, KU Leuven, ILO Geneva, and Tilburg University. Michele
Fornino, Francesco Giovanardi, Chiara Maggi and Cristina Manea provided excellent research
assistance. We thank the Fondation Banque de France for financial support. Part of this work has
been conducted while Monacelli was visiting the Department of Economics at Columbia
University, whose hospitality is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22489.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Jordi Galí and Tommaso Monacelli. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Understanding the Gains from Wage Flexibility: The Exchange Rate Connection
Jordi Galí and Tommaso Monacelli
NBER Working Paper No. 22489
August 2016
JEL No. E32,E52,F41
ABSTRACT
We study the gains from increased wage flexibility using a small open economy model with
staggered price and wage setting. Two results stand out: (i) the effectiveness of labor cost
reductions as a means to stimulate employment is much smaller in a currency union, (ii) an
increase in wage flexibility often reduces welfare, more likely so in an economy that is part of a
currency union or with an exchange rate-focused monetary policy. Our findings call into question
the common view that wage flexibility is particularly desirable in a currency union.

Jordi Galí
Centre de Recerca en Economia Internacional (CREI)
Ramon Trias Fargas 25
08005 Barcelona
SPAIN
and NBER
jgali@crei.cat
Tommaso Monacelli
IGIER Università Bocconi
Via Roentgen 1
20136 Milano
Italy
tommaso.monacelli@unibocconi.it

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22489

The belief in the virtues of wage flexibility is widespread in policy circles. It manifests
itself most clearly in the recurrent calls for wage moderation (or even outright wage
cuts), issued by international policy institutions, and addressed to countries facing high
unemployment. The Great Recession and the "crisis of the euro" have only reinforced
those views.
The case for wage flexibility rests on its perceived role as a factor of macroeconomic
stability. Thus, a decrease in wages is expected to oﬀset, at least partly, the negative eﬀects
on employment (and output) of an adverse aggregate shock. Conversely, the presence of
rigid wages tends to amplify the employment and output eﬀects of those shocks, increasing
macroeconomic instability.1
The role of wages as a cushion is viewed as being particularly important in the context
of economies that have joined a currency union or adopted any other form of hard peg, for
in those cases the exchange rate is no longer available as an adjustment mechanism. In
the face of a shock that calls for a real exchange rate depreciation, a wage-based "internal
devaluation" is warranted. The presence of wage rigidities, it is argued, will hinder that
adjustment, and make it longer and more painful, by requiring, ceteris paribus, a higher
rate of unemployment to bring about the needed adjustment in wages and prices. To the
extent that wage flexibility acts as a substitute for exchange rate flexibility, it is viewed
as particularly desirable in economies that have adopted a hard peg or joined a currency
union.2
Specifically, and in the face of an adverse shock, a reduction in domestic wages leads
to a terms of trade depreciation, which may help stabilize aggregate demand, output and
employment. We refer to that mechanism as the "competitiveness channel".
The previous conventional wisdom ignores, however, the fact that in economies with
nominal rigidities the impact of wage adjustments on employment works to a large extent
through its induced eﬀect on the endogenous component of monetary policy, as the latter
is loosened or tightened in response to lower or higher inflationary pressures. We refer to
this mechanism as the "endogenous policy channel." Thus, and as argued in Galí (2013)
in the context of a closed economy model, whether an increase in wage flexibility raises
welfare depends on the monetary policy rule in place and, in particular, on the strength of
the central bank’s systematic response to inflation. If that response is weak, the benefits
of increased wage flexibility in the form of more employment stability will be small and,
in many cases, more than oﬀset by the losses associated with greater volatility in price
and wage inflation.
1
See e.g. Hall (2005) and Shimer (2005, 2012) for a discussion of the role of wage rigidities in accounting
for labor market fluctuations in the context of the search and matching model. Blanchard and Galí (2007,
2010) emphasize the policy tradeoﬀs generated by the presence of wage rigidities.
2
The analysis of the interaction between wage rigidities and the exchange rate regime traces back to
Friedman (1953). Recent research on the consequences of wage rigidity in currency unions can be found
in Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2015) and Farhi et al. (2013).

1

In the present paper we extend the analysis of the gains from wage flexibility to the
case of an open economy, where both the competitiveness and endogenous policy channels
coexist to a greater or lesser extent. In particular, we focus on the case of a small open
economy that is part of a currency union or has adopted a hard peg. In that case, and
in the absence of capital controls, the domestic interest rate will not deviate from its
relevant foreign counterpart in the face of a variety of shocks that may call for terms of
trade adjustment. As a result the "endogenous policy channel" will be muted, and so will
be the eﬀect of a labor cost adjustment on aggregate demand and employment.
Our analysis, based on a small open economy model with staggered price and wage
setting, delivers two main findings.3
Firstly, we show that the impact of labor cost adjustments on employment is much
smaller for an economy that is part of a currency union, compared to an economy with an
autonomous monetary policy and a price stability mandate. Accordingly, and contrary to
conventional wisdom, wage adjustments are particularly ineﬀective in a currency union.
Secondly, we show that an increase in wage flexibility often reduces welfare, and it is
more likely to do so in an economy that belongs to a currency union or, more generally,
in an economy whose monetary policy attaches a strong weight to the stabilization of
the exchange rate. The previous finding is shown to be robust to a variety of changes in
the model’s assumptions. We identify an important qualification, however: an increase in
wage flexibility is more likely to be welfare improving if accompanied by a simultaneous
increase in price flexibility.
Taken as a whole, our findings call into question the robustness of the traditional view,
often taken as self-evident, that wage flexibility is particularly desirable in an economy
that has relinquished the exchange rate as an adjustment mechanism.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 1 we describe our baseline model. In Section 2 we analyze the role of the exchange rate regime in determining
the eﬀects of a labor cost reduction. Section 3 analyzes the eﬀects of increased wage
flexibility on welfare, and their relation to the exchange rate regime. Section 4 discusses
the robustness of our findings to an extension of our model allowing for capital accumulation, indexation, imperfect pass-through, and a range of intermediate monetary regimes,
among other features. Section 5 discusses the related literature. Section 6 concludes.
3

Our framework builds on Galí and Monacelli (2005), which is extended to incorporate sticky wages,
in addition to sticky prices. The resulting framework is similar to the one used in Campolmi (2012) and
Erceg et al. (2009).

2

1

A Baseline New Keynesian Model of a Small Open
Economy

In this section we describe the key ingredients of the baseline model we use in our analysis
of the gains from wage flexibility. Our model is one of a small open economy with staggered
price and wage setting. It builds on the framework developed in Galí and Monacelli (2005),
extending the latter by introducing sticky nominal wages (in addition to sticky prices), and
three additional shocks (domestic demand, exports, and world interest rate) beyond the
domestic technology shocks present in our earlier paper.4 As in Galí and Monacelli (2005)
we assume that the size of the home economy is negligible relative to that of the world
economy, which allows us to take world aggregates as exogenous. Furthermore, we assume
that the law of one price holds, that financial markets (both domestic and international)
are complete, and ignore capital accumulation. Since the model is relatively standard, we
restrict our exposition below to a description of the main assumptions, while relegating
most derivations to Appendix A.
In Section 4 below we examine the robustness of our results using an extension of our
baseline model that allows for a variety of features ignored in the baseline model.

1.1

Households

We study a small open economy inhabited by a representative household. The household
has a continuum of members, indexed by  ∈ [0 1]. Each household member is specialized
in a diﬀerentiated occupation and supplies labor services in an amount N (). Household
preferences are given by
∞
X
0
   (  {N ()};  )
(1)
=0

where  is a consumption index, and  is an exogenous preference shifter. Parameter
1
 ≡ 1+
∈ [0 1] is the discount factor.
Period utility  is assumed to take the form
µ
¶
Z 1
1
1+
 (  {N ()};  ) = log  −
N ()  
1+ 0
with the consumption index  defined by
 ≡ Υ( )1− ( )
4

(2)

See, e.g. Campolmi (2012) and Erceg et al. (2009) for earlier examples of New Keynesian open
economies with staggered nominal wage setting.

3

where Υ ≡ 1((1 − )(1−)   ).  is an index of domestic goods consumption given

µ
¶  −1
 −1

R1

by  ≡
 ()

where  ∈ [0 1] denotes the good variety.5  is the
0

quantity consumed of a composite foreign good. Parameter   1 denotes the elasticity
of substitution between varieties produced domestically. Parameter  ∈ [0 1] can be
interpreted as a measure of openness.6
The (log) preference shifter,  ≡ log  , is assumed to follow an exogenous (1)
process:
 =  −1 + 
Note that by aﬀecting the marginal rate of substitution between consumption at diﬀerent times, shocks to  will change the demand for consumption goods, given the interest
rate. Henceforth we refer to  shocks as demand shocks.
The period budget constraint for the typical household is given by
Z 1
Z 1
 () () +   +  {+1 +1 } ≤  +
 ()N () − 
(3)
0

0

for  = 0 1 2 , where  () is the price of domestic variety .  is the price of
the imported good, expressed in domestic currency. +1 is the nominal payoﬀ in period
 + 1 of the portfolio held at the end of period  (which may include shares in domestic
firms),  () is the nominal wage for type  labor.  denotes lump-sum taxes. The previous variables are all expressed in units of domestic currency. +1 ≡ ( +1 )( +1 )
is the relevant stochastic discount factor for one-period ahead nominal payoﬀs.
We assume that the law of one price holds. This implies that the price (in domestic
currency) of imported goods is given by:
 = E ∗
where E is the nominal exchange rate (the price of foreign currency in terms of domestic
currency) and ∗ is the foreign price level (expressed in foreign currency). With little loss
of generality, the latter is henceforth assumed to be constant and normalized to unity,
i.e., ∗ = 1, for all .
Workers specialized in each occupation (or a union representing them) set the corresponding nominal wage, subject to an isoelastic demand function for their services (derived
below). Each period only a fraction 1 −  of labor types, drawn randomly from the corresponding population, have their nominal wage reset. This is done in a way consistent
with household utility maximization, while taking the average wage, the price level and
5

As discussed below, domestic firms produce a continuum of diﬀerentiated goods, indexed by  ∈ [0 1]
Equivalently, and under the assumption that the domestic economy is infinitesimally small, 1 −  can
be interpreted as a measure of home bias. See Galí and Monacelli (2005) for a discussion.
6

4

other aggregate variables as given. The remaining fraction  of labor types keep their
nominal wage unchanged. Parameter  ∈ [0 1] can be thus seen as an index of nominal
wage rigidities. Much of the analysis below explores the consequences of changes in that
parameter.

1.2

Firms

A continuum of firms, indexed by  ∈ [0 1], are assumed to operate in the home economy.
A typical domestic firm produces a diﬀerentiated good using the technology
 () =   ()1−
³R
´  −1
 −1

1
where  () is output and  () ≡ 0  ( )  
is a CES function of the quantities  ( ) of the diﬀerent types of labor services  ∈ [0 1] employed. Parameter   1
denotes the elasticity of substitution between those labor services.  is a stochastic technology parameter, common to all firms. Its logarithm,  ≡ log  , follows an exogenous
(1) process:
 =  −1 + 
Employment is subject to a proportional payroll tax   , common to all labor types, so
that the eﬀective cost of type  labor service is  ()(1 +   )7
Each period, a subset of firms of measure 1− , drawn randomly from the population,
reoptimize the price of their good, subject to a sequence of isoelastic demand schedules
for the latter. The remaining fraction  keep their price unchanged. Parameter  ∈ [0 1]
can thus be interpreted as an index of price rigidities. Prices are set in domestic currency
and are the same for both the domestic and export markets, i.e., the law of one price also
holds for exports. All firms meet the demand for their respective goods at the posted
prices.8
As in Galí and Monacelli (2005), we assume in our baseline model that households have
access to a complete set of state-contingent securities, traded internationally. As shown
in Appendix A, that assumption implies the following relationship between domestic and
world consumption:
µ ¶

∗
 =  Q
(4)
∗
∗

where Q ≡ E is the real exchange rate, ∗ is (per capita) world consumption and ∗
is a discount factor shock in the rest of the world.
7

Note that a negative value for   should be interpreted as an employment subsidy.
Following convention, we assume that average markups are suﬃciently large and shocks suﬃciently
small that the probability that the posted price falls below the marginal cost is negligible.
8

5

1.3

Demand for Exports and Global Shocks

We assume that the demand for exports of domestic good  is given by:
¶−
µ
 ()
 () =


³R
1

´ 1−1

for  ∈ [0 1], where  ≡ 0  ()

is the domestic price index and  is an
aggregate export index. The latter is assumed to be given by
1−

 = S ∗

(5)

where ∗ is world output (expressed in per capita terms) and S ≡   denotes the
terms of trade. In equilibrium world output, ∗ , equals world consumption, ∗ . Below
we consider a symmetric steady state with S = 1 and  =  ∗ =  ∗ .9 In that case,
 =  ∗ and  = , implying a balanced trade, as well as  = , in that steady
state.
We consider two types of global shocks that aﬀect the home economy, and which we
refer to as export shocks and world interest rate shocks, respectively. Export shocks shift
the export function (5), leaving the world real interest rate unchanged. World interest
rate shocks, by contrast, change the latter variable while leaving global output unchanged
(thus influencing exports only through an eventual endogenous response of the terms of
trade). Though both world output and the world interest rate are themselves endogenous
variables and hence likely to be correlated, here we seek to understand their respective
eﬀects on the home economy by considering them in isolation. With that goal in mind,
we introduce global shocks in our model as follows. We assume that the discount factor
shifter for foreign households is given by
∗
∗
2
∗ = 1

where 1 ≡ log 1 and 2 ≡ log 2 follow independent, exogenous (1) processes:
 = ∗ −1 + ∗
∗
∗
for  = 1 2. Exogenous shocks 1
and 2
are defined by the diﬀerential monetary
policy responses they elicit from the (foreign) central bank. Thus, we assume that the
∗
world real interest rate remains unchanged in response to 1
shocks. By contrast, the
∗
foreign central bank is assumed to respond to 2 by adjusting the real interest rate in
order to keep ∗ unchanged. Under the assumption that foreign households have an Euler
equation analogous to that of domestic households, that is,
9

The equality among domestic and world steady state quantities should be understood as referring to
per capita variables.

6

1 = (1 +

∗ )

½µ

∗
∗
+1

¶µ

∗
+1
∗

¶¾

(6)

it follows from the assumptions above, and the global market clearing condition ∗ = ∗ ,
that
∗
∗ = 1
(7)
which implies that the risk sharing condition can be written as:
 = Q


∗
2

(8)

The behavior of the world interest rate implied by the assumptions above is given
10

by:

∗
∗ =  + (1 − ∗2 )2

(9)

Thus, 1 shocks have an eﬀect on global output, shifting the demand for home exports
(5). By contrast, 2 alter the world real interest rate and shift the risk sharing condition
(8); they only aﬀect aggregate exports through their possible impact on the real exchange
rate.11 This justifies our labeling of those shocks as export and world interest rate shocks,
respectively.

1.4

Monetary Regimes

In the present section, we analyze the equilibrium behavior of the small open economy
under two monetary policy regimes. Under the first regime, which we refer to as inflation
targeting, the central bank focuses on stabilizing domestic inflation,   ≡  − −1 ,
while letting the exchange rate fluctuate freely. Formally, we assume
  = 0
for all .
Under the second monetary regime, the home economy is assumed to be part of a
world currency union. Alternatively (and equivalently for our purposes) it is assumed to
peg the exchange rate indefinitely (and credibly) to the world currency. In either case,
and letting  ≡ log E denote the (log) nominal exchange rate, we assume without loss of
generality:
 = 0
10

Note that this should be viewed as an equilibrium condition, not as an interest rate rule. The
latter should be designed in order to guarantee not only consistency with the assumed behavior but also
uniqueness of the equilibrium.
11
Alternatively, 2 shocks can also be reinterpreted directly as deviations from the optimal risk sharing
condition resulting from the lack of complete markets.

7

for all . Note that under this second regime the domestic nominal interest rate will move
one-for-one with the world interest rate, independently of domestic economic conditions.
The previous two regimes are, admittedly, extreme ones, though they have the virtue
of allowing us to make our point in a simple and transparent way. In the robustness
section below we extend our analysis to the intermediate case of a managed exchange rate
regime, using a stylized parametric interest rate rule that allows for diﬀerent degrees of
central bank’s concern for exchange rate stability.

1.5

Equilibrium

In Appendix A we derive the (standard) optimality conditions for the problem facing
households and firms. Combined with the market clearing conditions and after loglinearization around the zero inflation steady state, they can be used to determine the set
of conditions characterizing the equilibrium of the small open economy. That equilibrium
can be represented by means of the following system of diﬀerence equations (with lower
case letters denoting the natural logarithms of the original variables and with constants
ignored):
Aggregate demand block:
∗
 = (1 − ) + (2 − ) + 1

(10)

∗
 = (1 − ) +  − 2

(11)

 =  {+1 } − ( −  { +1 }) + (1 −  )

(12)

 ≡  − 

(13)

 =
Aggregate supply block:
  =  { +1 } +

1
( −  )
1−
 
e +  
e  +  e
 +   
1−

  ≡  − −1
 

(14)

(15)
(16)

≡  − −1

 =  + 
 
e +  e
 −  
e
1−
≡  − −1



 =  { +1 } +




  ≡  − 
8

(17)
(18)
(19)

where variables with a "e" denote deviations from their natural (i.e., flexible price and
wage) equilibrium counterparts (e.g., e ≡  −  denotes the output gap, with  being
the natural level of output).
The aggregate demand block includes equation (10) determining output as a function
of aggregate demand, which in turn is expressed as a function of consumption  and the
terms of trade  (defined in (13)). Consumption evolves according to Euler equation
(12), and thus responds to changes in the domestic real rate and the preference shifter.
In addition, domestic consumption satisfies the risk sharing condition (11).12 Equation
(14) determines employment as a function of aggregate output, given technology.
The aggregate supply block consists of two equations, (15) and (17), describing the
evolution of aggregate (domestic) price and wage inflation (defined, respectively, by (16)
and (18)), as a function of the output, consumption and real wage gaps (as well as the
payroll tax in the case of price inflation). Finally, (19) defines the real (consumption)
wage, as a function of the nominal wage, the domestic price and the terms of trade.13
As derived in Appendix A, natural employment, which we denote by  is given by
(ignoring a constant term)
 =


1
∗
∗
(1

+ 2
−  ) −
1+
1+

Note that under our assumptions on technology and preferences, and in the absence of
variations in the employment subsidy, natural employment would be constant in a closed
economy (i.e., under  = 0).
The previous expression can be combined with other equilibrium conditions to derive
the natural values of the remaining variables. Thus, and ignoring constants,
 =  + (1 − )
∗
 =  −  + 2
−   − ( + )
∗
 =  + (1 − ) − 2

  =  −  −   − 
12

The intertemporal optimality conditions of the domestic and foreign consumers can be combined to
yield, as a first order approximation, the interest parity condition
 − ∗ =  {∆+1 }
We do not list that condition separately since it can be obtained by combining (9), (11) and (12).
13
Note that  +  =  corresponds to the (log) CPI.

9

1.6

Calibration

Table 1 lists the baseline settings for the model parameters, which we use in the simulations
below. The top panel contains the parameters relevant to the baseline model described
above. Parameters in the bottom panel are specific to the more general model used in
Section 5, and are discussed therein.
Parameters  is set to 38. That value is associated with a steady state price markup
of 35 percent, and is consistent with the evidence used in the calibration of the ECB’s
New Area Wide Model (NAWM) of Christoﬀel et al. (2008). Given that setting, a value
of 026 for parameter  is consistent with the observed 055 average labor income share
across Greece, Italy, Portugal, and Spain (GIPS, henceforth) over the 1999-2014 period.14
Parameter  is set to 43, again following Christoﬀel et al. (2008). Given that setting
for  , and using the approach developed in Galí (2011), a value of  equal to 22 can
be shown to be consistent with a steady state unemployment rate of 118 percent, the
average unemployment rate across the GIPS over the 1999-2014 period.15
Our baseline setting for the Calvo price parameter is  = 08, which implies an
average duration of individual prices of five quarters. That setting strikes a balance
between estimates for the euro area based on micro data (see, e.g. Álvarez et al. (2006))
and those that match the macro data (see, e.g., Galí, López-Salido and Gertler (2001,
2003), Christoﬀel et al. (2008), Burriel et al. (2009)). As to the Calvo wage parameter,
both the micro and macro evidence suggest that a baseline setting for  of 08 is also a
reasonable one for euro area countries (see, e.g., Christoﬀel et al. (2008), ECB (2009)).
The openness parameter, , is set to 03 (implying a steady state import share of that
value). This is consistent with measures of openness (average export and import shares)
in the GIPS countries. Finally, we set  = 099, as is common practice in the business
cycle literature.
In the robustness section we introduce additional parameters and their calibrated
values.
14

Note that in the steady state the following relation holds:
µ
¶
1

= (1 − ) 1 −



15

Galí (2011) shows that the ,  and the steady state unemployment rate  are related according to
equation:

 = log
 − 1
Interestingly, the resulting setting for  is nearly identical to the calibrated value in the NAWM of
Christoﬀel et al. (2008).

10

2

The Eﬀectiveness of Labor Cost Reductions

The extent to which wage flexibility may play a stabilizing role depends on the influence
that wages (or other labor cost components) may have on employment itself. In this
section we seek to dissect the mechanism through which that influence manifests itself in
our model economy, as well as its dependence on the monetary policy regime.
As argued in Galí (2013), the mechanism through which adjustments in wages end up
aﬀecting employment in the New Keynesian model is very diﬀerent from that in a classical
economy. In the latter, a change in the real wage directly aﬀects the quantity of labor
demanded by firms, which is determined by the equality between the marginal product of
labor and the wage. By way of contrast, in a Keynesian environment the amount of labor
hired is determined, in the short run and for a given technology, by the quantity of output
that firms want to produce, which in turn is determined by aggregate demand. Thus, in a
closed economy, a change in wages ends up aﬀecting employment through its (sequential)
impact on marginal cost, inflation and —through the monetary policy rule—nominal and
real interest rates and, hence, consumption and other interest rate-sensitive components
of aggregate demand (including net exports, through the eﬀects induced by the possible
response of the nominal exchange rate). Thus, the strength of the central bank’s response
to variations in inflation is a key factor in determining the response of employment to
a change in wages (or other labor costs). This is what we refer to as the "endogenous
policy channel". Clearly, the importance of that channel depends on the degree to which
monetary policy is constrained in its response to inflation. In particular, if the economy
belongs to a currency union and is small enough not to elicit a response by the common
central bank, the endogenous policy channel will be completely muted.
In addition to the endogenous policy channel just described, there is a second channel
through which a reduction in labor costs may aﬀect employment in the open economy: the
resulting drop in marginal costs and prices make domestic firms more competitive relative
to their foreign counterparts, leading to an increase in the demand for their goods, even
if the nominal exchange rate remains unaltered (as will be the case in a currency union).
We refer to this mechanism as the "competitiveness channel".
In order to illustrate the role played by the policy regime in determining the eﬀects of
changes in labor costs, we simulate the response of employment to a one-oﬀ, exogenous
reduction in the payroll tax under two alternative policy regimes: inflation targeting and
a currency union (or a hard peg).16
A reduction in the payroll tax provides a good example of the type of interventions
that are often advocated as a way to stimulate economic activity in high unemployment,
debt-ridden countries. That advice is especially targeted to those countries that can no
16

To be clear: we do not think that exogenous variations in payroll taxes or employment subsidies are
an important source of fluctuations in actual economies. But a change in the payroll tax provides a clean
experiment to examine the impact of changes in labor costs on employment.

11

longer rely on a currency devaluation to regain competitiveness, due to their membership
in a currency union.
More specifically, we assume the payroll tax is lowered by b
 0  0 in period zero, and
subsequently follows the path:
b
  =  b
0  0
Figure 1a displays the response of employment, the nominal and real interest rates,
and the terms of trade to a one percent (impact) reduction in the payroll tax in the
home economy, under the assumption that  = 09. The lines with circles display the
responses under an inflation targeting regime, while the lines with diamonds show the
responses under a currency union. Our findings are clear: The eﬀectiveness of the payroll
tax cut as a means to stimulate employment is much smaller under a currency union,
compared to the case of an autonomous monetary policy focused on price stability.
To understand the previous result, note that equation (10) implies that the response
of output (and, hence, of employment, given an unchanged technology) is directly related
to the responses of consumption and the terms of trade. To understand the consumption
response, we can combine equations (11) and (12) (setting all other shocks to zero) to
obtain:
∞
X
 = −(1 − )
 {+ } + lim  {+ }
→∞

=0

where  ≡  −  { +1 } is the real interest rate, measured in terms of domestic goods,
and where lim→∞  {+ } = 0 (in deviation from steady state) in the case of a transitory
tax cut, as assumed in Figure 1a. Thus, the response of consumption to a payroll tax
cut is inversely related to the sum of current and expected future real rates. It is easy
to show that a similar result holds for the terms of trade: by combining (11) and (12),
one can derive a "real" version of the uncovered interest parity condition (assuming an
unchanged foreign real rate):
 = − +  {+1 }
which in turn can be solved forward to yield
 = −

∞
X
=0

 {+ } + lim  {+ }
→∞

where, again, lim→∞  {+ } = 0 in response to a transitory tax cut. Thus, it follows
that the eﬀect of a payroll tax cut on employment will depend critically on the dynamic
response of the real interest rate, which in the presence of nominal rigidities of the sort
assumed here is strongly shaped by the monetary regime in place.
More specifically, the impact on employment of a payroll tax change is given, up to a

12

proportionality factor, by:
 ∝ −

∞
X
=0

 {+ }

= − − 

∞
X
=0

 {+ } +  lim  {+ }
→∞

As shown in Figure 1a, under a currency union the nominal rate remains unchanged in
response to the the payroll tax cut, despite the inflation decline (not shown) in the home
economy. In other words, the "endogenous policy channel" is muted. Furthermore, in
the case of a transitory shock, the domestic price level eventually returns to its initial
value, since the terms of trade do not change in the long run. Accordingly, the "long
real
rate" will move one-for-one with the initial change in the domestic price level, i.e.,
P∞
 =0  {+ } =  . Thus, in this case the employment stimulus relies exclusively
on the "competitiveness channel," i.e., on the extent of the short run drop in domestic
prices. Note that the latter reduces the long real rate, triggering a small increase in both
consumption (not shown) and the terms of trade, and accounting for the positive (albeit
small) employment response. Note also that the decrease in the long real rate coexists
with a short run increase in the short-term real rate due to the initial decline in expected
inflation, as is apparent in Figure 1a.
By contrast, and as illustrated in Figure 1a, under flexible exchange rates and an
inflation targeting regime the reduction in the payroll tax triggers a large and persistent
decline in nominal and real interest rates, a response that is required in order to stabilize
domestic prices. The resulting large rise of consumption is complemented by a commensurate depreciation of the terms of trade, with both
contributing to the large increase
P∞
in employment. Note that in that case  ∝ − =0  {+ }, i.e., the employment
stimulus fully hinges on the "endogenous policy channel".
Things are not too diﬀerent if we consider instead a permanent payroll tax cut, an
intervention which likely matches more closely the policies often advocated for countries
experiencing high unemployment rates. Figure 1b displays the dynamic responses for
that case, corresponding to  = 1. Note that in this case both employment and the
terms of trade are permanently raised by the tax cut, with the size of the long run eﬀect
being independent of the monetary regime. That similarity notwithstanding, the large
diﬀerences in the short run eﬀects closely mirror those observed under a transitory (though
persistent) payroll tax cut discussed above.
To summarize: in this section we have shown that, in a small open economy, the
eﬀects on employment of exogenous changes in labor costs are strongly mediated by the
response of monetary policy and hence by the monetary policy regime in place. When
the exchange rate is fixed, as in a currency union, supply side interventions aimed at
stimulating employment through a reduction in labor costs appear to be less eﬀective
13

than under an independent, price stability-oriented monetary policy. Thus, and contrary
to conventional wisdom, labor cost reductions appear to be particularly ineﬀective in a
small economy that is part of a currency union.
The previous finding suggests that when an economy belongs to a currency union
(or has adopted a hard peg), an increase in wage flexibility, with its consequent greater
sensitivity of labor costs to cyclical conditions, may not bring the employment stability
benefits that are generally expected from it. An analysis of those benefits is the focus of
the next section.

3

Wage Flexibility, Exchange Rate Policy and Welfare

The previous section has focused on the role played by a small open economy’s monetary
policy regime in determining the employment eﬀects of a one-oﬀ, exogenous change in
labor costs (in the form of a payroll tax cut). In actual economies, however, exogenous
shocks to wages or other labor cost components are likely to be rare events. Instead,
labor costs are better viewed as endogenous, with wages adjusting to changes in economic
conditions resulting from a variety of demand and/or supply shocks. Needless to say, that
adjustment may be faster or slower depending on the degree of wage flexibility.
As argued in the introduction, the degree of wage flexibility, i.e., the sensitivity of the
average wage to changes in economic conditions, is generally viewed as a key determinant
of employment stability. Thus, and in the face of an adverse shock, a reduction in the
average wage is likely to insulate, at least partly, the impact on employment of that shock.
But the findings in the previous section suggest that the monetary regime adopted by a
small open economy will be an important determinant of the extent to which endogenous
wage adjustments may be eﬀective in stabilizing employment fluctuations. In particular,
in the case of a small economy belonging to a currency union that eﬀectiveness is likely to
be limited, due to the lack of an "endogenous policy channel." The previous observation,
combined with the fact that —as is the case in our model economy— (i) fluctuations in
wage and price inflation are costly in their own right and (ii) the size of such fluctuations
is likely to increase with wage flexibility, raises the possibility that an increase in wage
flexibility may be counterproductive from a welfare viewpoint, its stabilizing benefits being
too small to oﬀset its harmful side eﬀects.
In the present section we analyze formally the welfare gains from increased wage
flexibility in a small open economy. In particular, we seek to find out whether conditions
exist under which, contrary to conventional wisdom, "improvements" in wage flexibility
may be welfare-reducing.
In the next subsection we restrict our analysis to the baseline model specification
introduced above. Two assumptions of that model—namely, log utility of consumption and
14

a unit elasticity of substitution between domestic and foreign goods—allow us to derive a
simple second order approximation to the welfare losses experienced by the representative
household in the small open economy. Robustness of our findings to departures from that
baseline specification are discussed in section 4.

3.1

Wage Flexibility and Welfare in a Currency Union

Under the assumption of an eﬃcient steady state, the average period utility losses of the
small open economy’s representative household are given, up to a second order approximation, by the following linear combination of the variances of the employment gap, price
inflation and wage inflation:17
¶∙
¶
µ
µ
µ ¶
¸
1−




(1 + ) (e
 ) +
(  ) +
(  )
L∼
(20)
2
 (1 − )

where 
e ≡  −  is the log deviation between employment and its eﬃcient level,  =

∗
( ∗ + 2
−  ).
1+ 1
Figure 2 displays the average welfare loss for a small open economy in a currency
union as a function of the degree of wage stickiness,  , and conditional on each of the
four exogenous driving forces introduced above, namely, two domestic shocks (technology
and demand) and two external shocks (export and world interest rate). All parameters
other than  are set at their baseline values. In each case the welfare losses are expressed
as a ratio to those under the baseline setting  = 08.
As Figure 2 makes clear, the relationship between the welfare loss and the degree of
wage rigidity is non-monotonic, independently of the driving force. Starting from a value
of  close to unity, a reduction in that parameter (i.e., making wages "more flexible")
always raises welfare losses. On the other hand, if wages are suﬃciently flexible to begin
with (i.e.,  is suﬃciently low), a further increase in wage flexibility always leads to a
decline in welfare losses. Thus, an increase in wage flexibility may raise or lower welfare,
depending on the initial degree of wage rigidities. Note also that the shape of the welfare
loss function varies considerably with the type of shock. Thus, the maximum is attained
for very diﬀerent values of  and the function displays significantly diﬀerent sensitivities
to changes in that parameter, depending on the driving shock. In particular, the loss
function appears to be nearly monotonic in the case of export shocks.
In order to understand the factors behind such patterns, Figure 3 displays the welfare
losses associated with demand shocks (line with circles), together with the three compo17

See Galí and Monacelli (2005) for a derivation of the welfare loss function of the small open economy
with sticky prices and flexible wages. The extension to the case of sticky wages is straightforward. See,
e.g., chapter 6 in Galí (2015). As in our earlier paper we implicitly assume the existence of a subsidy that
makes the steady state eﬃcient from the viewpoint of the small open economy. The robustness section
below relaxes that assumption.

15

nents of the welfare loss function, each being associated with one of the three terms in
(20). Similar qualitative results hold for the remaining shocks (not shown).
With regard to the first component, associated with employment gap fluctuations
(represented with the line with diamonds), we see that an increase in wage flexibility
always reduces the contribution of that component to overall welfare losses, though the
size of that reduction is relatively slow, due to the limited influence of wage adjustments
on employment in an economy that belongs to a currency union or has adopted a hard peg,
as discussed above. Turning to the second component (line with squares), we observe that
an increase in wage flexibility always raises the volatility of price inflation, and thus the
contribution of the latter to welfare losses. Note that these first two components of welfare
losses largely compensate each other. Finally, note that the wage inflation component of
welfare losses (line with crosses) displays the kind of non-monotonicity displayed by the
overall loss, so its contribution is particularly important in order to account for the finding
in Figure 3. The explanation for that non-monotonicity is straightforward. On the one
hand the variance of wage inflation increases monotonically as wages become more flexible.
This eﬀect, which tends to raise welfare losses, is dominant when  is relatively large
thus accounting for the negative relationship between welfare losses and  over the upper
range of the latter. On the other hand, the weight associated with wage inflation volatility
in the loss function,   , shrinks rapidly as wages become more flexible, accounting for
the positive relation between welfare losses and  when the latter parameter is below a
certain level.18
Figure 4 compares the welfare eﬀects of changes in wage flexibility in a currency union
to the case of an inflation targeting regime.19 The diﬀerences across the two regimes,
both qualitative and quantitative, are clear. In particular, and as Figure 4 makes clear,
under inflation targeting an increase in wage flexibility is always welfare improving, independently of the initial degree of rigidities and the source of fluctuations. Furthermore,
the sensitivity of welfare losses to changes in the wage rigidity parameter appears to be
much greater under inflation targeting. In other words, even when an increase in wage
flexibility is welfare improving in a currency union, the implied change in welfare is small
relative to that observed under inflation targeting.
The analysis above has examined the impact of changes in the degree of wage rigidities
while keeping the price rigidity parameter,  , unchanged at its baseline value of 08. To
what extent are the welfare eﬀects of a change in the degree of wage rigidities altered if
that change is accompanied by one in the same direction in the degree of price rigidities?
Figure 5 seeks to shed some light on that question by plotting, for each driving force,
the welfare losses under a currency union, as a function of the degree of overall nominal
rigidities, as captured by variation in a common value for  and  (denoted by ) in the
18

Note that lim →∞  = +∞
In both cases the welfare losses are, again, expressed relative to those under the baseline setting
 = 08.
19

16

Figure. Two findings are worth stressing. First, the non-monotonicity that characterized
the welfare loss function under a currency union when only the wage rigidity parameter
was adjusted (Figure 2) is preserved here, when both price and wage rigidities are varied
simultaneously. Thus one can still argue that an increase in the flexibility of wages and
prices jointly may be welfare reducing under a currency union, when rigidities are strong
to begin with, and in contrast with conventional wisdom. On the other hand, it is clear
that for most shocks the range of  values for which that finding obtains is smaller,
with welfare improving rapidly and substantially as wage and price rigidities are further
reduced, once a certain flexibility threshold is attained. The previous analysis points to
the desirability of simultaneous "improvements" in goods and labor markets, aimed at
making both prices and wages more responsive to economic conditions.

4

Gains from Wage Flexibility in a Medium-Scale
DSGE Model

In this section we assess the robustness of some of our key findings using a quantitative
DSGE model, which extends the baseline model employed so far along several dimensions. We briefly list some of the additional features next. First, we assume more general
preferences, allowing for habit formation. Second, we introduce endogenous capital accumulation (subject to adjustment costs). Third, we allow for incomplete exchange rate
pass-through, resulting from the combined eﬀect of nominal price stickiness in import
prices (as in Monacelli (2005) and Adolfson et al. (2007)) and local distribution costs (as
in Burstein et al. (2007) and Corsetti and Dedola (2005)). More specifically, we assume
that local labor is employed in the distribution of imported consumption goods. As a
result, deviations from the law of one price in tradables are the result of both price and
wage stickiness. Fourth, we assume (partial) indexation of wages and prices (both for
domestic and imported goods). Fifth, we calibrate the exogenous stochastic processes
using moments estimated from the data. Sixth, we assume a more general interest rate
rule that parameterizes the central bank’s relative weight on inflation and exchange rate
stability. Finally, we allow for the possibility of uncorrected monopolistic distortions, and
evaluate welfare losses around an ineﬃcient steady state. Below we briefly sketch the new
features of the DSGE model relative to the baseline model, and refer to Appendix B for
further details.20
The aggregate consumption index is now defined by:
¶ 
µ
1
1
1− 1
1− 1 −1


 ≡ (1 − )  +  
20

(21)

Appendix B contains the details of the DSGE model with only traded goods. Appendix C extends
the baseline DSGE model to a setting with traded and non-traded goods.

17

where  is a composite index of diﬀerentiated imported goods given by the CES function

µ
¶  −1
 −1

R1

 ≡
 ()

with  ∈ [0 1], and where   0 denotes the elasticity of
0
substitution between the domestic and the imported consumption bundle.
Domestic goods are produced using a technology described by the production function:
 () =   ()1−  ()

(22)

Capital is accumulated by households and rented to firms. Capital accumulation of
capital obeys the law of motion:
"
µ
¶2 #


(23)
−1
+1 = (1 − ) +  1 −
2 −1
where  is the stock of capital at the beginning of period ,  is investment in a final
composite good (analogous to (21)),  ∈ [0 1] is the rate of physical depreciation, and
  ≥ 0 is a parameter that scales the size of (quadratic) adjustment costs in investment.
Preferences of the representative household take the form:
µ
¶
Z 1
1
1+
e  {N ()};  ) = log 
e −
 (
N ()  
1+ 0

e () ≡  () − −1 denotes habit-adjusted consumption, with  ∈ [0 1].
where 
Nominal stickiness in import prices and the presence of local distribution costs generate
deviations from the law of one price (LOP). We define the LOP gap to be (under the
∗
assumption 
= 1):
E
(24)
Φ ≡

Note that in the case of complete pass-through, Φ = 1 for all . Letting the CPI be
1
given by  ≡ ((1 − ) 1− +  1− ) 1− , we can now express the real exchange rate
as:
Q ≡

E


= Φ

(25)
S
(S )

¡
¢ 1
where (S ) ≡ 1 −  + S1− 1− is an increasing function of the terms of trade.
Each variety of imported goods is distributed to the final consumer by a local importer.
Distributing  units of import variety  to the local consumer requires combining  , a
homogeneous imported input, with local labor, according to the following constant return
to scale production function:
18

 () =  ()  ( )1−

(26)

where  () and  ( ) denote the quantity of imported input and local labor employed
by importer  , and  ∈ [0 1].
∗
Let 
be the "dock price" of the imported input (expressed in units of foreign
currency), and let  ( ) be the "retail" price of the distributed variety  (in terms of
∗
domestic currency). Assuming 
= 1, for all , the cost minimization conditions imply
the following expression for the importer’s nominal marginal cost (common across local
importers):
Ψ = Υ 1− E
(27)

.
where Υ ≡ (1 −  )−(1− ) −

Each period, a local importer can change the retail price of the variety it distributes
only with probability 1 −  . The newly set price in period  by importer  , denoted by
  ( ), must solve:21

max 
  ( )

∞
X
¤
£
( ) + (  ( ) − Ψ+ )+ ( )
=0

subject to (26) and to the demand function for variety , which is given by
¶−
  ()
+ ( ) =
+ 
+
The aggregate export demand function is now assumed to be given by
µ



(28)

¶−

= 
∗
E
=  (S Φ ) ∗
µ

where the second equality makes use of (24).
The market clearing for each domestic variety  is now given by
¶−
µ
 ()
[(1 − )(S ) ( +  ) +  (S Φ ) ∗ ]
 () =


(29)

Households and firms (both domestic producers and importers) not reoptimizing their
wages or prices are assumed to adjust them mechanically according to the following indexation rules:

−1 ()
 () = Π−1
21

For simplicity, we present here the optimal pricing problem under the assumption of no indexation.
See Appendix B for the full specification.

19




 () = Π−1
−1 ()




 ( ) = Π−1
−1 ()

where  ∈ [0 1], for  =    .
We assume that monetary policy is described by an interest rate rule augmented with
partial adjustment:
 =  +  −1 + (1 −  ) 

(30)

where the target interest rate is given by
 ≡

1 − 

  +
 

1 − 

with  ∈ [0 1], i.e., the central bank is assumed to respond to the nominal exchange rate
in addition to domestic inflation. That specification allows us to capture the exchange rate
stabilization motive that characterizes managed exchange rate regimes. Notice that the
same specification nests the two polar monetary policy regimes considered in the baseline
model: strict domestic inflation targeting ( → 0) and a currency union or a hard peg
( → 1). Values of  ∈ (0 1) parameterize hybrid regimes of managed exchange rates.22

4.1

Calibration

The DSGE model requires the calibration of a few additional parameters, as summarized
in the bottom panel of Table 1 and in Table 2. Next we summarize how we calibrated
the additional parameters.
We set the habit formation and investment adjustment costs parameters to  = 0564
and  = 517, respectively, in line with the estimated values reported in Christoﬀel
et al. (2008). We set  = 0025, which corresponds to an annual depreciation rate of
10 percent. We calibrate the labor coeﬃcient in the importers’ production function to
match the margin in the distribution sector. The estimates in Campa and Goldberg
(2006) show that the distribution margin in the GIPS amounts, on average, to roughly 38
percent.23 In our setting, that margin is measured by (1 −  ), i.e., the elasticity of the
(consumer-level) import price to the labor component in the importers’ marginal cost.24
Based on the estimates from Christoﬀel et al. (2008) we set the Calvo index of (domestic
22

Many regimes oﬃcially classified as floating rates, both in developed and especially developing countries, involve de facto an active degree of nominal exchange rate stabilization. See for instance Calvo and
Reinhart (2002) and Reinhart (2000).
23
See Campa and Goldberg (2006) Table 5.
24
In the limit case of  → 1, the consumer-level price of the imported good would correspond to its
"dock price", and therefore would not incorporate any distribution margin.

20

currency) import price rigidity,  , to 0528, and the indexation parameters to  = 0417,
 = 048, and  = 0635.
We set  = 1 (currency union) in our baseline interest rate rule calibration, though we
report results for the full range of  values later on, using a partial adjustment coeﬃcient
of  = 07. Given the uncertainty in the literature about , the trade elasticity of
substitution, we do not take a specific stand on its value and report robustness exercises
across three diﬀerent values:  ∈ {05, 1, 2}. Note that  = 1 corresponds to our baseline
case. The values of all remaining parameters are as in the baseline model (see top panel
of Table 1).
We next turn to the calibration of the exogenous driving processes. Using quarterly
data over the sample 1999Q1-2014Q4, we approximate (log) total factor productivity as
 =  − 074 , where  and  denote HP-filtered (log) output and (log) employment
in country  ∈  . We then fit an AR(1) process for  :
 =  −1 +  
We set  and  (the standard deviation of the innovation) to the average value of the
estimated  and  across  ∈  . The corresponding values are reported in Table 2.
Given equation (7) above, we calibrate parameters (∗1   ∗1 ) describing the process for
∗
the foreign preference shock {1
} by estimating an AR(1) process for HP-filtered (log)
euro area GDP using quarterly data from 1999Q1 to 2014Q4.
∗
Calibration of {2
} exploits the link between the latter and the foreign interest rate
implied by equation (9) above. Together with our assumptions on the structure of foreign
shocks and inflation implies
∗
∗ =  + (1 − ∗2 )2

Accordingly, we calibrate (∗2   ∗2 ) by combining the previous equation with estimates
of an AR(1) process for the German three-month nominal rate (HP-detrended, 1999Q12014Q4, quarterly rate).
Finally, and conditional on the other shock processes being calibrated as above, we set
the persistence and standard deviation of the AR(1) process for the domestic preference
shock ( , ), in order to (residually) fit the average persistence and volatility of the
HP-filtered (log) GDP across the GIPS countries.

4.2

Welfare

For the DSGE model developed above an analytical expression for the welfare loss function
is not readily available in closed form. We therefore evaluate welfare losses numerically.
More specifically, we determine the fraction of consumption  that equates the unconditional expected utility along the equilibrium path to its value in the deterministic steady

21

state.25 Formally,  solves:
´o
n ³
e (1 +  ) {N ()}; 
= ((1 − ) ; 1)
  

(31)

where  {·} is the unconditional expectation operator, and the right hand side term
measures utility at the deterministic steady state. In order to compute the left-hand side
of (31) accurately, we evaluate  (·) up to second order.26

4.3

Findings

Our main findings on the welfare eﬀects of wage rigidities based on the DSGE model
described above are summarized in Figures 6 through 10. Figures 6a and 6b describe,
for the case of a currency union ( = 1), the eﬀect on welfare losses of variations in the
degree of wage rigidity,  , conditional on each shock (Figure 6a) and with all shocks
simultaneously active (Figure 6b). In all cases, welfare losses are expressed as a ratio
to its value under the baseline wage rigidity ( = 08). The price rigidity parameter
is kept unchanged at its baseline setting of  = 08. The main message of our above
analysis based on the baseline model is largely confirmed in the context of the DSGE
model: If monetary policy is constrained by an exchange rate peg, an increase in wage
flexibility tends to increase welfare losses for a non-trivial range of values for parameter
 . That finding holds regardless of the underlying source of shocks, and is also evident
when all shocks are combined, as shown in Figure 6b. Export shocks are the only shock
for which an increase in wage flexibility reduces welfare losses (locally) if wage rigidities
are very strong to begin with.27 For most shocks (export shocks are again the exception),
changes in the degree of wage rigidities imply quantitatively large relative changes on
welfare losses. Thus, when all shocks are simultaneously active, the normalized welfare
loss reaches a peak at  = 011. At that value, the welfare loss is as much as 75 percent
higher relative to its value under the baseline wage rigidity ( = 08). In absolute
25

In contrast with the welfare analysis in section 4, the present welfare analysis leaves the steady state
distortions uncorrected, a more plausible assumption in our view. Nevertheless, we have also performed
our baseline experiment (which evaluates the impact on welfare of varying the underlying degree of wage
rigidity) based on a second order approximation around an eﬃcient steady state (i.e., with an employment
subsidy in place which remove the market power distortion in both labor and goods markets). Our results
are virtually unchanged, quantitatively and qualitatively (findings available upon request).
26
Note that up to first order the unconditional expected value of utility would be equal to its value in
the deterministic steady state (and therefore  would be always equal to zero). See Schmitt-Grohe and
Uribe (2004, 2007) for details on our approach.
27
Experimentation with alternative calibrations suggest that the failure of export shocks to generate the
inverted U pattern that obtains for other shocks is related to the assumed high indexation. In the absence
of the latter the pattern is similar to that observed for all other shocks. Furthermore, in Appendix D,
we report the results of a conditional welfare analysis to assess the role of wage flexibility in determining
the welfare impact of one-oﬀ large shocks. In that case, welfare losses conditional on a large export shock
turn out to be monotonically increasing in the degree of wage flexibility.

22

terms, the peak welfare loss conditional on all shocks amounts to 026 percent of steady
state consumption, a non-negligible value when compared to the welfare losses typically
uncovered in related exercises in the literature.
Figure 7 displays, for the case of a currency union, welfare losses as a function of
both the degree of price and wage rigidity, relative to the baseline case ( =  = 08).
All shocks are assumed to be active. Clearly, the non-monotonic eﬀect of higher wage
flexibility on the welfare loss depends strongly on the underlying degree of price rigidity.
If prices are suﬃciently sticky, higher wage flexibility features the an inverted U-shaped
eﬀect on the welfare loss, with this eﬀect being dampened as prices become more flexible.
The figure also confirms that the potential welfare loss from increased wage flexibility is
larger when prices are very sticky. In the limit, as prices become fully flexible, greater
wage flexibility is always welfare improving though the gains appear to be relatively small
in the case of a currency union considered here.
Figure 8 evaluates the eﬀect on welfare losses of variations in the degree of wage
rigidity, for all possible values of coeﬃcient  in the interest rate rule, corresponding
to diﬀerent strengths of the monetary policy response to deviations in the nominal exchange rate from its (implicit) target (again, with all shocks simultaneously active). This
figure is best understood when looking at the two polar regimes: domestic inflation targeting ( = 0) and currency union ( = 1). In the former case, monetary policy is
completely unconstrained from any exchange rate stabilization motive, and welfare losses
are monotonically decreasing in the degree of wage flexibility. In the latter case, on the
other hand, the non-monotonicity result obtained earlier reappears. Notice however that
the non-monotonic eﬀect of wage rigidity on welfare emerges also at intermediate values
of  , corresponding to managed exchange rate regimes. It is also interesting to notice
that, conditional on a suﬃciently high degree of wage rigidity, welfare losses are generally monotonically decreasing in  , suggesting that if both nominal (price and wage)
rigidities are in place, it is welfare improving to partially stabilize the nominal exchange
rate. The reason for this is that in our economy, stabilizing the nominal exchange rate,
and therefore the terms of trade, indirectly contributes to stabilizing CPI inflation. The
latter eﬀect, in turn, contributes to the stabilization of the wage markup and, hence, of
wage inflation, whose variability has an important contribution to overall welfare losses,
especially so when wages are very rigid.28
Figure 9 evaluates the robustness of our results to alternative settings of two parameters: the inverse (Frisch) labor supply elasticity  and the elasticity of substitution
between domestic and foreign varieties, . Two main results emerge. First, a lower labor
supply elasticity (higher )29 magnifies the peak in the welfare loss but it does not aﬀect
28

See Faia and Monacelli (2008) and Campolmi (2012) for the welfare benefit of (partially) stabilizing
the nominal exchange rate in open economies with nominal rigidities.
29
This is consistent with the micro evidence surveyed in Chetty et al. (2011), who recommend to
calibrate the Frisch elasticity of aggregate hours below 1

23

significantly the value of  at which the peak is reached). Most importantly, however, the
non-monotonicity uncovered under the baseline calibration of  is preserved for variations
in the latter of a plausible magnitude. Secondly, the assumed value of the trade elasticity
is seen to be largely immaterial for the relationship between wage flexibility and welfare.
Finally, Figure 10 illustrates the role of the pass-through of marginal costs of imported
varieties to their retail prices. More specifically, it plots the normalized welfare loss as a
function of the degree of wage rigidities for two alternative cases: incomplete vs. complete
pass-through. The incomplete pass-trough case corresponds to our baseline calibration.
The complete pass-through case corresponds to a calibration with full price flexibility
in import prices ( = 0) and no role of local labor in distribution ( = 1). Note
that the inverted-U shape of the relation between wage rigidities and welfare losses is not
qualitatively aﬀected by the degree of pass-through. A higher degree of the latter, however,
appears to dampen somewhat the marginal loss in welfare resulting from increased wage
flexibility for plausible starting values of the latter.
In Appendixes C and D we provide some additional robustness analysis on the wefare
impact of changes in the degree of wage rigidities. Thus, in Appendix C see we report
results based on an extended version of our DSGE model featuring both traded and
non-traded goods. Our main findings are virtually unchanged in the modified model.
In Appendix D we analyze the welfare losses resulting from a one-oﬀ, large negative
realization of the shock, as a function of the degree of wage rigidity. If anything, our
results are even reinforced by this analysis, for two reasons. First, the absolute welfare
loss numbers are higher (relative to our baseline unconditional welfare analysis presented
in the main text). Second, and unlike our baseline unconditional welfare analysis, welfare
losses are monotonically increasing in the degree of wage flexibility also in the case of an
export demand shock.

5

Related Literature

Friedman (1953) is a classic reference on the interaction between nominal rigidities and
the exchange rate regime. His case for flexible exchange rates rests on the usefulness
of exchange rate adjustments as a substitute for price and wage adjustments, when the
latter are diﬃcult to bring about, in order to support a desirable or warranted change
in the relative price of domestic and foreign goods. The presence of suﬃciently flexible
wages and prices as one of the criteria for the success of a currency union can be viewed
as a corollary of Friedman’s argument (see, e.g. European Commission (1990), Mongelli
(2002)). More recent theoretical work focusing on the costs of downward nominal wage
rigidity under an exchange rate peg can be found in Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2015),
among others.
A number of contributions have analyzed the consequences and desirability of increased
price and wage flexibility in the closed economy. Thus, DeLong and Summers (1986) use
24

a model with staggered Taylor contracts to show that an increase in wage flexibility (as
indexed by the responsiveness of wages to cyclical conditions) may be destabilizing due
to a Mundell eﬀect (i.e., the contractionary impact of falling prices, working through the
expected real rate).
Using a New Keynesian model, Battarai, Eggertsson and Schoenlen (2014) study the
conditions under which an increase in price flexibility may have destabilizing eﬀects on
output and employment. This will be the case if demands shocks are prevailing and
interest rates do not respond strongly to inflation. By contrast, when supply shocks are
dominant, greater price flexibility is destabilizing only if interest rates respond strongly to
inflation. Also in the context of a closed economy, Galí (2013) addresses the same question
with a focus on wage flexibility and its impact on welfare. He shows that an increase
in wage flexibility may be welfare reducing if the interest rate is not too responsive to
inflation. Both the Battarai et al. (2014) and Galí (2013) papers rely on a closed economy
framework, and hence have nothing to say regarding the role of exchange rate policy.
The constraints on monetary policy imposed by a currency union are similar to those
implied by a binding zero lower bound on the nominal interest rate.30 In that context,
Eggertsson, Ferrero and Raﬀo (2014) raise a warning on the possible contractionary effects of structural reforms (modelled as favorable supply shocks), due to the increase in
real interest rates resulting from deflationary pressures combined with an unresponsive
nominal rate.

6

Concluding Remarks

Calling for greater wage flexibility as a way of insulating employment and output from
shocks has become part of the conventional policy advice kit. For countries under a hard
peg or belonging to a currency union, wage flexibility is seen as being even more valuable,
given the impossibility of using the exchange rate as an adjustment mechanism.
The present paper calls into question that conventional wisdom. Using versions of
an otherwise standard New Keynesian small open economy model, we have analyzed the
impact of changes in the degree of wage rigidity on the economy’s equilibrium properties,
focusing on its welfare implications. Two findings stand out.
Firstly, the eﬀectiveness of downward labor cost adjustments in stimulating employment is smaller in a currency union than under an autonomous, price stability-oriented
monetary policy. This is due to the lack of an endogenous monetary policy response in
the currency union.
Secondly, a (marginal) increase in wage flexibility often reduces welfare, and it is more
likely to do so in economies under an exchange rate peg or an exchange rate-focused
monetary policy. On the other hand, an increase in wage flexibility is more likely to
30

Similar, but not identical, as made clear by Erceg and Lindé (2012).

25

lead to a welfare improvement if it is accompanied by an increase in price flexibility as
well. Our findings thus call into question the conventional view that wage flexibility is
particularly desirable in a currency union.

26

References
Adolfson, Malin, Stefan Laseen, Jesper Linde and Mattias Villani (2007): "Bayesian
Estimation of an Open Economy DSGE Model with Incomplete Pass-Through," Journal
of International Economics, vol. 72(2), 481-511.
Álvarez Luis J, Emmanuel Dhyne, Marco M. Hoeberichts, Claudia Kwapil, Hervé Le
Bihan, Patrick Lünnemann, Fernando Martins, Roberto Sabbatini, Harald Stahl, Philip
Vermeulen and Jouko Vilmunen (2005): "Sticky Prices in the Euro Area: A Summary of
New Micro Evidence", ECB Working Paper n. 563 (December)
Barattieri Alessandro, Susanto Basu and Peter. Gottschalk (2014): "Some Evidence
on the Importance of Sticky Wages," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, vol.
6(1), pages 70-101, January.
Bhattarai, Saroj, Gauti Eggertsson, and Raphael Schoenle (2014): "Is Increased Price
Flexibility Stabilizing? Redux," mimeo.
Blanchard, Olivier J. and Jordi Galí (2007): “Real Wage Rigidities and the New
Keynesian Model,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, supplement to volume 39,
no. 1, 35-66.
Blanchard, Olivier J. and Jordi Galí (2010): "Labor Markets and Monetary Policy:
A New Keynesian Model with Unemployment," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2 (2), 1-33.
Burriel, Pablo, Jesús Fernández-Villaverde, Juan F. Rubio-Ramírez (2009): "MEDEA:
a DSGE Model for the Spanish Economy," SERIEs 1 (1-2), 175-243.
Burstein, Ariel, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo (2007): "Modeling Exchange
Rate Passthrough After Large Devaluations," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 54(2),
pages 346-368.
Calvo, Guillermo and Carmen Reinhart (2002): "Fear of Floating," Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 117(2),
Campa José and Linda Goldberg (2006): "Distribution Margins, Imported Inputs,
and the Sensitivity of the CPI to Exchange Rates", NY Fed Staﬀ Reports n. 247.
Campolmi, Alessia (2012): "Which Inflation to Target?: A Small Open Economy with
Sticky Wages," Macroeconomic Dynamics, 1-30.
Chetty, Ray, Adam Guren, Day Manoli, and Andrea Weber (2011), "Are Micro and
Macro Labor Supply Elasticities Consistent? A Review of Evidence on the Intensive and
Extensive Margins", American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, May.
Christoﬀel, Kai, Günter Coenen and Anders Warne (2008): "The New Area-Wide
Model of the Euro Area. A Micro-founded Open-economy Model for Forecasting and
Policy Analysis," ECB working paper no. 944.
Corsetti, Giancarlo and Luca Dedola (2005): "A Macroeconomic Model of International Price Discrimination," Journal of International Economics, vol. 67(1), pages 129155, September.

27

De Long, J. Bradford and Lawrence H. Summers (1986): "Is Increased Price Flexibility
Stabilizing?," American Economic Review 76(5), 1031-44.
Eggertsson, Gauti, Andrea Ferrero, and Andrea Raﬀo (2014): "Can Structural Reforms Help Europe?," Journal of Monetary Economics 61, 2-22.
Erceg, Christopher J., Dale W. Henderson, and Andrew T. Levin (2000): “Optimal
Monetary Policy with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts,” Journal of Monetary Economics vol. 46, no. 2, 281-314.
Erceg, Christopher, Christopher Gust and David López-Salido (2009): "The Transmission of Domestic Shocks in Open Economies," in J. Galí and M. Gertler (eds): International Dimensions of Monetary Policy, Chicago University Press.
Erceg, Christopher J., and Jesper Lindé (2012): "Fiscal Consolidation in an Open
Economy," American Economic Review, 102(3): 186-91.
European Central Bank (2009): "Wage Dynamics in Europe: Final Report of the
Wage Dynamics Network (WDN)"
European Commission (1990): One Market, One Money, Brussels.
Faia Ester and Tommaso Monacelli (2008): "Optimal Monetary Policy in a Small
Open Economy with Home Bias," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 40(4),
721-750, 06.
Farhi, Emmanuel, Gita Gopinath, and Oleg Itskhoki (2013): "Fiscal Devaluations,"
Review of Economic Studies 81 (2): 725-760.
Friedman, Milton (1953): "The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates," in M. Friedman,
Essays in Positive Economics, Chicago University Press (Chicago, IL)
Galí, Jordi (2011): Unemployment Fluctuations and Stabilization Policies: A New
Keynesian Perspective, MIT Press (Cambridge, MA).
Galí, Jordi (2013): “Notes for a New Guide to Keynes (I): Wages, Aggregate Demand
and Employment,” Journal of the European Econmic Association, 11(5), 973-1003.
Galí, Jordi (2015): Monetary Policy, Inflation and the Business Cycle. An Introduction to the New Keynesian Framework, second edition, Princeton University Press
(Princeton, NJ).
Galí Jordi, Mark Gertler, David J. Lopez-Salido (2001): "European Inflation Dynamics", European Economic Review, vol. 45(7), 1237-1270.
Galí Jordi, Mark Gertler, David J. Lopez-Salido (2003): "Erratum", European Economic Review, vol. 47(4), 759-760.
Galí, Jordi and Tommaso Monacelli (2005): “Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate
Volatility in a Small Open Economy,” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 72, issue 3, 2005,
707-734.
Hall, Robert (2005): "Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness,"
American Economic Review, 95(1), 50-64.
Monacelli, Tommaso (2005): “Monetary Policy in a Low Pass-Through Environment",
Journal of Money Credit and Banking, Vol. 37, N. 6, 1047-1066.
28

Mongelli, Francesco P. (2002): "New Views on the Optimum Currency Area Theory:
What is EMU Telling Us?" ECB Working Paper no. 138.
Mundell, Robert (1961): "A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas," American Economic Review, 51(4), 657-665.
Nakamura, Emi and Jón Steinsson (2008): "Five Facts about Prices: A Reevaluation
of Menu Cost Models," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. CXXIII, issue 4, 1415-1464.
Reinhart, Carmen M. (2000): "Mirage of Floating Exchange Rates." American Economic Review, 90(2): 65-70.
Schmitt-Grohe, Stephanie and Martin Uribe (2004): "Solving Dynamic General Equilibrium Models Using a Second-Order Approximation to the Policy Function." Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control, 28 (4), 755-775.
Schmitt-Grohe, Stephanie and Martin Uribe (2007): "Optimal, Simple, and Implementable Monetary and Fiscal Rules", Journal of Monetary Economics 54, September,
1702-1725.
Schmitt-Grohe Stephanie and Martin Uribe (2015): "Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity, Currency Pegs, and Involuntary Unemployment," Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Shimer, Robert (2005): “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and
Vacancies,” American Economic Review, 95(1), 25-49.
Shimer, Robert (2010): "Wage Rigidities and Jobless Recoveries," mimeo.

29

Parameter
'
w
p
p
w

i

h
F
F
w
p
f

!k

Table 1. Calibration
Description
Baseline Model
Curvature of labor disutility
Decreasing returns to labor
Elasticity of substitution (labor)
Elasticity of substitution (goods)
Calvo index of price rigidities
Calvo index of wage rigidities
Openness
Discount factor
Persistence of exogenous processes
DSGE Model
Consumption habits
Trade elasticity of substitution
Decreaing returns to labor (imports retail)
Calvo index of import price rigidity
Indexation of wages
Indexation of domestic prices
Indexation of import prices
Depreciation rate of capital
Investment adjustment cost

Value
2:2
0:26
4:3
3:8
0:8
0:8
0:3
0:99
0:9
0:564
f0:5; 1; 2g
0:62
0:528
0:635
0:417
0:480
0:025
5:169

Table 2. DSGE Model: Estimated Shock Processes
Parameter
Description
Value
Domestic technology shock: Persistence
0:74
a
Domestic technology shock: Standard deviation 0:0064
a
Domestic demand shock: Persistence
0:6
z
Domestic demand shock: Standard deviation
0:029
z
Export shock: Persistence
0:9
1
Export shock: Standard deviation
0:0057
1
World interest rate shock: Persistence
0:9
2
World interest rate shock: Standard deviation
0:001
2

4

0.5
currency union
inflation targeting

3

0
-0.5

%

%

2
-1

1
-1.5
0
-1

-2

0

5

10

15

20

-2.5

25

0

5

10

15

20

25

20

25

Nominal rate

0.5

2.5

0

2

-0.5

1.5

%

%

Employment

-1
-1.5

1
0.5

-2

0

-2.5

-0.5

0

5

10

15

20

25

0

5

Real rate

10

15

Terms of trade

Figure 1a. Dynamic Responses to a Temporary Payroll Tax Cut

3

0.5
currency union
inflation targeting

2.5

0

2

%

%

-0.5
1.5

-1
1
-1.5

0.5
0

0

5

10

15

20

-2

25

0

5

Employment

10

15

20

25

20

25

Nominal rate

0

2

-0.5

1.5

%

2.5

%

0.5

-1

1

-1.5

0.5

-2

0

5

10

15

Real rate

20

25

0

0

5

10

15

Terms of trade

Figure 1b. Dynamic Responses to a Permanent Payroll Tax Cut

Technology Shocks

Demand Shocks
1.25

1.1

1.2

1

1.15

Welfare loss

Welfare loss

1.2

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

1.1
1.05
1
0.95

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

0.9

1

0

0.2

0.4

θ

0.6

0.8

1

θ

w

w

Export Shocks

World interest rate shocks

1.2

1.2
1.1

Welfare loss

Welfare loss

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

0.5

1

0

0.2

0.4

θw

0.6

0.8

1

θw

Figure 2. Wage Rigidities and Welfare in a Currency Union

Demand Shocks
1.4
total
employment gap
price inflation
wage inflation

1.2

Welfare loss

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

θ

w

Figure 3. Wage Rigidities in a Currency Union: Welfare Components

1

Demand Shocks

Technology Shocks

2.5

2.5
currency union
inflation targeting
2

Welfare loss

Welfare loss

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

1.5

1

0.5

0

0.2

0.6

0.4

0.8

0

1

0

0.2

Export Shocks

1

World interest rate shocks
2.5

2

2

Welfare loss

Welfare loss

0.8

θw

2.5

1.5

1

1.5

1

0.5

0.5

0

0.6

0.4

θw

0

0.2

0.6

0.4

0.8

0

1

0

0.2

0.6

0.4

θ

0.8

1

θw

w

Figure 4. Wage Rigidities and Welfare: Currency Union vs. Inflation Targeting

Demand Shocks

Technology Shocks

1

1.4
1.2

Welfare loss

Welfare loss

0.8

0.6

0.4

1
0.8
0.6
0.4

0.2
0.2
0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

0

1

0

0.2

0.4

θ

0.6

0.8

1

θ

Export Shocks

World interest rate shocks
1

1.4
1.2

Welfare loss

Welfare loss

0.8
1
0.8
0.6
0.4

0.6

0.4

0.2
0.2
0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

θ

0.8

1

0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

θ

Figure 5. Nominal Rigidities and Welfare in a Currency Union

0.8

1

Figure 6a. Wage Rigidities and Welfare in a Currency Union: DSGE Model

Figure 6b. Wage Rigidities and Welfare in a Currency Union: DSGE Model + All Shocks

Figure 7. Nominal Rigidities and Welfare in a Currency Union: DSGE Model

Figure 8. Wage Rigidities, Exchange Rate Regimes and Welfare: DSGE Model

Figure 9. Wage Rigidities and Welfare in a Currency Union: DSGE Model
The Role of Labor Supply Elasticity (left) and the Trade Elasticity (right)

Figure 10. Wage Rigidities and Welfare in a Currency Union: DSGE Model
The Role of the Exchange Rate Pass-Through

