NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GENDER DIFFERENCES IN COOPERATIVE ENVIRONMENTS? EVIDENCE FROM THE
U.S. CONGRESS
Stefano Gagliarducci
M. Daniele Paserman
Working Paper 22488
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22488

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016

We thank Analia Schlosser, Laurent Bouton, and seminar participants at Bocconi University,
Boston University, Georgetown University, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Queen Mary University
of London, Sciences Po, Stockholm University, Tor Vergata University, University of Warwick,
SUNY Buffalo, and the Economics Workshop at IDC-Herzliya for many helpful suggestions.
Giacomo Brusco, Ying Lei, Amanda Loyola, Emily McCorry, Ben Sabath and Nathaniel Young
provided excellent research assistance. We also thank James Snyder for making the primaries
data available. The authors declare that they have no relevant material or financial interests that
relate to the research described in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Stefano Gagliarducci and M. Daniele Paserman. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Gender Differences in Cooperative Environments? Evidence from the U.S. Congress
Stefano Gagliarducci and M. Daniele Paserman
NBER Working Paper No. 22488
August 2016
JEL No. D70,D72,H50,J16,M50
ABSTRACT
This paper uses data on bill sponsorship and cosponsorship in the U.S. House of Representatives
to estimate gender differences in cooperative behavior. We employ a number of econometric
methodologies to address the potential selection of female representatives into electoral districts
with distinct preferences for cooperativeness, including regression discontinuity and matching.
After accounting for selection, we find that among Democrats there is no significant gender gap
in the number of cosponsors recruited, but women-sponsored bills tend to have fewer cosponsors
from the opposite party. On the other hand, we find robust evidence that Republican women
recruit more cosponsors and attract more bipartisan support on the bills that they sponsor. This is
particularly true on bills that address issues more relevant for women, over which female
Republicans have possibly preferences that are closer to those of Democrats. We interpret these
results as evidence that cooperation is mostly driven by a commonality of interest, rather than
gender per se.

Stefano Gagliarducci
University of Rome Tor Vergata
Via Columbia 2, 00133 Rome
Italy
stefano.gagliarducci@uniroma2.it
M. Daniele Paserman
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
paserman@bu.edu

1

Introduction

As the share of women in legislatures and executive positions continues to grow in the U.S.
and around the world, it is natural to ask how this change is likely to shape future policy. It
is not uncommon to read political commentators arguing that more women in key posts in
the executive and legislative branches of government would result in more desirable policy
outcomes. In the U.S., one of the most commonly voiced arguments is that women’s style of
politics is more conducive to cooperation, and may contribute to breaking partisan gridlock
in Congress. A recent editorial by Swanee Hunt, a former U.S. Ambassador to Austria, argues
that “women may be our best chance at breaking through disastrous partisan gridlock. As
Congress operates in an increasingly acrimonious space, politicians on each side are locked
in a stare-down. Yet the other current and future women in the Senate nodded agreement
when Susan Collins told Diane Sawyer on ABC World News, ‘If [women] were in charge
of the Senate and of the administration, we would have a budget deal by now... With all
deference to our male colleagues, women’s styles tend to be more collaborative.’ ”1 This
opinion also reflects a widely held popular opinion. According to a recent poll conducted by
the PEW Research Center 34% of adults think that female politicians are better at working
out compromises than their male counterparts, with only 9% saying that men are better.2
Yet, in the absence of credible quantitative measures of cooperativeness, many of these
arguments are guided more by casual observation than by solid empirical evidence. While
some recent studies have found that female politicians are able to deliver better policy outcomes, in a variety of different contexts and at different levels of government (more transfers
from the central government, more investment in public goods that address women’s concerns, less corruption), others have reached more mixed conclusions. A common shortcoming
of most of the existing studies is that they are only able to look at final outcomes, with little
understanding of the process and mechanism through which female representatives may be
able to achieve superior policy outcomes. Therefore, it is difficult to distinguish whether
women are able to achieve better outcomes because they are inherently more skilled, hard1
2

The Boston Globe, “For the sake of democracy, elect women,” January 2, 2013.
PEW, “Women and Leadership,” January 14, 2015.

1

working or ambitious (as would be the case if a woman has to overcome discrimination to
be elected, so that only the most qualified women are observed in the legislative body), or
because they act more cooperatively, or are able to induce more cooperation from those they
interact with.
The goal of this paper, therefore, is to study gender differences in cooperative behavior,
using the large amount of information available for the United States Congress. Legislatures
are particularly well suited to study cooperative behavior, because elected representatives,
almost by definition, require the cooperation of others to advance their preferred policy
initiatives. Moreover, because almost all aspects of parliamentary activity are recorded, we
have a rich wealth of data that allows us to create quantifiable and credible measures of
cooperativeness.

3

We focus in particular on sponsorship and co-sponsorship of Congressional bills. Every
bill has one main sponsor and can be signed by any number of cosponsors (the exact role
of sponsors and cosponsors will be discussed later). We construct two main measures of
cooperative behavior: a) the number of cosponsors on bills sponsored, which can be viewed as
a measure of coalition-building ability, both within and across party lines; and b) the percent
of cosponsors from the opposite party out of the total number of cosponsors (including the
main sponsor) – this second measure can be viewed as measure of bipartisanship.
Two main facts on gender differences emerge from a simple descriptive analysis of the
data. First, female representatives tend to recruit a larger number of cosponsors on the bills
that they sponsor, and the result is true for representatives of both parties. The results
on bipartisanship, however, reveal a different picture. While there are no apparent gender
differences in bipartisanship when we look at all Congress members as a whole, important
differences emerge when we conduct the analysis separately by party. Within the Democratic
Party, female representatives are in general less likely to sponsor legislation that attracts
opposite-party cosponsors. The opposite is true among the Republican Party, where female
representatives tend to attract a larger share of opposite-party cosponsors than their male
3

One could object that women in Congress are a highly selected group, and not representative of the whole
population. However, the focus on a group of high-achieving women in a male-dominated environment may
actually be more helpful for understanding the gender gap at the top of the occupational distribution, which
has been the focus of much of the literature. See Section 2.

2

counterparts.
Clearly, any differences in cooperative behavior among Congress members may reflect
the preferences of one’s constituents as well as any individual differences in cooperativeness.
Moreover, it may be that cooperativeness is driven by other personal Congress member
characteristics that are correlated with gender, rather than gender per se. To address these
potential confounding factors, we control in our analysis for a large number of individual
and district characteristics. While some of the differences are attenuated, especially when
one controls for district characteristics, the general pattern of results remains robust.
To further probe whether the results are driven by potential selection of women candidates into electoral districts with distinct preferences for cooperativeness, we employ a
number of additional econometric methodologies, including regression discontinuity (RD)
and matching. RD methods have become very popular in the empirical political economics
literature, because, if the necessary assumptions are satisfied, the gender of the elected representative can be thought of as exogenously determined by idiosyncratic events on Election
Day, and therefore the design allows us to identify the causal effect of gender on the outcomes
of interest. However, we caution that in our setting the validity of the design hinges on more
stringent assumptions than usual, especially when we conduct the analysis separately by
party.4
Most of the results are robust to the treatment of selection. In particular, we find
robust evidence that Republican women recruit more cosponsors and attract more bipartisan
support on the bills that they sponsor. On the other hand, among Democrats the gender
gap in the number of recruited cosponsors becomes statistically insignificant, but womensponsored bills continue to have fewer cosponsors from the opposite party.
To make sense of the patterns in the data, we develop a simple model of a legislator’s
decision over the content of a bill and the effort expended in recruiting cosponsors. Legislators
may differ in their ideological position, their willingness to deviate from their ideal policy
position, and their cost of recruiting cosponsors. We derive predictions on how the number
of cosponsors and the fraction of cosponsors of the opposite party vary with these thre
4

We elaborate on this point more fully in Section 7.

3

parameters. Straightforwardly, the number of cosponsors recruited decreases with the cost
of recruiting, and the fraction of cosponsors of the opposite party increases as the legislator’s
ideal policy position is closer to that of the median voter, and the cost of deviating from
one’s bliss point is lower.
The gender differences in bipartisanship can be mostly explained by gender differences
in policy preferences within each party. Even after accounting for district characteristics,
women representatives tend to be more liberal than men in their own parties (a fact that is
also reflected in the roll-call voting record). Therefore, female Republicans’ policy positions
are closer to those of the median voter, and they are more likely to sponsor bills that attract
bipartisan support; by contrast, female Democrats’ positions are more distant from the
median voter. On the other hand, we find no support for the hypothesis that women are
inherently more willing to compromise, as that would imply that women in both parties
would attract more bipartisan support, in contrast to what we observe in the data.
The gender difference in the number of recruited cosponsors, however, cannot be rationalized in terms of differences in policy preferences, but requires some intrinsic diversity in
the ability to foster cooperation. This is true especially for female Republicans, who exhibit
a solid advantage in recruiting cosponsors, but not necessarily for female Democrats, whose
effect on the number of cosponsors is not robust to the treatment of selection.
We conduct a number of additional analyses to further probe the meaning of these results.
First, we document that there is some degree of cooperation along gender lines: women
of both parties tend to attract more female cosponsors. Other than this, however, there
are no substantive gender differences in the seniority, status, or degree of influence of the
cosponsors recruited. In other words, there appears to be no “quality-quantity” tradeoff
in the recruitment of cosponsors. Second, gender differences in both coalition-building and
bipartisanship are more pronounced among more senior Congress members. This result
seems to go against the hypothesis that female Congress members need to be more active
and “work harder” to overcome discrimination on the part of voters and colleagues. Third,
we note that Republican women are particularly likely to attract bipartisan support on bills
related to women’s issues, over which they possibly lack support within their own party,

4

while the opposite holds for Democratic women. This reinforces the idea that bipartisanship
is mostly driven by a commonality of interests, rather than gender per se.
Before moving forward, it is useful to spend a few words on what exactly is meant by
cooperative behavior. The Oxford English Dictionary defines “cooperativeness” as “the act
of working together or with others to the same end.” In the economics literature, the term
has sometimes been given a slightly different connotation. For example, Niederle (2015),
in her survey of the experimental literature on gender differences in preferences and traits,
focuses on two particular definitions of cooperation: cooperation as altrusim, and cooperation
in prisoner’s dilemma or public good games. Abstracting for a moment from the repeated
nature of the interactions between elected representatives, it is easy to see how cosponsorship
of congressional bills maps into either of these definitions, as well as the dictionary definition
of “working together or with others to the same end.” The one-shot act of cosponsoring can
be either seen as an act of altruism toward another representative (i.e., an act from which
the cosponsor gains no direct benefit), or as a contribution to a public good (i.e., an act from
which the cosponsor may directly benefit, but would rather have someone else do instead).5
Of course, given the repeated nature of the interactions, one may choose to cooperate in
the one-shot game not because of any intrinsic trait, but because of the expectation of being
reciprocated in the future. Nonetheless, it is clear that any cooperative outcome in a repeated
game is more likely to be sustained if the players are more predisposed to also cooperate
in the one-shot game. Therefore, comparing Congress members’ propensity to cooperate
on individual bills can shed light on individual cooperativeness, regardless of whether the
individual act is driven by purely altruistic motives or by strategic behavior.
Finally, one may want to distinguish between the propensity to cooperate, and the
propensity to induce others to cooperate. In our analysis we focus mostly on the latter,
by looking at the number and type of cosponsors that the main sponsor is able to recruit.
The main reason for this is that the action and role of the main sponsor is more clearly
5

In thinking about bipartisan behavior, it can also be useful to think of cooperation in a coordination
game à la Battle of the Sexes, in which the players agree that they need to coordinate on one action to
achieve a goal, but have different preferences on which action to choose. For example, both sides may agree
that it is necessary to balance the budget, but one side may prefer spending cuts while the other prefers
higher taxes. In this setting, cooperation arises when one side agrees to move toward the position of the
other.

5

defined, and we can abstract from the debate about the exact role and motives of cosponsors
(Krehbiel, 1995).
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 discusses how the paper fits
into different strands of the literature. Section 3 gives some institutional background on the
U.S. Congress, and on bill sponsorship and cosponsorship. Section 4 presents the data and
describes how we construct our different measures of competitiveness. Section 5 outlines a
stylized model that will help us interpret the empirical findings. Section 6 describes some
preliminary evidence on gender differences in cooperative behavior including the basic OLS
analysis. Section 7 discusses the empirical approach we employ to address the potential biases
of the simple OLS analysis and presents the main empirical results. Section 8 concludes.

2

Related Literature

This project is related to at least three strands of literature: 1) on gender differences in the
performance and behavior of political representatives; 2) on bipartisanship and legislative
activity in Congress, as measured by roll-call votes, sponsorship and cosponsorship activity;
and 3) on gender differences in attitudes towards competition and cooperation.
Women in Politics. There is an emerging literature in economics on the choices and
performance of female politicians. Much of the literature has been concerned with identifying
gender differences in the way local fiscal policy is conducted. In an early and influential
paper, Chattopadhyay and Duflo (2004) use political reservations for women in Indian Village
Councils to show that female leaders invest more in public goods more closely linked to
women’s concerns.6 However, in contexts in which there are no reserved quotas for female
politicians, the results have been more mixed. Gagliarducci and Paserman (2012), using a
large sample of Italian municipal governments, find little evidence of differences in policy
outcomes such as the size of the budget deficit or the allocation of expenditures between
municipalities headed by male and female mayors, but a large difference in the probability
6

Using similar data from India, Clots-Figueras (2011) finds that female State Legislators who are elected
in scheduled caste seats favor women-friendly laws, such as amendments to the Hindu Succession Act that
give women the same inheritance rights as men, and affect the educational levels of individuals who grow up
in the districts where these female politicians are elected (Clots-Figueras, 2012).

6

that a female mayor survives until the end of her term. Ferreira and Gyourko (2014) conduct
a similar analysis in a sample of U.S. municipalities, and find no effect of gender of the mayor
on policy outcomes related to the size of local government, the composition of municipal
spending and employment, or crime rates.7
Other papers have looked instead at gender differences in the behavior of legislators, at
both the national and local level. Funk and Gathmann (2015), using data from direct democracy in Switzerland, find large gender gaps in the areas of health, environmental protection,
defense spending and welfare policy, but no difference in the overall size of government. Rehavi (2007), using data from state legislatures in the U.S., and exploiting the quasi-random
variation in the number of female legislators created by the outcomes of close elections, finds
that women contributed to a modest but significant increase in state health spending and
slowed the growth of corrections institution spending.
Most closely to this project are two recent papers that look in detail at women’s legislative
effectiveness using data from the U.S. Congress. Anzia and Berry (2011) find that women in
the U.S. Congress are able to deliver more discretionary federal spending to their districts,
and are also more politically active in that they sponsor and cosponsor significantly more
legislation. They interpret these results as evidence of bias on the part of voters, which
induces only the most talented and hard-working female candidates to succeed in the electoral
process. The paper, however, is silent as to the mechanism through which congresswomen
are able to deliver better policy outcomes to their districts, and does not address at all
the question of whether women engage in more bipartisan behavior. Volden et al. (2013)
instead find that women are more effective at keeping their sponsored bills alive through the
legislative process, but only when they are in the minority party.
Bipartisanship and Legislative Activity in Congress. Much attention has been
devoted in the political science literature to the issue of partisanship and polarization in
the U.S. Congress. Using ratings issued by interest groups such as the Americans for
Democratic Action and the United States Chamber of Commerce, Poole and Rosenthal
7

In contrast, Brollo and Troiano (2015), find that Brazilian municipalities headed by female mayors are
awarded more discretionary federal transfers, are less likely to have administrative irregularities, and achieve
better health outcomes; however, despite these results, female mayors are less likely to be re-elected, probably
because they engage less in political patronage.

7

(1984) found that beginning in the mid-1970s American politics became much more divisive, with more Democrats staking out consistently liberal positions, and more Republicans supporting conservative ones. Building on these early findings, Poole and Rosenthal
(1985) developed a spatial measure of legislative ideology aggregating information from all
roll-call votes in Congress. The NOMINATE score and its refinements (D-NOMINATE
and DW-NOMINATE) are now updated continuously on Poole and Rosenthal’s website
(http://www.voteview.com) and confirm that party polarization has continued to increase
since the 1980s, and has even accelerated since the mid-1990s.
In the literature there is some debate about how to correctly interpret roll-call voting
behavior, and the extent to which it is governed by party discipline. The traditional notion,
originally articulated by Mayhew (1974) and later assessed in an empirical study by McCarty,
Poole and Rosenthal (2001), is that parties have generally had negligible influence on roll-call
voting behavior, the voting on the floor being mostly dependent on the ideological position
of each representative and their loyalty to the constituency. This view, however, contrasts
with other recent empirical studies, like Jenkins (1999), Cox and Poole (2002), Ansolabehere,
Snyder and Stewart III (2001) and Snyder and Groseclose (2000), which show instead that
parties largely affect the roll-call voting behavior, the incidence being highest on close votes
and key party issues.
Harbridge (2015), however, argues that focusing only on roll-call voting may miss part
of the picture, because the set of bills that actually reaches a roll-call vote is determined
endogenously by the congressional leadership, which has an incentive to bring to the floor
only partisan bills that are not likely to create divisions within the party. In fact, Harbridge develops a new measure of bipartisanship based on bill cosponsorship coalitions, and
shows that bipartisanship in bill cosponsorship continues at relatively high levels, even as
polarization has increased. The argument for using cosponsorship activity as a measure of
bipartisanship is that it is less likely to be subject to agenda control and is one of the most
independent activities of Congress members. While there is some debate about the exact
nature of cosponsorship (whether it is used as a low-cost way of taking position and communicate with constituents, or as a way to send signals within the legislature; see Krehbiel, 1995,

8

and Kessler and Krehbiel, 1996), we agree with Harbridge’s position that cosponsorship of
bills that receive support from both side of the aisle is a credible measure of bipartisanship
and cooperation across party lines.
Gender and Competition/Cooperation. Finally, this paper can also have implications that go beyond the political arena. Understanding gender differences in cooperative
behavior may have important implications for organizations in a variety of different settings.
An organization’s success may depend both on the workers’ incentives to excel and stand
out individually relatively to their peers (as highlighted by the vast literature on rank-order
tournaments pioneered by Lazear and Rosen, 1981), but also on the workers’ propensity to
cooperate and work together as a team towards the common good. Understanding gender
differences in the ability to cooperate may help us understanding the factors that shape the
wage distribution, and may also yield insights on the optimal organization of team production.
Recent research has highlighted substantial gender differences in preferences for competitive environments and in performance in such environments. Men are more likely to select
into more competitive compensation schemes (Niederle and Vesterlund, 2007; Dohmen and
Falk, 2011; Booth and Nolen, 2012); they are more likely to seek difficult challenges (Niederle
and Yestrumskas, 2008); they tend to raise their performance in competitive settings (Gneezy,
Niederle and Rustichini, 2003; Gneezy and Rustichini, 2004) and are better able to maintain high levels of performance in high pressure situations (Lavy, 2008; Ors, Palomino and
Peyrache, 2013). These differences may play a role in explaining the substantial gender pay
gap at the top of the income distribution and the large underrepresentation of women in
“power” professions (Bertrand and Hallock, 2001). On the other hand, Lavy (2013) finds no
gender differences in performance in a tournament in which contestants have more time to
prepare and plan their strategies, and Manning and Saidi (2010) argue that gender differences in the incidence of pay-for-performance schemes can account for only a small fraction
of the gender gap in the U.K. Paserman (2010) finds that professional tennis players of both
genders substantially reduce their performance in high-pressure situations.
Some researchers have argued that women may have other characteristics that compen-

9

sate for this lack of “competitive spirit.” For example, women may exhibit a cooperative
personality that gives them a comparative advantage in contexts (such as certain types of
negotiations) where such skills translate into superior outcomes for all parties (Babcock and
Laschever, 2003). Cooperativeness is usually defined, in contrast to competitiveness, as the
aptitude of working or acting together willingly for a common purpose or benefit. The experimental evidence on this subject, based on public good games, ultimatum games and
dictator games, is mixed (see Table 3 in Niederle, 2014): comparing 272 studies using pure
social dilemma paradigms, Balliet, et al. (2011) find that “the relationship between sex and
cooperation in social dilemmas is not statistically different from zero.” Croson and Gneezy
(2009) suggest that the variance across studies can be explained by a differential sensitivity
of men and women to the social conditions in the experiment.
It has been hard to test for gender differences in cooperative behavior outside of experimental contexts, because of the difficulty of measuring cooperativeness. One of the
contributions of this paper is to provide evidence on gender differences in cooperativeness
from an important real-world setting with high stakes.

3

Institutional Background

The U.S. House of Representatives. The House of Representatives is the lower chamber of the U.S. legislative branch. There are 435 congressional districts, and each state is
represented in proportion to population. Elections for all districts occur every two years,
with each district electing one representative. The main role of elected representatives is to
draft new legislation. Legislation drafted in the House of Representatives must pass both
the House and the Senate, and then must be approved by the President before becoming
law.
Representatives can pass different types of legislation: bills, simple resolutions, concurrent
resolutions, and joint resolutions. A bill can be private or public, depending on whether it has
a general application or it only affects a single person, group, or area. Following the tradition
in this literature (Wawro, 2001), we focus our attention on Congressional public bills, since

10

they have force of law, and are the primary vehicle for members’ legislative efforts.8
Once introduced, bills are referred to one of 20 committees in the House. A committee
decides with majority vote whether to report a bill to the floor or not. Once reported, the
bills awaits for floor consideration depending on a schedule decided by the Speaker and other
Majority leaders. The bill is then debated, amended, and eventually approved with majority
vote. With each new Congress, all pending legislation of the previous Congress expires, so
many bills and resolutions are reintroduced.
Bill Sponsorship and Cosponsorship. Each bill has one primary sponsor. The sponsor is not necessarily the sole or the most important author of the bill, but he/she is identified
with the bill content. The sponsor’s activities include, but are not restricted to, gathering and
communicating information about the bill, building coalitions, administering public relations
around the bill, and shepherding the legislation through the House. Primary sponsorship
conveys very important information about individuals’ legislative behavior (Wawro, 2001).
Schiller (1995) remarks that a “senator’s choice of bills is a strong indicator of which issues
he or she wants to be associated with.”
Since 1978, House bills can be signed by any number of cosponsors.9 Cosponsors typically help the sponsor in promoting the bill, and in attracting support within the Congress.
Representatives who are listed as a cosponsor at the time of a bill’s introduction are called
“initial” or “original”, as they possibly contributed to the first draft of the bill. A cosponsor
who is added later is known instead as an “additional cosponsor”.
There is some debate in the literature about the exact motives for sponsoring and cosponsoring bills (see the discussion in Section 2). Of course, since only 20% of the bills pass the
House and 5% eventually become law, some bills only serve the purpose of conveying a signal to voters about the effort that a representative is exerting in Congress, irrespective of
whether the bill will become effective or not.
There is general agreement, however, that the sponsor has a strong commitment to make
the bill move forward in the legislative process, and that attracting numerous cosponsors can
8

Joint resolutions also have force of law, but their use is limited to matters such as continuing or emergency
appropriations, the designation of a commemorative holiday, or proposing amendments to the Constitution.
9
H. Resolution 86 (95th Congress).

11

keep a bill moving through the legislative process.10 Not surprisingly, a number of studies
have found that the number of cosponsors on a bill indeed positively related to the bill’s
passage probability (Browne, 1985; Wilson and Young, 1997). Accordingly, in our data we
find that, after controlling for district and sponsor characteristics, 10 more cosponsors are
associated with a 0.67 percentage points increase in the probability that a bill is passed by
the House, and with a 0.19 percentage points increase in the probability that a bill becomes
law, both correlations being strongly statistically significant.
The interpretation of bill sponsorship by Wawro and others is remarkably close to the
concept of cooperative behavior in its common accession. “The tasks and responsibilities of
the primary sponsor typically involve entrepreneurial activities, such as coalition building and
shepherding legislation through the House.” (Wawro, 2011, p. 27, our emphasis). Schneier
and Gross (1993) remark that the primary sponsor is responsible for discussing the bill with
proponents and opponents, and guiding the bill through the legislative process. Campbell
(1982) notes that members exert significant effort to recruit members as cosponsors and use
the number of diversity of cosponsors to make claims about the support for the legislation.

4

Data

We collect and link data from four different data sources: a) bill sponsorship and cosponsorship data; b) biographical information on members of congress; c) data on electoral results;
and d) data on district demographic and economic characteristics. These four data sources
will be described in turn.
Bill Sponsorship Data. Using the Library of Congress’ data information system,
THOMAS (http://thomas.loc.gov), we retrieved information on all bills submitted from the
101st Congress (elected in 1988) to the 111th Congress (elected in 2008). We restrict attention
to this time period because the fraction of women in the House of Representatives beforehand
was always very low. The information includes the names of the sponsors and cosponsors of
the bill; the detailed legislative history of the bill, the committees of referral, reporting and
10

Wawro (2001) states that “the number of cosponsors that a bill can [attract] ... is indicative of the
member’s ability to convince others that the bill is worthy of their support.”

12

origin. We also cross-validated this data with other sources, such as Adler and Wilkerson’s
Congressional Bills Project (http://www.congressionalbills.org) and Fowler, Waugh and
Sohn’s Cosponsorship Network Data (http://jhfowler.ucsd.edu/cosponsorship.htm). These
data sources also provided information on the major and minor topic of the bill, and whether
the bill eventually passed in the House, passed in the Senate, and whether it was eventually
enacted into law.
Biographical Data. Biographical information on all members of Congress, up the
104th Congress (1995-1997) is available from the Inter-university Consortium for Political
and Social Research (ICPSR) at the University of Michigan. Information on subsequent
Congresses was retrieved from the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress
available online at the Library of Congress (http://bioguide.congress.gov). The information
include, among the others, age, gender, tenure in congress, and committee membership of
each Congress member.
Election Data. Election statistics for all House districts and Senate seats are available
from the Office of the Clerk of the House of Representatives (http://clerk.house.gov). They
include the identity and vote share on all winning and losing candidates in each Congressional
election from 1920 onwards.
Economic and Demographic Data. Demographic and economic information on congressional districts are available from the U.S. Census Summary Data Files, retrievable
through ICPSR. Among the others, they provide time-varying figures on the percentage
voters by age, race and gender, plus per capita income.

4.1

Measuring Cooperativeness

A key part of our analysis involves the construction of measures of cooperative behavior
based on legislative activity. As we already explained in Section 3, we focus exclusively on
House public bills, therefore excluding other forms of legislative activity such as simple and
concurrent resolutions, which are often used more for pure position-taking and can have little
legislative impact.
Using bill sponsorship and cosponsorship data, we calculate two main measures of coop-

13

erative behavior: a) The number of cosponsors on bills sponsored, which can be used as a
measure of coalition-building ability, both within and across party lines; and b) the percent
of cosponsors from the opposite party out of the total number of bill supporters (i.e., the
number of cosponsors plus the bill sponsor).11 The latter measure captures the degree to
which congress members are able to generate policy initiatives that are supported, at least
initially, by members of the opposite party. It is worth remarking that, regardless of one’s
position on why members choose to cosponsor bills, introducing legislation that garners support from the other side of the aisle is undoubtedly indicative of cooperation across party
lines.
Notice that both measures can be thought of as measures of proactive cooperative behavior, in the sense that they capture the extent to which members of Congress initiate
and promote legislation that will receive broad or bipartisan support. We focus on these
measures, as they are more likely to reflect the sponsoring Congress member’s active efforts. A second advantage of this approach is that it allows us to conduct all the analysis at
the level of the Congressional bill, and therefore enables us to study whether the degree of
cooperativeness is affected by specific characteristics of the bill.12

5

Theoretical Framework

In this section we describe a stylized model of a legislator’s choice of the content of a bill
for which he/she acts as a sponsor, and of the effort in recruiting cosponsors. The aim of
the model is to guide the interpretation of our main empirical findings. To this purpose, we
will provide some comparative statics for how individual cooperative skills and ideological
11

We divide by the total number of cosponsors including the bill sponsor (i.e., the number of cosponsors
plus one) so as not to lose observations for bills that have zero cosponsors. All the results are qualitatively
unchanged if we divide just by the number of cosponsors, i.e., treating as missing values bills with zero
cosponsors; or if we use as dependent variable the number of opposite-party cosponsors, and include the
number of sponsors as a right-hand side control variable in the regressions.
12
Alternatively, one can also think of the correspondent measures of reactive cooperative behavior: the
number of bills on which one acts as a cosponsor, which tells us about the willingness of Congress members
to lend their support to initiatives sponsored by others, both within and across party lines; and the number
of bills cosponsored in which the primary sponsor belongs to the opposite party. Harbridge (2015) uses
cosponsorship by members of the opposite party to that of the primary sponsor as her main measure of
bipartisanship. Most of our results carry through also when we use these reactive measures (results available
upon request).

14

preferences affect the number and type of cosponsors.

5.1

Basic Model

We assume that the choice variables for a legislator are x ∈ [−1, 1], the chosen policy on a
Left-Right spectrum, and n, the number of cosponsors. We also assume that the probability
of a bill being approved is increasing both in n and h, which measures the proximity of the
policy to the median legislator m, such that:


1
2
(1)
h ≡ h − (x − m)
2
with h0 > 0, and more moderate bills having a higher probability of being approved. Legislator i maximizes the probability of the policy being implemented minus a cost, his/her
utility function being:
ai
(x − bi )2
(2)
2
where ci is the cost of recruiting cosponsors (i.e., the “ability to foster cooperation”), bi is
U = f (n, h) − ci n −

the ideal policy (i.e., his/her position on the ideological spectrum), and finally ai is the cost
of deviating from the ideal policy (i.e., the “willingness to compromise ”) for legislator i.
Without loss of generality, we assume that bi > m, i.e., the legislator is right-wing.
We also assume that the probability of a policy being implemented is increasing in both
arguments at decreasing rates, i.e. f1 > 0, f2 > 0, f11 < 0, f22 < 0. Finally, we assume
that f12 ≤ 0, meaning that the marginal value of an additional cosponsor is greater the more
extreme is the policy.
We do not explicitly model which cosponsors are recruited. However, we can assume,
somewhat loosely, that cosponsors are more likely to support a bill that is closer to their
own ideal policy position. This implies that a more moderate bill (i.e., a small |xi − m|) is
likely to obtain more support from cosponsors of the opposite party.
Given this setting, it is easy to derive the following first order conditions:
f 1 − ci = 0
−f2 h0 (x − m) − ai (x − bi ) = 0
15

where the second equation can be rewritten as:

x=

f2 h0 m + ai b
f2 h0 + ai

(3)

i.e., the optimal x∗ is a weighted average of m and bi .
Our data lend support to the model’s assumptions. Column 1 in Table 1 shows that the
probability of a bill passing the House is increasing in the number of cosponsors (n) and in
the percentage of cosponsors from the opposite party (a proxy for x), while the interaction
between the two is negative and significant. The latter coefficient implies that when a
proposed policy is more extreme, cosponsors can be more valuable in gathering consensus
towards the bill. An important assumption in our model is that the marginal effect of the
number of cosponsors and the fraction of cosponsors of the opposite party is the same for
men and women. We test this assumption in Column 2 of the table, where we interact
the explanatory variables with a dummy for the sponsor’s gender. Of the three interaction
coefficients, only one is marginally significant (at the 10% level), and the joint hypothesis
that all three coefficients are equal to zero is not rejected (p-value = 0.12).

5.2

Comparative Statics

Here we analyze the comparative statics of n∗ and x∗ with respect to the model parameters.
Taking the first derivative of n∗ and x∗ with respect to ci , bi and ai , and under the assumption
that f12 ≤ 0, we obtain the following Proposition (see Appendix A for a proof):
Proposition 1 Without loss of generality, for a right-wing legislator (bi > m) the following
results hold:
1. Coalition building. a)
2. Bipartisanship. a)

∂x∗
∂c

∂n∗
∂c

< 0; b)

< 0; b)

∂x∗
∂b

∂n∗
∂b

> 0; c)

> 0; c)

∂x∗
∂a

∂n∗
∂a

> 0.

> 0.

Some of these results have a straightforward intuition. For example, legislators will build
larger coalitions if the cost of recuiting cosponsors is smaller (result 1.a); and legislators
sponsor policy initiatives that are farther away from the median voter if their own ideal
16

preferences are distant from the median voter (result 2.b), or if it is costly for them to
deviate from their ideal policy (result 2.c). The other results depend on the assumption that
f12 ≤ 0: if one’s ideal policy is more extreme, or if it is costly to to deviate from one’s policy,
then one must garner more cosponsors to raise the probability that the bill passes (results
1.b and 1.c); similarly, if it is costly to recruit cosponsors, then one must compensate by
introducing a more moderate bill.
One first implication of Proposition 1 is that, if women are better at fostering cooperation
(cF < cM ), we should observe that they recruit more cosponsors, but they should also recruit
a smaller fraction of cosponsors of the opposite party, since they can sponsor a less moderate
bill. Similarly, if women are more willing to compromise than men (aF < aM ), they should
be able to recruit a larger fraction of cosponsors of the opposite party by sponsoring a more
moderate bill, in which case they need a fewer number of cosponsors. These results should
hold in both parties.
On the other hand, the effect of being more ideologically extreme should differ by party,
as the preferences of female Republicans are closer to the median relative to their male
counterparts, while those of female Democrats are farther away from the median. This can
be seen in Figure 1, where we show the empirical c.d.f. of the predicted Republican vote
share in districts represented by male and female Congress members, separately by party.13
Among Republicans, the c.d.f. for men first-order stochastically dominates that of women.
Among Democrats, there is clear evidence that women are more likely to represent districts
with low predicted Republican shares, but the distributions end up slightlly overlapping
in districts with a higher predicted Republican vote share. We can conclude that female
representatives of both parties tend to be elected in more liberal districts.
This difference in the characteristics of constituencies that elect men or women is also
reflected in the Congress members’ roll-call voting behavior. In Figure 2, we report the c.d.f.
of the first dimension of the DW-NOMINATE score by gender and party: for both parties,
women’s ideological preferences lie to the left of those of the men within their own party.
13

The predicted Republican vote share is obtained by running an OLS regression of the actual Republican vote share on a vector of district characteristics, including three region dummies, ppercentage blacks,
percentage urban, percent foreign born, percent over 65, log median income and log population density.

17

A similar pattern can be detected in Figure 3a, where we report the Party Unity Score by
gender and party:14 female Democrats tend to vote more often with their party than their
male colleagues, while the opposite is true for female Republicans. Under these conditions,
we should observe that female Democrats are less moderate in their policy making than
male Democrats, and therefore recruit a smaller fraction of cosponsors of the opposite party,
while the opposite applies to female Republicans. This, in turn, should imply that female
Democrats recruit more cosponsors to compensate for sponsoring a less moderate bill, and
female Republicans fewer.
Summing up, the model delivers sharp predictions on the effect of a female sponsor on the
number of cosponsors n∗ , and the chosen policy position x∗ (which maps one to one with the
fraction of cosponsors of the opposite party), depending on which parameter is responsible
for the gender differences. These predictions are summarized in the following table:

n∗

|x∗ |

D

R

D

R

cF < cM

+

+

+

+

aF < aM

-

-

-

-

D: |bF | > |bM |
R: bF < bM

+

-

+

-

Note: A “+” sign indicates that the theory predicts that female Congress members will have a
higher value of the relevant variable. A “-” sign indicates that female Congress members will
have a lower value.
14

The Party Unity Score is the fraction times that a Congress member votes with his or her own party
in divisive roll-call votes, i.e., votes in which a majority of Democrats vote differently from a majority of
Republicans.

18

6

Preliminary Evidence

6.1

Summary Statistics and Trends

We start by showing some basic trends on the gender composition of the House of Representatives. Figure 4 shows trends in the fraction of female Congress members, overall and
separately by party. The fraction of women in the House has risen from about 7% to 17%
over our sample period, but there are important differences between the parties. In fact,
while in 1988 Republicans had a slight advantage in the fraction of female representatives,
by the end of the sample period a substantial gap had developed in favor of Democrats.
Table 2 presents some basic summary statistics about our sample, including the main
dependent variables of interest. The top panel presents summary statistics for Congress
members, and the bottom panel for bills. We first refer to the first three columns, which
present statistics for both parties pooled together. Women represent 12.8% of Congress
members during our sample period (first row of Panel A), but they sponsor 14.0% of Congressional Bills (first row of Panel B). This is because on average, women sponsor 14.5 bills
per Congress, while men sponsor 12.5 bills. The distribution of the number of cosponsors is
heavily skewed to the right: the mean number of cosponsors on a bill is 17, but the median
number of cosponsors is 3 (Panel B). Female-sponsored bills tend to attract a larger number
of cosponsors (true for both the mean and the median). On the other hand, female-sponsored
bills have fewer cosponsors of the opposite party. Most of these patterns are replicated when
one looks separately by party, with one notable exception: Democratic women tend to attract a smaller fraction of cosponsors from the opposite party, while the opposite is true for
Republican women.
Figure 5 presents trends in our two measures of cooperative behavior. Figures 5a looks
at the measure of coalition-building: the mean number of cosponsors per bill. The series
exhibits a drop between 1988 and 1994, a rise between 1994 and 1998, and then stays
relatively constant. Notably, in every year the number of cosponsors on female-sponsored
bills is substantially higher than that on male-sponsored bills.
Figure 5b looks instead at the measure of bipartisanship: the percent of cosponsors from
the opposite party. The series exhibits an overall downward trend, consistent with the notion
19

of an increasing polarization in the U.S. Congress. The decline is sharper in the later years,
and also more pronounced for women.

6.2

OLS Results

The basic descriptive statistics presented above show that there are substantial gender differences in the ability to attract a large number of cosponsors. There are also gender differences
in the ability to attract cosponsors from the opposite party, but the sign of this difference is
party-specific, with Democratic women attracting less bipartisan support, and Republican
women attracting more bipartisan support. We now investigate through a series of OLS
regressions how these raw differences are affected once we control for the characteristics of
the bill, of the sponsors, and of the socioeconomic characteristics of the districts that they
represent. The basic model is the following:

Yijkt = α + F emalei + ct + Billj + Sponsit + Distrkt + ijkt

(4)

where Yijkt is either the total number of cosponsors or the percent of opposite-party cosponsors on bill j sponsored by congressman i, elected at time t in district k. Finally, ijkt is an
idiosyncratic error term, which for the moment is assumed to be uncorrelated with the other
regressors.
The results are presented in Table 3. The top panel looks at the effect of sponsor gender
on the total number of cosponsors, while the bottom panel looks at the percent of oppositeparty cosponsors. Each panel shows the results for all congress members pooled, and then
separately by party. Each column progressively adds more controls, allowing us to observe
how the coefficient on the female dummy changes with the inclusion of more control variables.
The first column is the most basic specification, where we control only for congress (i.e., time)
fixed effects. The coefficients simply reflect the findings from the descriptive statistics in
Table 2: female-sponsored bills attract more cosponsors, and this is true for both Democrats
and Republicans. On the other hand, the effect of gender on bipartisanship differs by party:
among Democrats, women attract less bipartisan support, but the opposite is true among
Republicans. All the above differences are statistically significant at conventional significance

20

levels.
The first obvious explanation for this gap is that male and female representatives engage
in different types of legislation, with women more likely to sponsor bills in areas in which large
coalitions are possible, or in which the typical Democrat is more distant from the median
position of the House, while the median Republican is closer. Column (2) shows that there
is some basis to this argument. Once we control for a set of bill category dummies, almost
all coefficients are attenuated, sometimes by as much as 30-50 percent.15
Next, we explore the possibility that the gap is explained by differences in the individual characteristics of Congress members. Female representatives in general have served in
Congress for fewer terms, but are slightly older, and differ from male representatives in their
educational and occupational background. In Column (3) we control for Congress member tenure, a dummy for whether the member is a rookie, the member’s age, a dummy for
whether the member is the chair or the ranking member of a committee, a dummy for having attended an Ivy League college, and five previous occupation dummies. We also control
for total number of bills sponsored, to exclude the possibility that cooperation may simply
reflect a different degree of activism within Congress. Perhaps surprisingly, the coefficient
on the female dummy tends to increase with the inclusion of these individual-level controls.
This indicates that on average female representatives tend to have individual characteristics that are negatively correlated with the number of cosponsors and with the percentage
of opposite-party cosponsors. For example, rookie Congress members tend to recruit fewer
cosponsors, and fewer opposite-party cosponsors.
In Column (4) we look at how coefficients are affected when district characteristics (but
not individual characteristics) are controlled for. The characteristics included in the regression are three macro area dummies, the percent of the population that is black, urban,
foreign-born, and above age 65, log median income, and log population density. Now, we
find a strikingly large drop in all the coefficients, for both outcome variables. This implies
that women tend to be elected in districts with characteristics that are associated with a
15

We assigned each bill to one of 226 mutually exclusive minor topics, based on the classification of
www.congressionalbills.org (Adler and Wilkinson, various years), and to one of the 33 committees of referral,
to capture the importance of the bill.

21

large number of cosponsors. The pattern of coefficients on the bipartisanship measure in
the bottom panel further suggests that women are elected in districts with characteristics
typically associated with a more liberal political orientation.
Finally, Column (5) includes controls for all bill, individual and district characteristics. In
terms of sign and statistical significance, the regression-adjusted coefficients in this column
are almost always the same as the raw coefficients in Column (1), but they tend to be smaller
in magnitude.
However, it would be inappropriate to conclude on the basis of these results that gender
is causally related to cooperative outcomes. Specifically, the pattern of coefficients in Table
3 clearly indicates that gender is correlated with observed district characteristics. This raises
the concern that gender may also be correlated with unobserved district characteristics, and if
one could control for these additional variables, all the gender differences would disappear.16
In what follows, we discuss the different econometric approaches that we employ to address
these potential biases.

7
7.1

Addressing Selection
Empirical Methodologies

Two results emerge from the OLS analysis described above: a) controlling for individual
and district characteristics affects the coefficients, sometimes in important ways; and b)
there are important differences by parties. The OLS estimates rely on the assumption that,
conditional on all of the observed individual and district characteristics, the gender of the
elected representative is as good as randomly assigned. However, there are reasons to be
skeptical of this assumption. For example, assume that women are more likely to run and be
elected in contested districts (as would be the case if women are predominantly “new” to the
political scene, and are therefore less likely to have accumulated a significant incumbency
advantage). Presumably, representatives from contested districts have stronger incentives to
demonstrate to voters that they have been active and that they have been able to garner
16
We have also experimented with specifications in which we control for district fixed effects. However,
since there is relatively small within-district variability in the gender of Congress members, these regressions
yielded highly imprecise and uninformative estimates.

22

broad support for their policy initiatives. In terms of bipartisanship, representatives from
contested districts must reach out to the opposite party to appeal to the key centrist voters,
while the opposite is true if representatives from contested districts need to polarize their
legislative activity in order to appeal to their core partisan base.
Therefore, one would want to control more explicitly for how strongly contested an electoral district is. An approach that has become quite popular in the empirical political
economics literature is to adopt a Regression Discontinuity (RD) design. That is, one would
focus only on representatives elected in districts that had a mixed-gender electoral race that
was decided by a narrow margin. The key idea behind RD is that in close races between
a male and female candidate, the identity of the election winner is determined by random
factors occurring on election day, essentially randomizing the gender of the elected representative.17 The OLS model is then augmented as follows:

Yijkt = α + F emalei + F emalei ∗ f (M Vikt ) + f (M Vikt ) + ct + ijkt

(5)

where f (M Vikt ) is a function of the margin of victory of a female candidate against a male
candidate.
However, in our setting, one must exercise caution. The OLS results clearly illustrated
that there are important differences by party. Therefore, we would like to conduct our
analysis not only for the sample as a whole, but also within each party. However, when
conducting an RD design separately by party, the key identifying assumption may come
into question. For example, suppose, without loss of generality, that we are interested in
the effect of gender within the Republican party. In an RD setting, we effectively compare
close races in which a female Republican defeats a male Democrat to races in which a male
Republican defeats a female Democrat. In general, there is no longer any guarantee that
electoral races on the left and the right of the threshold represent the “same races”, whose
outcome is determined by random factors occurring on Election Day. We are comparing two
sets of races that come potentially from a very different pool.
17

Some recent studies argue that, despite the appeal of the RD design, there may in fact be systematic
differences between winners and losers of close elections (Caughey and Sekhon, 2011). However, analyzing
more than 40,000 close races in a variety of settings, Eggers et al. (2015) conclude that the assumptions
behind the RD design are likely to be met in a wide variety of electoral settings.

23

To illustrate the problem, it is instructive to look at the density of the margin of victory
of the female candidate in mixed-gender electoral races, overall and separately by party
(Figure 6). The top panel of the Figure shows the density of the running variable for all
races pooled together. The density to the left of the threshold is slightly higher than that
to the right of the threshold, indicating that male candidates are slightly more likely than
female candidates to prevail in mixed-gender elections, even though a McCrary test does not
formally reject the null of no discontinuity at the threshold.

18

However, when we break the

sample by party, the picture changes substantially. Among Democrats, it is actually female
candidates who are slightly more likely to win in contested elections. Among Republicans,
however, there is strong evidence of a discontinuity in the density at the threshold, with male
candidates enjoying a marked advantage. It is important to remember how these density
estimates should be interpreted: if we only look at elected Republicans in mixed-gender
elections, we are comparing male Republicans who defeated a female Democrat to female
Republicans who defeated a male Democrat. In general, there is no reason to believe that
these elections come from the same “pool,” and in fact Figure 6 illustrates that the former
set of elections is much more numerous than the latter. Given this difference, it is likely that
the characteristics of the candidates and the districts are also different on the two sides of
the threshold.
Where does this leave us with respect to the RD exercise? One must recognize that when
conducting an RD analysis conditional on party, we are essentially performing a very specific
type of matching exercise. We have two groups of elections, potentially quite different, and
we try to find elections from each group that that are very similar to each other with respect
to one important variable: the margin of victory of the female candidate. Moreover, we are
trying to match elections for which the margin of victory of the female candidate is close to
zero. This of course does not guarantee that the other district and individual characteristics
are balanced at the threshold.
To illustrate this point, in Table 4 we report the standardized difference for a number
of district and individual characteristics between female and male representatives. The first
18

It is likely that much of this advantage is due to an incumbency effect.

24

three columns focus on all representatives, the second three look only at elected Democrats,
and the last three at elected Republicans. Following Imbens and Wooldridge (2009), the
standardized difference is calculated by dividing the difference in means between the groups
by the square root of the sum of the variances. This normalized difference provides a scale-free
measure of the difference in the distribution of covariates between the two groups. Imbens
and Wooldridge suggest as a rule of thumb that a standardized differences exceeding 0.25
is evidence of poor balance between the covariates, and linear regression methods generate
estimates that can be highly sensitive to the exact specification.
Columns (1), (4) and (7) report the raw standardized differences in the full sample
(Column 1) or the party-specific samples (Columns 4 and 7). Columns (2), (5) and (8),
instead, report the standardized difference obtained using an RD design. That is, we take
all mixed-gender elections in which the absolute value of the margin of victory does not
exceed 25, and run a linear regression of the relevant covariate on a gender dummy and the
margin of victory of the female candidate, allowing the slope to differ on either side of the
threshold. The number in the table is the estimated coefficient on the gender dummy (“the
RD estimate”) divided by the same square root of the sum of variances used to calculate
the standardized difference in the first column. In essence, this number tells us the extent
to which the covariates are balanced at the threshold in mixed-gender electoral races. It is
readily apparent that the covariates that were unbalanced in the raw sample continue to be
unbalanced in the RD sample, especially when looking at the parties separately.
Despite these shortcomings, we still see some value in showing RD results. The reason
is that, if we do actually have two elections that are very close to each other in terms of
observables, and in which the gender of the elected representative can be essentially thought
of as randomly determined, this would tell us quite cleanly what the effect of gender is.
To reduce the problem of imbalance in the covariates, we augment the RD design with a
propensity-score based procedure. Specifically, we proceed in the following steps: a) we
first estimate a simple RD regression, and calculate the optimal bandwidth, based on the
procedures described by Calonico et al. (2014); b) for observations within this optimal
bandwidth, we estimate the propensity score, i.e., the probability of electing a female repre-

25

sentative conditional on all district characteristics; c) we then reestimate the RD regression,
but weighting observations by the inverse of the estimated propensity score. The rationale
for this estimator is that it puts more weight to observations of female representatives who
are elected in districts in which the probability of electing a man was relatively high, and to
observations of male representatives elected in “female-friendly” districts.
In addition to the RD design described above, we also implement a more traditional
propensity-score based method. Having recognized that the RD design can be thought of
as a very particular form of a matching estimator, it makes sense to extend the matching
logic and compare districts that are as similar as possible in all observable characteristics,
including the margin of victory of the winning candidate. Notice that when following this
approach, we no longer require to focus only on mixed-gender electoral races. It is very
possible that the nearest neighbor to an electoral race won by a woman is a an electoral race
in which no woman was running.
In practice, we pool all electoral races together (for the full sample, and separately by
party) and estimate the probability of electing a female representative as a function of all
observable district characteristics, including the margin of victory of the elected candidate.
We then estimate the treatment effect on the outcome of interest by running a weighted least
squares regression of the outcome of interest on the gender dummy, weighting observations
by the inverse of the propensity score.19
Columns (3), (6) and (9) of Table 4 show the standardized differences in covariates
obtained by weighting observations by the inverse of the propensity score. As expected, all
the district characteristics that are unbalanced in the raw sample become balanced when
we use inverse-propensity score weighting. However, the individual member characteristics
(bottom panel of the Table), which were not used to construct the propensity score, continue
to be unbalanced.
The question of whether one should match only on district characteristics, or also on
individual characteristics is a conceptual one, to which there is no unambiguous answer.
When we match on district characteristics only, we essentially ask the question: “What is
19

While there are a variety of other propensity-score based methods, we choose the inverse-probability
weighting method as it makes the comparisons across different estimators most straightforward.

26

the effect of electing a female representative?” allowing for the possibility that women who
run for office are different in their observable characteristics (age, education, tenure in office,
etc.) from their male counterparts. On the other hand, if we match on both district and
individual characteristics, we are asking more specifically about differences in behavior that
are due exclusively to gender, holding all other characteristics constant. This is in itself
an interesting question that addresses directly the research question of gender differences in
cooperative behavior, but is perhaps less relevant from a policy point of view. For example,
if one wants to implement a policy of having more women run for Congress, the pool of
candidates would likely be more similar to the average woman currently serving, rather than
an ideal woman who is similar in everything to her male colleagues except for her gender. For
this reason, in the analysis that follows we present both sets of results: when the propensity
score is based only on district characteristics, and when it is based on both district and
individual characteristics.

7.2

Results

In the top panel of Table 5 we report the coefficient estimates on the gender dummy in a
series of regressions where the dependent variable is the number of cosponsors on a bill. In
the first column, we include in the sample all available bills, and run a simple OLS regression
of the number of cosponsors, a gender dummy, plus a full set of sponsor, bill and district
characteristics. This specification corresponds to the one in Column (5) of Table 3. In
Column (2) we control linearly for the margin of victory of the female candidate in mixedgender electoral races, allowing for different slopes on the two sides of the discontinuity
point within the optimal bandwidth.20 Thus, the gender dummy captures the difference
in the height of the regression function at the threshold, i.e., the effect of electing a female
representative in a tightly contested electoral race. To account for the potential unbalance of
district characteristics in mixed-gender electoral races as highlighted in Table 4, in Column
20

In all our analysis, an observation is an individual bill. However, the forcing variable varies only at the
congress/district level. In calculating the optimal bandwidth, one can either aggregate all variables at the
congress/district level, or treat individual bills as distinct observations. We choose the latter method to
better reflect the fact that some congress members are more active in sponsoring legislation. The results are
qualitatively unchanged if we had used the alternative method.

27

(3) we then reestimate the RD regression, but weighting observations by the inverse of the
estimated propensity score based on district characteristics. Finally, in the last two columns
we switch back to the sample of all electoral races to implement a propensity-score matching
based on district characteristics and the margin of victory (Column 4), and additionally on
sponsor characteristics (Column 5).
Compared to the simple OLS estimates in Column (1), the results become a bit more
noisy when we control for the margin of victory using our modified RD design (columns
2 and 3). The propensity score estimates in Columns (4) and (5) have the same sign and
statistical significance as the OLS estimates, but become somewhat smaller in magnitude.
The conclusion from this table is that there are no substantial gender differences in the
ability to foster cooperation over the entire sample, neither in the RD specifications, nor
in the PS ones. However, the gender gap in coalition building among Republicans is fairly
substantial and is robust to the treatment of selection. On the other hand, the weight of the
evidence is that there is no significant gender difference among Democrats in the number of
cosponsors recruited.
Panel B of Table 5 looks instead at our main measure of bipartisanship: the dependent
variable is the percentage of cosponsors from the opposite party. When looking at the
sample as a whole, there appears to be no meaningful gender differences, neither in the RD
specifications, nor in the PS ones. The split by party, however, confirms the interesting
contrasts between Democrats and Republicans that we had already documented in Table 3.
The magnitude of the estimates is somewhat sensitive to the exact specification used, but
there is clear evidence that female Republicans are more bipartisan relative to their male
Republican colleagues (about +20% over an average of 27 percentage points), and female
Democrats less. The gender gap becomes even larger in the RD specifications, but is not
always estimated precisely for Republicans.

21

21

It is worth mentioning another exercise that we ran to address the bias introduced in the RD estimates
by party. As discussed in Section 7, when focusing on parties we are comparing two sets of races that
come potentially from a very different pool. This should not be the case, however, in primary elections.
The assumptions necessary for RD are more likely to be satisfied when a male Republican runs against a
female Republican, or a male Democrat runs against a female Democrat. Unfortunately, to implement an
RD exercise on primary elections we need to focus not only on mixed-gender primary elections decided by a
small margin, but also on districts where one of the two parties ran for a safe seat, i.e., where the party won

28

In terms of the theoretical model described in Section 5, the results on bipartisanship
indicate that female Congress members have policy preferences that are shifted to the left
relative to their male party colleagues. It is remarkable that we still find a pattern of results
that is consistent with this notion, even after we control extensively for potential selection of
male and female representatives into different types of congressional districts. The differential
patterns in bipartisanship across parties is strong evidence that women are not inherently
more willing to move to the center in terms of the bills that they sponsor. As for the
number of cosponsors recruited, there is some evidence that women have inherently lower
costs of recruiting cosponsors, but this result is robust only for Republicans. The results
cannot be rationalized by differences in policy preferences within party, as these predict that
Republican women, being more moderate, would recruit a smaller number of cosponsors. In
what follows, we probe further into these differences.

7.3

Interpretation

The number of cosponsors. We have documented that female Congress members tend
to recruit a larger number of cosponsors, with the effect being mostly driven by female
Republicans. While the results could be suggestive, at least partially, of intrinsic differences
in the ability to induce cooperation, other factors could also be at play. One possibility
is that women need to recruit a larger number of cosponsors because they are less able
to recruit influential cosponsors that can help push forward their legislative initiatives. In
Tables 6a and 6b we investigate whether there is such a “quality-quantity” trade-off in
recruiting cosponsors, i.e., whether the cosponsors recruited by female Congress members
are less valuable than those recruited by men.22 If true, this could offset the advantage of
women in recruiting cosponsors.
In the top panel of Table 6a we first look at whether female Congress members recruit
more female cosponsors on their bills. There seems to be evidence that women have an
by more than 20 percentage points in the following general election. By doing so, we are left with only 185
races, which are not sufficient to run a meaningful exercise. Still, estimates on this subset of races delivers
less precise but similar numbers to those in Table 5.
22
The structure of this and all subsequent tables is the same as that of Table 5. Given the large differences
by party uncovered earlier, from here onwards we only present results disaggregated by party.

29

advantage in recruiting other women in almost all the specifications (+20% over an average of
14 percentage points), although this advantage is no more significant in the RD specification
with PS matching. Other than recruiting more women, however, there do not appear to be
any other substantive gender differences in the quality of cosponsors recruited. In the middle
and bottom panel of Table 6a we look in fact at the percentage of high-ranked cosponsors,
i.e., those who chair a committee and those with high tenure in Congress. We do not find any
significant disadvantage for women in recruiting leader cosponsors, nor Congress members
who have served for more than 5 terms in Congress.
In Table 6b we look at additional measures of cosponsor quality. With data on the
identity of all sponsors and cosponsors on each congressional bill, we can map the entire
network of bill sponsorship in Congress, and calculate for each Congress member various
measures of network centrality. In the top panel of Table 6b we look at degree of betweenness
centrality in terms of cosponsorship.23 There are no meaningful differences by gender among
Republicans, while there is some evidence that female Democrats tend to recruit slightly less
central cosponsors in the OLS and PS specifications. Finally, we investigate the possibility
that female Congress members recruit large coalitions to compensate for a potential difficulty
in recruiting ideologically diverse coalitions. To do this, in the bottom panel of Table 6b we
look at the variance of the first dimension of the DW-NOMINATE score among cosponsors.24
There is only mixed evidence for this hypothesis among Democrats, and nothing at all for
Republicans. Given that it is mostly among Republican women that we observe a significant
advantage in recruiting cosponsors, we conclude that there is little support for the existence
of a quantity/quality tradeoff in the type of cosponsors recruited.
Another concern is related to the possibility that women need to recruit more cosponsors
to compensate for their lack of experience, or to fight discrimination among voters and
colleagues (Anzia and Berry, 2011). According to this hypothesis, female Congress members
need to be particularly hard-working to signal to voters and male Congress members that
they are qualified for the job. If this were the case, we would expect the gender gap in
23

Betweenness centrality is defined as the number of times a Congress member acts as a link between two
other members in the network of cosponsorship, normalized between 0 (lowest) and 1 (highest).
24
The variance is computed including the main sponsor, so that we don’t lose any observations.

30

the number of cosponsors recruited to be more prominent among less experienced Congress
members, because it is the inexperienced women who are most likely to be discriminated
against. We look at this possibility explicitly in Table 7, where we divide the sample by tenure
in Congress (members with more and less than 5 terms). Contrary to the discrimination
hypothesis, we find that the positive gender gap highlighted in Table 5 only appears among
the most experienced Congress members.
In Table 8 we repeat the previous analysis but focusing on bills that are possibly more
related to women’s interests. Following the discussion in Section 5, we expect that women
might need more cooperation on issues that are closer to their bliss point, but farther from
those of men. We follow the previous literature and define a bill as related to “women’s
issues” if it has a major topic in Health, Labor/Employment/Immigration, Education,
Law/Crime/Family or Social Welfare.25 Results in Table 8 shows that female Republicans are slightly more effective in recruiting cosponsors when the bill is related to women’s
interests, while there are no significant gender differences among Democrats.
Percent Cosponsors from the Opposite Party. We now turn our attention to
understanding the mechanisms behind the gender differences in the percentage of cosponsors
from the opposite party. The discrimination hypothesis posits that women may seek to
sponsor more bipartisan bills, in order to overcome the skepticism of voters and colleagues.
Again, we find little support for this hypothesis: Table 9 shows that the positive gender gap
highlighted in Table 5 only appears among the most experienced Congress members. On the
other hand, Table 10 reveals stark differences by bill type in the extent of bipartisanship.
The large bipartisanship gap on the Republican side is driven almost exclusively by bills
related to women’s issues. The effect is quite large: bills on women’s issues sponsored by
female Republicans attract about 6 percent more Democrats than similar bills sponsored by
their male counterparts (a 20% effect with respect to a mean of 32 percentage points). On
the Democratic side, the opposite is true: the bipartisanship gap on women’s issues is small
and mostly insignificant, while it is more pronounced on all other bills.
25

We also tried with a second classification, where we define a bill as related to “women’s issues” if the bill
has a minor topic which ranks in the top 25% by the fraction of female sponsors. Results are very similar in
magnitude and statistical significance, and they are available upon request.

31

We interpret the fact that female Republicans recruit significantly more opposite-party
cosponsors, especially when it comes to bills related to women’s interests, as the result of
a lack of support within their own party. This is in line with the predictions of the model
we highlighted in Section 5: on women’s issues, it is likely that female Republicans are even
closer to the median than male Republicans, as can be also seen from their roll-call behavior
(compare Figures 3a and 3b).
Probability of Bills Passing the House. It is natural to ask how these differences in
the number and type of recruited cosponsors affect the way in which bills advance through the
legislative process. In our data, we find evidence that bills sponsored by female Democrats
are slightly less likely to pass the House (a 1.5 percentage point difference, relative to a
mean of about 17%), while there are no meaningful gender differences among Republicans
(female sponsored bills are 0.4 percentage points more likely to pass the House, relative to
a mean of about 21%).26 Accounting for differences in the number and type of cosponsors
can explain about 16% of the gender difference among Democrats, and more than 100%
of the (tiny) gender difference among Republicans – the difference becomes a negative 0.1
percentage points. It appears therefore that differences in patterns of cosponsorship do not
give women a significant advantage in legislative effectiveness. This is not too surprising:
the probability of a bill passing the House depends primarily on the underlying political
equilibrium in Congress, and only marginally on sponsor characteristics and activities (going
back to Table 1, while the effects of the number of cosponsors and the fraction of cosponsors
of the opposite party are highly statistically significant, they explain only a small fraction
of the total variation in the dependent variable).

8

Conclusion

In this paper we have studied gender differences in cooperative behavior in an important
real-world setting with high stakes. In addition, we contributed to the understanding of
cooperative behaviors and bipartisanship in the U.S. Congress.
26

These results are in contrast to those of Volden et al. (2013), who find that female Congress members
have higher legislative effectiveness. However, their measure of effectiveness is a composite index that takes
into account also the number of bills sponsored and how bills advance through committees.

32

Our main result is that, after controlling for the characteristics of the district in which
they are elected, and in particular the electoral margin of victory, there is little evidence to
suggest that women are inherently more cooperative or bipartisan. However some differences
emerge when one conducts the analysis separately by party. Even after controlling for
selection into different electoral districts, female Republicans tend to recruit a larger number
of cosponsors, and more cosponsors from the opposite party. These differences are most
pronounced on topics that are closer to women’s interests. This party difference might
be explained by the lack of support for female Republicans within their own party, with
Democrats being more available for cooperation on those subjects than male Republicans.
Among Democrats, we find no gender difference in the number of cosponsors, but female
Democrats are less likely to sponsor legislation that attracts bipartisan support.
Overall, our results suggest that differences in cooperative behaviors by gender are perhaps not as large as expected. Gender differences in cooperation arise when women strategically compromise to achieve a common goal, rather than because women are intrinsically
more cooperative. It appears therefore that an increase in female representation is unlikely
to lead to a substantial increase in cooperation in Congress.

33

References
[1] Ansolabehere, Stephen, Snyder, James M. Jr. and Stewart III, Charles. 2001. “The
Effects of Party and Preferences on Congressional Roll-Call Voting.” Legislative Studies
Quarterly, 26, 533-572.
[2] Anzia, Sarah F. and Berry, Christopher R. 2011. “The Jackie (and Jill) Robinson Effect:
Why Do Congresswomen Outperform Congressmen?” American Journal of Political
Science, 55, 478-493.
[3] Babcock, Linda and Laschever, Sara. 2003. Women Don’t Ask. Princeton University
Press: New Jersey.
[4] Balliet, Daniel, P. Li, Norman, Macfarlan, Shane J. and Van Vugt, Mark. 2011. “Sex
Differences in Cooperation: A Meta-Analytic Review of Social Dilemmas.” Psychological
Bulletin, 137, 881-909.
[5] Bertrand, Marianne and Hallock, Kevin F. 2001. “The Gender Gap in Top Corporate
Jobs.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 5, 3-21.
[6] Booth, Alison and Nolen, Patrick. 2012. “Choosing to Compete: How Different are Girls
and Boys?” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 81, 542-555.
[7] Brollo, Fernanda and Troiano, Ugo. 2015. “What Happens When a Woman Wins a
Close Election? Evidence from Brazil.” Mimeo, Universidad of Warwick.
[8] Browne, William P. 1985. “Multiple Sponsorship and Bill Success in U. S. State Legislatures.” Legislative Studies Quarterly , 10, 483-488.
[9] Calonico, Sebastian; Cattaneo, Matias D. and Titiunik, Rocio. 2014. “Robust Nonparametric Confidence Intervals for Regression-Discontinuity Designs.” Econometrica, 82(6),
2295-2326.
[10] Campbell, James E. 1982. “Cosponsoring Legislation in the U.S. Congress.” Legislative
Studies Quarterly, 7, 415-422.
34

[11] Caughey, Devin and Jasjeet S. Sekhon. 2011. “Elections and the Regression Discontinuity Design: Lessons from Close US House Races, 1942-2008.” Political Analysis, 19,
385-408.
[12] Chattopadhyay, Raghabendra and Duflo, Esther. 2004. “Women as Policy Makers: Evidence from a Randomized Policy Experiment in India.” Econometrica, 72, 1409-1443.
[13] Clots-Figueras, Irma. 2011. “Women in Politics. Evidence from the Indian States.”
Journal of Public Economics, 95, 664-690.
[14] Clots-Figueras, Irma. 2012. “Are Female Leaders Good for Education? Evidence from
India.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4, 212-244.
[15] Cox, Gary W. and Poole, Keith T. 2002. “On Measuring Partisanship in Roll-Call
Voting: The U.S. House of Representatives, 1877-1999.” American Journal of Political
Science, 46, 477-489.
[16] Croson, Rachel and Gneezy, Uri. 2009. “Gender Differences in Preferences.” Journal of
Economic Literature, 47, 448-474.
[17] Dohmen, Thomas and Falk, Armin. 2011. “Performance Pay and Multi-dimensional
Sorting: Productivity, Preferences and Gender.” American Economic Review, 101, 556590.
[18] Eggers, Andrew C., Fowler, Anthony, Hainmueller, Jens, Andrew B., Hall and James M.
Snyder Jr. 2015. “On the Validity of the Regression Discontinuity Design for Estimating
Electoral Effects: New Evidence from Over 40,000 Close Races.” American Journal of
Political Science, 59, 259-274.
[19] Ferreira, Fernando and Gyourko, Joseph. 2014. “Does Gender Matter for Political Leadership? The Case of U.S. Mayors.” Journal of Public Economics, 112, 24-39.
[20] Funk, Patricia and Gathmann, Christina. 2015. “Gender Gaps in Policy Making: Evidence from Direct Democracy in Switzerland.” Economic Policy, 30, 141-181.

35

[21] Gagliarducci, Stefano; Nannicini, Tommaso, and Naticchioni, Paolo. 2011. “Electoral
Rules and Politicians’ Behavior: A Micro Test.” American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy, 3, 144-174.
[22] Gagliarducci, Stefano and Paserman, M. Daniele. 2012. “Gender Interactions in Hierarchies: Evidence from the Political Arena.” Review of Economic Studies, 79, 1021-1052.
[23] Gneezy, Uri, Niederle, Muriel and Rustichini, Aldo. 2003. “Performance in Competitive
Environments: Gender Differences.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 1049-1074.
[24] Gneezy, Uri and Rustichini, Aldo. 2004. “Gender and Competition at a Young Age.”
American Economic Review, 94, 377-381.
[25] Grimmer, Justin, Eitan Hirsh, Brian Feinstein and Daniel Carpenter. 2012. “Are Close
Elections Random?” Mimeo, Stanford University.
[26] Harbridge, Laurel M. 2015. Is Bipartisanship Dead? Policy Agreement and AgendaSetting in the House of Representatives. New York: Cambridge University Press.
[27] Imbens, Guido and Lemieux, Tomas. 2008. “Regression Discontinuity Designs: A Guide
to Practice.” Journal of Econometrics, 142, 615-635.
[28] Imbens, Guido and Kalyanaraman, Karthik. 2012. “Optimal Bandwidth Choice for the
Regression Discontinuity Estimator.” Review of Economic Studies, 79, 933-959.
[29] Jenkins, Jeffrey A. 1999. “Examining the Bonding Effects of Party: A Comparative
Analysis of Roll-Call Voting in the U.S. and Confederate Houses.” American Journal of
Political Science, 43, 1144-1165.
[30] Kessler, Daniel and Krehbiel, Keith. 1996. “Dynamics of Cosponsorship.” The American
Political Science Review, 90, 555-566.
[31] Krehbiel, Keith. 1995. “Cosponsors and Wafflers from A to Z.” American Journal of
Political Science, 39, 906-923.

36

[32] Lavy, Victor. 2008. “Do Gender Stereotypes Reduce Girls’ or Boys’ Human Capital
Outcomes? Evidence from a Natural Experiment.” Journal of Public Economics, 92,
2083-2105.
[33] Lavy, Victor. 2013. “Gender Differences in Competitiveness in a Real Workplace: Evidence from Performance-Based Pay Tournaments among Teachers.” Economic Journal,
123, 540-573.
[34] Lazear, Edward P. and Rosen, Sherwin. 1981. “Rank-Order Tournaments as Optimum
Labor Contracts.” Journal of Political Economy, 89, 841-864.
[35] Lee, David S.. 2008. “Randomized Experiments from Non-random Selection in the U.S.
House Elections.” Journal of Econometrics, 142, 675-697.
[36] Lee, David S., Moretti, Enrico and Butler, Matthew J. 2004. “Do Voters Affect or
Elect Policies? Evidence from the U.S. House.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119,
807-859.
[37] Manning, Alan and Saidi, Farzad. 2010. “Understanding the Gender Pay Gap: What’s
Competition Got to Do with It?” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 63, 681-698.
[38] Mayhew, David. 1974. Congress: The Electoral Connection. New Haven: Yale University
Press.
[39] McCarty, Nolan; Poole, Keith T. and Rosenthal, Howard. 2001. “The Hunt for Party
Discipline in Congress.” American Political Science Review, 95, 673-687.
[40] Niederle, Muriel . 2014. “Gender.” Mimeo, Stanford University.
[41] Niederle, Muriel and Vesterlund, Lise. 2007. “Do Women Shy Away from Competition?
Do Men Compete too Much?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122, 1067-1101.
[42] Niederle, Muriel and Yestrumskas, Alexandra H. 2008. “Gender Differences in Seeking
Challenges: The Role of Institutions.” NBER Working Paper No. 13922.

37

[43] Ors, Evren, Palomino, Frederic and Peyrache, Eloic. 2013. “Performance Gender Gap:
Does Competition Matter?” Journal of Labor Economics, 31, 443-499.
[44] Paserman, M. Daniele. 2010. “Gender Differences in Performance in Competitive Environments? Evidence from Professional Tennis Players.” Mimeo, Boston University.
[45] Poole, Keith T. and Rosenthal, Howard. 1984. “The Polarization of American Politics.”
Journal of Politics, 46, 1061-1079.
[46] Poole, Keith T. and Rosenthal, Howard. 1985. “A Spatial Model for Legislative Roll
Call Analysis.” American Journal of Political Science, 29, 357-384.
[47] Rehavi, Marit. 2007. “Sex and Politics: Do Female Legislators Affect State Spending?”
Mimeo, University of British Columbia.
[48] Sapiro, Virginia. 2003. “Theorizing Gender in Political Psychology Research,” in Sears,
David O., Huddy, Leonie and Jervis, Robert L. (eds.) Oxford Handbook of Political
Psychology, 601-34. New York: Oxford University Press.
[49] Schiller, Wendy J. 1995. “Senators as Political Entrepreneurs: Using Bill Sponsorship
to Shape Legislative Agendas.” American Journal of Political Science, 39, 186-203.
[50] Schneier, Edward P. and Gross, Bertram. 1993. Legislative Strategy: Shaping Public
Policy. New York: St. Martin’s.
[51] Snyder, James M. Jr. and Groseclose, Tim. 2000. “Estimating Party Influence in Congressional Roll-Call Voting.” American Journal of Political Science, 44, 193-211.
[52] Snyder, Jason. 2005. “Detecting Manipulation in U.S. House Elections.” Mimeo, Haas
School of Business.
[53] Volden, Craig; Wiseman, Alan E. and Wittmer, Dana. 2013. “When Are Women more
Effective Lawmakers than men?” American Journal of Political Science, 57(2), pp.
326-41.

38

[54] Wawro, Gregory. 2001. Legislative Entrepreneurship in the U.S. House of Representatives. Ann Arbor (MI), University of Michigan Press.
[55] Wilson, Rick K. and Young, Cheryl D. 1997. “Cosponsorship in the U.S. Congress.”
Legislative Studies Quarterly, 22, 25-43.

39

Figures and Tables

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

Figure 1: Predicted Republican Share (c.d.f.)

0

20

40

Male, Democrat
Male, Republican

60
Female, Democrat
Female, Republican

Notes. The unit of observation is an individual-congress member.

40

80

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

Figure 2: DW-Nominate (c.d.f.)

−1

−.5

0

.5

Male, Democrat
Male, Republican

1

1.5

Female, Democrat
Female, Republican

Notes. First dimension of the DW-NOMINATE score as defined in Poole and Rosenthal (1985). The
unit of observation is an individual-congress member.

41

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

Figure 3a: Party-Unity Score (c.d.f.)

0

.1

.2

Male, Democrat
Male, Republican

.3

.4

Female, Democrat
Female, Republican

Notes. Party-Unity Score defined as the percentage of votes to bills on which
more than 70% of the opposite party voted yes, and less than 30% of his/her
own party voted yes. The unit of observation is an individual-congress member.

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

Figure 3b: Party-Unity Score (c.d.f.) - Women’s Issues

0

.1

.2

Male, Democrat
Male, Republican

.3

.4

Female, Democrat
Female, Republican

Notes. Party-Unity Score defined as the percentage of votes to bills on which
more than 70% of the opposite party voted yes, and less than 30% of his/her
own party voted yes. The unit of observation is an individual-congress member.

42

5

10

Pct. female
15

20

25

Figure 4: Fraction of Female Congress Members

1990

1995

2000
Year Congress Elected

All
Republicans

43

2005
Democrats

2010

14

Mean number of cosponsors
16
18
20
22

24

Figure 5a: Mean Number of Cosponsors

1990

1995

2000
Year Congress Elected
Total
Males

2005

2010

Females

15

Pct. of Cosponsors of Opposite Party
20
25
30

35

Figure 5b: Fraction Cosponsors of Opposite Party

1990

1995

2000
Year Congress Elected
Total
Males

44

Females

2005

2010

Figure 6: McCrary Density Test

0

.005

.01

.015

.02

All

−100

−50

0

50

100

0

0

.01

.005

.02

.01

.03

.015

.04

Republicans

.02

Democrats

−100

−50

0

50

100

−100

−50

0

50

100

Notes. Kernel density of the margin of victory of the female candidate for a bandwidth h = 15. The
unit of observation is an individual-congress member.

45

A

Appendix A: Comparative Statics Derivations

Taking the first derivative of n∗ and x∗ w.r.t. ci , bi and ai , and under the assumption that
f12 < 0, we obtain that:
−1
−f12 (x − m)
0 1 − f22 a(x−m)(b−m)
(a+f2 )2

∂n
1
=−
∂c
|J|
∂n
1
=−
∂b
|J|
∂n
1
=−
∂a
|J|

<0

−f12 (x − m)
1 − f22 a(x−m)(b−m)
(a+f2 )2

0
a
− a+f
2

0
2 (b−m)
− −f
(a+f2 )2

<0

−f12 (x − m)
1 − f22 a(x−m)(b−m)
(a+f2 )2

<0

(6)

(7)

(8)

Also
1
∂x
=−
∂b
|J|
1
∂x
=−
∂a
|J|
1
∂x
=−
∂c
|J|

−1

f11
f12 a(b−m)
(a+f2 )2
f11
f12 a(b−m)
(a+f2 )2

−a
(a+f2 )

−1
−f2 (b−m)
(a+f2 )2

f11
f12 a(b−m)
(a+f2 )2

46

−1
0

>0

>0

>0

(9)

(10)

(11)

Table 1: Gender and Bill Passed the House
(1)
Number of Cosponsors (÷100)
Fraction Cosponsors Opposite
Number of Cosponsors (÷100) * Fraction Cosponsors Opposite

0.075 ***
(0.009)
0.167 ***
(0.010)
-0.076 ***
(0.023)

Sponsor Female

(2)
0.070 ***
(0.010)
0.172 ***
(0.010)
-0.065 **
(0.025)
-0.011
(0.008)

Sponsor Female interacted with:
Number of Cosponsors (÷100)

0.028
(0.024)
-0.042 *
(0.025)
-0.054
(0.059)

Fraction Cosponsors Opposite
Number of Cosponsors (÷100) * Fraction Cosponsors Opposite

n. bills
n. sponsors

60,677
4,746

60,677
4,746

Year effects
Yes
Yes
Bill characteristics
Yes
Yes
Sponsor charactersistics
Yes
Yes
District characteristics
Yes
Yes
Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered at the individual-Congress level, in parentheses. The unit of
observation is a bill. All estimates include Congress fixed effects. Bill characteristics include 33 dummies
for the committee of referral, and 226 dummies for the topic. Sponsor characteristics include: age,
tenure in Congress, a dummy for whether the sponsor is a rookie, a committee leader (chair or ranking
member) or black, a party dummie, 5 occupational dummies, a dummy for whether the sponsor has an
Ivy League college degree, a dummy for whether the sponsor was born in the state of election, and the
total number of bills sponsored within the congress. District characteristics include: 3 macro area
dummies, the percentage of black, over-65, foreign and urban residents, the logarithm of the median
income, and the logarithm of population density.

Table 2: Summary Statistics
Panel A: Sponsor Characteristics
All
Number of Sponsors
Number of bills sponsored: mean

Democrats

Republicans

All
4,778

Male
4,188

Female
590

All
2,505

Male
2,099

Female
406

All
2,273

Male
2,089

Female
184

12.8
(10.5)

12.5
(10.4)

14.5
(11.1)

13.2
(11.1)

12.9
(10.9)

14.8
(12.0)

12.4
(9.7)

12.2
(9.8)

14.0
(8.8)

All
61,161

Male
52,577

Female
8,584

All
33,043

Male
27,027

Female
6,016

All
28,118

Male
25,550

Female
2,568

17.0
(35.9)
3

16.5
(35.5)
3

19.9
(38.3)
5

17.6
(35.8)
4

17.0
(35.6)
3

19.9
(36.8)
6

16.3
(36.0)
3

15.9
(35.4)
3

19.8
(41.7)
4

15.0
(21.3)

15.2
(21.4)

13.5
(20.6)

11.7
(18.1)

12.4
(18.6)

9.0
(15.32)

18.8
(24.0)

18.3
(23.6)

23.9
(26.8)

Panel B: Bill Characteristics
Number of bills
Number of cosponsors: mean
Number of cosponsors: median
Percent cosponsors opposite party: mean

Notes: In Panel A the unit of observation is an individual-congress member, while in Panel B is a bill. Standard deviation in parentheses.

Table 3: OLS Regressions
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

A: Number of Cosponsors
All
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors

3.308 ***
(0.667)
61,334
4,791

1.297 **
(0.602)
61,334
4,791

1.956 ***
(0.616)
60,670
4,746

0.846
(0.618)
61,334
4,791

1.395 **
(0.628)
60,670
4,746

Democrats
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors

2.675 ***
(0.836)
33,043
2,505

0.668
(0.757)
33,043
2,505

1.994 ***
(0.726)
32,847
2,492

0.057
(0.789)
33,043
2,505

1.172
(0.746)
32,847
2,492

Republicans
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors

4.082 ***
(1.135)
28,118
2,273

2.811 ***
(0.963)
28,118
2,273

3.491 ***
(1.042)
27,671
2,244

2.419 **
(0.948)
28,118
2,273

3.149 ***
(1.017)
27,671
2,244

B: Percent Cosponsors of Opposite Party
All
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors

-1.539 **
(0.626)
61,331
4,791

-2.000 ***
(0.594)
61,331
4,791

-0.124
(0.505)
60,667
4,746

-0.896
(0.560)
61,331
4,791

0.181
(0.507)
60,667
4,746

Democrats
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors

-2.996 ***
(0.417)
33,042
2,505

-2.560 ***
(0.405)
33,042
2,505

-2.178 ***
(0.401)
32,846
2,492

-1.648 ***
(0.407)
33,042
2,505

-1.505 ***
(0.419)
32,846
2,492

Republicans
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors

5.847 ***
(1.177)
28,116
2,273

3.765 ***
(0.967)
28,116
2,273

4.766 ***
(0.947)
27,669
2,244

2.954 ***
(0.881)
28,116
2,273

3.666 ***
(0.916)
27,669
2,244

Year effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Bill characteristics
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Sponsor charactersistics
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
District characteristics
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Notes: Each entry in the table represents the coefficient on the female sponsor dummy from separate regressions. Robust standard
errors, clustered at the individual-Congress level, in parentheses. The unit of observation is a bill. All estimates include Congress fixed
effects. Bill characteristics include 33 dummies for the committee of referral, and 226 dummies for the topic. Sponsor characteristics
include: age, tenure in Congress, a dummy for whether the sponsor is a rookie, a committee leader (chair or ranking member) or
black, a party dummie, 5 occupational dummies, a dummy for whether the sponsor has an Ivy League college degree, a dummy for
whether the sponsor was born in the state of election, and the total number of bills sponsored within the congress. District
characteristics include: 3 macro area dummies, the percentage of black, over-65, foreign and urban residents, the logarithm of the
median income, and the logarithm of the population density.

Table 4: Balancing Tests
(1)
OLS - Full
Sample

ALL
(2)
(3)
RD - optimal PS matching bandwidth Full Sample

(4)
OLS - Full
Sample

Democrats
(5)
(6)
RD - optimal PS matching bandwidth Full Sample

Republicans
(7)
(8)
(9)
OLS - Full RD - optimal PS matching Sample
bandwidth Full Sample

A: District Characteristics
Northeast

-0.038

-0.003

0.035

-0.114

Midwest

-0.053

-0.218

-0.017

-0.022

South

-0.204

-0.152

-0.020

-0.304 *

0.005

0.418 *

-0.028

0.051

-0.036

-0.022

0.242

0.003

-0.097

-0.655 *

0.061

-0.413 *

0.030

0.003

0.120

-0.033

0.525 *

-0.005

0.048

0.563 *

-0.004

0.017

-0.200

-0.271 *

-0.120

West

0.293 *

% Black

0.094

% Urban

0.429 *

0.094

0.036

0.435 *

0.216

0.016

0.260 *

-0.240

% Foreign Born

0.421 *

0.050

-0.002

0.435 *

0.164

-0.026

0.241

-0.225

-0.179

-0.209

0.013

-0.308 *

-0.260 *

0.037

0.013

-0.276 *

-0.023

% Over 65
Log(Median Income)

0.445 *

-0.354 *

-0.077

-0.030

0.057

-0.172

0.027
0.003

0.121

0.093

0.024

0.207

0.363 *

0.014

0.070

-0.205

-0.001

Log(Population Density)

-0.048

0.025

-0.003

-0.066

0.345 *

0.058

-0.091

0.025

-0.075

Lagged Democratic Share

0.248

0.087

0.016

0.010

-0.228

-0.069

0.122

0.369 *

0.227

0.054

0.053

0.018

0.044

-0.001

0.047

0.019

0.113

-0.033

0.000

-0.059

-0.021

0.000

-0.054

-0.149

0.000

-0.040

-

-

-

-

-

-

Campaign Expenditures Ratio (D/R)
Margin of victory

0.089

B: Member Characteristics
Democrat
Tenure in Congress

0.276 *

0.617 *

0.042

-0.304 *

-0.283 *

-0.307 *

-0.367 *

-0.541 *

-0.348 *

-0.265 *

0.156

-0.330 *

Rookie

0.110

0.181

0.089

0.155

0.400 *

0.133

0.053

-0.494 *

0.029

Age

0.139

0.128

0.099

0.124

-0.173

0.015

0.129

0.395 *

Leader

-0.204

-0.079

-0.261 *

-0.197

-0.208

-0.291 *

-0.222

-0.082

-0.234

Born in State

-0.363 *

-0.370 *

-0.330 *

-0.308 *

-0.263 *

-0.137

-0.497 *

-0.457 *

-0.550 *

Ivy League College

-0.124

-0.100

-0.157

-0.168

-0.195

-0.177

-0.094

0.147

-0.050

0.164

0.126

-0.069

0.157

0.107

No occupation
Education

0.063
0.380 *

0.112

-0.132
0.104

0.254 *

0.165

0.169

0.225

0.115

0.165

0.281 *

0.301 *

0.101

Lawyer

-0.436 *

-0.176

-0.430 *

-0.455 *

-0.191

-0.458 *

-0.518 *

-0.380 *

-0.502 *

Professional

-0.110

-0.065

-0.135

-0.048

-0.100

-0.042

-0.267 *

-0.251 *

-0.275 *

Business

-0.175

0.178

-0.213

-0.007

0.636 *

-0.097

-0.299 *

0.127

-0.313 *

0.532 *

-0.252 *

Other

0.283 *

-0.079

0.380 *

0.170

-0.387 *

0.264 *

Black

0.209

-0.009

0.059

0.189

-0.078

0.065

-0.058

0.000

0.676 *
-0.063

Notes: Each coefficient represents the standardized difference between treated and control units. All specifications control for Congress fixed effects. The unit of observation is an
individual-congress member. Leader is a dummy for being a committee chair or ranking member. Camp. Exp. D/R is the percentage of total campaign spending by the Democratic
candidate. In column (4) the optimal bandwidth is 25.

Table 5: RD and PS Matching Estimates
(1)
OLS - Full Sample

(2)
RD - optimal
bandwidth

(3)
RD - optimal
bandwidth with PS
matching

(4)
PS matching - Full
Sample

(5)
PS matching - Full
Sample

A: Number of Cosponsors
All
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

1.395 **
(0.628)
60,670
4,746

2.308
(2.597)
4,871
403
25

1.138
(2.333)
4,871
403
25

0.496
(0.608)
55,672
4,403

-0.083
(0.673)
55,008
4,358

Democrats
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

1.172
(0.746)
32,847
2,492

2.182
(3.609)
2,343
193
30

-1.600
(3.459)
2,343
193
30

0.429
(0.892)
29,560
2,278

0.301
(0.950)
29,364
2,265

Republicans
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

3.149 ***
(1.017)
27,671
2,244

6.101
(4.796)
1,227
100
13

6.857 *
(3.912)
1,227
100
13

1.912 **
(0.852)
26,089
2,121

3.124 ***
(1.040)
23,818
1,953

B: Percent Cosponsors of Opposite Party
All
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

0.181
(0.507)
60,667
4,746

0.822
(3.876)
2,781
232
16

1.884
(3.071)
2,781
232
16

0.982
(0.732)
55,670
4,403

0.651
(0.860)
55,006
4,358

Democrats
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

-1.505 ***
(0.419)
32,846
2,492

-3.351 *
(1.910)
1,978
167
24

-5.297 ***
(2.000)
1,978
167
24

-0.929
(0.570)
29,559
2,278

-1.208 **
(0.525)
29,363
2,265

Republicans
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

3.666 ***
(0.916)
27,669
2,244

12.514 *
(6.673)
1,043
88
11

5.038
(3.850)
1,043
88
11

2.905 ***
(0.820)
26,088
2,121

2.827 ***
(0.868)
23,817
1,953

Sponsor characteristics
Yes
No
No
No
No
Bill charactertistics
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
District characteristics
Yes
No
No
No
No
Propensity Score
Distr.
Distr.+MV
Distr.+MV+Spon.
Notes: Entries in the table represent the coefficient on the female sponsor dummy. Robust standard errors, clustered at the
individual-Congress level, in parentheses. The unit of observation is a bill. All estimates include Congress fixed effects. Bill
characteristics include 33 dummies for the committee of referral, and 226 dummies for the topic. Sponsor characteristics include:
age, tenure in Congress, a dummy for whether the sponsor is a rookie, a committee leader (chair or ranking member) or black, a
party dummie, 5 occupational dummies, a dummy for whether the sponsor has an Ivy League college degree, a dummy for whether
the sponsor was born in the state of election, and the total number of bills sponsored within the congress. District characteristics
include: 3 macro area dummies, the percentage of black, over-65, foreign and urban residents, the logarithm of the median income,
and the logarithm of the population density.

Table 6a: Gender and the Types of Cosponsors Recruited
(1)
OLS - Full Sample

(2)
RD - optimal
bandwidth

(3)
RD - optimal
bandwidth with PS
matching

(4)
PS matching - Full
Sample

(5)
PS matching - Full
Sample

A: Percent Female Cosponsors
Democrats
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

2.523 ***
(0.387)
32,845
2,492

2.186
(1.615)
1,795
152
22

1.135
(1.581)
1,795
152
22

1.937 ***
(0.344)
29,559
2,278

2.449 ***
(0.396)
29,363
2,265

Republicans
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

1.154 ***
(0.389)
27,670
2,244

2.355
(2.576)
1,157
95
12

-0.137
(2.106)
1,157
95
12

1.376 ***
(0.380)
26,088
2,121

1.509 ***
(0.407)
23,817
1,953

Democrats
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

-0.218
(0.245)
32,846
2,492

-2.238 *
(1.217)
1,980
168
25

-1.248
(1.300)
1,980
168
25

-0.576 **
(0.239)
29,559
2,278

-0.241
(0.253)
29,363
2,265

Republicans
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

0.439
(0.270)
27,670
2,244

1.285
(1.739)
989
83
11

4.010 **
(1.909)
989
83
11

0.039
(0.236)
26,088
2,121

-0.081
(0.272)
23,817
1,953

B: Percent Leader Cosponsors

C: Percent Cosponsors Tenured 5+
Democrats
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

0.548
(0.755)
32,845
2,492

-3.452
(3.672)
1,562
129
19

-3.565
(3.711)
1,562
129
19

-0.439
(0.794)
29,559
2,278

0.321
(0.953)
29,363
2,265

Republicans
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

1.045
(0.806)
27,666
2,244

2.239
(4.821)
1,123
93
11

2.620
(3.267)
1,123
93
11

0.197
(0.750)
26,085
2,121

1.422
(0.879)
23,814
1,953

Sponsor characteristics
Yes
No
No
No
No
Bill charactertistics
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
District characteristics
Yes
No
No
No
No
Propensity Score
Distr.
Distr.+MV
Distr.+MV+Spon.
Notes: Entries in the table represent the coefficient on the female sponsor dummy. Robust standard errors, clustered at the
individual-Congress level, in parentheses. The unit of observation is a bill. All estimates include Congress fixed effects. Bill
characteristics include 33 dummies for the committee of referral, and 226 dummies for the topic. Sponsor characteristics include:
age, tenure in Congress, a dummy for whether the sponsor is a rookie, a committee leader (chair or ranking member) or black, a
party dummie, 5 occupational dummies, a dummy for whether the sponsor has an Ivy League college degree, a dummy for whether
the sponsor was born in the state of election, and the total number of bills sponsored within the congress. District characteristics
include: 3 macro area dummies, the percentage of black, over-65, foreign and urban residents, the logarithm of the median income,
and the logarithm of the population density.

Table 6b: Gender and the Types of Cosponsors Recruited
(1)
OLS - Full Sample

(2)
RD - optimal
bandwidth

(3)
RD - optimal
bandwidth with PS
matching

(4)
PS matching - Full
Sample

(5)
PS matching - Full
Sample

D: Mean Betweeness Centrality Cosponsors
Democrats
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

-0.141 ***
(0.034)
32,847
2,492

-0.118
(0.223)
1,283
110
16

0.035
(0.243)
1,283
110
16

-0.080
(0.064)
29,560
2,278

-0.114 **
(0.057)
29,364
2,265

Republicans
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

0.097
(0.077)
27,671
2,244

-0.108
(0.373)
469
41
5

0.253
(0.474)
285
22
5

0.090
(0.068)
26,089
2,121

0.112
(0.083)
23,818
1,953

E: Variance DWNom1 Cosponsors
Democrats
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

-9.201 ***
(2.627)
32,724
2,485

5.008
(10.282)
1,899
160
23

-13.556
(12.314)
1,899
160
23

-8.120 ***
(2.665)
29,442
2,271

-4.624
(3.170)
29,248
2,258

Republicans
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

2.067
(3.655)
27,577
2,235

7.941
(17.681)
1,515
123
16

-14.966
(14.019)
1,515
123
16

-3.060
(3.083)
26,009
2,113

2.676
(4.510)
23,748
1,945

Sponsor characteristics
Yes
No
No
No
No
Bill charactertistics
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
District characteristics
Yes
No
No
No
No
Propensity Score
Distr.
Distr.+MV
Distr.+MV+Spon.
Notes: Entries in the table represent the coefficient on the female sponsor dummy. Robust standard errors, clustered at the
individual-Congress level, in parentheses. All measures include the sponsor and are mutiplied by 1,000. The unit of observation is a
bill. All estimates include Congress fixed effects. Bill characteristics include 33 dummies for the committee of referral, and 226
dummies for the topic. Sponsor characteristics include: age, tenure in Congress, a dummy for whether the sponsor is a rookie, a
committee leader (chair or ranking member) or black, a party dummie, 5 occupational dummies, a dummy for whether the sponsor
has an Ivy League college degree, a dummy for whether the sponsor was born in the state of election, and the total number of bills
sponsored within the congress. District characteristics include: 3 macro area dummies, the percentage of black, over-65, foreign and
urban residents, the logarithm of the median income, and the logarithm of the population density.

Table 7: Gender and the Number of Cosponsors, by Sponsor Tenure
(1)
OLS - Full Sample

(2)
RD - optimal
bandwidth

(3)
RD - optimal
bandwidth with PS
matching

(4)
PS matching - Full
Sample

(5)
PS matching - Full
Sample

A: Tenure 5+
Democrats
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

1.325
(1.041)
21,497
1,376

-7.577
(7.162)
805
52
30

-25.639 ***
(7.927)
805
52
30

-0.201
(1.248)
18,908
1,238

-0.625
(1.188)
18,846
1,232

Republicans
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

4.176 **
(1.700)
15,785
1,080

-4.080
(5.517)
410
26
13

-2.965
(14.892)
410
26
13

4.071 ***
(1.242)
14,848
1,010

5.951 ***
(1.668)
13,537
939

Democrats
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

0.505
(0.981)
11,350
1,116

2.464
(4.641)
1,538
141
30

-0.306
(4.527)
1,538
141
30

1.835
(1.183)
10,652
1,040

2.804 **
(1.371)
10,518
1,033

Republicans
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

0.580
(1.177)
11,886
1,164

3.370
(5.320)
817
74
13

7.046
(4.412)
817
74
13

0.857
(1.020)
11,241
1,111

1.088
(1.190)
10,281
1,014

B: A: Tenure 5-

Sponsor characteristics
Yes
No
No
No
No
Bill charactertistics
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
District characteristics
Yes
No
No
No
No
Propensity Score
Distr.
Distr.+MV
Distr.+MV+Spon.
Notes: Entries in the table represent the coefficient on the female sponsor dummy. Robust standard errors, clustered at the
individual-Congress level, in parentheses. The unit of observation is a bill. All estimates include Congress fixed effects. Bill
characteristics include 33 dummies for the committee of referral, and 226 dummies for the topic. Sponsor characteristics include:
age, tenure in Congress, a dummy for whether the sponsor is a rookie, a committee leader (chair or ranking member) or black, a
party dummie, 5 occupational dummies, a dummy for whether the sponsor has an Ivy League college degree, a dummy for whether
the sponsor was born in the state of election, and the total number of bills sponsored within the congress. District characteristics
include: 3 macro area dummies, the percentage of black, over-65, foreign and urban residents, the logarithm of the median income,
and the logarithm of the population density.

Table 8: Gender and the Number of Cosponsors, by Bill Content
(1)
OLS - Full Sample

(2)
RD - optimal
bandwidth

(3)
RD - optimal
bandwidth with PS
matching

(4)
PS matching - Full
Sample

(5)
PS matching - Full
Sample

A: Women's Issues
Democrats
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

2.506 **
(1.104)
11,721
868

-0.705
(8.821)
613
56
21

-2.802
(7.456)
613
56
21

-1.382
(1.133)
10,316
775

0.638
(1.264)
10,277
773

Republicans
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

4.045 **
(1.866)
8,292
682

14.172
(9.161)
508
50
16

11.419
(7.938)
508
50
16

1.639
(1.632)
7,811
652

3.143 *
(1.874)
6,980
599

Democrats
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

0.516
(0.854)
21,126
1,624

-3.410
(3.962)
1,083
86
21

-0.437
(4.140)
1,083
86
21

1.730
(1.152)
19,244
1,503

0.331
(1.214)
19,087
1,492

Republicans
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

2.552 **
(1.079)
19,379
1,562

-2.525
(3.819)
1,205
85
16

-0.789
(3.873)
1,205
85
16

2.094 **
(0.998)
18,278
1,469

3.253 ***
(1.225)
16,838
1,354

B: Other Issues

Sponsor characteristics
Yes
No
No
No
No
Bill charactertistics
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
District characteristics
Yes
No
No
No
No
Propensity Score
Distr.
Distr.+MV
Distr.+MV+Spon.
Notes: Entries in the table represent the coefficient on the female sponsor dummy. Robust standard errors, clustered at the
individual-Congress level, in parentheses. The unit of observation is a bill. All estimates include Congress fixed effects. Bill
characteristics include 33 dummies for the committee of referral, and 226 dummies for the topic. Sponsor characteristics include:
age, tenure in Congress, a dummy for whether the sponsor is a rookie, a committee leader (chair or ranking member) or black, a
party dummie, 5 occupational dummies, a dummy for whether the sponsor has an Ivy League college degree, a dummy for whether
the sponsor was born in the state of election, and the total number of bills sponsored within the congress. District characteristics
include: 3 macro area dummies, the percentage of black, over-65, foreign and urban residents, the logarithm of the median income,
and the logarithm of the population density.

Table 9: Gender and Percent Cosponsors of the Opposite Party, by Sponsor Tenure
(1)
OLS - Full Sample

(2)
RD - optimal
bandwidth

(3)
RD - optimal
bandwidth with PS
matching

(4)
PS matching - Full
Sample

(5)
PS matching - Full
Sample

-9.149
(6.168)
557
37
24

-1.693 **
(0.675)
18,907
1,238

-1.675 **
(0.653)
18,845
1,232

15.101
(15.600)
318
20
11

7.090 ***
(1.092)
14,847
1,010

7.990 ***
(1.081)
13,536
939

A: Tenure 5+
Democrats
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

-1.645 ***
(0.581)
21,496
1,376

0.648
(5.287)
557
37
24

Republicans
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

6.638 ***
(1.394)
15,784
1,080

14.384 ***
(4.643)
318
20
11

Democrats
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

-1.180 *
(0.607)
11,350
1,116

-3.707
(2.488)
1,421
130
24

-3.251
(2.387)
1,421
130
24

-0.423
(0.670)
10,652
1,040

-0.207
(0.715)
10,518
1,033

Republicans
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

0.292
(1.032)
11,885
1,164

-2.655
(3.630)
725
68
11

-1.135
(3.429)
725
68
11

1.165
(0.842)
11,241
1,111

-0.724
(0.925)
10,281
1,014

B: A: Tenure 5-

Sponsor characteristics
Yes
No
No
No
No
Bill charactertistics
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
District characteristics
Yes
No
No
No
No
Propensity Score
Distr.
Distr.+MV
Distr.+MV+Spon.
Notes: Entries in the table represent the coefficient on the female sponsor dummy. Robust standard errors, clustered at the
individual-Congress level, in parentheses. The unit of observation is a bill. All estimates include Congress fixed effects. Bill
characteristics include 33 dummies for the committee of referral, and 226 dummies for the topic. Sponsor characteristics include:
age, tenure in Congress, a dummy for whether the sponsor is a rookie, a committee leader (chair or ranking member) or black, a
party dummie, 5 occupational dummies, a dummy for whether the sponsor has an Ivy League college degree, a dummy for whether
the sponsor was born in the state of election, and the total number of bills sponsored within the congress. District characteristics
include: 3 macro area dummies, the percentage of black, over-65, foreign and urban residents, the logarithm of the median income,
and the logarithm of the population density.

Table 10: Gender and Percent Cosponsors of the Opposite Party, by Bill Content
(1)
OLS - Full Sample

(2)
RD - optimal
bandwidth

(3)
RD - optimal
bandwidth with PS
matching

(4)
PS matching - Full
Sample

(5)
PS matching - Full
Sample

A: Women's Issues
Democrats
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

-0.894 *
(0.498)
11,721
854

-2.014
(2.623)
710
71
25

-3.162
(2.781)
710
71
25

-0.444
(0.653)
10,316
751

-0.810
(0.581)
10,277
747

Republicans
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

6.835 ***
(1.486)
8,290
663

24.394 **
(10.462)
383
30
12

11.176
(7.820)
383
30
12

6.398 ***
(1.078)
7,810
627

6.240 ***
(1.320)
6,979
566

Democrats
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

-2.040 ***
(0.525)
21,125
1,638

-4.806 **
(2.362)
1,270
97
25

-6.387 ***
(2.422)
1,270
97
25

-1.255 *
(0.659)
19,243
1,527

-1.523 **
(0.638)
19,086
1,518

Republicans
s.e.
n. bills
n. sponsors
optimal bandwidth

1.728 *
(0.909)
19,379
1,581

2.051
(4.935)
829
68
12

0.313
(3.943)
829
68
12

0.964
(0.919)
18,278
1,494

1.267
(0.921)
16,838
1,387

B: Other Issues

Sponsor characteristics
Yes
No
No
No
No
Bill charactertistics
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
District characteristics
Yes
No
No
No
No
Propensity Score
Distr.
Distr.+MV
Distr.+MV+Spon.
Notes: Entries in the table represent the coefficient on the female sponsor dummy. Robust standard errors, clustered at the
individual-Congress level, in parentheses. The unit of observation is a bill. All estimates include Congress fixed effects. Bill
characteristics include 33 dummies for the committee of referral, and 226 dummies for the topic. Sponsor characteristics include:
age, tenure in Congress, a dummy for whether the sponsor is a rookie, a committee leader (chair or ranking member) or black, a
party dummie, 5 occupational dummies, a dummy for whether the sponsor has an Ivy League college degree, a dummy for whether
the sponsor was born in the state of election, and the total number of bills sponsored within the congress. District characteristics
include: 3 macro area dummies, the percentage of black, over-65, foreign and urban residents, the logarithm of the median income,
and the logarithm of the population density.

