                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          SELF-SELECTION AND THE
                          EARNINGS OF IMMIGRANTS




                             George J. Borjas




                          Working Paper No. 2248




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 May 1987




Support from the Ford Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Labor Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #2248
                                                  May 1987




                Self-Selection   and the Earnings of Immigrants




                                    ABSTRACT




    This paper analyzes the way in which the earnings of the immigrant
population may be expected to differ from the earnings of the native
population because of the endogeneity of the migration decision. The
conditions that determine the nature of the self—selection are derived
and depend on economic and political characteristics of the sending
and receiving countries. The empirical analysis shows that
differences in the U.S. earnings of immigrants with the same measured
skills, but from different home countries, are attributable to
variations in conditions in the country of origin at the time of

migration.



                                                    George J. Borjas
                                                    University of California
                                                    Department of Economics
                                                    Santa Barbara, CA 93106
                                                    (805) 961—2753
                  Self-Selection and the Earnings of Immigrants

                               George J. Borjas*



               This paper analyzes the way in which the earnings

          of the immigrant population may be expected to differ

          from the earnings, of the native population because of

          the endogeneity of the decision to migrate. The empir-

          ical study shows that differences in the U.S. earnings

          of immigrants with the same measured skills, but from

          different home countries, are attributable to variations

          in political and economic conditions in the countries of

          origin at the time of migration.



     Immigrants in the United States do not make up a random sample of the

population from the countries of origin. This is perhaps the most convincing

finding in the literature that analyzes how immigrants perform in the U.S. labor

market. In the "first-generation" studies of this literature (Barry R. Chiswick,

1978; Geoffrey Carliner, 1980; Gregory DeFreitas, 1980), cross-section earnings

functions were estimated and two conclusions were reached: (1) the age/earnings

profile of immigrants is steeper than the age/earnings profile of the native

population; and (2) the age/earnings profile of immigrants crosses the age/

earnings profile of natives about 10-15 years after immigration. Thus, after

a relatively short adaptation period immigrant earnings "overtake" the earn-

ings of the native-born. The first of these findings was often explained in

terms of the human capital framework: Immigrants presumably have stronger

investment incentives than native workers, and thus immigrant earnings grow
                                              2




at a faster rate than native earnings. The existence of the overtaking age,

however, was explained in terms of the unobserved characteristics of the

migrants: Immigrants are a self-selected group and, as a result, immigrants

may be "more able and more highly motivated" (Chiswick, 1978, P. 900) than the

native-born.

     Recently, the focus has shifted from analyses of single cross-section

data sets to studies of cohort or longitudinal data (see my 1985 and 1987

papers; and Guillermina Jasso and Nark R. Rosenzweig, 1985, 1986). The de-

parture point for these studies is the well-known fact that the analysis of a

single cross-section of data cannot separately identify aging and cohort
                                                       .
effects. 1                  .    .     .           .
             The cross-section finding that immigrant earnings and years-since-

migration are positively correlated can be explained either in terms of an

aging effect (i.e. ,   assimilation)       or it may be due to cohort differences in

quality (caused by non-random return migration propensities and/or secular

shifts in the skill mix of immigrants admitted to the United States). These

recent studies, in effect, bring to the forefront the question of how cohort

quality and immigrant self-selection are related. For example, are immi-

grants selected from the upper or lower tail of the ability (or income) dis-

tribution in the sending countries? Even if immigrants are drawn from the

upper tail of the income distribution in the home country, does that ensure

that they end up in the upper tail of the U.S. income distribution? Finally,

if cohort quality has experienced a secular decline in the postwar period, as

my 1985 analysis suggests, what factors are responsible for this change in the

selection mechanism determining immigration?

     This paper presents a theoretical and empirical study of these questions.

It is assumed that individuals compare the potential incomes in the United

States with the incomes in the home countries, and make the migration decision
                                         3




based on these income differentials (net of mobility costs). The use of this

standard model allows a systematic analysis of the types of selection biases

that are created by this behavior.2 It will be seen that the common assumption

that immigrants are drawn from the upper tail of the "home" income distribution

requires a set of conditions that will not be generally satisfied. More

importantly, this type of model suggests a few key variables (namely, the

characteristics of the relevant income distributions) that "predictt' the

types of selection biases created by income-maximizing behavior on the part

of potential migrants.

      The empirical work presented in this paper analyzes the U.S. earnings of

immigrants from 41 countries using the 1970 and 1980 Censuses. Not surpris-

ingly, it is found that the variance in (relative) immigrant earnings across

these countries is substantial. Using the theoretical insights, however, the

analysis shows that the variance in various measures of the "quality" of

immigrants can be explained to a large extent by a few key variables describing

economic and political conditions in the countries of origin.



I.    Theoretical Framework

      Suppose there are two countries: country 0 and country 1. For concrete-

ness, country 0 denotes the "home" country or the country of origin while

country 1 denotes the United States or the country of destination.3 Residents

of the home country have earnings which are distributed as:

(1)
                               2nw0p0+c0
where e0N(0,cj). The earnings facing this population if they were to migrate

to the United States are given by:

(2)                            £n w1 =       +   '
where c1N(0,cr), and     and    have correlation coefficient p.
                                               4



        Equations (1) and (2) describe the earnings distributions facing a given

individual that is contemplating emigration to the United States. This frame-

work, due to A.D. Roy (1951), can be interpreted as decomposing individual

earnings into a part due to observable socioeconomic variables (p0 and

and a part due to unobserved characteristics ( and c1). The Roy model

focuses on the impact of selection biases on the disturbances              and

Initially, therefore, variations in socioeconomic variables (which shift

and p) are ignored, but their role will be discussed below.4

        The parameter p is the mean income that residents from the home country

would earn in the U.S. if all home country citizens were to migrate to the

United States. In general, this level of income need not be the same as that

of the U.S. native population since the average skills of the two popula-

tions - even in the absence of selection biases - may differ. For simplicity,

in the remainder of the discussion it is assumed that these intercountry dif-

ferences in skill (such as education and age) have been standardized, and

hence       also gives the earnings of the average native worker in the U.S.5

      The migration decision for persons in country 0 is determined by the sign

of the index function:


(3)                      =
                              w+C              1P0 + (c1-c0)

where C gives the level of mobility costs, and 7t gives a "time-equivalent"

measure of the costs of emigrating to the United States (i.e., it =
                                                                            C/w0).
Assume that it is constant across all individuals in the country of origin.

Since migration to the U.S. occurs when 1>0, the emigration rate from the

country of origin is given by:

(4)                          P =   Pr[v   >              =

where v     c1-e0; z =                        and   is the standard normal distribution
                         -(p1-p0-it)/a;
function.
                                          5




      Equation (4) neatly summarizes the economic content of the theory of

migration proposed by Larry A. Sjaastad (1962). If follows from (4) that the

emigration rate is: (a) a negative function of mean income in the home country;

(b) a positive function of mean income in the United States; and (c) a nega-

tive function of the costs of emigrating to the United States. There are,

however, a number of other implications in the theory that yield important

insights into the kinds of selection biases generated by the endogenous migra-

tion decision. In particular, consider the conditional means E(2n w011>O) and

E(n w111>O). The first of these means gives the average earnings of emigrants

in the country of origin, while the latter term gives the average earnings of

these migrants in the United States. Under the normality assumptions these

conditional means are given by:


(5)                     E(n w011>0) =     + 0001
                                               V
                                                   (p -
                                                          1
                                                              )
                                              ao1 c
(6)                     E(.Qn w1II>0) =   +        (J -
                                               V     0

where X =   4(z)/P;   and    is the density of the standard normal. The variable X

is inversely related to the emigration rate, and takes on a value of zero when

P1 (Heckman, 1979). Assume initially that P<1 so that at least part of the

home country's population is better off by not emigrating. Then the second

terms in (5) and (6) define the kinds of selection biases generated by income-

maximizing behavior. Equation (5) shows that the average emigrant may be

?tbettert or "worse" than the average person in the country of origin depending

on p G/a.       Similarly,   equation (6) shows that the average immigrant in the

U.S. may have higher or lower earnings than the average native person depending

on cT1/cr0p. Let Q0 be the income differential between the average emigrant and
                                           6




the average person in country 0, Q1 be the income differential between the

average immigrant and the average native person in the United States, and

k =         There are three cases that are of interest:6



Case 1.   Positive Selection: Q0>O and Q1>O.

      In this situation the "best" persons leave the country of origin and when

they get to the U.S. they outperform the native population. A reading of the

literature on the earnings of immigrants suggests that this positive selection

is most often assumed iii   the   interpretation of those empirical results. Inspec-

tion of equations (5) and (6), however, shows that the necessary (and sufficient)

conditions for positive selection to occur are:


(7)                         p >
                                   .1      k) and k >   1.
                                  mln(k,

Thus if p is sufficiently high and if income is more dispersed in the U.S.

than in the country of origin, the immigrants arriving in the U.S. are indeed

selected from the upper tail of the home country's income distribution and

will outperform the native-born.



Case 2.    Negative Selection: Q0<O and Q1<0.

      In this type of selection the U.S. draws persons from the lower tail of

the home country's income distribution and these immigrants do not perform

well in the U.S. labor market. The necessary (and sufficient) conditions for

negative selection to occur are:


(8)                         p >
                                  min(,    k) and k <   1.

Negative selection again requires that p be "sufficiently" positive but that

the income distribution be more unequal in the home country that in the U.S.7
                                       7




 Case 3.    Refugee Sorting: Q0<O and Q1>O.

       The U.S. draws below-average immigrants (in terms of the country of

 origin), but they outperform the U.S. native-born upon arrival. The necessary

 (and sufficient) condition for this to occur is:


 (9)                            p < min(, k)


       These three cases summarize the quality differentials between migrants

and the native base in each of the two countries. It seems plausible to argue

that for non-Communist countries p is likely to be positive and large. After

all, profit-maximizing employers are likely to value the same factors in any

market economy. The quality of immigrants in the United States then depends

entirely on the ratio of variances in the income distributions of the United

States and the country of origin. Suppose, for example, that      > cT. The
United States, in a sense, "insures" low-income workers against poor labor

market outcomes while "taxing" high-income workers (relative to the country

of origin). This opportunity set implies that low-income workers have much

greater incentives to migrate than high-income workers, and thus leads to

immigrants being negatively selected from the population. Conversely, if

   > a, the home country now protects low-income workers from poor labor

market outcomes and "taxes" the high income worker. This opportunity set

generates a "brain drain" into the United States. Available data on the

distribution of income (World Bank, 1986, pp. 226-227) suggests that income

is more unequally distributed in the large number of "third-world" countries

(e.g., Mexico, India, etc.) which form the bulk of current immigration to the

U.S.8 Income maximizing behavior is inconsistent with the traditional assump-

tion that the U.S. draws the "best" workers from a given country and that those

workers will (eventually) outperform the U.S. native-born.
                                     8




     On the other hand, p need not always be positive and strong. It is

likely, in fact, that p is negative for countries that have recently expe-

rienced a Communist takeover. The change from a market economy to a Communist

system is often accompanied by structural shifts in the income distribution

and, in particular, the confiscation of the financial holdings of entrepre-

neurs. Imigrants from such systems will be in the lower tail of the "revolu-

tionary't income distribution but will outperform the average U.S. native

worker. This result signals the movement of persons who cannot match with

the new political structure, but who "seek refuge" and match quite well in a

market economy.

     These insights are developed under the assumption that selection biases

do exist (i.e., P<l and X>O). Since for most countries in Latin America and

Asia the mean level of the U.S. income distribution greatly exceeds the mean

level of the home country's income distribution, it is unclear why --   in   the

context of an income-maximizing model --   the entire population of country 0
does not emigrate to the United States.

     There are two reasons why we do not observe wholesale migrations of

entire populations to the United States. First, it is not the differences in

mean income levels that determine the extent of migration, but the differences

in mean income levels net of migration costs. These migration costs will be

both monetary and psychic, and are likely to be large in countries which have

different cultural and social backgrounds than the United States. Second,

there are statutory restrictions on the number of legal immigrants the U.S.

will accept from any given country. These quotas play the important role of

increasing migration costs for emigrants (if the numerical constraints are

binding) since these individuals will presumably have to compete (and invest

time and effort) to obtain the relatively scarce visas. Hence mobility costs
                                        9




ensure that only some persons in country 0 find it worthwhile to emigrate and

thereby create the selection biases that are apparent in immigration data.

       The model outlined above can be used to infer how the quality of immi-

grants in the United States will differ in the cross-section (across different

countries of origin) or over time (as economic conditions in the country of

origin and in the U.S. change). The income-maximization hypothesis implies

the existence of a quality-of-immigrants equation given by:

(10)                       '1 = Q1(J1-p0-Tc,a0,cr1,p)

To determine the restrictions implied by the behavioral assumption of income
                                                                   a0a1
maximization it is instructive to recall that Q1 = yX, where y =          (k-p).
The parameter y does not depend on the size of the flow, while X does. The

impact of any variable a on the quality of immigrants in the U.S. is given by:


(11)                            __i=X1+
                                     aa

The first term in (11) holds the size of the flow constant and will be called

the ttcompositiont? effect. It measures how a change in the ability mix of a

constant-sized immigrant pool affects their quality (relative to the U.S.

native population). The second term in (11) will be called the "scale' effect

and captures what happens to the quality of U.S. immigrants as the size of the

flow is increased for any given ttmixt? (i.e., for constant y).

       Consider what happens to immigrant quality as the mean of the home countryt s

income distribution increases. It can be shown that:


(12)                                   (k-p)      .




Shifts   in p0 lead only to a scale effect on Q1. In addition, it is easy to

show that aX/az>0.9 As discussed earlier, the sign of k-p determines whether

immigrants fall in the upper or lower tail of the U.S. income distribution.
                                      10




Equation (12) shows that k-p also determines what happens to the (U.S.) earn-

ings of immigrants as mean income in the home country increases. If k-p is

negative (immigrants are coming from countries with significantly more unequal

income distributions and p is "sufficiently" positive), aQ1/ap0<0. The intui-

tion for this result follows from the fact that as p0 increases the emigration

rate falls. The increase in p0 improves the position of the "marginal" imini-

grant so that he no longer migrates. But this marginal immigrant was more

productive than the average immigrant. The increase in      therefore, leads

to a reduction in the average quality of the immigrant population. Since the

mean of the home country's income distribution and mobility costs play identical

roles in the model, equation (12) also predicts that increases in mobility

costs will decrease immigrant quality if k-p<0.

     It is important to note that this result only captures the impact of

changes in p (or migration costs) on the extent of selection bias (Q). The

increase in p, however, can be induced by either a shift in the skill distri-

bution of the country of origin's population, or by an increase in the country's

wealth that is unrelated to skills (e.g., the discovery of a large inventory

of natural resources). If p0 shifts because of the latter factor, equation

(12) correctly predicts the change in observed immigrant earnings (which are

given by p1 + Q1).   However, if p0 shifts due to an increase in the skill

level of the population, the change in immigrant earnings will also depend on

the term dp1/dp0. This derivative will be positive if skills are transferable

across countries, and this skill shift may dominate the selection bias effect

given by (12). Hence the (relative) earnings of immigrants in the U.S. may

well be a positive function of p0 regardless of the sign of equation (12).10

     The change in the quality of immigrants due to a mean-preserving increase

in the income inequality of the home country is given by:
                                              11




                           1
                                            oo2
                                             1
(13)                   =       °(p2_1)X -      0 (k-p)(1-pk)    z
                 cr0       a3
                            V                 V
where the first term gives the composition effect and the second term gives

the scale effect. Since IpI<1, the composition effect will always be non-

positive. An increase in a0 reduces the income of the poorest while it im-

proves the position of the richest. Hence the mix of immigrants will include

more persons from the lower tail of the distribution.

       In addition, a change in o changes the rate of emigration. Equation

(13) shows that the sign of the scale effect depends on the sign of three terms:

(k-p), (1-pk) and z. The first two of these terms are nothing but the restric-

tions in equations (7) and (8). Suppose, for concreteness, that there is nega-

tive selection: the least able persons leave the home country and they perform

below the U.S. native average. This implies k-p<0 and 1-pk>O. Inspection of

(13) reveals that the direction of the scale effect depends on the sign of z

                           >     + It, so   that mean U.S. incomes are higher than

foreign incomes even after adjusting for mobility costs, z is negative, the

scale effect is negative and thus immigrants from countries with more income

inequality will perform worse in the United States.

       The intuition for the workings of the scale effect can be grasped by

considering Figure 1, which is drawn with z<0 and ci1<cj0. As a increases, the

worse-off persons in country 0 will still want to migrate, while the better

off persons become relatively better off and their migration incentives de-

cline. The emigration rate drops due to the withdrawal of the ?best?t poten-

tial migrants from the market, and thus the quality of the pooi that does

reach the United States declines.

       The last characteristic of the home country's income distribution which

determines the quality of immigrants is p.          It can be shown that:
                                              12




(14)
                 aQi =   -   ____ (1-pk)X +   a2o
                                               1            ax
                                                                 z
                                                    (k-p)


Changes in the correlation coefficient also induce two effects. Consider

first the composition effect. Its sign depends on -(1-pk), which is negative

if there is negative selection. An increase in p implies that a better match

exists between performance in the U.S. and in the home country. Since

this decreases the profitability of migration for the best persons in country

o and increases it for the worst persons.

       In addition, changes in p have an impact on the emigration rate, and the

scale effect is given by the last term in (14). If the conditions for negative

selection hold, k-p<O and the sign of the scalie effect will depend on the sign

of -z. If, as before, we assume z<O, the scale effect of an increase in the

correlation coefficient on the quality of immigrants is seen to be positive.

       A summary of the comparative statics results under the various regimes is

provided in Table 1. One implication is immediately clear: generalizations

about the quality of immigrants in the United States are hard to come by. The

model does, however, isolate the key factors that determine the types of

selections in the immigrant population and these factors shed some light on my

1985 finding that the quality of immigrants declined in the postwar period.

Prior to the 1965 Amendments to the Immigration and Nationality Act, immigra-

tion to the United States from Eastern Hemisphere countries was regulated by

numerical quotas. These quotas were based on the ethnic population of the

United States in 1919 and thus encouraged immigration from (some) Western

European countries and discouraged immigration from all other countries. The

favored countries have one important characteristic: their income distribu-

tions are probably much less dispersed than those of countries in Latin

America or Asia. The 1965 Amendments revamped the quota system, established a
                                               13




20,000 numerical limit for immigration from any single country (subject to

both Hemispheric and worldwide numerical limits), and led to a substantial

increase in the number of immigrants from Asia and Latin America. The new

flow of migrants originate in countries that are much more likely to have

greater income inequality than the United States. It would not be surprising,

therefore, if the quality of immigrants declined as a result of the 1965
              11
Amendments.



II. Empirical Framework

       The quality measure Q1 derived in the previous section is the standardized

wage differential between immigrants and natives in the U.S. In any given

cross-section, this wage differential is affected by two factors:            (1) differ-

ences in the skill composition of the various immigrant cohorts; and (2) the

rate of convergence between foreign- and native-born earnings (i.e., the rate

of assimilation of immigrants). An empirical framework for measuring these

effects thus begins with the specification of the regression model:

(15)        n w.(T) =
                        X.OT
                               +    ÔL   +
                                             c1Iyj   +

                               +
                                    lii
                                    I.C. ÷
                                           2ii    1'
                                            I.C ÷ v.

where w.(T) is the wage rate of individual i in cross-section year T; X1

is a vector of socioeconomic characteristics; I. is a dummy variable set

to unity if the individual is foreign-born;              represents the number of years

the immigrant has resided in the United States; and C is the calendar year

of the immigrantts arrival. The parameters a1 and a2 capture the impact of

assimilation on the (relative) earnings of immigrants, while             and 2 capture
                               12
the cohort differentials.

       Of course, in a single cross-section of data equation (15) cannot be

estimated since the variables C. and y. are related by the identity T             C1 +   y1.
Substituting this identity in (15) yields:
                                              14



            Ln w.Cr) =          +                     +
(16)
                         X.OT       (ô+1T+p2T2)J.          (1-1-22T)I.y.
                                + (cy +2)I.y
                                      2   11 +       v.1
Equation (16) shows that the typical cross-section earnings function esti-
mated in the immigration literature does not identify a single parameter of

interest)3 It is easy to show, however, that if another cross-section is

available in calendar year T' all the parameters in (15) can be identified.14

Noreover, the comparison of the two cross-section regressions provides inter-

esting insights about the extent and direction of cohort quality differentials.

Let    =                                                   =
            1T2T2,       y2 =   c1-1-22T,      and
                                                               a2+2,   be the coefficients of

the immigration variables in the cross-section at calendar year T. This vector

will shift over time since:


                                          =     ÷
(17)
                                                    2T

(18)                                      =
                                              -2

(19)


The immigration vector in cross-section earnings functions (except for the

coefficient of Iy2) is inherently unstable, though the direction of the

instability provides insights into the underlying structural changes. For

instance,      (the coefficient of the immigrant dummy) will be shifting down

over time if the quality of immigrants is decreasing at the "margin" (i.e., in

the cross-section year T). In addition, the age/earnings profile of immi-

grants (relative to natives) becomes steeper over time (i.e., 2 increases) if

the decline in the quality of immigrant cohorts has accelerated over the

sample period.
                                     15




     The empirical analysis below uses the 1970 and 1980 Census cross—sections

to identify the parameters of interest (ô,ci1,a2,1, and        From these

estimates it is possible to calculate measures of three alternative dimensions

of cohort quality that underlie the discussion. The first of these dimensions

is simply the wage of an immigrant cohort relative to the native base prior to

any assimilation taking place; i.e., a measure of the ttrawtt skills a given

immigrant cohort brings to the United States. A second dimension is given by

the extent to which the quality of successive immigrant cohorts is changing

over time, while a third dimension is given by the extent to which the earn-

ings of a specific immigrant cohort grow--above and beyond pure aging effects--

in the U.S. labor market. Clearly, there are many ways of defining variables

that capture these three facets of the "quality" of immigrants. However,

since all possible definitions of a particular dimension of quality are based

on the same underlying parameters, there is a high degree of correlation among

the alternative measures. Thus, to some extent, the choice of the empirical

representation of a given facet of quality is arbitrary. In the empirical

analysis below, the three dimensions of quality are defined by:

     1.   The predicted wage differential in 1979 between the most recently

arrived immigrant cohort and the native base. This measure of the quality of

a single cohort of immigrants--prior to assimilation taking place --    is   given

by the coefficient of the immigrant dummy variable in the 1980 cross-section.

     2.   The rate of wage growth (relative to natives) for an immigrant cohort

that has resided in the United States for 10 years. This is the assimilation

effect evaluated at y = 10, and is given by a.Qnw/aI..10 =        + 20a2.
     3.   The predicted wage differential immediately after immigration be-

tween the 1979 cohort and the 1955 cohort. This measure of the extent of

cohort quality change is designed to compare the typical immigrant that
                                     16




migrated prior to the 1965 Immigration and Nationality Act with the typical

immigrant from the most recent wave. Using equation (15) it is easy to show

that this change in cohort quality is given by 24(, +         -           where T
                                                        22T       242),
indexes the 1980 cross-section.



III. Regression Results from the 1970—1980 Censuses

     The data are drawn from the 1970 2/100 U.S. Census (obtained by pooling

the 5% SNSA and County Group Sample and the 5% State Sample) and the 1980

5/100 A Sample.15 The complete samples are used in the creation of the immi-

grant extracts, but random samples are drawn for the native "baseline't popula-

tion.16 The analysis is restricted to men aged 25-64 who satisfied four

sample selection rules: (1) the individual was employed in the calendar year

prior to the Census; (2) the individual was not self-employed or working

without pay; (3) the individual was not in the Armed Forces (as of the survey

week); and (4) the individual did not reside in group quarters.17

     Since labor market conditions changed substantially between 1970 and

1980, the empirical framework derived in the previous section focused on the

behavior of immigrant earnings relative to the earnings of natives. In this

paper all immigrant groups will be compared to a single native base: the

group of white, non-Hispanic, non-Asian men.

    Forty-one countries were chosen for analysis. The countries were selected

on the basis that both the 1970 and 1980 Censuses contained a substantial

number of immigrants from that country. In particular, it is necessary to

have at least 80 observations of persons born in a particular foreign country

in the pooled 2/100 1970 Census to enter the sample of the 41 countries.'8

The 41 countries under analysis account for 90.4 percent of all immigration to

the U.S. between 1951 and 1980.
                                     17




     Summary statistics on the immigrant flow in the 1951-1980 period are

presented in Table 2. The first column of Table 2 gives the total number of

immigrants from each country that arrived in the United States in that period.

Although this number is interesting, it is more instructive if it is converted

into a percentage of the country of origin's 1980 population. This statistic

is presented in column 2 and gives the percentage by which the country of

origin's population would increase (in 1980) if all the persons who emigrated

to the United States in the past three decades returned to their birthplace.

This percent ranges from the trivially small (.04 percent of Brazil and the

USSR) to the amazingly large (over 10 percent for Jamaica). Of the 41 coun-

tries in Table 2, 17 of them experienced emigation to the United States which

exceeded 1 percent of that country's population.

     The national composition of the flows received by the United States over

the 1951-1980 period did not remain constant over the three decades. Column 3

gives the flow of immigrants in the 1951-1960 decade as a percent of the

country's 1950 population; while column 4 presents the flow of immigrants in

1971—1980 as a percent of the country's 1970 population. These statistics

document the declining importance of Western European countries as a source of

immigrants and the increasing importance of Asia and Latin America. The fact

that the characteristics of the sending countries changed drastically during

the postwar period implies that the types of selections that distinguish the

immigrant population from the native-born also changed.

     The 1970 and 1980 cross-section regressions were jointly estimated in

each of the 41 samples (i.e., the group of immigrants from a specific country

of origin pooled with the "white" native base), using the (2n) wage rate in

the year preceding the census as the dependent variable. The socioeconomic

vector of characteristics X included: years of completed schooling, age, age
                                     18




squared, whether health limits work, whether married, spouse present, and

whether resident of an SNSA. The regression framework derived in Section II

implies that the coefficient of the quadratic years-since-migration variable

should be constant across Censuses. This restriction was satisfied (at the 10

percent level of significance) by 32 of the 41 countries in the data, and

hence was imposed on the analysis.

     The restricted coefficients of the immigration vector in both the 1970

and 1980 Census cross-sections are presented in the first five columns of

Table 3. The coefficients of the immigration variables in 1970 differ drasti-

cally from the coefficients of the immigration variables in 1980. This dif-

ference implies that cross-section regressions do not capture the "true"

assimilation impact since cohort effects are confounding the analysis. Con-

sider, for example, Colombia. In 1970, the most recent immigrants earned

about 22 percent less than the native base, and their (relative) earnings

increased by about 1.7 percent in the first year after immigration. By 1980,

the most recent wave of Colombians earned 40 percent less than the same native

base, and their earnings increased by about 2.2 percent in the firstyear

after immigration. The tilting of the cross-section profile so that later

cross—sections are steeper and have a more negative constant term implies that

the quality of the more recent Colombian immigrant waves is lower than that of

the earlier waves. Conversely, consider the immigrants from France. In 1970,

the typical French immigrant earned about 8 percent less than a comparable

native person, and had earnings growth of about .2 percent during that first-

year after immigration. By 1980, the most recent immigrant earned about 10

percent more than the native base, and had earnings growth of minus .5 percent

during that first year. The flattening of the cross-section profile implies

that the quality of French immigrants increased over the sample period.
                                      19




     Three dimensions of cohort quality are implicit in these regression

coefficients. The entry wage differential between the 1979 immigrant cohort

and the native base is given by the coefficient of the immigrant dummy in the

1980 Census cross-section. Table 3 clearly shows that this coefficient has a

large variance across countries. The last two columns of Table 3 present

estimates of the other two dimensions of cohort quality: the assimilation

rate defined by the slope of the earnings/assimilation path at y =   10; and the
rate of change in cohort quality, defined by the earnings differential between

the 1979 cohort and the 1955 cohort at the time of arrival in the U.S. Since

these estimated parameters are functions of the cross-section coefficients of

Table 3, it is not surprising to find that there is a lot of variance in both

of these variables across countries. Immigrants from some countries have high

assimilation rates, while immigrants from other countries experience no assimi-

lation at all. Similarly, the rate of cohort quality change is sometimes

positive (thus indicating quality increased between the 1955 and 1979 cohorts)

and sometimes negative (thus indicating a quality decrease across cohorts).

For example, the most recent immigrant wave from the United Kingdom has an

earnings potential that is about 13 percent higher that the wave that arrived

in 1955, while the most recent immigrants from India have 28 percent lower

earnings than the earlier cohort.

     The Roy model suggests that country-specific characteristics of the income

distribution (and mobility costs) determine the quality of immigrants in the

United States. The important task, therefore, becomes the identification of

observable variables which can proxy for these theoretical parameters, and

the determination of whether these country-specific variables "explain" the

variance in the quality proxies presented in Table 3.
                                     20



IV. Determinants of Immigrant Quality

     Table 4 describes the construction and source of country-specific aggre-

gate variables which portray the political and economic conditions (as well as

some characteristics of the immigrant populations) of the 41 countries under

analysis during the 1950-1979 period. Table 4 also presents the mean and

range of these variables and comparable statistics for the U.S.

     Three of these variables are designed to capture political conditions in

the country of origin. These political measures are obtained from the Cross-

National Time-Series Archive (CNTSA), a historical dataset containing both

political and economic variables for all sovereign countries since 1815 (up to

1973).19 The CNTSA set contains a variable describing the extent of "party

legitimacy", i.e., whether or not there is competition among political parties

in the electoral system. The measure of party legitimacy is interpreted as an

index of political freedom, and is used to construct two variables: (1) a

dummy variable set equal to unity if the immigrant's birthplace had a competi-

tive political system during the entire 1950-1973 period; and (2) a dummy

variable set equal to unity if the immigrant's birthplace had a competitive

political system at the beginning of the period, but lost its political freedom

by the end of the period. The omitted dummy variable indicates whether the

birthplace of the immigrant had a noncompetitive political system both at the

beginning and at the end of the 1950-1973 period.20 The last index of political

stability used is a variable measuring the number of political assassinations

(defined as a politically motivated murder or attempted murder of a high

government official or politician) that took place in the specific country

during the 1950-1973 period.

    The country-specific vector also includes variables that describe

economic conditions in the various countries of origin:
                                      21




     1.    The logarithm of per capita Gross National Product in 1980 (in U.S.

dollars). In addition, the analysis also uses the average annual percentage

change in that variable over the 1963-1980 period. These variables, of course,

are designed to control for the mean level of the income distribution (as well

as changes in that level) in the various countries of origin.

     2.    The ratio of household income accruing to the top 10 percent of the

households to the income accruing to the bottom 20 percent of the households

(circa 1970). Unfortunately, this measure of income inequality does not exist

prior to the 1970s for most of the countries under analysis, and hence the

change in the extent of income inequality during the last three decades cannot

be documented. The empirical analysis below will proxy for the change in income

inequality by using the change in the fraction of GNP that can be attributed to

central government expenditures over that period. Presumably, the greater the

role of the government the more taxation and income redistribution that occurs,

and hence the less unequal the income distribution will be.

     3.    The level of mobility costs is proxied by the number of air miles

between the countryt s capital and the nearest U.S. gateway.

     Finally, the regressions also include variables that describe relevant

characteristics of the immigrant population itself. The two variables in this

category are the fraction of the most recently arrived immigrants who speak

English well or very well, and the average age at migration. These variables

are likely to affect the earnings of immigrants as well as their incentives to

invest in human capital, and hence will be important determinants of immigrant

quality.



A.   Determinants of the Entry Wage Differential

     In the last section a variable measuring the entry wage differential
                                     22




between the foreign-born and the native-born for the immigrant cohort arriving

in 1979 was calculated for each of the 41 countries under analysis. Table 5

presents the generalized least squares regressions of this measure of immigrant

quality on the country-specific aggregate variables.2'

     The simplest specification in column 1 shows that the variable measuring

whether or not the country was politically competitive in the postwar period

has a strong positive impact on the immigrant's entry wage. Immigrants from

these countries have 27 percent higher relative earnings (at the time of entry

into the U.S.) than immigrants from politically repressive countries. This

basic regression also shows that the extent of income inequality has a weak

negative impact on the relative quality of immigrants. Immigrants from coun-

tries with more income inequality are of lower quality. This result is consis-

tent with the theoretical implications of the Roy model. As income inequality

increases, the migration incentives for persons in the upper tail of the

distribution decline, thus lowering the average quality of the immigrant

population.

     In the second column of Table 5, the variables measuring mobility costs

and the age and English proficiency of immigrants are added to the regression.

The results suggest that persons migrating from countries that have 100%

English proficiency rates have about 26 percent higher relative earnings at

the time of entry than immigrants from countries with 0% English proficiency

rates.22 Table 5 also shows that age at migration has a significant negative

impact on the initial relative earnings of immigrants in the United States.

Hence persons who migrate as youths have an easier time in the U.S. labor

market than older immigrants.

     The third regression in Table 5 adds the mean level of GNP per capita to

the list of exogenous variables. Its impact is strongly positive, and its
                                      23




inclusion increases the explanatory power of the regression to over 80 percent!

A 10 percent increase in a country's GNP increases the relative earnings of

immigrants by about 1.2 percent. This effect is likely to be caused by the

fact that the higher the GNP in the country of origin, the greater the resem-

blance between that country's economic structure and that of the U.S., as well

as the greater the skills of the immigrant flow. Hence immigrants from those

countries perform quite well in the U.S. labor market. The last regression in

Table 6 adds continent dummies (the omitted continent is Europe) to control

for continent-specific fixed effects. These additional controls do not have a
                                                          23
major impact on the coefficient of the other variables.

     Table 5 shows that the introduction of the GNP variable has a major

impact on the coefficient of the inequality variable: the latter turns posi-

tive (and insignificant). The reason for this shift lies in the very high

negative correlation between the two variables (r =   -.6).    Since high-income

countries (mostly in Western Europe) also tend to have the least amount of

income inequality, the impact of per capita GNP on initial immigrant quality

is likely capturing shifts in both the mean and the variance of the country of

origin's income distribution.

     The results in Table 5, therefore, are not entirely consistent with the

theoretical predictions. Note, however, that these regressions do not truly

constitute a "test" of the theory. The Roy model shows that selection biases

will depend on a number of parameters which are not directly measurable.

Table 5 attempts to explain inter-country differences in terms of variables

which supposedly proxy for these primitive concepts. Clearly the errors intro-

duced in the creation of these variables weaken the link between the theory

and the empirical work. Nevertheless, it is important to note that these few

country-specific variables "explain" a large fraction of the inter-country

differences evident in Census data.
                                     24




B.   Determinants of the Rate of Assimilation

     The assimilation rate is defined by the rate of earnings growth of an

immigrant cohort (relative to natives) evaluated at 10 years after immigra-

tion. Table 6 presents the regressions of this variable on the various

country-specific proxies.

     Assimilation rates are determined by political factors. In particular,

immigrants from free countries have lower assimilation rates than immigrants

from countries with a long history of political repression, while immigrants

from countries that recently lost their political freedom have the highest

assimilation rates. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that the

costs of return migration for immigrants from politically repressive countries

are "high", and therefore they have the most incentives to adapt to the U.S.

labor market. The same reasoning can also explain the strong positive impact

of the number of assassinations on the rate of immigrant assimilation: immi-

grants from politically unstable countries have greater incentives to assimi-

late in the U.S. labor market since their return migration may be costly.

     The regression in column 2 shows that although distance between the U.S.

and the country of birth has a positive impact on the assimilation rate, the

effect is not significant. However, immigrants from countries with higher

levels of English proficiency have much higher assimilation rates. In fact,

the rate of earnings growth of immigrants from English-speaking countries is

1.4 percentage points higher than that of immigrants from countries with 0%

English proficiency rates. Similarly, the age at immigration has a strong

positive impact on assimilation rates. This result is consistent with the

hypothesis that immigrants who migrate as youths have little to gain from

assimilation p se. On the other hand, the adaptation period is likely to be

important for persons who migrate at older ages.
                                     25




     The last two regressions in Table 6 add the per capita GNP variable and

the continent dummies to the list of regressors. These variables have a

significant impact on the assimilation rate (in column 4). Immigrants from

wealthier countries have higher assimilation rates, and Europeans (the omitted

continent dummy) have higher assimilation rates than immigrants from the

Americas, but lower assimilation rates than immigrants born in Asia or Africa.

Despite the strongly significant impact of the continent dummies, the qualita-

tive effect of most of the other variables in the regression is unaffected.



C.   Determinants of the Change in Cohort Quality

     Section III calculated a variable measuring the wage differential between

the 1979 immigrant cohort and the 1955 immigrant cohort as of the date of

immigration. The regressions analyzing the determinants of cohort quality

change are presented in Table 7. It should be noted that the specification of

these regressions differs slightly from those presented in Tables 5 and 6

since cohort quality change is likely to be determined by changes in the

explanatory variables over the 1954-1979 period.

     The simple specification in column 1 reveals that cohort quality change

is strongly influenced by practically all the variables in the regressions.

For example, the quality of cohorts from countries that experienced a shift

from political competition to repression increased by about 13 percent (rela-

tive to the quality of cohorts from countries that were politically repressive

throughout the period). This effect is consistent with the implications of

the theory developed in Section I. The change in political structure can be

viewed as a change in the correlation coefficient of the earnings of indi-

viduals between the home country and the U.S. The change towards a repressive

government may make the correlation coefficient in earnings across the two
                                    26



countries negative. Thus persons in the "revolutionary" lower tail of the

home country's income distribution migrate to the U.S. and perform quite well

in the U.S. labor market.

    Table 7 also shows that cohort quality change is strongly affected by the

average annual change in the percent of GNP that is attributable to expendi-

tures by the central government. Presumably the greater the role of the

government, the more income redistribution that takes place and the greater

the decrease in income inequality over the postwar period. The coefficient of

this variable in Table 8 is consistent with the theoretical implication.

     The next two regressions in Table 8 introduce the (2n) level of GNP to

control for country-specific differences in wealth, and the continent dummies

to control for continent-specific fixed effects. The continent dummies are

not very significant, but the GNP variable does have a strong positive impact

on cohort quality change. Its positive coefficient confirms the finding

suggested by the descriptive analysis in Section III: the quality of immi-

grants admitted to the United States has been increasing over time when the

immigrants originate in Western Europe and has been declining over time when

the immigrants originate in the less developed countries.

     One factor causing systematic quality shifts across immigrant cohorts may

have been the change in the quota system mandated by the 1965 Amendments to

the Immigration and Nationality Act. Table 4 defined a variable that measures

the change in the fraction of the home country's population "eligible" for

emigration to the United States before and after the 1965 Amendments. Higher

levels of this variable imply a reduction in the levels of "mobility costs"

faced by potential emigrants. The Roy model suggests that its impact on the

rate of cohort quality change is positive if the correlation coefficient

between earnings capacities in the two countries is positive and if income is
                                     27




more unequally distributed in the countries of origin than in the United

States. The last column of Table 7 adds the quota variable to the regression

and shows that it indeed has a positive and significant impact on the rate of

change in cohort quality. It is important to note that this regression is

estimated on only 28 observations since the quota system prior to the 1965

Amendments was applicable only to countries that were in the Eastern Hemisphere.



D.   Determinants of the Emigration Rate

     The empirical analysis in this paper focuses on the determinants of the

(relative) earnings of immigrants. It is worth noting, however, that the Roy

model also implies that the emigration rate will be a function of the same

characteristics of the income distribution, political conditions, and migra-

tion costs that determine the relative earnings of immigrants. Therefore, it

is important to explore if the emigration rate from the various countries of

origin is responsive to shifts in the country-specific variables that have

been used throughout this section.

     Table 8 presents two probit regressions on the emigration rate.24 The

dependent variable is obtained from the second column of the summary statis-

tics presented in Table 2, and is the percentage of the country of origin's

population that emigrated to the United States in the 195 1-1980 period. The

first of the two regressions includes the political variables, the distance

variable (to measure migration costs), and the inequality variable, while the

second regression adds the continent dummies.25

     As expected, the distance between the country of origin and the United

States has a negative impact on the emigration rate. The emigration rate is

also lower for countries that have high levels of GNP per capita. These

results, of course, are consistent with the predictions of the wealth-
                                     28



maximization framework. More interestingly, the second moment of the income

distribution (as predicted by the Roy model) plays an important role in the

determination of the emigration rate. In particular, countries with more

income inequality have lower emigration rates. This negative coefficient is

implied by the wealth-maximization framework if there is negative selection in

the immigrant pool. Negative selection requires that the correlation between

earnings in the U.S. and in the sending countries be sufficiently positive

and that the U.S. has less income inequality than the sending countries.

If, in addition, mean income in the U.S. exceeds mean income in sending

countries (adjusted for mobility costs), as income inequality in the home

country increases, the migration incentives of the most able decreases while

the poorest will still migrate. Hence the emigration rate declines due to the

withdrawal of high-income persons from the pooi of emigrants. The analysis of

the emigration rate, therefore, leads to results that are generally consistent

with the types of selection biases that have been documented in this paper.



V.   Summary

     What determines the (labor market) quality of foreign-born persons in the

United States? Most of the literature addresses this question simply by

assuming that immigrants are a "selectt' group, and that the selection mecha-

nism somehow sends the most able and the most ambitious persons in any country

of origin to the United States. This paper is an attempt to analyze both the

conceptual and empirical foundations for this type of assertion. Among the

major findings of the study are:

     1.   If potential emigrants are income-maximizers, foreign-born persons

in the United States need not be drawn from the most able and most ambitious

in the country of origin. Two conditions must be satisfied in order for
                                     29




positive selection to take place:   (1) there is a strong positive correlation

between the earnings a worker may expect in the home country and the earnings

the same worker may expect in the U.S.; and (2) the U.S. has a more unequal

income distribution than the home country. If the income distribution in the

sending country is more unequal than that of the U.S. (and the correlation in

earnings is positive and strong), emigrants will be chosen from the lower tail

of the income distribution in the country of origin.

     2.   The empirical analysis of the earnings of immigrants from 41 differ-

ent countries using the 1970 and 1980 Census shows that there are strong

country-specific fixed effects in the (labor market) quality of foreign-born

persons. In particular, persons from Western European countries do quite well

in the United States, and their cohorts have exhibited a general increase in

earnings (relative to their measured skills) over the postwar period. On the

other hand, persons from less developed countries do not perform well in the

U.S. labor market and their cohorts have exhibited a general decrease in

earnings (relative to their measured skills) over the postwar period.

     3.   The empirical analysis of the variance in various dimensions of

immigrant incomes shows that a few variables describing political and economic

conditions in the various countries of origin explain over two-thirds of the

intercountry variance in the mean U.S. incomes of immigrants with the same

measured skills. Immigrants with high incomes in the U.S. relative to their

measure skills come from countries that have high levels of GNP, low levels of

income inequality, and politically competitive systems.
                                        30




                                      Footnotes



     *Department of Economics, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA

93106, and National Bureau of Economic Research. I am grateful to Orley

Ashenfelter, Gary Becker, Stephen Bronars, Richard Freeman, Daniel Hamermesh,

James Heckman, Larry Kenny and Sherwin Rosen for comments on earlier drafts

of this paper. The research was funded by a grant from the Ford Foundation

to the NBER, and by the National Science Foundation (Grant No. SES-8603973).

The data sets used in this paper are available on request from the author.
     1
          For a recent discussion of this identification problem see James

J. Heckman and Richard Robb (1983).
     2
          The model is formally identical to that presented in A.D. Roy's

(1951) study of the impact of self-selection in occupational choice on the

income distribution. The wealth-maximization hypothesis is also the corner-

stone of the human capital model proposed by Larry A. Sjaastad (1962).

However, both Sjaastad's work and the literature it engendered pay little

attention to the selection biases that are at the core of the Roy model.
     3
          Two important problems are ignored by the two-country setup.

First, it is likely that potential movers from any country j will have more

than one possible country of destination. Secondly, the probability that U.S.

native-born persons emigrate to other countries may not be negligible. These

possibilities are ignored in order to focus on the essential aspects of the

selection problem.

          The Roy model has been recently used by Robert J. Willis and Sherwin

Rosen (1979) to analyze the types of selection biases created by the college

attendance decision. Heckman and Guilherme Sedlacek (1985) present a general-

ization of the Roy model and apply it to the problem of estimating market

wage functions.
                                           31



              It is possible, of course, that the average person in country 0 has

 ethnic or racial characteristics which are favored or penalized by the U.S.

 labor market. Hence the mean income of (equally skilled) natives may not

 equal p1. This possibility is ignored in the discussion that follows, but

 it can be easily incorporated into the model.
         6
             A fourth case where Q0>0 and Q1<O is theoretically impossible since

it requires p>1.

             The generalization of the model to allow for variable mobility costs

 (it)   shows that the necessary conditions for negative selection remain un-

changed as long as mobility costs and earnings do not have an "excessiv&'

negative correlation.
        8
             It must be noted, however, that these data on income inequality do

not correspond exactly to the variances that are the primitive parameters of

the Roy model. In particular, a and             describe the dispersion in

"opportunities" (for given socioeconomic characteristics).

             This follows trivially from the fact that X is defined as E(xlx>z),

whre x is a standard normal random variable.
        10
             This discussion illustrates how differences in skill characteristics

can enter the Roy model. More generally, the earnings distributions in the

two countries can be written as:

                                 £n w0 =        +
                                           Xô       C0

                                 £n w1 =     +
                                         Xó1
and the emigration rate (for given characteristics X) is given by:

                       P   Pr{(c1-c0) >   - [x(61-o0)    -

Selection    will occur not only on the basis of unobserved characteristics

(c), but also in terms of the socioeconomic variables X as       long   as the two
                                        32



countries value these skills differently. Although the empirical analysis

below (by holding X constant) focuses on the selections in C,    it would be
very interesting to also investigate the types of selections generated in X.

          In addition, the 1965 Act changed the emphasis in the allocation

of visas towards family reunification and away from occupational preferences.

This shift may well lead to an even steeper decline in the quality of immi-

grants admitted to the U.S.
     12
          The parameters ft and 2 capture two kinds of cohort effects: (1)

differences in the skill composition of cohorts due to a secular trend in the

quality of immigrants; and (2) differences due to selective emigration of

foreign-born persons in the U.S. Little is known, however, about the selection

biases associated with return migration even though the Roy model can be

generalized to account for the possibility that individuals make "mistakes".

Unfortunately, U.S. data on the return migration of foreign-born persons is

basically non-existent, and hence this problem is ignored in what follows.
     13
          Except perhaps for the coefficient of the immigrant dummy. This

coefficient gives the wage differential between the most recent cohort

of immigrants and the native-born population.
     14
          Provided that period effects on the immigrant/native wage differential

are negligible. This assumption is far from innocuous. Unfortunately, since

only two cross-sections are available, little can be done to test its validity.
     15
          The two 1970 samples that are pooled are essentially independent

of each other. The only substantive difference between them --     in   the context

of this study --   is   that the set of persons for whom SMSA residence is defined

differs in the two samples. However, the coefficients of the SFISA dummy in

earnings functions estimated separately in the two samples are not statisti-

cally different from each other.
                                       33



      16
            The native-born extract is a .001 sample in the 1970 Census

 and a .00042 sample in the 1980 Census.
      17
            The analysis is restricted to men aged 25-64 in either Census year.

 This differs from the more common methodology of tracking the t?sameU men over

 time. It can be shown (Heckman and Robb, 1983) that if the underlying para-

meters are constant over time it is unnecessary to track specific cohorts

across Censuses in order to identify the structure. In addition, the samples

exclude men who are self-employed. This restriction creates its own set of

selection biases. However, an equally serious problem would arise if self-

employed men were included in the study and their incomes were analyzed

jointly with the wages of salaried men. Finally, the data exclude men who

had annual earnings under $1,000 in either of the Census years.
     18                            .

           Only two of the countries in the analysis have between 80 to 100
observations in the 1970 Census, an additional 11 countries have between

101 and 200 observations, 8 have between 201 and 300 observations, and 20

have more than 300 observations. Of course, the sample sizes in the 1980

Census are significantly larger.
     19
           The Cross-National Time-Series Archive was created by Professor

Arthur Banks and is available through the Inter-University Consortium for

Political and Social Research.
     20
           There is also the possibility that a country gained its freedom

during the 1950-1973 period. Only one country, however, falls in this

category (The Dominican Republic). To reduce the number of exogenous

variables, this country was pooled with the countries that were ?tfreet?

throughout the entire period.
     21
           The dependent variables in the "second stage" regressions presented

in this section are themselves estimated regression coefficients (or linear
                                                34



combinations thereof). Hence the disturbances in these regressions are hetero-

scedastic. Let y be the true value of the dependent variable (for country i)

in the second-stage regressions. The "true" model is given by:

          yi =      +


where E(c1) = 0 and E() =         cr.       The variable y is unobserved, but           is

estimated from the regressions in Section III, where              =
                                                                      y1
                                                                           +
                                                                               v,   E(v1) =   0,
E(v) = cJ, and       and v1 are assumed to be independent. The heteroscedasticity

arises because the estimated regressions are given by:

             =      + (c..   -
                                 v.)    =   Z. +
where E(p) = 0 and E(p) =               + cr.    The OLS regression of the second stage

provides an estimate of , and combined with the estimates of                        available

from the first stage regressions, the parameter               can be estimated by:



           c
                 SSE -
                         1
                   N-K
where SSE is the error sum of squares from the second stage regression and

N - K is the number of degrees of freedom. The calculated                      is then used to

reestimate the second stage regression using generalized least squares.
     22
          These results are consistent with the estimated gains to English

language proficiency reported in Walter McHanus, William Gould and Finis Welch

(1983).
     23
          To further test the sensitivity of the results two additional

variables were introduced into the regression: the percent of the country's

labor force that is in agriculture, and the per capita school enrollment rate.

Both of these variables were highly correlated with GNP per capita, and in fact

became insignificant once GNP was controlled for. Their impact on the other

variables in the regression was negligible.
     24
          The probits were estimated using generalized Jeast squares. The

estimator, therefore, is minimum chi-squared and efficient.
                                       35



     25
          The regressions in Table 8 exclude the age at migration from the

list of regressors since this variable was calculated in the subsample of

immigrants and may have little relationship to the age distribution of the

population in the country of origin.
                                      36



                                   References



Borjas, George J., "Assimilation, Changes in Cohort Quality, and the Earnings

     of Immigrants," Journal of Labor Economics, October 1985, 3, 463-489.

_______________      "A Longitudinal Analysis of Immigrant Earnings: The Case

     of Scientists and Engineers," Mimeo, University of California, Santa

    Barbara, 1987.

Carliner, Geoffrey, "Wages, Earnings, and Hours of First, Second and Third

     Generation American Males," Economic Inquiry, January 1980, 18, 87-102.

Chiswick, Barry R., "The Effect of Americanization on the Earnings of

    Foreign-Born Men," Journal of Political Economy, October 1978, 86,

     897—921.

DeFreitas, Gregory, "The Earnings of Immigrants in the American Labor

    Market," Ph.D. Dissertation, Columbia University, 1980.

Beckman, James J., "Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error,"

    Econometrica, January 1979, 47, 153-161.

________________ and Richard Robb, "Using Longitudinal Data to Estimate

    Age, Period, and Cohort Effects in Earnings Equations," in H. Winsborough

     and 0. Duncan, eds., Analyzing Longitudinal Data for Age, Period, and

     Cohort Effects, New York: Academic Press, 1983.

_________________ and Guilherme Sedlacek, "Heterogeneity, Aggregation, and

    Market Wage Functions: An Empirical Model of Self-Selection in the

     Labor Market," Journal of Political Economy, December 1985, 93, 1077-1125.

Jasso, Guillermina and Mark R. Rosenzweig, "How Well Do U.S. Immigrants Do?

     Vintage Effects, Emigration Selectivity, and the Occupational Mobility

     of Immigrants," Mimeo, University of Minnesota, June 1985.
                                      37




________________________________________   "Family Reunification and the Immi-

     gration Multiplier: U.S. Immigration Law, Origin-Country Conditions,

     and the Reproduction of Immigrants," Demography, August 1986, 23, 291-311.

McManus, Walter, William Gould, and Finis Welch, "Earnings of Hispanic Men:

     The Role of English Language Proficiency," Journal of Labor Economics,

     April 1983, 1, 101—130.

Roy, A.D., "Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings," Oxford Economic

     Papers, June 1951, 3, 135-146.

Sjaastad, Larry A., "The Costs and Returns of Human Migration," Journal of

     Political Economy, October 1962 Supplement, 70, 80-93.

United Nations, Compendium of Social Statistics, New York, 1977.

U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, World Military Expenditures and

     Arms Transfers, 1972-1982, Washington, D.C., 1984.

U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, World Military Expenditures and

     Arms Trade, 1963—1973, Washington, D.C., 1975.

U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service, Annual Report of the Immigration

     and Naturalization Service, Washington, D.C., 1965.

U.S. Bureau of the Census, Statistical Abstract of the United States,

     Washington, D.C., various issues.

Willis, Robert J. and Sherwin Rosen, "Education and Self-Selection," Journal

     of Political Economy, October 1979 Supplement, 87, S7-S36.

World Bank, World Development Report, New York, Oxford University Press,

     various issues.
                                               38




                                              Table 1

                          Summary of Comparative Statics Results




                                 Positive Selection     Negative Selection   Refugee Sorting
                                    Q0>O,Q1>O                Q0<O,Q1<O          Q0<O,Q1>O

aQ1/3p0:   Composition Effect           none                  none                none

           Scale Effect                   +                     -                   ÷

                                                                -
aQ1/aa0:   Composition Effect
           Scale Effect, z<O              -                     -                   ÷
                           z>O            +                     +                    -

           Composition Effect             +                     -
aQ1/ap:
           Scale Effect, z<O              -                     +                    -
                           z>O            +                     -                   +
                                          39




                                         TABLE 2

          INNIGRATION FLOWS TO TIlE UNITED STATES IN TIlE 195 1-1980 PERIOD

                                                           1951-1960           1971-1980
                           1951-1980 Immigration           Immigrants          Immigrants
                       Total Number    As Percent of      as Percent of       as Percent of
 Country of Birth       (in l000s)    1980 Populationa    1950 Populationa 1970 Populationa

Europe:
  Austria                   48.1               .6              .4                 .1
  Czechoslovakia           60.4                .4              .2                 .1
  Denmark                  30.0                .6              .3                 .1
  France                   90.1                .2              .1                 .04
  Germany                 611.5             1.0                .7                 .1
  Greece                  232.3             2.4                .6               1.1
  Hungary                  93.4                .9              .7                 .1
  Ireland                 120.9             3.5               2.2                 .5
  Italy                   524.8                .9              .4                 .2
  Netherlands              85.7                .6              .5                 .1
  Norway                   45.1             1.1                .8                 .1
  Poland                  244.9                .7              .5                 .1
  Portugal                204.2             2.1                .2               1.2
  Romania                  49.8                .2              .1                .1
  Spain                    71.2                .2              .04               .1
  Sweden                   41.9                .5              .3                .1
  Switzerland              40.1                .6              .4                .1
  United Kingdom          562.9             1.0                .4                .2
  USSR                    105.4                .04             .02               .02
  Yugoslavia              147.0                .7              .4                .2
Asia and Africa:
  China (Taiwan)          331.9             1.9                .4               1.4
  Egypt                    46.4                .1              .02               .1
  India                   211.1              .03               .001              .03
  Iran                     59.1              .2                .01               .2
  Israel                   48.1             1.3                .7                .9
  Japan                   131.1                .1              .05               .05
  Korea                   314.8                .8              .02               .8
  Philippines             478.9                .9              .1               1.0
Americas:
  Argentina                81.5                .3              .1                .3
  Brazil                   43.1                .04             .02               .01
  Canada                  676.4            2.8               2.0                 .5
  Colombia                165.5             .6                 .4                .6
  Cuba                    611.9            6.3               1.5                3.2
  Dominican Republic      251.9            4.3                .5                3.4
  Ecuador                  96.7            1.2                .3                 .8
  Guatemala                45.1                .7             .1                 .5
  Haiti                   100.2            1.8                .1                1.3
  Jamaica                 221.7           10.3                .6                7.3
  Mexico                 1399.8            2.0               1.2                1.3
  Panama                   50.8            2.6               1.2                1.5
  Trinidad & Tobago        88.0            8.0                .2                6.0

Source: U.S. Bureau of the Census (various issues).
aThe population base refers to the country of origin.
                                                         40




                                                TABLE 3
                                      ESTIMATES OF MODEL PARAMETERSa

                                                                                      Rate of         1955—79
                               1970                             1980                Assimilation     Change in
Country of Birth                                  I              Lx        Iy2         at y=10     Cohort Quality

Europe:
    Austria           .0189       .0036         .0321          .0034     -.00003        .0040           .0287
                      (.26)       (.75)         (.52)          (.82)      (-.45)       (.66)           (.20)
    Czechoslovakia   -.1525       .0147     -. 1441            .0127     - .00019      .0088          — .0143
                      (—2.48)     (3.34)        (-2.79)        (3.23)     (—2.74)      (1.64)          (—.10)
    Denmark           .0838      - .0033        .2018         -.0056      .00009       .0068           .2441
                      (.82)       (—.44)        (2.14)         (—.81)     (.72)        (.78)           (1.21)
    France           - .0785      .0020         .0999         - .0046     .00005       .0111           .3183
                      (—1.28)     (.47)         (2.48)         (—1.33)    (.79)        (2.05)          (2.74)

    Germany           .0999      - .0025         1409         -.0047      .00007      -.0002           .0618
.
                      (3.82)      (—1.37)       (5.40)         (—2.62)    (2.38)       (—.10)          (1.17)
    Greece           - .2400      .0115     -   .3092     .0141          - .00018      .0049          —.1231
                      (-6.70)     (3.73)        (—11. 28) (5.42)          (—3.33)      (1.56)          (-1.75)

    Hungary          - .1555      .0173     -   .2082          .0145     - .00021      .0036          —.1744
                      (—2.98)     (4.12)        (-4.30)        (4.23)     (-3.31)      (.86)           (-1.85)
    Ireland          - .0732      .0019     - .0514            .0027     - .00002      .0050           .0666
                      (—1.54)     (.53)         (-1.09)        (.78)      (-.28)       (1.26)          (.72)

    Italy             .0133       .0060     - .0673            .0065     - .00009     - .0031         —.1855
                      (.60)       (3.72)        (-3.45)        (4.58)     (—3.49)      (—1.55)         (—4.07)
    Netherlands       .0127      - .0061        .1252         -.0074      .00015       .0062           .2487
                      (.23)       (—1.45)       (2.71)         (—2.15)    (2.35)       (1.35)          (2.41)

    Norway            .2245      -.0093         .2785         -.0096      .00015      -.0013           .1241
                      (2.54)      (—1.55)       (3.77)         (—1.76)    (1.58)       (—.17)          (.71)
    Poland           - .1936      .0181     -   .2734    .0184           - .00024      .0058          —.1865
                      (—5.70)     (7.62)        (-11.08) (9.61)           (—6.86)      (1.98)          (-3.08)

    Portugal          .0797       .0032     - .0913            .0073     - .00012     - .0102         —.3418
                      (1.95)      (.86)         (-3.25)        (2.47)     (—1.95)      (—2.77)         (-4.02)
    Romania          -.3015       .0263     - .3161            .0229     - .00030      .0136          -.0929
                      (—4.23)     (4.97)        (-7.02)        (5.47)     (—3.65)      (2.17)          (-.72)

    Spain            -.3547       .0233     -. 1920            .0134     -.00022       .0203           .2245
                      (-6.15)     (4.32)        (-4.10)        (2.88)     (—2.39)      (3.98)          (1.92)
    Sweden            .0128       .0119         .0465          .0099     - .00021      .0080           .0465
                      (.13)       (1.90)        (.69)          (1.88)     (—2.14)      (.88)           (.24)
    Switzerland      - .0201      .0132         .1467          .0067     - .00015      .0171           .2912
                      (—.27)      (2.18)        (2.48)         (1.33)     (—1.56)      (2.56)          (1.97)
    United Kingdom    .0607      -.0006          1271         -.0023      .00002       .0038           .1303
                      (2.70)      (-.34)        (7.38)         (—1.61)    (.67)        (1.84)          (2.81)
                                                        41




                                              TABLE 3 (continued)

                                                                                  Rate of         1955- 79
                               1970                           1980     _____    Assimilation     Change in
Country of Birth                                  I                                at y=lO     Cohort Quality
  USSR             - .3509           .027 7   -.4299     .0262   -.00035            .0105          -.2144
                       (-6.70)       (8.34)     (—18.75) (11.70) (—7.67)            (2.22)          (—2.31)
  Yugoslavia       -   .0659         .0096    - .0920        .0097   -.00009        .0054          - .0608
                       (-1.51)       (2.72)     (—2.82) (3.52)        (—1.61)       (1.49)          (—.79)

Asia and Africa:
  China (Taiwan)   -.4525            .0227    -.5327    .0254   -.00037             .0114         -.1481
                       (-14.34)      (9.43)    (-26.43) (11.66) (-8.22)             (4.01)         (-2.44)
  Egypt            -.4466            .0421    -.4586    .0396        -.00056        .0260         -.0706
                       (—7.00)       (5.67)    (—10.84) (7.57)        (—4.34)       (4.76)          (—.57)
  India            -.2847            .0453    -.4340    .0497   -.00096             .0179         —.2845
                    (—7.09)          (9.71)    (—21.41) (16.75) (—11.03)            (5.33)         (—3.84)
  Iran             -.4078            .0229    -.3101    .0249        -.00031       .0294            .2690
                    (-4.71)          (3.03)    (-10.19) (5.45)        (—2.47)      (4.13)           (1.88)
  Israel           -.2998            .0282    -.3397         .0260   -.00041       .0128          -.1314
                       (—4.19)       (4.54)    (-8.44) (5.74)         (—3.84)      (2.11)           (—1.00)
  Japan            -.1314            .0010     .1016     -.0049       .00002       .0159            .4616
                       (-2.65)       (.19)     (4.31)        (-1.46) (.18)         (3.60)           (4.78)
  Korea            -.5450            .0439    -.4481    .0393        -.00071       .0323            .1544
                       (-8.69)       (5.72)    (-19.44) (9.68)        (-5.40)      (6.31)           (1.37)
  Philippines      -.4360    .0265   -.3881    .0266   —.00041                     .0233           .1158
                    (—13.31) (11.30)  (—23.14) (13.33) (—9.34)                     (7.84)          (1.80)

Americas:

  Argentina        -.2099            .0210    -.2427         .0186   —.00032       .0077          -.1191
                       (-3.81)       (3.58)    (—5.80) (4.13)         (-3.11)      (1.65)          (—1.12)
  Brazil           -.1430            .0114    -.0257         .0062   -.00015       .0123           .1941
                    (—1.70)          (1.44)    (—.45)        (1.00) (—1.11)        (1.66)          (1.19)
  Canada            .0645            .0003     .1165     -.0013      -.00000       .0030           .0988
                    (2.86)           (.17)     (6.06)     (—.91)      (—.21)       (1.50)          (2.17)
 Colombia          - .2247           .0169    - .4030        .0219   -.00036      - .0007         -.3444
                    (—4.33)          (2.74)    (-12.67) (5.78)        (—3.71)      (-.17)          (—3.82)
 Cub a             -.4612    .0214            -.4517    .0208        -.00025       .0164           .0129
                    (—22.20) (8.89)            (-18.26) (9.24)        (—5.20)      (9.74)          (.28)
 Dominican
   Republic        - .3293           .0141    - .4556        .0142   -.00018      -.0019          - .3020
                    (-5.81)          (2.45)    (-13.91) (3.62)        (—1.74)      (-.44)          (—3.01)
 Ecuador           -.4041            .0242    -.4195         .0210   -.00026       .0127          -.0906
                    (—6.06)          (3.28)    (-9:77) (4.13)         (—1.98)      (2.58)          (.82)
 Guatemala         - .5127           .0408    - .4013        .0298   —.00066       .0222           .0828
                    (—5.76)          (5.03)    (-8.97) (5.09)         (—4.40)      (2.96)          (.51)
 Halt I            - .3356       -   .0027    - .5234   .0175        -.00011       .0064          -.1130
                    (-4.99)          (-.34)    (-13.95) (3.39)        (-.77)       (1.20)          (-.94)
                                                42




                                       TABLE 3 (continued)


                                                                          Rate of         1955-79
                            1970                      1980              Assimilation     Change in
Country of Birth      I                     I                  I.yZ        at ylO      Cohort Quality

  Jamaica          —.3322    .0165     -.2594        .0097   - .00020       .0095           .0600
                    (-6.75) (4.06)         (—9.33) (2.92)     (-2.77)       (2.24)          (.64)
  Mexico           —.3307      .0191 .4037
                                       -      .0206  - .00031               .0078          -.1497
                    (—16.57) (14.80) (-34.72) (22.25) (—15.94)              (4.16)          (—3.61)
  Panama           —.3438      .0159   -.2516        .0115   -.00010        .0165           .1476
                    (-3.52) (2.31)         (-4.35) (2.07)     (-.88)        (2.04)          (.84)
  Trinidad &
     Tobago        -.3091      .0187   -.3257        .0211   -.00024        .0158           .0013
                    (-4.02) (2.59)         (-6.94) (3.70)     (-1.95)       (2.35)          (.03)




aThe t-ratios are presented in parentheses. The cross-section regressions hold constant
the individualts completed schooling, age, marital status, health and SMSA residence.
                                        43




                                                    TABLE 4
                                    DEFINITION OF COUNTRY-SPECIFIC VARIABLES


         Variable                              Definition and Source              Mean   Minimum   Maximum   U.S. Value

Politically Competitive      1 if the country had a                                .41
                                                    competitive party system
System                     during the entire 1950-1973 period; 0 otherwise.
                           Source:  Cross-National Time-Series Archive (CNTSA)

Recent Loss of Freedom       1 if the country had a
                                                    competitive party system       .20                           0
                           at the beginning of the period but had a non-
                           competitive party system at the end of the period;
                           O otherwise. Source: CNTSA.

Number of Assassinations   Number of politically motivated murders or             3.21     0         22         12
                           attempted murders of high government officials
                           or politicians in 1950-1973.  Source:  CNTSA.

Income Inequality                                                                 7.50     1.42
                           Ratio of household income of the top 10 percent                          30.0       5.91
                           of the households to the income of the bottom 20
                           percent of the households.  Source: World Bank
                           (various issues) and United Nations (1977).

Distance from U.S.         Number of air miles (in thousands) between the         3.37      .18     7.49
                           country's capital and the nearest U.S. gateway
                           (Los Angeles, Miami, or New York).  Source:
                           Airline Offices.

English Proficiency        Fraction of 1975-80 cohort of immigrants who speak      .74      .24      1.00
                           English well or very well. Source: 5/100 A Sample
                           of the 1980 U.S. Census.

Age at Migration           Mean age at migration. Source:   5/100   A Sample     24.56   12.40     32.40
                           of the 1980 U.S. Census.
                                            44




                                                     TABLE 4
                                                   (continued)




    Variable                            Definition and Source                    Mean    Minimum   Maximum   U.S. Value

n   (per capita GNP)        (.n) 1980 Per Capita GNP in dollars.  Source:
                            U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency (1984).     8.17      5.42      9.62       9.39

Rate of Change in           Annual rate of change in per capita GNP between        .03      .004      .07        .02
Per Capita GNP              1963 and 1980, defined by: £n
                                                           (GNP1980/GNP1963)/17.
                            Source:  U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
                            (1975, 1984).

Rate of Change in Central   Annual Change in the Percentage of GNP that is         .41    -1.69      2.08        .26
Government Expenditures     accounted for by central government expenditures,
                            defined by                         where GOVTt
                                       (G0VT1980-G0VT1950)/30,
                            the percent of GNP attributable to central govern-
                            ment expenditures in year t. Source: CNTSA and
                            U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency (1984).

Change in Quota             Change in fraction of population eligible for        38.90      .28    149.67
                            migration to the U.S., defined by (20000/1979
                            population) ÷ (QUOTA/1950 population), where
                            20,000 is the maximum number of visas allocated
                            to the country after 1965, and QUOTA is the number
                            of visas allocated prior to 1965. Source:    U.S.
                            Immigration and Naturalization Service  (1965).
                                       45




                                     TABLE      5
              DETERMINANTS OF TUE ENTRY WAGE DIFFERENTIAL BETWEEN
                      TUE 1979 IMMIGRANT COHORT ANI) NATIVESa



Country of Origin                                    Regression
 Characteristics               1                 2                3              4

Intercept                  -.2214         .1838               -.9934         -.9469
                         (-3.88)        (1.06)              (-3.41)        (—3.30)

Politically
Competitive
System                      .2743           .1306              .1101          .1264
                          (4.49)        (2.01)               (2.16)         (2.39)

Recent Loss of
Freedom                   -.0010         -.0511              - .0062          .0136
                          (—.01)        (—.75)               (—.12)          (.25)

Number of
Assassinations            -.0072         - .0028               .0021          .0044
                         (-1.20)        (-.54)                (.51)          (.92)

Income Inequality         -.0084         -.0038                .0039          .0046
                        (—1.78)         (—.89)               (1.02)         (1.13)

Distance from U.S.         -             - .0114             - .0031          .0018
                                        (-.89)              (-.31)           (.09)

English Proficiency        -              .2596               .1980           .2030
                                        (2.20)              (2.12)          (2.21)

Mean Age at Migration      -             - .0217             - .0149         - .0119
                                       (-3.55)             (—2.99)          (2.28)

£n (per capita GNP)        -                -                 .1164           .1015
                                                            (4.57)          (3.77)

Country in Asia or
Africa                     -                -                 -              - .1145
                                                                           (—1.58)
                                                                       .

Country in North or
South America              -                                                 - .0640
                                                                            (- .73)

R2                         .504             .681              .808            .826




aThe t-ratios are presented in parentheses.
                                        46



                                      TABLE 6

                      DETERNINANTS OF TILE RATE OF ASSINILATIONa


Country of Origin                                     Regression
 Characteristics               1                2                   3            4

Intercept                    .0076        - .0240             -    .0237      - .0280
                           (2.96)       (—3.88)              (-1.50)        (-2.32)

Politically                 - .0029       - .0068             - .0068         - .0091

Competitive               (-1.06)       (-2.66)              (-2.60)        (-4.28)
System

Recent Loss of               .0063         .0029                .0030          .0021
Freedom                    (1.81)        (1.21)               (1.15)         (1.06)

Number of                    .0008         .0006                .0006          .0008
Assassinations             (2.68)        (2.36)               (2.14)         (3.07)

Income Inequality           - .0001       -.00002             -.00002          .0002
                           (—.50)        (—.11)               (—.10)          (.90)

Distance from U.S.                            .0003             .0003         -.0027
                                             (.74)             (.70)        (-2.89)

English Proficiency                        .0138                .0138          .0122
                                         (3.27)               (3.20)         (3.70)

Mean Age at Migration                      .0009                   .0009       .0009
                                         (4.28)               (3.95)         (4.72)

                                                              -    .00002      .0021
£n (per capita GNP)
                                                              (—.01)         (1.83)

Country in Asia or                                                             .0151
Africa                                                                       (5.11)

Country in North or                                                           - .0080
South America                                                               (-2.08)

R2                           .302             .704                 .704        .842



aThe t-ratios are presented in parentheses.
                                       47




                                     TABLE 7

               DETERMINANTS OF THE RATE OF CHANGE IN COHORT QUALITY




 Country of Origin                                 Regression
  Characteristics             1               2                 3          4

 Intercept                 -.3194       -.9951             -1.1779    -2.2202
                         (—3.19)       (—3.97)            (—4.08)     (—4.69)

 Politically
 Competitive
 System                     .1760        .1075               .0712       .0630
                          (2.54)       (1.60)               (.97)       (.70)

Recent Loss of
Freedom                    .1256         .1468              .1272       .1310
                         (1.67)        (2.16)             (1.81)      (1.33)
Number of
Assassinations             .0077         .0156              .0122       .0256
                         (1.19)        (2.32)             (1.69)      (2.00)
Rate of Change in
Central Government
Expeüditures               .0698         .0699              .0641      -.0099
                         (1.60)        (1.75)             (1.60)      (—.21)

Rate of Change in Per
Capita GNP                4.7010        3.0956             1.1567     -1.5321
                         (2.27)        (1.60)              (.46)      (—.50)

2n (per capita GNP)                      .0889              .1186       .2443
                                       (1.93)             (3.22)      (4.15)

Country in Asia or
Africa                                                      .1374
                                                          (1.42)

Country in North or
South America                                               .0274
                                                           (.41)

Change in Quota                                                         .0034
                                                                      (2.26)
R2                         .284             .418            .453        .581



aThe t-ratios are presented in parentheses.
                                       48



                                      TABLE 8

                     PROBIT REGRESSIONS ON THE EMIGRATION RATEa




Country of Origin                                             Regression
 Characteristics                                       1                          2


                                                  - .6060                  -1. 1614
Intercept
                                                (-1.30)                    (-2.46)

Politically Competitive System                      1206                         .080 1
                                                 (1.13)                      (.81)

Recent Loss of Freedom                              1096                     - .0365

                                                  (.95)                     (- .32)

Number of Assassinations                          - .0245                    - :0337

                                                (-2.65)                    (-3.65)

                                                  - .0113                    - .0145
Income Inequality
                                                (-1.51)                    (-2.00)

Distance from U.S.                                -.   1332                  — .1271

                                                (-6.11)                    (-2.68)

English Proficiency                                .1661                      .0488
                                                  (.94)                      (.30)

                                                  —.1130                     - .0441
2n (per capita GNP)
                                                (-2. 14)                    (-   .83)
Country in Asia or Africa                                                     .3386
                                                                            (2.19)

Country in North or South America                                             .2923
                                                                            (1.52)

x2                                               98.45                     108.82



     aThe dependent variable is the probability that an individual migrated to
the United States in 1951-1980, and is given by the second column of Table 2.
The t-ratios are presented in parentheses.
49




      + it   J.tl




 Figure 1
