NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MULTINATIONAL FIRMS AND INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS CYCLE TRANSMISSION
Javier Cravino
Andrei A. Levchenko
Working Paper 22498
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22498

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016

We are grateful to the editor (Pol Antràs), four anonymous referees, Ariel Burstein, Aaron
Flaaen, Jim Hines, Sebastian Krautheim, Sebastian Sotelo, Linda Tesar, Carolina VillegasSanchez, Andrei Zlate, and seminar participants at various institutions for helpful suggestions and
to Laurien Gilbert, Nitya Pandalai-Nayar, and Rishi Sharma for excellent research assistance.
This research is supported by the Michigan Institute for Teaching and Research in Economics
(MITRE). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Javier Cravino and Andrei A. Levchenko. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Multinational Firms and International Business Cycle Transmission
Javier Cravino and Andrei A. Levchenko
NBER Working Paper No. 22498
August 2016
JEL No. F23,F44
ABSTRACT
We investigate how multinational firms contribute to the transmission of shocks across countries
using a large multi-country firm-level dataset that contains cross-border ownership information.
We use these data to document two novel empirical patterns. First, foreign affiliate and
headquarter sales exhibit strong positive comovement: a 10% growth in the sales of the
headquarter is associated with a 2%growth in the sales of the affiliate. Second, shocks to the
source country account for a significant fraction of the variation in sales growth at the sourcedestination level. We propose a parsimonious quantitative model to interpret these findings and to
evaluate the role of multinational firms for international business cycle transmission. For the
typical country, the impact of foreign shocks transmitted by all foreign multinationals combined
is non-negligible, accounting for about 10% of aggregate productivity shocks. On the other hand,
since bilateral multinational production shares are small, interdependence between most
individual country pairs is minimal. Our results do reveal substantial heterogeneity in the strength
of this mechanism, with the most integrated countries significantly more affected by foreign
shocks.

Javier Cravino
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street, Lorch Hall 365B
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
jcravino@umich.edu
Andrei A. Levchenko
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
alev@umich.edu

A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w22498

1

Introduction

Multinational companies are a first-order feature of the world economy, accounting for
about one-third of gross output in many developed countries (see, e.g., Alviarez, 2013).
Since multinationals encompass production facilities that are spread across different parts
of the globe, a natural conjecture is that their rapid growth in recent decades has had an
impact on how economic shocks are transmitted across countries. However, the relationship between multinational firms and transmission of shocks is not yet well-understood.
At the micro level, there is limited empirical evidence on how the activities of the different
parts of a multinational are interrelated at business cycle frequencies. At the macro level,
it is yet to be established whether multinational production (MP) matters quantitatively
for aggregate comovement.
This paper uses novel firm-level data and a quantitative multi-country model to examine the role of multinational firms in aggregate business cycle transmission. Our data
come from ORBIS, a firm-level database that covers several million domestic and multinational firms operating in 34 countries over the period 2004-2012. The key feature of the
dataset is that it contains information on domestic and foreign ownership. Hence, for the
first time in this context, the operations of parents and affiliates are observed in the same
dataset as well as through time and in a broad cross-section of countries. This information
allows us to study micro-level cross-country comovement between the different parties
of the multinational corporations. At the same time, the data cover the bulk of economic
activity in our sample of countries, making it possible to aggregate the firm-level results
and derive their implications for business cycle comovement.
Our analysis goes from micro patterns to macro implications in three stages. First,
at the firm level, we document strong comovement between multinational affiliates and
their parents: a 10% growth in the sales of the parent is associated with a 2% growth
in the sales of the affiliate. This correlation is computed after controlling for sectoral
and aggregate trends using source-sector-destination-sector-year fixed effects, so that it
captures the role of linkages within the multinational firm. The correlation is pervasive
across firms in different sectors, including services, which suggests that it is not driven
solely by vertical production linkages. The strong correlation between the parent’s and
affiliate’s growth is also present when we use value added or employment to measure
firms’ growth, and is highly significant and robust to different samples, time periods,
fixed effects, and aggregation methods.
The firm-level estimates show that units of the same firm comove together at the business cycle frequency. However, precisely because they are obtained controlling for very
1

detailed aggregate trends, they may not capture transmission of shocks that are common across parent firms in the source country. With this in mind, in our second step we
aggregate multinational sales to the source-destination level (e.g., combined sales of all
US multinational affiliates operating in the UK), and estimate whether the variation in
source-destination growth rates is driven by source-specific or destination-specific factors. Source-specific factors account for about 10% of the variation in bilateral growth
rates, compared to 18% accounted for by destination-specific factors. We interpret this result as evidence that shocks to the source country are important for the variation in total
sales.
Our empirical results thus demonstrate strong interdependence between source countries and their foreign affiliates. This interdependence is detectable both at the firm and
the source-destination level. The third step of our analysis assesses the quantitative importance of this phenomenon for aggregate business cycle transmission using a multicountry model that can be taken to the data. In the model, each country produces a
final good by aggregating the output of intermediate producers. These intermediate producers may be local firms or foreign multinational affiliates. We introduce comovement
between multinational firms and their foreign affiliates by assuming that the productivity
of the affiliate is affected by the productivity of the parent.1 In particular, the productivity
of foreign affiliates is a combination of a source-specific and destination-specific component. The relative importance of the source vs. the destination component is governed by
a crucial parameter that we discipline with the data.
In the model, the extent to which multinationals contribute to the transmission of
shocks across countries is driven by: (i) what share of the firm’s technology shock originates in the source vs. the destination country; (ii) the distribution of bilateral multinational shares in the economy; and (iii) general equilibrium effects. We use the model’s
structural equations to interpret our empirical results, and to calibrate the extent to which
shocks in the source country are transmitted by multinationals. We estimate that between
20 and 40 percent of the foreign affiliates’ shocks originate in the source country. The
multinational production shares are taken directly from the data. Finally, the magnitude
of the general equilibrium effects depends on a composite parameter that combines the
elasticity of substitution across intermediates and the Frisch labor supply elasticity. We
1 This

is a common approach in the literature on multinational production, see, among many others,
Helpman (1984); Markusen (1984); Helpman et al. (2004) and more recently McGrattan and Prescott (2009,
2010); Burstein and Monge-Naranjo (2009); Keller and Yeaple (2013); Ramondo and Rodríguez-Clare (2013);
Ramondo (2014); Alviarez (2013). See Antràs and Yeaple (2014) for a recent overview of modeling approaches. Bilir and Morales (2016) show that US multinational parents’ R&D expenditures affect the productivity of their foreign affiliates.

2

benchmark these parameters using micro estimates of these elasticities, and check the
sensitivity of the results to alternative values.2
We use the calibrated model to conduct three quantitative exercises to measure the
importance of multinational firms for the transmission of shocks across countries. First,
we compute impulse responses to productivity shocks in each source country, and track
the propagation of these shocks across countries. A 1% productivity shock in the rest
of the world as a whole raises productivity by 0.12% in the average country, and by as
much as 0.2-0.35% in the most integrated countries such as Ireland, the Netherlands, and
Slovakia. Not surprisingly, the external impact of individual source country shocks is
considerably smaller. A shock that increases GDP by 1% in one of the 4 most important
source countries – US, Germany, UK, and France – raises output in the rest of the sample
by between 0.01 and 0.02%. Shocks to other source countries have a negligible impact,
since multinational affiliates from other source countries tend to have small output shares
in a typical destination.
Second, we use the model to compute the business cycle correlation between each
pair of countries assuming that the primitive productivity shocks are uncorrelated. This
is an assessment of how much correlation can be generated purely by propagation of
shocks through multinationals under the observed levels of multinational activity. The
variation in model-implied correlations is driven entirely by the pattern of multinational
output shares. On the one hand, in most country pairs bilateral multinational shares are
small, and thus the model generates little business cycle comovement: the mean modelimplied correlation is 0.01 in the full sample of country pairs. On the other hand, for
country pairs involving either a major source or a major recipient of multinational firms,
the model generates between one-tenth and one quarter of the correlation observed in
the data. In addition, in the cross-section of country pairs the model-implied correlations
have a positive and highly significant relationship to the GDP correlations in the data.
Third, we conduct two counterfactual exercises that evaluate how the cross-country
dispersion of growth rates changes as we change the shares of multinational firms in the
world economy. In the first counterfactual, we consider a world in which there are no
multinational firms operating in foreign destinations. The counterfactual cross-country
dispersion in growth rates is 7.5% larger in this scenario than in our benchmark calibration. In the second counterfactual, we simulate a “full integration” equilibrium, in which
multinationals from any source country operate with the same intensity in all destina2 Our

analysis abstracts from the extensive margin adjustment of MP in response to business cycle
shocks. While the business cycle frequency response of MP location to aggregate shocks remains a fruitful
area for future research, the extensive margin cannot be disciplined with our data as it does not distinguish
between firms entering/exiting production and firms entering/exiting the scope of ORBIS data collection.

3

tions. Under full integration the counterfactual cross-country dispersion in growth rates
is over 30% smaller than in our benchmark calibration.
Our main takeaway from these exercises is that the combined impact of all foreign
multinationals is small but significant, accounting for about 10% of the productivity shocks
in a typical country and leading to a somewhat more synchronized international business
cycle. The impact is highly heterogeneous across countries. The transmission of shocks
and positive business cycle correlations induced by multinational presence are clearly detectable for the country pairs involving the most important source and destination countries. On the other hand, aggregate interdependence between most individual country
pairs is minimal, since most bilateral shares are small.
We highlight three key advantages of our dataset relative to existing empirical analyses of multinationals and business cycle comovement. First, ORBIS provides information
on the activities of both the multinational parents and affiliates at a yearly frequency,
which allows us to estimate parent-affiliate sales correlations. Second, it includes the local firms in each country along with the domestic and foreign multinationals. This allows
us to compute the importance of multinationals in each economy relative to the domestic firms, and also to better estimate the country components of business cycle shocks.
Finally, ORBIS covers a broad cross-section of countries. This permits a decomposition
of growth rates into source and destination components, an exercise requiring data from
multiple sources and destinations. In addition, we can document the large heterogeneity
in the impact of multinationals across country pairs.
While the driving mechanism in our model is that productivity shocks are directly
transferred across countries within multinational firms, our model is isomorphic to a
setup in which comovement arises from the transmission of demand shocks for the firms’
product or from certain types of intermediate input linkages (see Online Appendix C.4).
It has not (yet) been established empirically that the transmission of shocks through input trade by multinationals is a quantitatively important phenomenon. Ramondo et al.
(2016) show that US multinational affiliates abroad sell mostly in the local market, with
the median affiliate having no shipments to the parent. In a non-international context,
Atalay et al. (2014) show that most vertical ownership links are not primarily motivated
by input trade within the firm. In our own results, the correlation between affiliate and
parent sales occurs even among service sector firms, for which input trade is likely to be
much less relevant. While our model can accommodate the input linkage interpretation,
our empirical results show that intermediate input linkages are unlikely to be the sole
determinant of parent-affiliate comovement.
This paper contributes to three strands of the literature. The first is the research agenda
4

on the role of multinational firms in the transmission of international business cycles
(see, e.g., Burstein et al., 2008; Contessi, 2010; Menno, 2014; Zlate, 2016).3 This literature has focused mainly on the role of within-multinational trade and vertical integration
for business cycle synchronization, and has predominantly employed 2-country models.
In contrast, we develop a parsimonious multi-country quantitative framework that can
be directly taken to the firm-level data.4
Second, we contribute to the empirical literature on multinational firms and comovement. A number of papers (e.g., Budd et al., 2005; Boehm et al., 2014) explore whether parents and affiliates are correlated, including due to internal capital markets within multinationals (Desai and Foley, 2006; Desai et al., 2009).5 Buch and Lipponer (2005) and Kleinert
et al. (2015) use sectoral and regional data to study whether greater multinational presence is associated with greater comovement. All of these papers feature only one source,
or only one destination country, and frequently the information on either the parent or
the affiliate is limited. Our work is the first to study aggregate comovement with multicountry data in which parents and affiliates are observed within the same dataset. In
addition, these papers by and large do not attempt to go from micro estimates to business
cycle comovement between countries. We develop a quantitative framework to interpret
the empirical findings and evaluate their implications for aggregate comovement.
Finally, a large theoretical literature studies multinationals and technology transfers
(see, among many others, McGrattan and Prescott, 2009; Keller and Yeaple, 2013; Ramondo and Rodríguez-Clare, 2013), and an extensive body of empirical work investigates the effects of FDI on productivity.6 Also related is the literature on the domestic
employment impact of increased multinational activity.7 Our empirical contribution is to
use firm-level data to quantify the extent to which parents and affiliates are affected by
common shocks at the business cycle frequency.
3 Also

related is the literature that explores the role of cross-border vertical production linkages in the
international business cycle transmission (see, e.g., Kose and Yi, 2001; Arkolakis and Ramanarayanan, 2009;
Johnson, 2014), though this line of research is not explicit on whether the production linkages take place
within firms.
4 Our analysis complements several contributions that address the opposite question: how the correlation between domestic and foreign business cycles affects MP location decisions (Ramondo and Rappoport,
2010; Ramondo et al., 2013), or multinationals’ risk premia (Fillat and Garetto, 2015; Fillat et al., 2015). Online Appendix C.5 presents an extended model in which firm location decisions are made subject to uncertainty and sunk costs, and relates it to our baseline framework.
5 Alfaro and Chen (2012) investigate whether the affiliates of multinational firms responded to the recent
financial crisis differently than local establishments. Their focus is not, however, on parent and affiliate comovement. A number of recent studies examine how liquidity shocks are transmitted through international
banks, see for example Acharya and Schnabl (2010), Cetorelli and Goldberg (2011), and Schnabl (2012).
6 See for example Javorcik (2004), Guadalupe et al. (2012), and Fons-Rosen et al. (2013).
7 See Becker et al. (2013); Boehm et al. (2015); Kovak et al. (2015) for some recent examples.

5

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data and presents
the basic summary statistics on multinationals’ presence. Section 3 documents bilateral
firm-level and source-destination-level comovement between multinational firms. Section 4 develops a structural framework to interpret our empirical results and to study
the aggregate implications of multinationals for business cycle comovement and for the
transmission of shocks. Section 5 describes the quantitative results from the model and
counterfactuals, and Section 6 concludes. Detailed descriptions of data, robustness checks
on the empirical results, and additional theoretical results are collected in the Online Appendix.

2

Data and summary statistics

The data come from ORBIS, a large cross-country database maintained by Bureau van
Dijk. The ORBIS database includes information on both listed and unlisted firms collected from various country-specific sources, such as national registries and annual reports. Importantly, it contains information on the “global ultimate owner” of each firm
in the database. This information enables us to build links between affiliates of the same
firm, including cases in which the affiliates and the parent are in different countries. We
specify that a parent should own at least 50% of an affiliate to identify an ownership link
between the two firms. The time period is 2004-2012. The main variable used in the
analysis is the total sales (turnover) of each firm.
ORBIS contains data on more than 100 countries, but coverage is extremely uneven,
with most of those countries reporting information on very few firms. In addition, in
order to analyze multinationals we must use the “unconsolidated” accounts of each firm,
since the “consolidated” accounts may include operating revenue of the foreign affiliates.
After extensive checking of the data, we retain a sample of 34 countries with sufficiently
good coverage and data quality. In particular, the country sample satisfies the following
criteria. First, we keep countries with data on more than 750 firms in the average year
(as noted below, most countries in our sample are well above this threshold, the median
country has data on 73,000 firms in the average year). Second, we keep countries for
which the aggregate revenues in ORBIS are at least 40% of aggregate output as reported in
standard sources. Third, we keep countries for which the correlation between the growth
rate of aggregate revenues in ORBIS and of GDP as reported in the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators exceeds 0.50. Online Appendix A describes the data assembly,
cleaning steps, and additional data validation exercises in detail.
Appendix Table A1 presents the resulting sample of countries along with some sum6

mary statistics and checks on the quality of the data. The sample is dominated by European countries, but includes both developed and developing countries, as well as countries outside of Europe. Column 1 reports the total number of firms in the average year
for each country. The mean number of firms is about 140,000, and the median is about
73,000. There is a wide range of coverage even in our restricted sample of countries: the
country with the smallest number of firms, Australia, has only 766 in an average year.
Column 2 reports the number of foreign multinational affiliates in each country. In the
median country there are about 2,250 foreign multinational firms in the average year.
Column 3 presents the correlation between the country’s GDP growth rate and the
growth rate of aggregate sales of all the continuing firms in ORBIS. The aggregate growth
rate implied by ORBIS mimics the GDP growth quite well: the mean correlation between
aggregate growth in ORBIS and GDP growth from the national accounts is 0.81, and the
median is 0.83. This suggests that business cycle features are well captured in the ORBIS
data. Column 4 reports the ratio of the total sales of firms in ORBIS to the gross output
as reported in other sources. We use two data sources for this consistency check. For
EU countries, the best source of gross output data is EUROSTAT. For countries outside
of the EU, we take gross output data from the UN System of National Accounts. In this
sample of countries, the ORBIS data captures the bulk of aggregate output as reported by
national statistical agencies.
Figure 1 shows the relative importance of foreign multinational affiliates in the countries in our sample for the average year. In the average country, about 7.5% of all firms
are affiliates of foreign multinationals, ranging from 0.1% in Japan to 29% in Australia.
Multinational affiliates tend to be larger than domestically-owned firms, so they comprise higher shares of total revenue, 29% on average. Once again there is a wide range,
from 1.5% for Japan to 84% for Ireland. Indeed, in a number of countries – Netherlands,
Slovakia, Singapore, Belgium, Czech Republic, Austria, and the UK – multinational affiliates account for 40% or more of total sales in our data.

3

Empirical results

This section estimates how the growth rates of affiliates are related to the growth rates of
parents, both at the firm level and at the source-destination level. Throughout the analysis
below, we use growth rates and shares in the form suggested by Davis et al. (1996):
any
⌘
⇣ x for
j,t x j,t 1
.
variable x j and time periods t and t 1, the growth rate is defined as g j,t ⌘ 2 x + x
j,t
j,t 1
That is, the denominator is the average of the beginning and end period levels, rather than
the beginning period level. Davis et al. (1996) recommend using this growth rate because
7

Figure 1: The importance of foreign multinationals
IRL
NLD
SVK
SGP
BEL
CZE
AUT
GBR
POL
EST
SRB
SWE
BGR
ESP
AUS
LTU
HUN
MEX
DEU
ROU
NOR
FRA
HRV
SVN
UKR
ITA
LVA
FIN
GRC
PRT
TUR
KOR
JPN

0

.2

.4
share of revenue

.6

.8

fraction of firms

Notes: This figure reports, for each country, the share of foreign multinational affiliates in total revenue
(light bars) and the total number of firms (dark bars).

it has a number of attractive properties: it is bounded between 2 and 2, is symmetric
around zero, and lends itself to aggregation. If xt = Â j x j,t , the aggregate growth of xt ,
gt , can be written as the weighted sum of the disaggregated growth rates, gt = Â w j,t g j,t ,
x + x j,t 1
. All of the firm-level and aggregate
with weights that are defined as w j,t = Â (j,t
j x j,t + x j,t 1 )
growth rates between years t 1 and t are computed using only firms present in ORBIS
in both t 1 and t, and thus capture intensive margin growth rates.8

3.1

Firm-level comovement

We begin by documenting comovement at the firm level between parents and affiliates.
In particular, we estimate the following specification:
gin,t ( f ) = fgii,t ( f ) + āinss0 ,t + ein,t ( f ) .
8 Because

(1)

ORBIS does not cover the universe of firms in each country, it cannot be used to measure entry
and exit, since for newly observed firms we cannot distinguish between genuine entry and entry into the
ORBIS data collection. Using a Census of French firms in which entry and exit can be measured relatively
more accurately, di Giovanni et al. (2014) show that the extensive margin of entry and exit of firms is not
important in accounting for aggregate fluctuations.

8

Table 1: Affiliate-parent comovement
(1)

(2)
All

(3)

(4)

Manufacturing

(5)

(6)

Services

f

0.278***
(0.005)

0.229***
(0.012)

0.402***
(0.014)

0.299***
(0.039)

0.233***
(0.006)

0.213***
(0.013)

Obs.
N. mult.
R2
FE

182029
18886
0.047
No

182029
18886
0.724
Yes

19809
2476
0.102
No

19809
2476
0.789
Yes

105704
12413
0.032
No

105704
12413
0.674
Yes

Notes: Standard errors clustered at the parent level in parentheses. ***: significant at the 0.1% level. This
table presents the results of estimating equation (1). “FE” refers to source ⇥ destination ⇥ affiliate sector ⇥
parent sector ⇥ year fixed effects. Sectors are defined at the 2 digit level of the NACE classification.

Here gin,t ( f ) is the sales growth rate of the firms in multinational group f from source
country i, operating in destination country n, and gii,t ( f ) is the growth rate of multinational group f ’s parent firm in the source country i.9 The specifications include source
⇥ destination ⇥ affiliate sector ⇥ parent sector ⇥ year fixed effects āinss0 ,t that control for
comovement arising from country-specific sectoral and aggregate trends. We run equation (1) on the sample of firms that are foreign affiliates (so that the growth rate of the
parent gii,t ( f ) exists), pooling observations across years. Standard errors are clustered at
the parent level.
Table 1 presents the results. It reports estimates of a simple bivariate regression with
no fixed effects, as well as with the fixed effects. The first panel of the table shows the
results for a sample consisting of all firms, while the next two panels focus on a sample
of firms in which both the parent and the affiliate are either in the manufacturing or in
the service sector. There is a strong positive and highly significant correlation between
affiliates and parents across all the specifications. Our benchmark estimate of f using the
full sample and controlling for fixed effects is 0.229. The estimated correlation is larger for
firms in the manufacturing sector, although the last panel shows there is a strong positive
correlation for service sector firms as well.
9 To

compute the growth rate of the multinational group in a (source or destination) country, gin,t ( f ),
we aggregate the sales of all the firms belonging to multinational f that operate in the country in the two
consecutive years on which the growth rate is computed. This ensures that changes in the composition of
the multinational group (i.e. by the acquisition of a new firm in a particular destination) are not reflected in
the growth rate.

9

Robustness

Online Appendix B and Appendix Tables A4-A8 explore the firm-level re-

sults in detail and present a large battery of robustness checks. First, Section B.1 follows
several strategies to show that the results are not driven solely by vertical input linkages between parents and affiliates. We show that parent-affiliate comovement is present
among (i) firms that operate only in the service sector; (ii) dropping wholesale and retail
firms; and (iii) using value added or employment instead of sales. In addition, we use information on sectoral cross-border input linkages from the World Input-Output Database
to show that parent-affiliate comovement is not differentially stronger in sector pairs that
exhibit greater input trade.
Second, Section B.2 evaluates whether the parent-affiliate comovement is driven by tax
shifting purposes or by internal capital markets within multinational firms. The results
are unchanged when we drop Ireland and the Netherlands, countries most associated
with tax shifting behavior. Comovement is not differentially stronger among country
pairs with larger corporate tax rate differences. Parent-affiliate comovement is also not
differentially stronger in destinations with less developed capital markets, and is equally
evident in the years prior to the 2008 financial crisis.
Third, Section B.3 checks whether parent-affiliate comovement is conditioned by country characteristics that affect the ease of technology transfer within the firm. We show that
parent-affiliate comovement is not significantly greater in destinations with better intellectual property rights (IPR) protection, though the absence of significant results may be
due to limited variation in the strength of IPR protection among the destination countries in our sample. Similarly, comovement is not more pronounced for country pairs
with lower geographical distance. Parent-affiliate comovement does appear to be modestly higher for country pairs with larger bilateral MP shares and somewhat higher in
high-income destinations.10,11
Finally, the Online Appendix B also presents a large battery of additional robustness
checks on data construction, aggregation, and subsamples of firms and countries.
10 The

coefficient on parent growth is 0.191 for the bottom quartile of MP shares, and 0.252 for the top
quartile. High-income countries have a 0.091 greater coefficient on parent growth than lower-income countries.
11 All of the Online Appendix Tables control for source-sector-destination-sector-year fixed effects. With
source-sector-year and destination-sector-year effects, we do find stronger parent-affiliate comovement in
sectors with greater input linkages. However, without the most stringent fixed effects that we use in the
baseline, we cannot separate this particular mechanism from other omitted variables affecting comovement
at the country-pair-sector level.

10

3.2

Bilateral comovement

The estimates from the previous section show that units of the same firm comove together
at the business cycle frequency. However, precisely because they are obtained after partialling out detailed aggregate trends, they may not capture transmission of shocks that
are common across parent firms in the source country. We would like to establish that
there is a common component to the combined overall sales of multinationals from a
particular country. We thus estimate the contribution of source- and destination-specific
shocks to the variation in the bilateral growth rates:
gin,t = si,t + dn,t + ain,t .

(2)

Equation (2) writes the growth rate gin,t of total sales of firms owned by country i
operating in country n (e.g., the growth rate of the total sales of all i =US multinationals
operating in n =UK) as a sum of the source effect si,t common to all firms owned by i
worldwide, the destination effect dn,t common to all firms from all countries selling in
market n, and an idiosyncratic term ain,t . This decomposition of a cross-section of data
into different types of shocks draws on a standard approach in macroeconomics (see, e.g.,
Stockman, 1988, and the literature that followed), but to our knowledge has never been
applied to foreign multinational operations to establish the existence of a source country
shock.
The empirical model (2) is estimated by regressing observed growth rates gin,t on
source and destination fixed effects (when carried out year-by-year), or source-year and
destination-year effects (when carried out in a pooled sample of years). The regression
for the pooled sample of years also includes non-time-varying source-destination fixed effects. There is a large amount of variation in the size of source-destination pairs. Smaller
in pairs tend to have fewer firms and thus tend to be more volatile. To account for this
fact, we employ a Generalized Least Squares estimation in which the observations are
weighted by the inverse of the Herfindahl index of firm-level sales shares in an in pair.12
This approach underscores the usefulness of firm-level data even for the estimation of
source- or destination-level outcomes, as firm-level information helps capture the heteroskedasticity in the source-destination data.
12 Let

the variance of the residual of an individual firm’s growth rate be s2 ( f ), and let w̃in,t ( f ) be the
share of firm f in the total sales of firms from source i in destination n. Assuming that s2 ( f ) does not differ
by firm, the variance of the residual of the source-destination level observation is equal to Var ( ain,t ) =
2 ( f ) ⌘ s2 ( f ) Her f
s2 ( f ) Â f 2Win w̃in,t
in,t , where Win is the set of firms from i selling in n. The GLS estimator
weights the observations by the inverse of the variance of the error term, which in this case is proportional
to the Herfindahl index of firm sales shares.

11

Table 2: Importance of source and destination effects
(1)

(2)
R2

2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
Mean
Median

Part.
0.11
0.09
0.06
0.17
0.08
0.13
0.09
0.11
0.10
0.10

Pooled

0.11

(3)

Source

(4)

(5)

(6)

Destination

F-stat.
2.65
2.22
1.49
5.01
2.08
3.60
2.44
2.74
2.78
2.55

p-val.
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Part. R2
0.13
0.14
0.12
0.24
0.19
0.22
0.17
0.22
0.18
0.18

F-stat
4.53
5.21
4.60
10.03
7.72
9.16
6.89
8.89
7.13
7.31

p-val.
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

6.57

0.00

0.16

7.91

0.00

Notes: This table reports the results of estimating equation (2). The first column reports the partial R2
associated with the source and destination effects. The second column reports the F-statistic associated
with the hypothesis that all of the source/destination effects are zero, and the third column reports the
p-value associated with that hypothesis test. The results are reported year-by-year as well as pooled across
years. The pooled estimation uses source-year and destination-year effects.

Table 2 reports the results. Source effects account for about 10% of the variation in
the cross-section of source-destination growth rates, compared to 18% for the destination
shocks. The table reports the F-statistics and p-values associated with the hypothesis that
the source effects as a group are zero. The source effects are jointly highly significant in
accounting for the variation in the data.

4

A structural framework for interpreting the data

The preceding empirical results underscore two key features of the data. First, there is
significant comovement between multinational parents and their foreign affiliates. This
comovement is detectable in overall source-destination sales. Second, there is a large
amount of heterogeneity across sources, destinations, and country pairs in the extent of
multinational presence. This suggests that the impact of multinational firms on business
cycle comovement may differ significantly across country pairs. These two features of
the data inform the design of the quantitative multi-country model that we use to study
the implications of the empirical findings for aggregate cross-country comovement. After
setting up the theoretical framework, we circle back to the empirical results in Section 3
12

and interpret them through the lens of the model.

4.1

Model

Preliminaries

The world economy consists of multiple countries indexed by i and n.

Each country is populated by differentiated intermediate good producers potentially owned
by firms from different countries. The output of the intermediate producers cannot be
traded internationally. In each country, intermediates are aggregated into a final good
by competitive final goods producers. We assume that the final good is homogeneous
across countries and can be freely traded.13 The final good is the numeraire of the world
economy and its price is set to one. We focus on the model’s predictions for productivity
and aggregate output. As discussed below, these assumptions coupled with a standard
functional form for agent preferences imply that production allocations are independent
of the international asset market structure.
Technologies and market structure
country n is given by:
Qn,t =

The production function of the final good in each
"

1
r

r 1
r

Â Aein,t Qin,t
i

#

r
r 1

,

(3)

where Qin,t is a bundle of the output produced by firms from source country i that operate in country n, and r denotes the elasticity of substitution across goods produced by
ein,t is a source-destination specific productivity
firms from different source countries. A
ein,t = 1 for each n. Thus, the production function
parameter, normalized such that Âi A
is an Armington aggregator of goods produced by firms owned by various countries, inein,t
cluding domestically owned and operated firms. As will become clear below, the A

parameters allow us to match the full distribution of multinational production shares in
ein,t at the
the cross-section of source and destination countries. In addition, changes in A
business cycle frequency allow us to accommodate source-destination specific idiosyncratic shocks.
In turn, the intermediate output bundle Qin,t aggregates the output of all the firms
13 The

assumption that the final good is homogeneous is not crucial for the results that follow. Online
Appendix C.2 derives the equations under the assumption that country-specific goods are imperfect substitutes, so that there are terms of trade movements in response to productivity shocks.

13

from source country i operating in n:
Qin,t =

"

Â

f 2 Wi

Qin,t ( f )

r 1
r

#

r
r 1

,

(4)

where Wi is the set of firms from country i and Qin,t ( f ) is the output of firm f from
country i in the destination country n.
As in Melitz (2003), firms are monopolistically competitive and differ in productivity.
Each firm operates a linear technology that uses labor in the destination country as the
only input in production. Following the literature on multinational production and technology transfers, we assume that the multinational’s technology can be partially shared
across all destination countries.14 In particular, the output of the firm is given by:
ef ( f ) Z
e 1 f ( f ) Lin,t ( f ) ,
Qin,t ( f ) = Zin,t ( f ) Lin,t ( f ) = Z
n,t
i,t

(5)

where Lin,t ( f ) is the firm-specific labor input, and Zin,t ( f ) is a firm-destination specific
productivity component.
The second equality in (5) states the key assumption in our framework. Productivity of
an affiliate of firm f selling in n and whose parent is from i is a Cobb-Douglas aggregate of
en,t ( f ).15 The parent
ei,t ( f ) and a local productivity component Z
the parent’s productivity Z
thus transfers productivity to the affiliate, with the share f of the affiliate’s productivity
coming from the parent.16 This is the only potential endogenous source of aggregate
comovement in the model. It is worth noting that, while formally technology transfers are
the drivers of comovement between parent and affiliate firms, our model is isomorphic
to a setup in which comovement is driven by shocks to demand for the firms’ product.
In this alternative setup, the term Zin,t ( f ) would come out of equation (5), and demand
14 See,

among others, McGrattan and Prescott (2009, 2010), Ramondo and Rappoport (2010), Keller and
Yeaple (2013), Ramondo (2014), Antràs and Yeaple (2014), and Tintelnot (2016) for theoretical treatments
that adopt this assumption, and Bilir and Morales (2016) for empirical evidence that R&D spending by the
parent is the key determinant of foreign affiliate performance.
15 The assumption that the productivity in the source and destination are combined by a Cobb-Douglas
aggregator is not crucial. Online Appendix C.3 derives the equations under CES aggregation of productivities, and shows they are the same to a first-order approximation.
16 We assume that the parameter f is the same for all country pairs. The model can be easily extended
to let f vary across i and n. Our firm-level empirical results evaluate many types of heterogeneities in the
parent-affiliate comovement across countries, including, but not limited to, by quality of IPR protection,
geographical distance, and directly by MP shares themselves. There is some heterogeneity, for instance
country-pairs with higher multinational presence do experience slightly higher parent-affiliate comovement. However, quantitatively the differences are minor, and thus we favor a more parsimonious specification and do not make explicit use of this variation in the analysis below.

14

1

shifters for the firm’s product would enter as Zin,t ( f ) r in equation (4).17 In addition, our
setup can be reinterpreted in a version of the model in which the transmission of shocks
is driven by cross-border intermediate input linkages, as in e.g. Irarrazabal et al. (2013).
Online Appendix C.4 presents this alternative model.18
Finally, we assume that the source component of the firm productivity is given by
ei,t ( f ) = Zi,t Zi,t ( f ), where Zi,t is common to all firms from source i and Zi,t ( f ) is
Z

idiosyncratic to firm f . We make the same assumption for the destination component
en,t ( f ) = Zn,t Zn,t ( f ) .
Z

Preferences Consumers in country n experience utility from consumption of the final
good and disutility from supplying labor according to the GHH preferences (Greenwood
et al., 1988):
u (Cn,t , Ln,t ) =

t

Âd n
t

✓

Cn,t

◆
y0 ȳ
L
,
ȳ n,t

where Cn,t is consumption, Ln,t the labor supply, and the function n is increasing and
concave.
Equilibrium Let Wn,t denote the wage earned by labor in n, and Pin,t ( f ) denote the price
charged by firm f from country
i operatingoin n. A monopolistically competitive
equilibrium o
n
n
and resource allocations Cn,t , Ln,t , { Lin,t ( f )}i, f
at time t is a set of prices Wn,t , { Pin,t ( f )}i, f
n
n
such that (i) consumers maximize utility; (ii) firms maximize profits, and (iii) all goods
and factor markets clear. Online Appendix C.1 characterizes the equilibrium.
Let lower-case variables denote growth rates of the corresponding upper-case variables. Online Appendix C.1 shows that aggregate growth in country n is approximated
by:
gn,t = y

ÂÂ

i f 2 Wi

win,t ( f )

17 Of



ãin,t
+ zin,t ( f ) ,
r 1

(6)

course, this isomorphism claim relies on the assumption that firm demand shocks across locations
have the same posited structure as productivity shocks in the baseline, that is, a demand shock in a location is a combination of a global demand shock for the multinational’s product and a destination-specific
component.
18 The production function can be easily generalized to a case in which firms use local intermediate inputs to produce. In particular, if the firms’ production function is given by Qin,t ( f ) =
1 a
[ Zin,t ( f ) Lin,t ( f )]a Xin,t
( f ), where Xin,t ( f ) is an input produced with the final good (3), the results below go through with r 1 replaced by a (r 1) in equations (6), (7), (8) and (10).

15

where win,t ( f ) ⌘

Pin,t ( f ) Qin,t ( f )
Pn,t Qn,t

denotes the share of country n0 s revenues generated by

firm f from source country i, and y ⌘

equation (6) becomes

gn,t =
where win,t ⌘

Pin,t Qin,t
Pn,t Qn,t

y
r

1Â
i

ȳ
ȳ 1

> 1. Using the functional form for zin,t ( f ) ,

win,t [ ain,t + f (r

1) zi,t ] + y (1

f) zn,t ,

(7)

denotes the share of country n’s revenues generated by firms from

source country i, and the bilateral term encompasses
the idiosyncratic termsi specific to
h
win,t ( f ) ãin,t
f) zn,t ( f ) .
the country pair: ain,t = (r 1) Â f 2Wi w
r 1 + fzi,t ( f ) + (1
in,t

Discussion Equation (7) encapsulates the role of multinationals in business cycle comovement. It states that growth in country n depends on its own productivity shock,
zn,t , and a weighted average of the productivity shocks zi,t to all countries that have firms
operating in country n. Because foreign multinational affiliates inherit part of the shock
to the parent zi,t , their presence implies that productivity and output of countries will be
positively correlated even if the primitive productivity shocks zn,t are not. This equation
connects our framework to the international business cycle literature in the tradition of
Backus et al. (1995, henceforth BKK). The canonical BKK model has no multinationals, but
it typically assumes that TFP shocks across countries are correlated. Equation (7) provides
a possible micro foundation for this correlation.
The equation illuminates the key parameters and quantities that determine the strength
of the shock transmission through multinationals. The first is the share of the affiliate productivity shock that originates in the source country, f. The more foreign affiliates inherit
the source country productivity, the more comovement there will be in the aggregate.
The second is the multinational shares, win,t . Larger shares will imply more comovey
ment, since more of the shocks are shared. Finally, the combination of parameters r 1
captures the strength of general equilibrium effects that occur in response to a particular
productivity shock zi,t . It regulates how the rest of the economy responds to a shock in a
particular country.19
Note that output in the model is determined independently of the structure of international asset markets and of how multinational firms’ profits are distributed across
19 As a side note, if the z ’s are not perfectly correlated, increased multinational presence reduces the
i,t
volatility of output growth by diversifying shocks, a mechanism reminiscent of Caselli et al. (2015). In particular, when zi,t ’s are uncorrelated and the variance of zi,t is equal to sz2 for all i, and ignoring idiosyncratic
h
i2
2 + (1
f)2 sz2 .
shocks ain,t , the variance of output growth is given by sn2 = y2 2f (1 f) wnn + f2 Âi win
Output growth variance is highest in autarky (wnn = 1).

16

countries. While these factors will determine how countries split the consumption of
the final good, under GHH preferences the labor supply is independent of the level of
consumption. As long as firms maximize profits, output growth is solely determined by
productivity growth in each country. In this sense, our model is closely related to a standard international business cycle model with one good and no capital. The assumption
of a homogeneous final good thus allows us to isolate the comovement arising from the
transmission of shocks within multinational firms, while abstracting from the transmission arising from factor supply and relative price movements that are emphasized in the
international business cycle literature. For the same reason, for the purposes of the analysis below we do not need to take a stand on how multinationals’ profits are allocated (the
allocation of profits is important in other contexts, see, e.g., Arkolakis et al., 2014). Allocation of profits across countries will affect consumption, but not output in our framework.
In the counterfactual exercises that follow, the MP shares along with the elasticities f
y
and r 1 are sufficient statistics to evaluate the propagation of country level shocks across
countries. An advantage of this approach is that it avoids the need to take an explicit
stand on a large number of parameters of the model, such as the levels of productivities
ein,t in every country. Note that in our framework MP shares
and the demand shifters A
are endogenous, as they arise from firm optimization decisions given productivities. Online Appendix C.5 lays out a model in which firms’ decisions to open foreign affiliates are
made subject to sunk costs and uncertainty, as in Ramondo and Rappoport (2010) and Ramondo et al. (2013), and can potentially depend on the covariance of shocks across coun-

tries. The appendix shows that the key equations, the parameter estimation approaches,
and the counterfactual analyses in the main text are still valid in this extended model. It
also discusses the model’s relationship to the frameworks of Ramondo and Rappoport
(2010) and Ramondo et al. (2013), and provides parameterizations under which the covariance of shocks does not affect the equilibrium MP shares, despite the sunk cost.20
Finally, we note that the counterfactual analysis below will evaluate the impact of
multinationals on business cycle comovement through the mechanism posited by the
model, namely the within-firm productivity transmission coupled with general-equilibrium
effects. We acknowledge that multinationals may have other effects on international comovement that we leave unmodeled, for instance through engagement in arms-length
20 The

Appendix model assumes that MP entry only happens in period 0. This assumption implies that
we do not need to keep track of each firm’s entry and exit decisions in each period, and can solve for one
non-time-varying productivity cutoff for MP for each source-destination pair. Hence, the model abstracts
from the extensive margin adjustment of MP in response to shocks, highlighted by Fillat and Garetto (2015)
and Fillat et al. (2015). With time-varying entry subject to sunk costs, a country experiencing a (persistent)
positive productivity shock would generate more entry from all source countries. These extensive margin
responses may generate correlation over and above what is implied by our quantitative exercises.

17

trade, or technology spillovers outside the firm.
We now interpret the empirical results from Section 3 in light of the conceptual framework, and use these results to disentangle the different shocks and discipline the model.

4.2

Interpreting affiliate-parent comovement

The empirical results in Section 3.1 can be given a structural interpretation and used to
estimate the share of the firm’s technology that gets transferred across destinations, f.
Online Appendix C.1.1 shows that the affiliate growth rate can be expressed in the model
as a function of parent growth:
gin,t ( f ) = ā¯ in,t + fgii,t ( f ) + ein,t ( f ) ,

(8)

where ā¯ in,t ⌘ āin,t f āii,t , with āin,t ⌘ (1 r) [wn,t fzi,t (1 f) zn,t ] + rpin,t + qin,t ,
and ein,t ( f ) ⌘ (r 1) (1 f) zn,t ( f ).
Equation (8) states that, after controlling for source-destination-year effects, the coefficient on the parent’s growth rate can be interpreted as f. Hence, the empirical results in
Table 1 imply that the share of a firm’s productivity that is transferred across countries is
approximately 20% (f ⇡ 0.2).
Econometrically, an identifying assumption required for the structural interpretation
of the regression coefficients is that the idiosyncratic component of the destination-specific
shock zn,t ( f ) is orthogonal to the idiosyncratic component of the source shock zi,t ( f ).
Substantively, however, this orthogonality assumption is without loss of generality, as the
technology transfer coefficient can simply be reinterpreted as technology transfer-cumshock correlation, in which case the destination-specific shock becomes orthogonalized
with respect to the source-specific shock (see Online Appendix C.1.1 for details).
Note that (8) can be thought of as a purely cross-sectional specification, in spite of
the variables being indexed by t. Indeed, the empirical results are unchanged when we
estimate the specification separately for each year. Under the assumption that affiliate
productivity is a function of only the contemporaneous (and not lagged) parent’s productivity, (8) is the correct specification even if there is time dependence in the underlying productivity shocks zn,t ( f ) and zi,t ( f ). Indeed, since the idiosyncratic component
of the destination-specific productivity zn,t ( f ) is part of the error term, time dependence
in it does not bias coefficient estimates, and clustering at the parent level adjusts for the
autocorrelated error structure.21
21 Irarrazabal

et al. (2013) estimate the share of inputs imported from the parent in total costs of foreign
affiliates of Norwegian multinationals, and find that it is quite high (0.9). Though not the same object, it

18

4.3

Interpreting source- and destination-specific shocks

We now use the model’s implications for aggregate source-destination growth rates gin,t
to interpret the empirical results in Section 3.2. Online Appendix C.1.1 shows that the
total revenues by multinationals from source country i operating in country n can be
expressed as:
Pin,t Qin,t = Ain,t Si,t Dn,t ,
f ( r 1)

where Si,t = Zi,t
h
f(r
Dn,t = Âi Ain,t Zi,t

1)

iy

(9)

is a term common to all firms from source country i,
r +1
r 1

tination country n, and Ain,t
rates, this becomes:

y (1 f )

is a term common to all firms operating in desh
ir 1
ein,t Â f 2W Z f ( f ) Z (1 f) ( f )
= A
. Expressed in growth
n,t
i,t
i
Zn,t

gin,t = si,t + dn,t + ain,t ,

(10)

which is identical to the decomposition
(2) estimated in Section
h
i 3.2, and
win,t ( f ) ãin,t
f) zn,t ( f ) .
ain,t = (r 1) Â f 2Wi w
r 1 + fzi,t ( f ) + (1
in,t
Equation (10) provides a structural interpretation for the source and destination dummies estimated in Section 3.2. The fact that a significant fraction of the variation of the
bilateral growth rates is accounted for by the source dummies, as reported in Table 2,
implies a role for the transmission of technology from the source country, f > 0 .

4.4

Calibrating the comovement parameter with source-destination data

These structural equations together with the estimates for the source- and destinationspecific shocks provide a means to pin down the technology transfer parameter f. In
particular, the model structure implies the destination components have the form:
dn,t =



y
r

1

1

Â win,t [ain,t + si,t ] + r
i

y 1 f
sn,t .
1 f

(11)

Foreign productivity shocks zi,t affect the destination effect in country n through two
different channels. On the one hand, these changes affect competitiveness in country n
can be interpreted as related to our f parameter. Our approach identifies f from the comovement in sales
between parents and affiliates, while Irarrazabal et al. (2013) rely instead on the elasticity of affiliate sales to
distance. A higher value of f would lead to an even greater importance of multinationals in business cycle
transmission.

19

through

h

f ( r 1)
Âi Ain,t Zi,t

i

1

(i.e. in response to an increase in Zi,t , firms from all other

source countries i’ will sell less in country n due to increased competition). On the other
hand, these shocks affect the real wage (and real aggregate output) in country i through
i y
h
f ( r 1) r 1
(i.e. in response to an increase in Zi,t , aggregate demand in country n
Âi Ain,t Zi,t
will increase, increasing the sales of all firms operating in country n). In the case of r 1 =
y these two effects exactly offset each other, and the destination effect is independent of
changes in foreign technologies.
Rearranging (11), taking variances of both sides, and solving for f yields an estimate
of f based on observed variabilities of the source and destination effects:
f =

ss,t
,
ss,t + sF,t

(12)

⇣
⌘2
1
s
s
is the cross-sectional variance of sn,t at time t, and
Â
Â
n,t
N 1 n
N m m,t
h
⇣
⌘
⇣
⌘i2
r 1
y +1 r
r 1 1
y +1 r
2 ⌘ 1
sF,t
w
a
+
s
w
a
+
s
d
d
[
]
[
]
,t
m,t
i,t
i,t
N 1 Ân
y
r 1 Âi in,t in,t
y N Âm
r 1 Âi im,t im,t
is the variance of the destination effect adjusted for the general equilibrium impact of for⇣
⌘2
1
2 = s2 = 1
d
d
eign shocks. Note that in the special case of r 1 = y, sF,t
Â
Â
n,t
N 1 n
N m m,t
d,t
is simply the cross-sectional variance of the destination effects at time t.
Equations (11) and (12) use the model structure to connect observables – si,t , dn,t , and
ain,t estimated in Section 3.2 – to the two key model parameters, y/(r 1) and f. For
each value of y/(r 1) we can thus use (11) and (12) and the estimated si,t , dn,t , and ain,t
to pin down f.
The basic intuition for this approach can be gleaned from (12) and the fact that the
source effect is a scaled productivity shock: sn,t = f (r 1) zn,t . Ignoring the general
equilibrium effects, (12) says that f determines the relative variances of the estimated
source and destination effects. In the world of no spillovers from source countries (f = 0),
shocks to the source country do not affect bilateral growth rates, so that the variance of
the source effects is zero. By contrast, high f would manifest itself in a high variability
of the source effects. The variance of the source effects is benchmarked by the variance of
the destination effects, since those are driven by the same productivity shock process as
the source effects, but affect all the firms operating in each market.
y
Table 3 presents the implied f for different values of r 1 . We focus on the special
2 ⌘
where ss,t

1

y
r 1 = 1, in which the general equilibrium effects cancel out, and the alternative
y
cases of r 1 = 2 (the effect of a positive foreign shock on domestic income dominates the
y
effects on increased competition) and r 1 = 2/3 (the increase in competition dominates

case of

20

Table 3: Estimated f based on source-destination data
Year

y
r 1

y
r 1

=1

=2

y
r 1

=

2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012

0.517
0.441
0.379
0.417
0.380
0.415
0.365
0.401

0.579
0.518
0.455
0.521
0.507
0.531
0.477
0.485

0.425
0.370
0.311
0.326
0.285
0.322
0.276
0.330

Mean
Median

0.414
0.408

0.509
0.512

0.331
0.324

2
3

Notes: This table reports estimates of f using bilateral data following equation (12). Each column represents
y
the estimate under an alternative value of the GE parameter r 1 .

the effect of increased income).22 The estimates of f range from 0.3 to 0.5, with a central
tendency of about 0.4. This is higher than, but not too dissimilar from, the firm-level
estimates in Section 4.2.
What are the relative merits of the firm-level based estimates of f from Section 4.2
compared to the source-destination level estimates in this section? The firm-level estimates use stringent fixed effects, and thus represent the most convincing evidence that
the correlation between parents and affiliates captures within-firm transmission of shocks
rather than simply common shocks across countries and/or sectors. On the other hand,
precisely because it nets out common shocks at the source-sector-destination-sector-year
level, the firm-level estimation will omit the within-firm transmission of aggregate shocks.
A shock that hits all the firms in the Chemicals sector in France may be transmitted from
the French parent operating in the Chemicals sector to its subsidiaries in Spain. But the
fixed effects in the firm-level specification net out the aggregate/sectoral shocks, and thus
identify only the transmission of the idiosyncratic shock hitting the French Chemicals
parent. The firm-level estimate will shed light on this channel to the extent that common shocks are transmitted with the same intensity as purely idiosyncratic shocks. Al22 The

special case of y = r 1 is consistent with empirical estimates of the Frisch elasticity of labor supply and the elasticities of substitution across intermediate varieties used in the trade literature. In particular,
estimates of the aggregate labor supply elasticity put it at about 0.5 (see Chetty et al., 2013), which implies
a ȳ = 3 and y = 1.5. This implies that r = 2.5 – well within the range of estimates in Broda and Weinstein
y
y
(2006) – is consistent with r 1 = 1. Under an aggregate labor supply elasticity of about 0.5, r 1 = 2 (resp.,
2
3)

implies an elasticity of substitution of r =

7
4

(resp., 3.25).

21

ternatively, one can focus on the source-destination level estimates, since the source and
destination effects will capture not only the transmission of firm-level, but also of aggregate shocks in the parent country to the foreign destinations. An additional benefit of the
source-destination estimates is the much lower data requirements, as they can be implemented without firm-level data, and thus potentially used even in contexts where only
aggregate MP data are available.

5

Quantitative results

We now have the theoretical structure, the estimates of the key parameter, and the data
to carry out a quantitative assessment of multinationals’ role in the international business
cycle transmission. This section performs three exercises. The first is an “impulse response” exercise designed to answer the question, how much does a productivity shock
in one country affect output in another? The second is a counterfactual correlation exercise, that answers the question, if all the countries’ productivity shocks were uncorrelated,
how much correlation would the business cycles exhibit across countries under the current levels of multinational activity? And third, how much do multinationals contribute
to observed dispersion in cross-country growth rates, and how much would that dispersion fall if integration increased further? The exercises in the next two subsections do not
require time subscripts, and thus we suppress them to streamline notation.

5.1

Transmission of shocks across countries

We start by assessing the total impact of all foreign productivity shocks on a country’s
productivity. One way to gauge the importance of all foreign shocks combined is to consider the impact of a 1% change in all foreign productivities simultaneously. The change
in destination n’s productivity in this experiment is given by
f (1

wnn ).

(13)

This expression has a clear and intuitive interpretation. The combined importance of
foreign shocks in country n is the product of the total presence of multinationals, 1
wnn , and the strength of the productivity transmission from foreign parents to the local
affiliates, f.
The top row of Table 4 and Figure 2 report the results, under the assumption that f =
0.4 and wnn ’s for 2011. In our sample of 34 countries, the mean value of this combination
22

Table 4: Impulse responses for top source countries and the world

Source

Destination
All
High-Income Emerging High-Income
Countries
Europe
Europe
ROW

Emerging
ROW

World

0.121

0.139

0.126

0.075

0.077

United States
Germany
United Kingdom
France

0.023
0.017
0.015
0.010

0.038
0.017
0.022
0.015

0.009
0.023
0.008
0.010

0.019
0.003
0.020
0.002

0.019
0.010
0.005
0.004

Notes: This table reports averages of the impulse responses (13) in the entire sample of countries and 4
regions for the top 4 most important source countries, and the average impulse responses to a world shock.

of parameters is 0.12, with the median of 0.11. This suggests that loosely speaking, foreign
shocks can account for 12% of productivity shocks in the average country, or alternatively,
foreign shocks are about one-ninth as important as domestic productivity shocks. Foreign
shocks are most important on average in Europe (13.9% and 12.6% in the high-income and
emerging groups, respectively), and less important in the other countries in our cample.
In some countries foreign shocks are more significant. At the extreme, the value of this
combination of parameters is 0.35 in Ireland, 0.25 in the Netherlands, and 0.23 in Slovakia.
We next evaluate how productivity shocks to any individual source country spread
internationally. From (7), the response of output in n to a productivity shock in any source
country i is given by:
∂gn
= y [win f + (1
∂zi

f ) I i=n ] ,

(14)

where Ii=n is an indicator function that equals 1 if i = n and 0 otherwise. We can express
the response in country n as a fraction of the effect of the shock in the source country i as:
∂gn ∂gi
/
∂zi ∂zi

=

win f
wii f + (1

f)

n 6= i.

(15)

Equation (15) answers the question, how much does aggregate output growth in country n change when output in country i goes up by 1? It is immediate that the answer depends on two key quantities: the magnitude of the spillover f, and the extent of country
i’s multinational presence in n, win . If either of these is large, there will be more interdependence between i and n. In contrast, note that given these parameters, the impulse
23

Figure 2: Response (in %) to a 1% shock in all foreign countries simultaneously
IRL
NLD
SVK
SGP
BEL
CZE
AUT
GBR
POL
SRB
EST
BGR
HUN
ESP
MEX
SWE
ROU
LTU
DEU
UKR
HRV
NOR
FRA
AUS
LVA
SVN
ITA
GRC
FIN
PRT
TUR
KOR
JPN

0

.1

.2
φ(1−ωnn)

.3

.4

Notes: This figure displays the change in productivity in each destination that accompanies a change in
productivity in every foreign source country (i.e. i 6= n) equal to 1.
y

response does not depend on the value of the general equilibrium parameter r 1 . There is
no simulation required to compute these impulse responses. Instead, they are computed
directly from the data on win and estimated f. Since there are 34 countries in the sample,
there are 34⇥33 cross-border impulse responses.
Figure 3 shows the impulse responses to source-specific shocks for all possible country
pairs. We use f = 0.4 and win ’s for 2011 to construct the figure. Each square in the figure
represents the impulse response in destination n to a productivity shock in source country
i, zi , relative to the response in the source country, as in (15). We can interpret each square
of the figure as the percent change in country n GDP in response to a shock that increases
GDP in country i by one percent. We rank countries on the x- and y-axes according to
their importance as a source or as a destination, respectively. We omit the ii entries (they
are all tautologically 1) to facilitate the presentation.
The figure shows that shocks to the productivity of most source countries do not have
big aggregate consequence in most destinations. This reflects the fact that the bilateral
shares win in equation (15) are small for most country pairs. In about half of all sourcedestination pairs, the impact is less than 0.0001, reflecting the (near) absence of multinationals from most sources in most destinations. Even restricting attention to the top
half of impulse responses, the mean impact is about 0.006, that is, an increase in a source
country output of 1% changes foreign output by less than one-hundredth of that amount.
24

Figure 3: Response (in %) to a source shock that raises source country output by 1%

0.2

∂γ d /∂γ s

0.15

0.1

0.05

0
USA
DEU
GBR
FRA
JPN
NLD
ITA
SWE
AUT
KOR
FIN
ESP
NOR
BEL
HUN
CZE
GRC
POL
SVN
IRL
SGP
HRV
LTU
EST
PRT
AUS
MEX
TUR
SVK
Source
LVA
UKR
BGR
SRB
ROU

IRL
SVK
NLD
BEL
CZE
SGP
AUT
GBR
POL
EST
HUN
ESP
SRB
SWE
ROU
MEX
HRV
DEU
NOR
BGR
FRA
SVN
AUS
LVA
LTU
ITA
PRT
FIN
GRC
Destination
UKR
TUR
USA
KOR
JPN

Notes: This figure displays the change in aggregate output of each destination that accompanies a change
in source output equal to 1.

However, this low amount of transmission is in part a consequence of the fact that most
countries are not quantitatively important sources of multinationals. Table 4 reports the
average impulse responses to shocks in the top 4 most important source countries: the US,
Germany, the UK, and France. In the entire sample, the average outward impact of these
4 countries ranges from 1 to 2.3 percent. The next four columns report averages by destination country regions. There is some heterogeneity in the regional impact: the shock
to the US affects most strongly high-income Europe, a 3.8% average impulse response.
By contrast, a shock to Germany has the largest effect in emerging Europe, 2.3%. In total, 18 country pairs have impulse response coefficients of above 0.03, with the maximum
coefficient of 0.17 between US and Ireland.

25

5.2

Country-pair growth correlations and multinational shares

This section derives how much comovement in aggregate output would be generated by
the presence of multinationals in a world where the only shocks are shocks to countrylevel productivities zi . Consider a setting in which country productivity shocks have
variance sz2 and correlation rz,z0 , common across z and z0 . Under these conditions, the
output growth correlation between any pair of countries is:
rn,n0 =
where

Q̄2n

h

⇥

f (1

⇤
f) [wn0 n + wnn0 ] + f2 Âi win win0 [1
Q̄n Q̄n0

+ f2

2

2
Âi win

i

rz,z0 ]

+

rz,z0
,
Q̄n Q̄n0

(16)

⌘ 2f (1 f) wnn
+ (1 f) [1 rz,z0 ] + rz,z0 . Note that the correlation rn,n0 is a function only of the correlation in firm-level growth f, the multinational
shares win , and the correlation of the shocks rz,z0 . Given a value of f, the size of the
general equilibrium effects does not affect the results in this section.
Equation (16) illustrates how the parameters affect the correlation of growth rates
across countries. First, if the primitive shocks are uncorrelated (rz,z0 = 0), and there are
no multinational firms (win = 0 for i 6= n), then countries growth rates are uncorrelated,
rn,n0 = 0. Other things equal, the correlation increases for country pairs that share more
multinational links, as captured by the terms wn0 n + wnn0 and Âi win win0 . Second, the
scope for multinational firms to induce cross-country correlations falls as the correlation
of the primitive shocks increases. In the limit, if rz,z0 = 1, output is perfectly correlated
across countries, rn,n0 = 1, irrespective of the multinational shares win .
With this in mind, Table 5 evaluates the model’s ability to generate positive crosscountry growth correlations. The row labeled “Data” presents the summary statistics for
the correlations of GDP growth over the period 1994-2007. The row labeled “Model”
presents the correlations implied by the model when rz,z0 = 0. Consistent with our results from the previous section, on average in the whole sample the predicted correlations
tend so be small. The mean is only 0.01, and 95% of all the bilateral correlations are below
0.03. However, this is partly a consequence of small multinational shares for most pairs
of countries. The bottom two panels of the Table report the correlations for country pairs
in which one country is a large source of multinational firms (such as the US, the UK,
or Germany), and for country pairs in which one country is an important destination for
multinationals (such as Ireland, Netherlands, or Slovakia). Not surprisingly, the predictions of the model come much closer to the data for these country pairs. At the extreme,
the model generates about a quarter of the observed correlation for country pairs in which
one of the countries is either the US or Ireland.
26

Table 5: Predicted and actual correlations
Across all country pairs

Data
Model

Mean

St.Dev.

Min

Max

0.132
0.009

0.352
0.017

-0.684
0.000

0.872
0.255

Pairs involving large sources

Data
Model
Data
Model

Pairs involving large destinations

Mean

St.Dev.

Min

Max

Mean

St.Dev.

Min

Max

US

0.131
0.029

0.404
0.047

-0.623
0.002

0.752
0.255

Ireland

0.097
0.024

0.413
0.047

-0.684
0.002

0.868
0.255

UK

0.127
0.024

0.303
0.029

-0.547
0.002

0.588
0.119

Netherlands

0.232
0.020

0.429
0.023

-0.479
0.004

0.848
0.119

Data
0.254
0.303
-0.243 0.752
0.049
0.326
-0.512 0.617
Germany
Slovakia
Model
0.023
0.018
0.005 0.080
0.011
0.014
0.001 0.067
Notes: This table reports summary statistics for aggregate correlations. The row labeled “Data” reports
the actual correlations of aggregate GDP growth sourced from World Development Indicators over the
period 1994-2007. The row labeled “Model” reports the results for correlations computed using equation
(16) under the assumption that sz,z0 = 0 for all country pairs.

Second, in the spirit of the literature on international trade and comovement (see, e.g.,
Johnson, 2014), we compare the correlations predicted by the model to those observed in
the data.23 Figure 4 plots the partial correlation between the GDP correlation in the data
(y-axis) against the correlation implied by the model under uncorrelated shocks (x-axis),
after controlling for source and destination country effects. There is a positive and highly
significant conditional correlation between the model-implied correlations and the correlations in the data.24 This is remarkable given that the model correlations are computed
under the assumption of uncorrelated shocks, and the only source of variation across
country pairs in the model is due to differences in multinational shares. The model also
cannot yield negative correlation coefficients, which are observed in the data. As a result,
relative to the data, the model generates substantially less variation in the cross-country
correlations than observed in the data.
To underscore the way the model generates correlations, the figure labels the “inte23 A

challenge in empirically demonstrating a causal link between multinational presence and business
cycle comovement is that multinational firms may locate in countries that for other reasons have more
synchronized shocks. By imposing that the primitive shocks are uncorrelated and the same across country
pairs, we can isolate the role of multinationals as a source of transmission from other factors that may
induce comovement.
24 The relationship is equally pronounced and significant unconditionally, without controlling for any
fixed effects.

27

1

Figure 4: Actual and predicted correlations

−1

Data Correlation, Residuals
−.5
0
.5

Coeff. = 4.319
Std.Err. = 1.3

−.02

0
.02
.04
Model Correlation, Residuals
Integrated

.06

Non−Integrated

Notes: This figure plots the partial correlation between the GDP correlation in the data and the aggregate
correlation implied by the model, after controlling for source and destination country effects. Dots labeled
“Integrated” depict the country pairs with higher than the median combined bilateral multinational shares
(wn0 n + wnn0 ). Dots labeled “Non-Integrated” depict country pairs with the combined bilateral multinational shares below the median.

grated” and “non-integrated” country pairs differently (though the regression is run on
all the data). We label a country pair integrated if its combined bilateral multinational
shares wn0 n + wnn0 are above the median, and non-integrated if they are below the median. The model generates little to no dispersion in predicted correlation among the
non-integrated pairs (hollow dots), and as a result in this subsample the model has no
predictive power over the data correlations, which range (in deviations from the country means) from large positive to large negative. On the other hand, for integrated pairs
(solid dots) there is a clear positive relationship between the model-implied correlations
and those in the data. Indeed, in the subsample of integrated pairs, the model correlations
have a greater explanatory power than in the full sample.
Our main takeaway from these exercises is that in most country pairs, transmission of
shocks through multinationals in and of itself cannot generate anything close to observed
output correlations. This is unsurprising since in most country pairs bilateral multinational shares are small. However, among the more closely integrated country pairs, the
model generates both non-negligible correlations, and a significantly positive relationship
between model-implied and observed correlations.

28

5.3

Predicted and counterfactual comovement

This section studies how business cycle synchronization would change under different
scenarios for multinational presence. Rather than assuming an exogenous parsimonious
shock correlation structure as in the previous section, here we use the estimated ain,t and
si,t from Section 3.2 to compute aggregate growth rates using model-implied relationships
(7) and (11). We then conduct two sets of counterfactual exercises to investigate how
multinationals contribute to business cycle synchronization. Our metric of synchronization is the cross-sectional dispersion in country-level growth rates (see Kalemli-Ozcan
et al., 2013, for a closely related metric of comovement). We exploit the cross-sectional
dimension as the available time series is quite short.
Notation

The aggregate growth rate in country n is:
gn,t = Âi win,t gin,t =

Â win,t [ain,t + si,t ] + dn,t ,

(17)

i

We can express country n’s growth rate relative to the cross-sectional average growth rate
at time t as:
gn,t

ḡt = An,t + Sn,t + Dn,t

(18)

1
where An,t ⌘ Âi win,t ain,t
N Ân Âi win,t ain,t is the aggregation of all the idiosyncratic
shocks; Sn,t ⌘ Âi win,t [si,t s̄i,t ] N1n Ân Âi win,t [si,t s̄i,t ] is the aggregation of all the
source shocks, and Dn,t ⌘ dn,t d¯t is the demeaned destination effect. In these expressions x̄t ⌘ N1 Â xn,t denotes the average of a variable across all destinations.

Changing multinational shares In the first set of counterfactuals, we ask what the
cross-country dispersion in growth rates would look like if multinational shares were
different. We focus on two polar opposite counterfactuals: (i) “No multinationals” and
(ii) “Full Integration.” Under “No Multinationals,” we change the values of the win ’s
N M = 1 if i = n, w N M = 0 if i 6 = n. That is, the only firms producing
so that win,t
in,t
in country i are country i firms. Under “Full Integration” we change the win ’s so that
N
FI = w̄ FI = 1
25 That is, the production shares of firms of all source counwin,t
i,t
N Ân win,t .
tries is the same in every country, and equal to the average share of each country i across
destinations observed in the data.
25 Note

that Âi w̄ i,t =

1
N

Ân Âi win,t = 1.

29

In each of the counterfactual exercises indexed by c = { N M, FI }, we compute the
c , Ac , D c using estimated s and a
counterfactual components Sn,t
i,t
in,t as:
n,t
n,t
1
N

c
Sn,t
=

c
si,t
Â win,t

Acn,t =

c
ain,t
Â win,t

c
Dn,t
=

⇤
y+1 r ⇥ c
y 1 f own
c
An,t + Sn,t
+
Sn,t ,
r 1
r 1 f

i

i

c
si,t
Â Â win,t
n

1
N

(19)

i

c
ain,t
Â Â win,t
n

(20)

i

(21)

h
i
1
own ⌘ s
captures the deviation of country n’s productivity shock
where Sn,t
s
Â
n,t
n,t
N n
c
from the world average. We use (19)-(21) to compute the counterfactual growth rates gn,t
r
⇣
⌘2
1
c
c
c
as in equation (18) and then report the standard deviations sgn,t = N 1 Ân gn,t ḡt .
Our baseline results adopt the assumption that
pendent of the general equilibrium effects).

y
r 1

= 1 (the destination shocks are inde-

Table 6: Cross-sectional standard deviation of gn,t
Mean

Median

0.062
0.067
0.043

0.064
0.066
0.042

1.074
0.687

1.075
0.684

= 2; f = 0.5
Ratio of
to baseline:
NM: No Multinationals
1.091
FI: Full Integration
0.633

1.095
0.631

sgn,t :
Baseline
NM: No Multinationals
FI: Full Integration
Ratio of sgc n,t to baseline:
NM: No Multinationals
FI: Full Integration

sgc n,t

y
r 1

y
r 1

= 2/3; f = 0.3
Ratio of
to baseline:
NM: No Multinationals
1.056
FI: Full Integration
0.757
sgc n,t

1.055
0.749

Notes: This table reports the mean and median cross-sectional standard deviations in aggregate growth
rates over all years, and the mean and median ratios of the standard deviations in the two counterfactuals relative to the baseline. The bottom two panels summarize the ratios of standard deviations under
alternative parameterizations of y/(r 1).

The top panel of Table 6 reports the average baseline and counterfactual dispersions
30

of growth rates across the years in our sample. To facilitate comparison, the second panel
of the table reports the average ratios of the counterfactual sgc n,t ’s relative to the baseline.
The standard deviation of growth rates under the “No multinationals” counterfactual is
7.5% higher compared to the baseline. Note from equation (19) that the dispersion of
c is higher under this scenario, since multinationals are not there to spread the source
Sn,t

shocks across countries.
The table also reports the average standard deviations of growth rates under the “Full
c = 0 (since w
Integration” counterfactual. Note from equation (19) that in this case Sn,t
in,t
is constant across destinations). Source shocks are completely shared across destinations
under full integration, hence differences do not contribute to the dispersion in growth
rates. As a consequence, the dispersion in growth rates is significantly smaller under this

scenario. For the median year, the standard deviation of growth rates would decrease by
over 30% if all barriers to multinationals are eliminated.
The bottom two panels of Table 6 report a sensitivity analysis to alternative values of
y
y
y
the general equilibrium parameter r 1 . We focus on the cases of r 1 = 2 and r 1 = 2/3
discussed in Section 4.4. Under each alternative parameterization, we re-calibrate the pay
rameter f according to equation (12). The table shows that the case r 1 = 2 is associated
with slightly larger counterfactual changes in the cross-sectional variance of growth rates,
y
while the opposite is true for the case of r 1 = 2/3. However, the alternative parameterizations do not change the order of magnitude of the results.
Changing the correlation in firm-level growth In the second set of counterfactuals, we
maintain the observed multinational shares and change the correlation between parents
and affiliates fc . In this case we can compute the counterfactual components as:

cf

Sn,t =

fc
Sn,t ,
f

cf

An,t = An,t

y
cf
Dn,t =
r 1

1

h

i
cf
An,t + Sn,t +

y 1 fc own
Sn,t .
r 1 f

Figure 5 shows the resulting standard deviation in growth rates for alternative values
for counterfactual f. As f get closer to zero, there is no transmission of shocks between
multinational firms and their foreign affiliates, and the standard deviation in growth rates
increases and gets closer to that in the counterfactual of “No Multinationals.” As f gets
closer to one, the correlation between multinationals and their foreign affiliates becomes
31

.055

Median St. Dev.
.06
.065

.07

Figure 5: Correlation between multinationals and their foreign affiliates (f) and the crosssectional dispersion of aggregate growth rates

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

φ

Notes: This figure plots the median standard deviation of aggregate growth rates on the y-axis against the
share of source shocks in the affiliates’ technology shocks (f) on the x-axis.

stronger, and the dispersion in growth rates decreases. Yet, this effect is limited by the
fact that the share of multinationals in the economy is small.

6

Conclusion

Understanding business cycle transmission across countries is one of the central questions in international macroeconomics. In this paper, we used new data and a quantitative model to assess how shocks are transmitted internationally through firms that operate in multiple countries. Our empirical results demonstrate important interdependence
between source countries and their foreign affiliates. This interdependence is detectable
both at the firm and the source-destination level. We use a quantitative model to interpret
these findings and to evaluate the role of multinationals for international business cycle
comovement.
All foreign multinationals together account for a large share of total output, and thus
the rest of the world is responsible for about 10% of the productivity shocks in an average
country. On the other hand, bilateral multinational production shares tend to be small,
limiting the contribution of multinationals for observed comovement between individual
country pairs. In the benchmark parameterization, eliminating barriers to multinational
production decreases the cross-country standard deviation in growth rates by over 30
32

percent, indicating that international comovement may become significantly stronger as
the share of multinationals in the world economy increases.

References
Acharya, Viral V and Philipp Schnabl, “Do Global Banks Spread Global Imbalances?
Asset-Backed Commercial Paper during the Financial Crisis of 2007-09,” IMF Economic
Review, August 2010, 58 (1), 37–73.
Alfaro, Laura and Maggie Xiaoyang Chen, “Surviving the Global Financial Crisis: Foreign Ownership and Establishment Performance,” American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy, August 2012, 4 (3), 30–55.
Alviarez, Vanessa, “Multinational Production and Comparative Advantage,” December
2013. mimeo, University of Michigan.
Antràs, Pol and Stephen R. Yeaple, “Multinational Firms and the Structure of International Trade,” in Elhanan Helpman, Kenneth Rogoff, and Gita Gopinath, eds., Handbook
of International Economics, Vol. 4, Elsevier, 2014, chapter 2, pp. 55–130.
Arkolakis, Costas and Ananth Ramanarayanan, “Vertical Specialization and International
Business Cycle Synchronization,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, December 2009, 111
(4), 655–680.
, Natalia Ramondo, Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, and Stephen R. Yeaple, “Innovation and
Production in the Global Economy,” December 2014. NBER Working Paper No. 18792.
Atalay, Enghin, Ali Hortasu, and Chad Syverson, “Vertical Integration and Input Flows,”
American Economic Review, April 2014, 104 (4), 1120–48.
Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Finn E. Kydland, “International Business Cycles:
Theory and Evidence,” in Thomas Cooley, ed., Frontiers of business cycle research, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1995, pp. 331–356.
Becker, Sascha O., Karolina Ekholm, and Marc-Andreas Muendler, “Offshoring and the
onshore composition of tasks and skills,” Journal of International Economics, 2013, 90 (1),
91 – 106.
Bilir, L. Kamran and Eduardo Morales, “The Impact of Innovation in the Multinational
Firm,” April 2016. NBER Working Paper No. 22160.
33

Boehm, Christoph, Aaron Flaaen, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar, “Input Linkages and the
Transmission of Shocks: Firm-Level Evidence from the 2011 Tohoku Earthquake,” October 2014. mimeo, University of Michigan.
,

, and

, “Multinationals, Offshoring and the Decline of U.S. Manufacturing,” De-

cember 2015. mimeo, University of Michigan.
Broda, Christian and David Weinstein, “Globalization and the Gains from Variety,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2006, 121 (2), 541–85.
Buch, Claudia M. and Alexander Lipponer, “Business Cycles and FDI: Evidence from
German Sectoral Data,” Review of World Economics/Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, December
2005, 141 (4), 732–759.
Budd, John W., Jozef Konings, and Matthew J. Slaughter, “Wages and International Rent
Sharing in Multinational Firms,” Review of Economics and Statistics, February 2005, 87
(1), 73–84.
Burstein, Ariel T. and Alexander Monge-Naranjo, “Foreign Know-How, Firm Control,
and the Income of Developing Countries,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, February
2009, 124 (1), 149–195.
, Christopher Kurz, and Linda L. Tesar, “Trade, Production Sharing, and the International Transmission of Business Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2008, 55, 775–
795.
Caselli, Francesco, Miklós Koren, Milan Lisicky, and Silvana Tenreyro, “Diversification
through Trade,” August 2015. NBER Working Paper No. 21498.
Cetorelli, Nicola and Linda S Goldberg, “Global Banks and International Shock Transmission: Evidence from the Crisis,” IMF Economic Review, April 2011, 59 (1), 41–76.
Chetty, Raj, Adam Guren, Day Manoli, and Andrea Weber, “Does Indivisible Labor Explain the Difference between Micro and Macro Elasticities? A Meta-Analysis of Extensive Margin Elasticities,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 2013, 27 (1), 1 – 56.
Contessi, Silvio, “How Does Multinational Production Change International Comovement?,” October 2010. mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
Davis, Steven J., John C. Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh, Job creation and destruction, Cambridge and London: MIT Press, 1996.
34

Desai, Mihir A. and C. Fritz Foley, “The Comovement of Returns and Investment within
the Multinational Firm,” NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics, 2006, pp. 197–
237.
,

, and James R. Hines, “Domestic Effects of the Foreign Activities of US Multination-

als,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, February 2009, 1 (1), 181–203.
di Giovanni, Julian, Andrei A. Levchenko, and Isabelle Méjean, “Firms, Destinations, and
Aggregate Fluctuations,” Econometrica, July 2014, 82 (4), 1303–1340.
Fillat, José L. and Stefania Garetto, “Risk, Returns, and Multinational Production,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2015, 130 (4), 2027–2073.
Fillat, José L., Stefania Garetto, and Lindsay Oldenski, “Diversification, cost structure,
and the risk premium of multinational corporations,” Journal of International Economics,
May 2015, 96 (1), 37–54.
Fons-Rosen, Christian, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Bent E. Sørensen, Carolina VillegasSanchez, and Vadym Volosovych, “Quantifying Productivity Gains from Foreign Investment,” Mar 2013. NBER Working Paper No. 18920.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Gregory W Huffman, “Investment, Capacity
Utilization, and the Real Business Cycle,” American Economic Review, June 1988, 78 (3),
402–17.
Guadalupe, Maria, Olga Kuzmina, and Catherine Thomas, “Innovation and Foreign
Ownership,” American Economic Review, December 2012, 102 (7), 3594–3627.
Helpman, Elhanan, “A Simple Theory of International Trade with Multinational Corporations,” Journal of Political Economy, June 1984, 92 (3), 451–71.
, Marc J. Melitz, and Stephen R. Yeaple, “Export versus FDI with Heterogeneous Firms,”
American Economic Review, March 2004, 94 (1), 300–316.
Irarrazabal, Alfonso, Andreas Moxnes, and Luca David Opromolla, “The Margins of
Multinational Production and the Role of Intrafirm Trade,” Journal of Political Economy,
February 2013, 121 (1), 74–126.
Javorcik, Beata Smarzynska, “Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase the Productivity
of Domestic Firms? In Search of Spillovers Through Backward Linkages,” American
Economic Review, June 2004, 94 (3), 605–627.
35

Johnson, Robert C., “Trade in Intermediate Inputs and Business Cycle Comovement,”
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, October 2014, 6 (4), 39–83.
Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Elias Papaioannou, and José-Luis Peydró, “Financial Regulation, Globalization and Synchronization of Economic Activity,” Journal of Finance, June
2013, 68 (3), 1179–1228.
Keller, Wolfgang and Stephen Ross Yeaple, “The Gravity of Knowledge,” American Economic Review, June 2013, 103 (4), 1414–44.
Kleinert, Jörn, Julien Martin, and Farid Toubal, “The Few Leading the Many: Foreign Affiliates and Business Cycle Comovement,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
October 2015, 7 (4), 134–159.
Kose, M. Ayhan and Kei-Mu Yi, “International Trade and Business Cycles: Is Vertical Specialization the Missing Link?,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 2001,
91 (2), 371–75.
Kovak, Brian, Lindsay Oldenski, and Nicholas Sly, “The Labor Market Effects of Offshoring by U.S. Multinational Firms: Evidence from Changes in Global Tax Policies,”
mimeo, Carnegie-Mellon, Georgetown, and Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, June 2015.
Markusen, James R., “Multinationals, multi-plant economies, and the gains from trade,”
Journal of International Economics, May 1984, 16 (3-4), 205–226.
McGrattan, Ellen R. and Edward C. Prescott, “Openness, technology capital, and development,” Journal of Economic Theory, November 2009, 144 (6), 2454–2476.
and , “Technology Capital and the US Current Account,” American Economic Review,
September 2010, 100 (4), 1493–1522.
Melitz, Marc J., “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry Productivity,” Econometrica, November 2003, 71 (6), 1695–1725.
Menno, Dominik, “Multinational Firms and Business Cycle Transmission,” November
2014. mimeo, EUI.
Ramondo, Natalia, “A quantitative approach to multinational production,” Journal of International Economics, May 2014, 93 (1), 108 – 122.
and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, “Trade, Multinational Production, and the Gains from
Openness,” Journal of Political Economy, 2013, 121 (2), 273 – 322.
36

and Veronica Rappoport, “The Role of Multinational Production in a Risky Environment,” Journal of International Economics, July 2010, 81 (2), 240–252.
,

, and Kim J. Ruhl, “The Proximity-Concentration Tradeoff under Uncertainty,” Re-

view of Economic Studies, 2013, 80 (4), 1582–1621.
,

, and

, “Intrafirm Trade and Vertical Fragmentation in U.S. Multinational Corpo-

rations,” Journal of International Economics, January 2016, 98 (1), 51–59.
Schnabl, Philipp, “The International Transmission of Bank Liquidity Shocks: Evidence
from an Emerging Market,” Journal of Finance, June 2012, 67 (3), 897–932.
Stockman, Alan C., “Sectoral and National Aggregate Disturbances to Industrial Output
in Seven European Countries,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 1988, 21, 387–409.
Tintelnot, Felix, “Global Production with Export Platforms,” April 2016. Forthcoming,
Quarterly Journal Economics.
Zlate, Andrei, “Offshore Production and Business Cycle Dynamics with Heterogeneous
Firms,” Journal of International Economics, May 2016, 100, 34–49.

37

38

Number of
Firms

affiliates in the average year in each country, the correlation between the growth rates of aggregate sales in ORBIS and GDP growth over the period
for which ORBIS data are available (2004-2012), and the ratio of combined sales in ORBIS to total gross output reported in EUROSTAT (for EU
countries) or UN SNA data (for non-EU countries).

Country

Ratio of
Correlation
Country
Number of
Number of
Ratio of
Correlation
Number of
ORBIS
between
Firms
Foreign
ORBIS
between
Foreign
revenue to
ORBIS
Multinationrevenue to
ORBIS
Multinationals
growth and total revenue
als
growth and total revenue
GDP growth
GDP growth
Austria
15299
2202
0.83
0.63
Lithuania
7473
631
0.96
0.53
Australia
766
208
0.60
Latvia
43887
1093
0.91
0.59
Belgium
18360
3603
0.91
0.70
Mexico
6102
485
0.49
0.93
Bulgaria
120520
1444
0.92
0.71
Netherlands
10061
2163
0.81
0.40
Czech Republic
85422
7007
0.86
0.81
Norway
148599
3708
0.80
0.81
Germany
224394
10010
0.89
0.69
Poland
56414
6780
0.82
0.68
Estonia
47131
1537
0.96
0.71
Portugal
212761
2047
0.89
0.93
Spain
519129
9034
0.82
1.07
Romania
319347
4700
0.86
0.55
Finland
106222
2301
0.93
0.93
Serbia
48083
2428
0.62
0.74
France
751858
14581
0.96
0.81
Sweden
222882
3942
0.79
0.93
United Kingdom
194711
22459
0.59
0.69
Singapore
1249
351
0.64
Greece
24639
1262
0.74
0.54
Slovenia
29868
559
0.90
0.77
Croatia
60527
2292
0.96
0.75
Slovak Rep.
30377
3004
0.75
0.88
Hungary
174795
822
0.99
0.76
Turkey
7975
286
0.77
Ireland
14131
2579
0.56
1.03
Ukraine
218489
2489
0.79
0.80
Italy
556756
12630
0.96
0.79
United States
97378
605
0.84
0.09
Japan
217024
282
0.81
0.84
Mean
137879
3828
0.81
0.74
Korea, Rep.
95111
598
0.68
0.78
Median
72974
2247
0.83
0.76
Notes: This table reports the sample of countries used in the analysis. It reports the total number of firms and total number of foreign multinational

Table A1: Sample and summary statistics

