                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          DO PRIVATE EQUITY FUNDS MANIPULATE REPORTED RETURNS?

                                       Gregory W. Brown
                                         Oleg R. Gredil
                                       Steven N. Kaplan

                                       Working Paper 22493
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w22493


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2016




Helpful comments and suggestions provided by James Bachman, Diego Garcia, Tim Jenkinson,
Bob Harris, James Kocis, Anna Kovner, Ludovic Phalippou, Kelvin Law, Minjie Zhang and
seminar participants at the 2012 Global Private Investing Conference, the 2013 Meeting of the
European Finance Association, Berkeley-Haas Fraud and Misconduct Conference, the 2014
Meeting of the American Finance Association, the 2014 Meeting of Financial Intermediation
Research Society, and the 2014 Vanderbilt Private Equity and Venture Capital Conference. We
thank Burgiss and especially Brandon Renkart and Wendy Hu for providing research support.
This research has benefited from the support of the Private Equity Research Consortium (PERC)
and the UAI Foundation. Kaplan has consulted to buyout and venture fund general partners and
limited partners. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22493.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Gregory W. Brown, Oleg R. Gredil, and Steven N. Kaplan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Private Equity Funds Manipulate Reported Returns?
Gregory W. Brown, Oleg R. Gredil, and Steven N. Kaplan
NBER Working Paper No. 22493
August 2016
JEL No. G23,G24,G30

                                         ABSTRACT

Private equity funds hold assets that are hard to value. Managers may have an incentive to distort
reported valuations if these are used by investors to decide on commitments to subsequent funds
managed by the same firm. Using a large dataset of buyout and venture funds, we test for the
presence of reported return manipulation. We find evidence that some under-performing
managers boost reported returns during times when fundraising takes place. However, those
managers are unlikely to raise a next fund, suggesting that investors see through much of the
manipulation. In contrast, we find that top-performing funds likely understate their valuations.


Gregory W. Brown                                         Steven N. Kaplan
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill              Booth School of Business
Kenan-Flagler Business School                            The University of Chicago
gregwbrown@unc.edu                                       5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
                                                         Chicago, IL 60637
Oleg R. Gredil                                           and NBER
Tulane University                                        steven.kaplan@chicagobooth.edu
Freeman School of Business
7 McAlister Drive
New Orleans, LA 70118
ogredil@tulane.edu
I. Introduction

      Recent SEC inquiries have examined the possibility of private equity partners overstating port-
folio net asset values (NAVs) in an attempt to attract investors to future funds.1 Because there is no
liquid market for most assets held by private equity funds, investors rely on estimates of NAVs in
quarterly reports provided by private equity general partners (GPs). Increasingly, NAVs are deter-
mined by outside valuation consultants and auditors, but the process is nonetheless subjective and
is based on data produced by the portfolio companies that are directly owned by the funds.
      In this paper, we examine the empirical evidence on potential NAV manipulation using a large
dataset of buyout and venture capital funds. Our findings suggest that little manipulation of NAVs
goes unnoticed by institutional investors. Some GPs of poorly performing funds appear to over-
state NAVs around the time they would be attempting to raise a follow-on fund. However, these
embellishments appear unsuccessful at influencing investment decisions in so far as those firms
are significantly less likely to raise a follow-on fund, on average. We also find evidence of con-
servatism in valuations among the best performing funds. This is consistent with a concern on
the part of GPs about being wrongly labeled as a firm that exaggerates NAVs. This also suggests
that the equilibrium behavior of GPs in reporting NAVs is influenced by the potential for gaming
reported values. Of course, the odds of GPs obtaining benefits from manipulating NAVs one way
or the other depend on a variety of assumptions including the reliance of investors on past NAVs
to make investment decisions as well as the inability of investors to detect or punish manipulators.
      We utilize data provided by Burgiss which includes quarterly cash flows and NAV reports from
a sample of 2,071 funds. These data are sourced from over 200 institutional investors that represent
approximately $0.75 trillion in committed capital to private equity. We supplement these data with
an independent database of private equity firms provided by StepStone. The StepStone database
contains a nearly exhaustive record of institutional private equity fundraising between 1971 and

  1   For example, see “Private Equity Industry Attracts S.E.C. Scrutiny” by Peter Lattman, New York Times, February 12, 2012.




                                                               2
2016. This combination of data sources allows us to examine the relation between private equity
performance reporting and fundraising success with a high degree of confidence in the data.
    In our primary analysis, we conduct several tests to see if fundraising for a subsequent fund is
related to abnormal returns. First, we consider returns around the first capital call for a firm’s next
fund. If there is no next fund, we assume fundraising attempts occur near the end of the fund’s life
(i.e., this is when a firm would have to be making a final push to raise a new fund). The data reveal
a decline in performance around these events for both the average buyout and venture fund. We
examine the source of the change in performance by separating funds into three groups that raise
a next fund quickly, slowly, or not at all. For buyout funds, the decline in performance is entirely
due to funds that are unable to raise a follow-on fund. For venture funds, those with no next fund
also exhibit a decline in returns late in life.2 We undertake similar event studies across additional
subsamples to demonstrate that fundraising does not appear to be driven by naı̈ve investors.
    Next, we estimate a probability model of fundraising success as a function of excess returns and
distributions to investors while controlling for the variation in fundraising environment and fund
characteristics. We find evidence that exaggerated NAVs are associated with lower probability of
raising a follow-on fund. Furthermore, we show that conservative reporting and credible signaling
(via distributing capital back to investors) have stronger effects than market-adjusted performance.
The results are similar for both buyout and venture funds.
    We also examine how NAV changes depend on the performance of peer funds (i.e., those of
similar vintage and strategy) and identify the determinants of the reporting bias over a fund life. We
find evidence consistent with “peer-chasing” where top-performing funds report lower interim re-
turns subsequently and bottom performing funds report higher returns. We show that this behavior
is especially pronounced when fundraising incentives are strong.
    Finally, we examine whether the adoption of new mark-to-market accounting standards in
2006-08 (FAS 157) has affected the quality of NAV reporting by private equity funds. We find

   2 Venture funds that raise a next fund late experience a leveling off of returns after fundraising. However, their returns before

fundraising are better than for the average fund, so lifetime returns match those of funds that raise a next fund early in their life. On
average, these funds do not experience a decline in returns after fundraising.



                                                                   3
some evidence that regulation has improved accuracy of reported NAVs, however the analysis is
confounded by the 2008-09 financial crisis. In general, our results are robust to the change in
reporting standards around FAS 157 adoption.
    Our conclusions add to the private equity literature and are distinct from several contempora-
neous studies of private equity interim reporting and subsequent fundraising. Similar to Jenkinson,
Souse and Stucke (2013) and Barber and Yasuda (2015), we find abnormal returns for a typical
fund are smaller after the time that fundraisings occur. However, unlike the other papers, we show
that the abnormal returns remain positive, on average, for successful fundraisers. Our results differ
because the tests of NAV manipulation in the other papers are inherently misspecified. Because
they use only fund-level data, measurement error is correlated with the history of cash flows and
market returns. This makes such tests prone to spurious results as many explanatory variables of
interest correlate with the fund cash flows and market returns. We exert a high degree of caution
in constructing our variables and verify the validity of the null hypothesis via falsification tests.3
    While confirming that performance rank versus peers tends to peak during fundraising (as
do Barber and Yasuda, 2015), we go one step further in examining the market (i.e. investors’)
response. Our estimates suggest that ‘signal-jamming’, as proposed in Chakraborty and Ewens
(2014) and Barber and Yasuda (2015), is not a complete characterization of the fundraising equi-
librium. Rather, this equilibrium likely features elements of costly signaling (of which the in-
vestors are aware) as well as conflicts of interests between the current fund’s investors and the next
fund’s investors (with respect to resources for monitoring and nurturing of the investments port-
folios). The importance of these tensions have been long recognized as evidenced by the nature
of covenants in fund term sheets (e.g. see Gompers and Lerner, 1996). These features provide
an alternative explanation (which our results strongly support) for the elevated write-off rates that
both studies interpret as evidence of previously overstated NAVs.
    We also show that (1) performance rank during fundraising predicts final performance rank,

   3 We conduct simulations where we create placebo samples of funds using portfolios of public equities with similar properties

and show that our tests are robust to funds’ systematic risk misspecifications as well as correlations with the funds’ cash flow
patterns.



                                                               4
and (2) rookie managers do not report more aggressive NAV marks. These findings are differ-
ent from the evidence in Jenkinson et al (2013) and Cumming and Walz (2010), respectively.
The differences arise because we condition on the peer fund average final returns (unknown as of
fundraising), and because we more clearly separate current performance from experience.
   Overall, our results indicate that overstating interim returns has not been a winning strategy
for GPs on average. While current fund performance impacts the odds of a successful fundraising,
aggressive NAV marks are associated with a lower probability of raising a next fund. Consequently,
GPs who are not underperforming should have an incentive to be truthful, or even conservative,
with their unrealized investment valuations. Our evidence supports this. These results are notable
(and distinct from the findings of related papers) because they show that while top-performing
funds are more likely to raise a follow-on fund, inflating NAVs seems to reduce the odds of success.
   The paper proceeds as follows: Section II provides a more detailed discussion of the eco-
nomic game managers and investors might play. Section III describes the data used in the analysis.
Section IV provides our main result. Sections V and VI report additional tests and more carefully
address the endogenous relationship between fundraising and performance. Section VII concludes.


II. Reporting NAVs with incomplete and asymmetric information

   The relationship between general partners (GPs) in a private investment firm and the outside
investors (LPs) who invest in the GPs’ funds is complicated by a lack of hard and timely infor-
mation on performance. At the time of committing capital to a new fund, LPs do not know what
specific investments the GPs will undertake. Consequently, in making fund investment decisions,
LPs are forced to rely on (often interim) reported values of GPs’ previous funds (if any) and soft
information about the value-relevant qualities of GPs (e.g., access to deal flow, reputation in the
industry, etc.).
   LPs rely on past performance because of their expectation that the performance of a GP’s
previous funds predicts the performance of its subsequent funds. Academic evidence suggests that
this expectation is reasonable. For example, Kaplan and Schoar (2005) document that absolute
and relative performance of earlier funds predicts that of subsequent funds managed by the same

                                                 5
private equity firm – both in venture and buyout. In a recent study, Harris, Jenkinson, Kaplan
and Stucke (2013) find additional evidence of persistence for venture funds established after 2000
(about when sample coverage of many prior empirical studies stops). They document a decline in
(but not disappearance of) persistence for buyout funds with inception dates after 2000. Kaplan
and Schoar (2005) and Harris et al. (2013) also find that positive performance predictability decays
in fund sequence – that is, the second previous fund is less informative about the current fund
performance. While LP’s expectation of persistence is reasonable in this context, there is abundant
evidence that investors in mutual funds also condition investment decisions on past performance
even though that past performance does not predict future performance.
   In a survey of over 200 LPs, DaRin and Phalippou (2014) find that LPs indeed focus on past
performance. They spend an average of 16 to 26 days (depending on the fund type) on due dili-
gence for each fund they invest in. More than 90% of the LPs calculate their own measure of GP
past performance and benchmark that past performance against other GPs.
   The typical private equity fund has an investment period of five or six years and a fund life of at
least ten years. After the investment period, the typical PE firm will seek to raise a new fund so that
it can continue to invest while its previous investments mature. As a result, when LPs evaluate the
performance of a GP’s most recent fund, they must rely on net asset values (NAVs) reported by the
fundraising GPs. This is particularly relevant for buyout funds since the performance of already
resolved funds (e.g., third and fourth back in a sequence) appears to contain little predictive power
on average.
   GPs make investments in companies that are privately held, and thus market prices are not
observable for most of the fund’s unrealized assets. GPs have the potentially difficult problem of
obtaining a valuation for each portfolio company at the end of each reporting period (normally
quarterly). The GPs observe contemporaneous and lagged company characteristics for their port-
folio companies (e.g., sales, profits, etc.) as well as public market characteristics for other, some-
times quite similar, companies, industries, and markets. In addition, GPs may observe, but only
with a lag, the performance of their competition – that is, the performance of other funds of similar



                                                  6
vintage and investment strategy.4
       GPs have an incentive to assign valuations in a way that maximizes the value of their fund
management firm. This problem includes maximizing not only the return from the current fund,
but also possible future funds. Metrick and Yasuda (2010) and Chung, Sensoy, Stern, and Weisbach
(2011) show that the expected income from subsequent funds comprises a similar fraction of a GP’s
lifetime income as the income from the GP’s current fund. Chung et al. (2011) propose and find
empirical support for a rational learning model where follow-on funds provide an indirect payoff
for performance to GPs. GPs, therefore, have an incentive to overstate recent fund performance if
such an overstatement increases the likelihood they raise their next fund.
       At the same time, overstatements have potential costs to the GPs if LPs can detect overstate-
ments and punish GPs by not investing when they discover an overstatement. DaRin and Phalippou
(2014) report that 30% of the LPs in their survey say that they use their own fair value assessments
of unrealized values (or NAVs). This strongly suggests that LPs are aware of the potential for GPs
to overstate performance and that many LPs exert effort to detect those overstatements.
       In this institutional context, therefore, GPs likely face a set of trade-offs in deciding whether or
not to overstate reported NAVs. There are at least three potential equilibria in this environment.
       First, it is possible that LPs can always detect overstatements and penalize the GPs who do so
by not investing in their fund. In this case, the costs of overstatement are high and GPs will not
overstate. Given the result in DaRin and Phalippou (2014), this seems an unlikely equilibrium.
       Second, it is possible that LPs cannot explicitly detect or see overstatements and that the costs
of overstating are not high. In this case, all GPs will overstate even though LPs may understand that
overstating is taking place. This is analogous to the signal-jamming equilibrium in Stein (1989).
       Finally, overstatement may have different costs and benefits to different GPs if LPs can observe
fund value but only imprecisely. For example, for a GP with a very poorly performing fund, there
is not much value in reputation if the firm ceases to exist after an unsuccessful attempt at raising

   4Discussions in Phalippou (2009) and Harris, Jenkinson and Stucke (2012) as well as the proliferation of private equity bench-
marking data vendors and consultants (e.g. in Brown et al. 2015) suggest that most GPs are aware where they stand versus peers.




                                                               7
a new fund. So, the cost to overstating is small. For a strong-performing GPs, with a fund that
is performing well, there is no benefit to overstating. In fact, given the potential for a negative
shock in the future, a strong GP might have an incentive to be conservative. Doing so will not
reduce the likelihood of raising a fund, but may reduce the odds of being mistakenly classified as
a manipulator if the negative shock were to occur.
      More formally, in this equilibrium, LPs use imprecisely measured fund NAVs as an input to
the decision on whether to invest in follow-on funds. Low ability managers try to mimic high
ability managers by overstating returns, and usually, but not always, fail. Given the information
asymmetry, good managers have an incentive to be conservative so as to not get confused with
the bad managers (in the case of idiosyncratic bad outcomes unrelated to their ability). This equi-
librium relies on only three assumptions: (i) PE managers have heterogeneous ability; (ii) past
performance by PE managers provides a useful, but imperfect assessment of their ability; and (iii)
portfolio company values cannot be determined precisely, but costly research by LPs improves
accuracy.
      Our analyses attempt to answer which, if any, of these three equilibria are present in the data.


III. Data

      We obtain data on private equity funds for this study from Burgiss and StepStone. The Bur-
giss dataset is sourced exclusively from LPs and includes the complete transactional and valuation
history for fund investments. The Burgiss data we utilize are provided by over 200 institutional
investment programs and represent over $0.75 trillion in committed capital. The Burgiss LP cus-
tomer base consists of approximately 60% pension funds (a mix of public and corporate), 20%
endowments and foundations, and 20% other institutional investors such as funds-of-funds and
sovereign wealth funds. Data from individual LPs are scaled by Burgiss to be representative of the
full fund and supplemented with fund-specific characteristics (e.g., investment strategy).    5


      We supplement the Burgiss data with information obtained from the StepStone SPI database

  5   Additional details on the Burgiss data are available in Brown et al. (2015)



                                                                  8
to provide an independent source of information about fund sequences and start dates. The SPI
database tracks 12,545 U.S. dollar-denominated funds by 5,128 PE firms between 1969 and 2016.
The SPI database is among the most comprehensive we are aware of in terms of coverage of buyout
and venture funds. For each of the funds in the Burgiss sample, we identify the same fund and
parent firm in the SPI database to verify the dates of new fund formation and the sequence of funds
operated by a particular GP. Independent verification of fund sequence is especially important for
our analysis of unsuccessful fundraising as described in more detail below.
    The Burgiss dataset has been utilized in other academic studies. Harris, Jenkinson, and Kaplan
(2014) compare several private equity datasets and conclude that the Burgiss dataset is representa-
tive of the buyout and venture funds investable universe. A major advantage of the Burgiss dataset
is a complete and audited set of fund cash flows derived from direct recording of the fund account-
ing information disseminated to LPs. This feature is important for our research question because it
insures against breaks in voluntary reporting by GPs and certain selection biases in other datasets
(e.g., those relying on disclosures from public records and Freedom of Information Act requests to
certain LPs). We limit our sample to U.S.-dollar denominated buyout (venture) funds with more
than $25 ($10) million in capital commitments. Our total sample includes 997 buyout funds and
1,074 venture funds. Of these, 641 buyout and 910 venture funds focus on North America. In
our sample, 488 of the buyout and 323 of the venture funds remain active (i.e., are unresolved) as
of March 2012.6 We are able to categorize each fund by: (1) industry sector according to Global
Industry Classification Standard; (2) amount of capital committed; (3) strategy description; (4)
firm affiliation; (5) dated (to the day) cash in-flows and out-flows as well as quarterly reported
Net-Asset Values (NAVs).
    Table 1 reports summary statistics for the funds in our sample separately for buyout and venture
funds. We define a fund as no longer active or “resolved” once it has an NAV less than 2% of the
fund’s initial commitment amount. Results in Panel A indicate the well-known heterogeneity and

   6 In unreported results, we verify that the main findings hold in just the funds focusing on North America. Because of the

smaller sample size, the power of tests using samples of funds focusing outside North America are necessarily weaker, but we do
not find any results contrary to those reported for the full sample.



                                                              9
positive skew in performance among both resolved and active funds as well as the generally larger
commitment amounts for buyout funds. The median buyout (venture) fund makes a distribution or
capital call in 32% (25%) of active quarters.
   Our data allow us to track each fund’s affiliation with a private equity fund-management firm
(henceforth, PE firm) so that we are able to generate fund sequences. Panel A of Table 1 also shows
that for firms with at least two funds, the (interquartile) time between a particular fund’s inception
and a follow-on fund’s first capital call varies from two to five years. Panel B of Table 1 presents
further detail on successive fundraising patterns by breaking out each fund type into groups based
on the number of years between a fund’s inception and the next fund offering by the same firm
(as measured by the date of the follow-on fund’s first capital call). In addition, we tabulate the
number of funds (i) by firm experience as measured by the number of previous funds raised and
(ii) fundraising conditions as measured by public equity market performance through the third year
of fund operations. If public market total returns in the three years around a fund’s inception were
in the bottom (top) tercile in comparison to other funds of the same type, we classify the fund as
starting operations in a low (high) market environment.
   Combining the Burgiss data on cash flows and NAVs with the SPI data on fund starts enables
an analysis of the relationship between fund interim performance and fundraising success. For
all tests in this paper, we define a follow-on fund as the first fund by the same GPs raised after
3 years from the current fund’s first capital call. We define “same GP” for follow-on funds as
those: (i) operated by the same PE firm; (ii) with the same geographic focus (if any) and currency
denomination; (iii) with a similar investment strategy (e.g. buyout or venture). According to the
above criteria, the follow-on success rate for buyout (venture) funds is 86.5% (83.2%). These
values are about 10% higher than the follow-on rates inferred from the Burgiss data alone which
are 77.2% (72.7%).


IV. Primary Results

   We start our analysis by examining the patterns in fund returns since inception and around
fundraising events. Specifically, we seek to detect the presence of any bias in reported NAVs. A

                                                 10
bias could enter NAVs in several ways. First, valuing companies using comparable firms requires
judgment as to which set of firms constitutes the appropriate comparison set and which metrics
are the most suitable for determining value. Second, valuing companies using cash flow models
requires a set of subjective modeling assumptions about growth rates, discount rates, etc. Finally, a
bias in NAVs can derive from the timing of changing to fair value versus historical cost (or timing
of write-downs of failed investments), particularly for venture funds. Historically, fund managers
have had some flexibility on when to switch valuation methods. While funds use external valuation
firms today, the valuation process remains at least partially subjective.7

A. Do Funds Overstate Returns?

    If private equity firms inflate existing fund NAVs to boost to-date performance during new
fundraisings, fund performance should subsequently deteriorate. The unwinding of such biases
need not be immediate, but would necessarily occur when portfolio companies are sold or written
off. We start our analysis by averaging quarterly performance as a function of time since inception
across many funds. Because internal rate of return (IRR) is a money-weighted mean, quarterly
changes in the IRR are poor measures of interim performance.8 The commonly-used money-
multiple (MM or TVPI) is the ratio of all fund distributions and remaining NAV (i.e. “Total Value”)
to total capital calls (“Paid-in Capital”). In Appendix A, we show that a change in MM is a special
case of a change in the to-date PME, when gross benchmark returns, Rm,t , are set equal to 1 for all
periods. Consequently, our analysis relies on a measure of the change in PME defined as
                                NAVt−1
     ∆PMEt = (RtNAV − Rtmkt )               ,                                                                                      (1)
                              f vt (Calls)

    7 Before 2009, GPs had a large amount of discretion in valuing their portfolios. Since 2009, Financial Accounting Standards

Board (FASB) Accounting Standard Codification Topic 820 (also known as FAS 159) requires private equity firms to value their
assets at fair value every quarter, rather than permitting them to value the assets at cost until an explicit valuation change. This has
likely had the practical effect of making estimated unrealized values closer to true market values than in the past. We examine this
question later.
    8 In Appendix A we provide a simple example where the interpretation of IRR-to-date leads to a misleading assessment of

actual fund to-date performance.




                                                                  11
where Rmkt and RNAV are, respectively, the public equity index gross return and the fund gross re-
turn.9 The latter is computed using NAV changes adjusted for cash flows. We define f vt (Calls) =
∑ti=0 {Callsi (∏tτ=i Rmkt
                      τ+1 )} as the time t value of cumulative capital calls adjusted by cumulative

market returns. (RtNAV − Rtmkt ) is the excess return of a fund’s invested assets over period t. Equa-
tion (1) captures the importance of NAV changes in the performance numbers that investors get
to observe. To compute abnormal performance based on NAVs over a time interval (a,b) for a
cross-section S of funds, we define the Weighted-PME (WPME) as
                           t=b              .                              
       W PMEab     = 1+ ∑        ∑i∈S ∆PMEi,t
                                              ∑i∈S
                                                              NAVit−1           .                                          (2)
                           t=a                              f vit (Calls)

In a Monte-Carlo experiment described in Appendix A, we find that excess returns and, thus
WPME changes, yield sharper estimates of time trends in mean excess returns than do raw re-
turns or money-multiples.10
    Figure 1 presents the WPMEs across all buyout and venture funds in our sample since fund
inception (Panel A) and +/-12 quarters around the next fundraising event (Panel B). We define the
date of the next fundraising event as the quarter of the first capital call by the next fund by the same
firm (given at least 11 quarters since the current fund inception). In case there is no such follow-on
fund according to our data, the event quarter is the 13th quarter preceding the last NAV report if
the fund is resolved or at least 10 years old.
    Panel A of Figure 1 shows that average abnormal performance since inception for both buyout
and venture funds increases fairly steadily for the first few years of fund life. Around quarters 15-
20 average fund returns start to grow more slowly, though excess returns remain mostly positive.
The slowing in return growth is slightly more pronounced for venture funds.

    9 We use the CRSP Value-Weighted market return as a proxy for public market returns. However, the choice of benchmark

is not an obvious one (see Phalippou, 2013) so we have also examined alternatives and our results are robust to the choice of
benchmark. In addition, our subsequent analysis with placebo fund returns uses style- and size-matched public equity portfolio
returns based on Fama-French research portfolios. Note that Kaplan-Schoar PME, as an estimator of the expectation of a product
of cash flows and the discount factor, is inherently robust to risk-exposure misspecification. See Korteweg and Nagel (2016),
Sørensen and Jagannathan (2015) for a theoretical exposition as well as Robinson and Sensoy (2011) for an empirical assessment
of the sensitivity of cross-sectional mean PME to different beta/benchmark assumptions.
   10 We also show that inference about the path of cross-sectional mean returns does not depend much on our assumption about a

typical fund’s level of systematic risk (i.e., market beta).



                                                              12
    Since funds launch a follow-on fund at different times in the existing fund’s life, we next
examine returns around the subsequent fundraising event. In particular, the 3-year window before
a fund’s first capital call is the time that a firm is most likely to be active in trying to secure
commitments to a new fund. Panel B of Figure 1 plots cumulative abnormal performance starting
3 years before the next fundraising event. The plots show the same pattern suggested by Panel A.
The cumulative average excess return for both buyout and venture funds in the 3 years following
the fundraising event is less than in 3 years preceding the event. However, it is important to note
that after fundraising (t> 0 in Panel B) excess returns remain positive.
    Contrary to the literature discussed in the introduction, we do not consider the assumption of
constant excess returns over a fund’s life an appropriate null hypothesis. There are alternative ex-
planations that are consistent with the flattening of excess returns post-fundraising which do not
involve a bias in reported valuations. For example, if part of the value-added by a GP involves find-
ing underpriced assets then excess returns will decline as investments are made and then properly
valued. GPs may then need time to facilitate an exit from the investment or simply add additional
value, but at a lower rate, through “nurturing” portfolio companies.
    In addition, the elevated write-off rates after fundraising may occur as a result of GPs learn-
ing about the ultimate prospects of specific investments. Intuitively, GPs will be more likely to
“throw in the towel” for any given investment later in a fund’s life while factoring-in the probabil-
ity of the write-down is not consistent with GAAP.11 A fund’s performance may also deteriorate
after a next fund is raised if GPs dedicate most of their efforts (and possibly better deals) to the
new fund or simply face better investment opportunity earlier in a fund’s life with the marginal
return to investment declining with the investment period approaching its expiration. While this
potentially represents an agency cost born by LPs in the old fund, this would not constitute a NAV
manipulation.
    Figure 1 is also consistent with standard industry practice in how many LPs evaluate perfor-

  11 According to SFAS 157 (ASC 820), the Level III assets must be assigned a value corresponding to ‘Highest and Best Use ’ as

being ‘consequently operated with the other assets in its group’. So changes to the fund portfolio may naturally trigger changes to
‘Highest and Best Use’-valuations of the remaining assets.



                                                               13
mance of GPs. LPs often require a certain level of successful divestments from the current fund
before committing new capital, so GPs may have to exit some of their best investments early to
credibly convey their ability. Such actions can be viewed as a cost of asymmetric information and
uncertainty about NAVs that LPs are nonetheless willing to endure to better learn about a GP’s skill
(in spirit of Leland and Pyle, 1997). However, this sort of behavior is also distinct from reporting
biased valuations. In addition, some investors could simply overreact to particularly strong (yet
truthfully reported) returns over the last few quarters. Thus, a reversion to lower levels (that would
occur irrespective of the new fund launch) may induce the aforementioned pattern. Finally, it is
possible that broad market conditions relevant to buyout and venture fund returns (e.g., access to
exits or new capital) determine the timing of fundraising. Much of our subsequent analysis seeks
to differentiate among these explanations.

A.1. Successful versus unsuccessful fundraisers

   As a next step, we investigate WPMEs for subsets of buyout and venture funds. First, we
categorize funds into groups based on the time it takes to raise a next fund. We create three groups:
The “Early (Late) Next Fund” group is defined as those funds that take less (more) than the median
time to raise a new fund. The “No Next Fund” group is defined as those funds for which we do not
observe a follow-on fund (as discussed in section III). We also split the sample based on median
5-year rolling public markets returns as of the 13th quarter of the fund’s life and call these “High
Market Return” and “Low Market Return” funds.
   Panel A of Figure 2 show the cumulative changes in excess returns for buyout and venture
funds conditional on the time it takes to raise a follow-on fund. Unsurprisingly, funds with no next
fund have much weaker performance than funds which are successful at fundraising. Otherwise,
moderation in performance is only apparent for venture funds with a late next fund. Excess returns
in early years are typically as good or better for those funds that take longer than average to raise
a next fund though we show subsequently that this is partly related to market conditions.
   Recall that we define a hypothetical fundraising event for the No Next Fund group as the 13th
quarter before the last NAV report for funds that are resolved or lived for at least 10 years. This


                                                  14
approach takes into account the salient features of the contractual and operating environment doc-
umented for private equity funds (e.g. see Metrick and Yasuda, 2010). Specifically, GPs are
generally free to choose when to exit fund investments subject to constraints on how long they
can charge management fees for, and rarely enter (or exit) several “deals” simultaneously. In such
settings, one would expect that any existing valuation bias to reveal itself gradually as the fund
unwinds its portfolio (rather than a one-time write-off or liquidation).12
       Panel B of Figure 2 reveals the most interesting results. For both buyout and venture funds,
the excess returns of funds that are unsuccessful at raising a next fund (dotted lines) show patterns
consistent with funds gaming returns. In both cases, excess returns increase in the period during
which a firm is likely to be making a final effort to raise a next fund only to reverse returns in the
final years of the fund (as cash flows are realized).13 We note that these represent not just lower
excess returns, but in fact, negative excess returns. Thus, this evidence is suggestive of attempts
at manipulation that are not successful since investors are not willing to commit to a next fund.
In other words, the market for buyout and venture funds may look through attempts at gaming
NAVs and determine the actual performance of a fund. These results are consistent with the third
equilibrium described above.14
       In Figure 3, we further refine the analysis by considering the performance of different fund
groups during periods of strong and weak market returns. Both buyout and venture funds have
higher excess returns prior to fundraising when market returns are low (regardless of when the
fund was raised) suggesting a higher bar for raising funds during a weak market. The evidence
for No Next Funds shows that the degree of potential gaming also appears to be more pronounced

  12  See the example in the opening of section V for more intuition.
  13  Figure B.3 shows that this result is not driven by outliers and assumptions about the timing of a last-ditch effort to raise a
follow-on fund. The top charts in Panel A show that when 2008:Q2-2009:Q2 are excluded, the hump-shaped pattern of WPME
in buyout and venture subsamples remains largely unchanged for the No Next Fund groups (while not being evident among the
successful fundraisers). In Panel B, we define the event time as 3 years after the median peer fund raised a successor fund. The
subsequent underperformance relative to successful fundraisers remains obvious in both subsamples. The bottom charts in both
panels demonstrate the advantage of using our preferred metric based on Kaplan-Schoar PMEs. Nonetheless, the increase in the
performance gap from the successful fundraisers is evident with TVPI as well.
   14 An alternative explanation would be that these GPs delayed fundraising and then were unlucky with their investments. Such

delays are likely to be costly given the GPs’ value maximization objectives discussed in Metrick and Yasuda (2010) and Chung et
al. (2011).



                                                                15
during weak markets for buyout funds. There is no evidence that the mean excess returns become
negative after successful fundraising in either of the subsamples.

A.2. Heterogeneity among successful fundraisers

   To more closely examine the issue of performance reporting around fundraising, we consider
future performance conditional on past performance using tercile transition probabilities (similar
to Kaplan and Schoar (2005) and Phalippou (2010) but over a given fund’s life rather than across
funds). Table 2 reports transition probabilities between performance terciles based on IRR-to-
date within each fund peer group. Panel A shows results for buyout funds and Panel B shows
results for venture funds. In both cases we examine only funds that have a follow-on fund. For
example, the first row of each panel reports the probability of being in each final performance
tercile conditional on being in the bottom tercile at the conclusion of fundraising. The last row of
each panel reports the unconditional distribution of funds across final performance terciles, and the
last column reports how many funds successfully raised a next fund in each tercile.
   First, the far right columns in each Panel show that a firm is about twice as likely to raise
a follow-on fund when the current fund performance is in the top tercile versus in the bottom
tercile: 44.7% [42%] versus 18.8% [22.9%] for buyout [venture]. This finding is consistent with
funds gaming NAVs as well as with investors requiring credible evidence of investment success
through exits before committing to a follow-on fund. However, for both buyout and venture funds,
top and bottom performers during the fundraising period are most likely to remain in the same
performance tercile. Thus, the interim performance rank is typically informative about the final
performance rank for the current fund. In the appendix, we demonstrate that this result holds if
PME is used in place of IRR (Table B.2) and appears to be even stronger with quartiles (Table B.3).
   Nonetheless, there are some funds that transition between top and bottom terciles. For example,
about 10% of top buyout and venture funds at life-end were in the bottom tercile during fundraising.
This suggests that investors put weight on other indicators of GP quality besides interim returns.
For both buyout and venture funds, there were slightly more transitions from top to bottom terciles
than from bottom to top. Likewise, for both buyout and venture funds more middle-tercile funds


                                                  16
at fundraising transition to the bottom tercile than to the top tercile. These results also suggest
heterogeneity in NAV reporting biases among successful fundraisers. However, it is not clear if it
pays to overstate NAVs. In the next sections, we investigate if overstated NAVs actually increase
the odds of a successful fundraising.

A.3. A signaling model of fundraising

      While the evidence presented previously is suggestive, we have yet to provide statistical tests
of our hypotheses. We start our statistical analysis by estimating a linear probability model where
the dependent variable equals one if we observe a follow-on fund and zero otherwise. For now,
we limit our sample to the funds that were resolved or operated for at least 10 years. As before,
the event time is defined by the quarter in which the follow-on fund made its initial investment
or the 13th quarter before the last NAV report (if the fund is resolved or operated for at least 10
years).15 We consider the following covariates; all are defined as categorical variables to simplify
the interpretations:

      • PME drop (after) – equals 1 if the fund’s PME at resolution is lower than at the event time
        and zero otherwise;

      • PME run-up (before) – equals 1 if the fund’s PME 1 year before the event time is lower than
        at the event time and zero otherwise;

      • Large Distribution (before) – equals 1 if the sum of distributions over the year preceding the
        event time exceeds 20% of NAV and zero otherwise;

      • Top tercile-to-date – equals 1 if the fund is in the top (best) IRR-tercile across vintage and
        strategy peers at the event time and zero otherwise, and

      • Bottom tercile-to-date – equals 1 if the fund is in the bottom (worst) IRR-tercile at the event
        time and zero otherwise.

 15   In sections III and A.1 we provide additional discussion and robustness tests.




                                                                 17
   Table 3 reports the results of this estimation, separately for buyout (Panel A) and venture (Panel
B) subsamples. All specifications include the interaction of the fund vintage year and industry
fixed effects to absorb the variation in investor demand for certain types of funds over time. The
standard errors are clustered by the event year to account for any correlated shocks affecting the
fund returns. In specifications (3) and (4), we also include the level of PME at the event date as
well an indicator whether the market return was positive in the year prior to the event.
   From specifications (1) through (3), we see that negative post-event abnormal returns as well
as lower returns just before the event correspond to a lower probability of successful fundraising.
The magnitudes of the effects similar to those of being in the top performance tercile (a difference
in probability of a successful fundraising of 8-12 percentage points). As discussed above, PME
drop (after) is an indication of overly optimistic NAVs at the event time. It therefore appears that
investors scrutinize fund portfolios and consider aggressive valuations in the current fund as a bad
signal about a GP’s ability. The negative coefficient on PME run-up (before) suggests that investors
also react negatively to above market return reports over the few quarters before the event.
   Specification (4) examines another possible explanation. The significant positive coefficients
on Large Distribution (before) interacted with PME run-up (before) suggests that investors appre-
ciate positive excess returns when accompanied by large distributions from the fund. This may
drive much of the performance rank affect around the fundraising quarters documented by Barber
and Yasuda (2015). Overall, these results are consistent with NAV overstatements reducing the
odds of fundraising success.
   These results suggest that it is unlikely that overstating interim returns has been a winning
strategy for GPs on average. Although the current fund performance clearly has bearing on the
odds of a successful fundraising, overly optimistic NAVs (nefarious or not) are generally associated
with a lower probability of raising a follow-on fund. Therefore, GPs would have an incentive to
be truthful, or even conservative, with their unrealized investment valuations. These results are
interesting (and distinct from the findings of related papers) because they show that while top-
performing funds are more likely to raise a follow-on fund, inflating NAVs seems to reduce the
odds of success. Overall, the findings are consistent with the third equilibrium we describe above.

                                                 18
Next, we more carefully examine the sources of cross-sectional variation in NAV biases.

B. Peer-Chasing

   The extent and nature of any strategic behavior regarding NAV reporting is likely to depend on
to-date performance of a fund as compared to its peer funds. This is reflected in the standard indus-
try practice of comparing performance across funds of similar vintage-year. It is therefore natural
to assume that GPs track their fund’s performance as compared to that of the peers. Likewise, GPs
likely have an incentive to incorporate this knowledge in the valuation process. Discussions in
Phalippou (2009), Stucke (2011) and Harris and Stucke (2012) suggest that some GPs “manage”
their peer set.
   If the resulting behavior results in mimicking peer fund performance, or what we call “peer-
chasing”, this could cause NAV manipulation to spread across firms as a strategic response to the
informational asymmetry between GPs and LPs. For example, underperforming funds have an
incentive to report upward-biased NAVs and may have limited tools to credibly convey that their
NAVs are more conservative than those of their peers. At the same time, top performing funds may
want to insure against bad luck that could tarnish their reputation in the long-term.
   Empirically, peer-chasing could appear as mean-reversion in reported performance. To identify
peer-chasing, we compare future reported returns conditional on cumulative to-date performance.
Specifically, for each fund-quarter we compute the 4-quarter ahead change in PME-to-date. We
then rank these changes by funds of similar vintage year (+/- one year) and plot the distribution of
the ranks by cumulative performance tercile (as measured by IRR-to-date) for different fund-life
periods. Specifically, we look at: 8-17 quarters since inception (denoted as ˜ 3yrs); 18-27 quarters
since inception (denoted as ˜ 5yrs); and 28 or more quarters since inception (denoted as > 7yrs).
   Given the probable relation between fund returns on public market returns, we need to be
careful about the null hypothesis for peer-chasing tests. It could be that mean-reversion is naturally
present in the unobservable true return-generating process (weighted by fund-quarter population).
To address this concern, we also construct placebo return series for each fund in our dataset as a




                                                 19
sum of style-matched public equity portfolio returns.                    16


    Results for these tests are reported in Figure 4 for buyout funds (Panel A) and venture funds
(Panel B). In each panel, top to-date performers are shown in the top graph and bottom to-date
performers are shown in the bottom graph. The results suggest strong peer-chasing patterns for
both buyout and venture funds. For example, in Panel A of Figure 4, a buyout fund that is in the
top to-date tercile after 3 years is much more likely to report relatively low returns over the next
year (as the darkest bar is much higher than the other two). This effect persists but is notably
weaker for ˜ 5yrs since inception. By the ˜ 7yrs since inception the mean-reversion flips as the
top-to-date funds are more likely to report relatively high changes (the darkest bar is the lowest).
This is consistent with the necessary undoing of conservatism as portfolio companies are exited.
In contrast, before the ˜ 5yrs since inception, buyout and venture funds in the bottom tercile are
more likely to report high excess returns over the next 12 months. While after ˜ 7yrs since in-
ception, when performance numbers again become increasingly driven by actual cash flows, the
12-month excess returns become notably worse than those of top tercile peers. In addition, there is
some apparent asymmetry in these results in the early years with bottom tercile funds overstating
performance more than top performing funds are understating performance. The placebo returns
generated from public portfolios (reported in the appendix in B.4) indicate that comparable public
market returns exhibit very weak, if any, return-reversal patterns.
    Overall, the evidence in this section reveals interesting, and economically significant, patterns
in reported NAVs. These patterns appear related to some poor performing funds inflating returns
during fundraising as well as evidence of conservatism by top-performing funds. However, the

   16 The style-matched public portfolio for each fund is a weighted subset of Fama-French research portfolios that represent U.S.

equity sorts into deciles based on mid-year book-to-market ratios and market capitalization. We use only the below-median size
portfolios. For buyout funds we use the 25 highest book-to-market portfolios and lever their returns by a factor of two to account for
leverage in buyout transactions (for example, Axelson, Jenkinson, Strø̈mberg, and Weisbach (2013) report the Debt-to-Enterprise
Value ratio of 0.6 for their sample of LBOs against just 0.3 for the public firm matches). For venture funds we take actual returns of
the 25 lowest Book-to-Market portfolios. Once the weights are selected, they remain fixed over the fund life-time while the placebo
returns correspond to the actual fund operation periods. This placebo comparison can be thought of as deriving from a simulation
where we draw factor-returns from a sample of actual paths rather than taking a stand on return-generating process explicitly. An
advantage of this approach is that it retains the cross-sectional heterogeneity in the actual time-series of equity returns (including
any anomalies).




                                                                 20
findings are not consistent with the fundraising success being positively related to NAV over-
statements. On the contrary, we show evidence that investors punish overoptimistic NAVs by not
providing capital to new funds. In addition, LPs appear to prefer positive interim performance
signals in the form of cash distributions following successful divestments by funds. The data are
also consistent with the realized performance bar being higher (and attempts to manipulate NAVs
being stronger) in a tough fundraising environment. Luck experienced by funds in their early
years appears to have less of an effect on fundraising. If luck were important, we would observe
lower excess returns after early fundraisings. Instead the post-fundraising excess returns for funds
that are early to raise the next fund are on average positive and no different from those after late
fundraisings.


V. Comprehensive Analysis

       In the reminder of the paper we seek to characterize the bias in performance reporting that is
robust to measurement errors and certain alternative explanations. Given the variety of factors that
may affect NAV, focusing on just cross-sectional mean changes for excess returns is limiting. In
this section we take a careful look at how fund timing and peer-chasing may jointly determine
NAVs. We define the NAV-bias and make clear what may obscure inference.
       We define the NAV bias as a ratio (≡ Γt ) of reported NAV to an unbiased assessment of the
market price of the fund in an arms-length transaction.17 By construction, this ratio will have a
value that is always greater than zero and equal to one when the bias is zero (e.g., when NAVs
turn into cash). We model this bias as a continuously compounded change from the level in the
previous period. Such a change in bias over a period can be written as:18

         ∆biast = log (NAVt ) − log (NAVt−1 × Rtm − Kt−1 ×CFt ) − log(Rtε ),                                                    (3)

       where Rtε and Rtm are the fund idiosyncratic gross returns and systematic gross returns, re-

  17  An unbiased assessment satisfies the GAAP fair value definition as the value “at which that asset could be bought or sold in a
current transaction between willing parties, other than in a liquidation.” We do not distinguish between cases when GPs (i) pretend
that reported NAVs are fair values in the GAAP sense and (ii) report NAVs that are conditional on a successful realization of the
business plan (which is a very uncommon practice according to our conversations with LPs).
  18 See Appendix A for derivation.



                                                                21
spectively; CFt represents net distributions to fund investors over period t; Kt−1 is a ratio of the
valuation bias multiple (Γ) at time t − 1 to time t idiosyncratic gross return.
       The intuition behind ∆biast is straightforward. It is a change in log(NAV) that cannot be
explained by the market returns or fund cash flows. Conditioning on the previous level of the
bias (through multiplication by Kt−1 ) in periods with cash flows is necessary because the cash
flows implicitly change the level of the remaining bias. For example, suppose the fund’s “true
value” of assets did not change from $10m but had been overstated by 10% last period so that
NAVt−1 = 10 · exp {0.10} = 11.05. Consider what happens when the underlying assets do not
change in value, but the fund distributes a quarter of its assets at t (i.e., CFt = 1/4 · 10 = 2.5). The
valuation bias (Γ) on the remaining assets will have to step-up for the reported returns to be zero.
Specifically, 0 = NAVt +CFt − NAVt−1 = Γt · 7.5 + 2.5 − 1.105 · 10 implies that the new bias will be
Γt = 1.14. So multiplication by Kt−1 allowes to capture the innovations in the bias in t (rather than
the interaction of the past levels with the cash flows).19 However, neither returns nor past levels
of the valuation bias are observable, so we must replace them with proxies. Next, we discuss the
rationale behind our choices of proxies.

A. Dependent variables

       For our main dependent variable, we utilize equation (3) assuming Kit and Rεit are equal to 1
while Rtm is the value-weighted CRSP index return (or CRSP index returns levered by market beta
                                                             ]it is defined as:
estimates from the literature). So for each fund-quarter it, bias
                                                            
      ^it = log (NAVit ) − log NAVi,t−1 × RCRSP
     ∆bias                                      t   −CFit .                                                                      (4)

             ]it is just the market and cash flow adjusted NAV growth between t − 1 and t. As
       Thus, bias
outlined above, the measurement error on this feasible proxy for ∆biast will be a function of:20

  19  Jenkinson et al. (2013) consider a change in NAVs from the past period as their main dependent variable while Barber and
Yasuda (2013) define a “markdown” variable as min{NAVt −(NAVt−1 −CFt ), 0}. To see how this may result in a spurious correlation
with cash flows consider a situation when a fund decides to value the remaining holdings more conservatively having made some
distributions recently. The inference using their method would be that NAVs were overvalued prior to when those distributions took
place even if in reality they were undervalued (i.e. Γt < Γt−1 is considered evidence of Γt−1 > 1). See Appendix A for details.
  20 To the extent (i) true exposure to the market deviates from the assumed one, and (ii) the ratio of the previous period valuation

bias to the current period idiosyncratic return (gross) deviates from one. See Appendix A for details.



                                                                22
       • fund i idiosyncratic returns for period t,

       • the market return for period t, Rt CRSP , and

       • the fund i cash flow for period t, CFit .

       Thus, any multivariate analysis with this dependent variable would be susceptible to biased
coefficient estimates whenever the regressors (X) correlate with these items. To confirm that our
results are not driven by such spurious relations, we also construct a placebo dependent vari-
able that is a function of misspecified systematic risk and the actual fund cash-flows. Substitut-
                            placebo
ing (NAVt + CFt )/Rt                  for NAVt−1 in equation (3) while keeping Kt−1 =1, yields the following
placebo counterpart:
                                                                                  
               placebo          placebo                   m     m    placebo CFt
         ]t
         ∆bias           = log(Rt       ) − log          Rt + (Rt − Rt      )        .                                               (5)
                                                                              NAVt
                                                                                      ] t and X then
       If controlling for cash flows results in spurious correlations of residuals of ∆bias
                                                                                     placebo
                                                     ]t
we should observe similar spurious correlations with ∆bias                                     and X. Similarly, if RCRSP or
                                                                                                                  placebo
                                                                            ]t
idiosyncratic returns are correlated with X, this will also be the case for ∆bias                                           . In other
                                           placebo
                         ]t
words, regressions using ∆bias                       will indicate the direction and magnitude of the econometric
bias in the estimates arising from the measurement error’s correlation with X.

B. Explanatory variables

       Our two primary explanatory variables of interest are called FundTiming and PeerChasing.
FundTiming is defined as the natural log of the number of years (1 plus years after the second)
spent without a follow-on fund. It is a proxy for a growing incentive to boost NAV as the GP
goes longer without raising a follow-on fund. By construction, the change in FundTiming will be
smaller for each subsequent quarter without a fund.21

  21  We note that the term FundTiming is somewhat misleading insofar we intend to test for the active manipulation of NAV reports
rather than the choice of time to launch a fund. We also note that it is possible that a reverse causality drives the relationship between
upward-biased NAVs and follow-on fund launches and that using FundTiming should help mitigate concerns about us identifying
this as nefarious manipulation. Suppose that, innocuously, GPs become overly optimistic about the investment opportunity set or
their skill. These are precisely the times when they would seek to start another fund for a good reason. In other words, GPs may
make honest mistakes that induce correlation between reported returns and new fund launches. Unlike dummy variables indicating
lead/lags from the fundraising quarter, the variation in FundTiming can be considered relatively exogenous with respect to such
“honest optimism” waves in so far as the optimism is unlikely to increase monotonically in the time spent without a fund.


                                                                   23
   PeerChasing is the difference between a funds reported IRR-to-date and the median across
the fund’s peers. We construct fund peer groups as we did for Figures 4. Specifically, peer
groups consist of other funds of the same strategy and adjacent vintage years (including already re-
solved funds) as of the previous quarter. For placebo tests, we also construct a PeerChasing series
from placebo returns. Under the null of unbiased (independently distributed) NAV changes, risk-
adjusted returns should not correlate with their own lags. Additional details on the construction of
both variables are presented in Appendix A.
   An alternative explanation for a relation between NAV growth and FundTiming or PeerChasing
is that some funds have stale NAVs. That is, some GPs simply lag behind their peers in updating
their portfolio valuations. For example, GPs may wait to revalue until a next funding round or
follow a convention of holding assets at cost. Such firms may nonetheless have to bring stale
NAVs more up to-date when it is time to start marketing a new fund. Thus, managerial style may
result in mean-reversion of returns that is stronger when it has been awhile since the previous
fund’s inception. We address this concern via our cross-sectional tests in this section as well as in
separate tests in the robustness section.
   Because we want to focus on NAV reports that can be plausibly manipulated and also affect
the fund performance assessment by investors, we only consider reports between the 6th and 28th
quarter of fund life for this analysis. To reduce the impact of outliers and remain realistic about the
extent to which a common slope may hold across funds with dramatically different performance,
we include only fund-quarter observations where IRR-to-date is within 30 percentage points from
the peer-group median. To motivate this censoring, we estimate local polynomial regressions of
bias                                                                          g placebo
]it on PeerChasingit−1 and PeerChasingit−2 (Figure B.6 contrasts them against biasit    ). We
find a negative association with reported returns when PeerChasing is close to zero. However,
when it is more than 30 percentage away from zero, the relationship dissipates. These results
suggest that PeerChasing effect is present only where it might be credible (or relevant). Table B.4
reports summary statics for the dependent and explanatory variables used in subsequent tests.




                                                  24
C. Main effects

       Table 4 reports estimates for the following two models (for both buyout and venture funds)
over the sample period covering 1984 through 2011:
           ^it = [FundTimingit PeerChasingit ]β +Controlsit + vit
       (i) ∆bias
            ^it = [FundTimingit PeerChasingit FundTimingit ×PeerChasingit ]γ+Controlsit +uit
       (ii) ∆bias
       Results from model (i) are reported in specifications (1) and (2) while results from model (ii)
are reported in specifications (2) and (4). Controlsit include fund fixed effects, year-quarter fixed
effects, as well as fund distributions and capital calls over the current quarter scaled by the end-
of-quarter NAVs. Specifications (1) and (2) have adjusted NAV growth computed assuming a beta
of one relative to the value-weighted CRSP stock index. In specifications (3) and (4), we use a
beta of 1.7 for buyout funds and of 2.4 for venture funds which are provided in Driessen, Lin and
Phalippou (2012).22
       For buyout funds (Panel A), estimation results in specification (1) indicate a positive and signif-
icant coefficient on FundTiming and a negative and significant coefficient on PeerChasing across
all specifications. The corresponding results for the venture sample (Panel B of Table 4) show sim-
ilar relations with somewhat smaller magnitudes for FundTiming. These coefficients constitute a
prediction of next period fund reported returns up to a fund-specific trend. Results in specification
(3) indicate that the findings are not very sensitive to the alternative market beta.23
       To gauge the economic significance, we can calculate that for a buyout fund, the fourth year
spent without a follow-on fund elevates the reported excess returns an average of about 6.5% next
quarter (0.08*log(3)). The coefficient on PeerChasing indicates how much the average fund excess
return increases next quarter if it is above the peer group median IRR-to-date by 1 percentage
point. For example, the estimate in the first column of Table 4 Panel A of -0.205 for buyout funds
suggests a reversion of about 20 basis points. Given the standard deviation of 0.13 for PeerChasing

  22  These are the highest values of beta among the papers we reviewed: Brav and Gompers (1997), Cao and Lerner (2007),
Kortoweg and Sorensen (2009), Franzoni, Nowak and Phalippou (2012), Driessen, Lin and Phalippou (2012), Ewens, Jones and
Rhodes-Kropf (2013).
  23 This suggests that the measurement error discussed in the previous section is not driving the results. Table B.5 reports

additional specifications for model (i) and (ii) that demostrate the estimates robustness to different set of fixed effects and cash flow
controls which provides additional assurance against the spurious correlation risk discussed in Appendix A.


                                                                  25
this suggests a typical reporting distortion is around 2.6 percentage points of quarterly returns.
       In model (ii), we examine the interaction between fund timing and peer chasing. The coeffi-
cients on FundTiming remain positive and significant for both buyout and venture funds suggesting
that timing effects are robust to accounting for the interaction effects. The coefficient on PeerChas-
ing becomes positive and significant in some specifications, suggesting that when the FundTiming
variable is zero there is no reversion in returns but rather a persistence (whereas in model (i) the
effects are implicitly evaluated at a mean level of other variables).24 To better assess the economic
significance, consider the case where a buyout fund has performance two standard deviation below
its peers and five years have elapsed without raising a new fund. In this case, the model suggests
that the change in reported performance from previous quarter will have a positive bias of nearly
5 percentage points.25 Now consider a similar fund that has gone five years without raising a new
fund but has performance two standard deviation above its peers. In this case the bias will be just
about 1 percentage point. These magnitudes are similar to the venture sample.
       In short, the negative and significant coefficient on the interaction term reinforces the conclu-
sion that peer-chasing is stronger when the incentive to do so is high (as measured by FundTiming).
In other words, the longer it takes to raise a next fund, the more strongly the funds reported returns
revert to those of its peers. Because the effect is stronger when incentives are large, this finding
is consistent with NAV manipulation rather than alternative explanations discussed in the previous
section. To the extent that more time spent without a fund is associated with lower performance,
these results are consistent with underperforming funds tending to overstate NAVs.26

D. Cross-sectional differences

       In this section we investigate how cross-sectional differences affect fund timing and peer-
chasing. We extend model (i) by including the interactions of FundTiming and PeerChasing with
the following variables:

  24 Albeit the models’ R-squared hardly moves after adding the interaction term, the reduction in Bayesian Information Criterion
(untabulated) is greater than 20 for both, buyout and venture funds, regardless of the additional control variables.
  25 0.053*log(4) +0.117*[2*-0.13] -0.304*[log(4)* 2*-0.13]
  26 Year-quarter fixed effects, very close point estimates across different beta assumptions leave hardly any room for a risk-based

explanation of our results.


                                                                26
       • Rookiei , equals 1 if the firm has had two or less previous funds in the sample and zero
         otherwise;

       • TopTercileit , equals 1 if fund i to-date-IRR at time t is in the top tercile of peer funds in the
         same strategy in adjacent vintage-years and zero otherwise;

       • BtmTercileit , equals 1 if fund i to-date-IRR at time t is in the bottom tercile of peer funds in
         the same strategy in adjacent vintage-years and zero otherwise.

       Table 5 reports four specifications separately for buyout and venture funds. All are estimated
with fund fixed effects, year-quarter fixed effects, and fund distributions and capital calls over the
current quarter scaled by the end-of-quarter NAVs. Since TopTercileit and BtmTercileit are time-
varying characteristics over a fund’s life, we can identify the effect on reporting bias in the quarters
right after transitions to and from the respective tercile. In contrast, Rookiei is a fixed characteristic
for a given fund so only its interaction terms are present in the model.
       Specification (1) examines the Rookie effect, (2) examines the TopTercile effect, (3) includes
all effects (thus, the base case is middle tercile funds with two or more previous funds from the
same firm), and (4) investigates whether our inference is sensitive to the level of market beta we
assume. It is important to note that the control group for top tercile funds in specification (2) is
both middle and bottom tercile funds, whereas the control group in specifications (3) and (4) is
only middle tercile funds.27
       We first consider the results from specification (1) for buyout and venture funds which examines
the rookie-effect. The coefficient on the interaction with FundTimingit is negative but insignificant
and small. We note that rookie venture funds do not exhibit significantly different fund timing or
peer-chasing behavior. However, peer-chasing is more pronounced among rookie buyout funds.
       In specification (2), we consider how the effects differ for top-performing funds. The positive
and significant coefficient on TopTercile indicates that top performing funds to-date continue to
report abnormally high NAV-growth in both subsamples, buyout and venture. This is consistent

  27 By construction, performance-tercile dummies are strongly correlated with PeerChasing variable. Thus, the effects of
(1 TopTercile BtmTercile) × FundTiming effectively proxy for FundTiming × Peerchasing × Per f ormanceRank.


                                                           27
with these funds carrying conservative valuations or having superior ability. The coefficient on
the interaction with FundTiming is negative and significant suggesting that top-tercile buyout and
venture funds time less than their underperforming peers. The insignificant coefficient on the in-
teraction between TopTercile and PeerChasing indicates that the top performing funds appear to
peer-chase about the same as other funds. Taking baseline and interaction effects of FundTiming
and PeeChasing together, the point estimates suggest that top-tercile buyout and venture funds
tend to report downward-biased returns for the next quarter when current IRR is one or more stan-
dard deviation above their peers.28 This is consistent with our third equilibrium described above
where top-performing funds report conservative NAVs (e.g., to build a cushion against negative
idiosyncratic returns in the future).
    In specification (3), we examine all effects simultaneously and find similar results for fund-
timing overall. Meanwhile, specification (4) suggests that our inference about the cross-sectional
effects is unlikely to be affected by heterogeneity in the risk exposure across funds. The esti-
mates with high betas are very similar to those with unit betas. We find evidence that FundTiming
amongst buyout and venture funds is significantly stronger in the bottom tercile (as indicated by the
large positive coefficient on the BtmTercile interactions with FundTiming). As for PeerChasing,
the effect appears stronger for bottom tercile buyout funds while not being significant for the funds
in the middle performance tercile. This is somewhat different from the venture sample where the
relationship between the next quarter returns and the current distance from peers’ IRR does not
appear to be statistically different across performance terciles.
    The evidence presented in Table 5 is not consistent with less experience leading to more ag-
gressive NAV marks. In fact, the rookies appear somewhat more conservative regardless of their
performance to-date which is consistent with incentives to build a long-term reputation as per
Chung et al. (2011). Instead, it follows that it is the current performance what largely determines
the direction of the reporting bias.

  28 Even for IRRs very close to a median peer (i.e. PeeChasing near zero), overstating NAVs by top-tercile funds is statistically

zero as conveyed by the tabulated F-tests for sum of coefficients on FundTiming +Top × FundTiming.




                                                               28
       We note that the cross-sectional results are inconsistent with stale NAVs for some funds driving
the main results. If stale NAVs were a significant driver in Table 4, we would expect that funds
with the highest true returns had the largest gap to cover which predicts positive coefficients on
Top × FundTiming and a positive total peer-chasing effect for that group (in contrast to what we
find in specification (2)).

E. Placebo tests

       As noted above, to better calibrate the null hypothesis for our tests, we examine a set of specifi-
cations similar to those in Table 4 and 5 but use placebo equivalents to determine if our estimation
method is capturing something inherent in market conditions. Essentially, we estimate how style-
matched public equity returns, conditional on actual fund cash flows, associate with lagged public
equity returns since the respective fund inception (via PeerChasing). Also, we can identify actual
calendar time patterns in subsequent funds starts (via FundTiming). The interactions with Rookie,
TopTercile and BtmTercile dummies allow us to check whether these relations (1) are different
in time periods when funds with less than two predecessors were operating, and (2) vary across
performance ranks.29 The results are tabulated in the appendix (Table B.6) but reveal no consistent
relationships for either fund-timing or peer-chasing. Although a few coefficients are statistically
different from zero, they tend to have opposite signs from what we find in Tables 4 and 5. This
reassures that the effects we report in Table 5 are unlikely to be spurious.


VI. Robustness and other tests

A. Alternative estimators

       In this section we scrutinize the assumptions about the fund return-generating process in the
panel regressions of Section V. Namely, (1) the strict exogeneity of fund fixed effects with regards
to other regressors included in the model, (2) the constant trend in fund excess returns between

  29In matching placebo portfolios, we further condition on placebo to-date returns being in the same tercile as the actual fund
IRR as of 28th quarter since inception or the last quarter in the sample for younger funds.




                                                              29
the 6th and 28th quarters of fund life, and (3) the stale NAV explanation for the fund-timing and
peer-chasing effects in Table 4.
       Assumption (1) is a concern since both key explanatory variables, FundTiming and PeerChasing
values depend on past idiosyncratic returns of the fund which are also components of the measure-
                                      ] In other words, the underlying model has strong
ment error on the dependent variable, ∆bias.
features of a dynamic panel (i.e. yi,t = γyi,t−1 + αi + εi,t ) where fixed effects estimators may yield
biased estimates of γ because E[yi,t−1 (εi,t − ε̄i )] 6= 0.30
       Assumption (2) appears vulnerable in light of the discussion in section IV. Absent any valu-
ation biases, the abnormal performance trend may nonetheless deteriorate after a follow-on fund
launches because of changes in asset composition, lack of manager attention, etc. Fixed effects
models will disregard such changes during a fund’s life and may falsely relate them to the varia-
tion in the explanatory variables.
       A possible fix for these econometric difficulties is to use a first-difference (FD) estimator to
remove fund-level unobserved heterogeneity. Further, if we make an assumption that real changes
to a fund’s return generating process (i.e. due to incentives) do not happen in a short interval (e.g.,
over few quarters) whereas manipulated changes to NAV do, a FD estimator should yield more
power against the “gaming” alternative.
       Not demeaning the dependent and explanatory variables at the fund level also allows for in-
cluding explanatory variables that are functions of future idiosyncratic returns. This helps with
controlling for the possible effects of stale NAVs. Note that stale NAVs can be formulated as self-
correcting valuation errors which should be greater the further the reported performance level is
from the final value (i.e. by the time all holdings are converted to cash flows). So if some GPs
are simply slow to update values, the difference between the final PME from its level in the next
                                                        ]
period should absorb all of the suspicious variation in ∆bias.
       With first-differencing, there is still a concern regarding endogenous variables so long as parts

  30 The bias of the fixed-effect estimates would be finite and decreasing in panel length, but still can be sizeable in the case of
highly persistent regressors. See, for example, Wooldridge (2002).




                                                                30
of FundTiming and PeerChasing (henceforth, Xit ) depend on returns at t − 1. Therefore, we in-
strument ∆Xit with two lagged levels, Xit−1 and Xit−2 . Provided that the process for X is persistent
and carries information about unobserved heterogeneity among funds, lagged levels are valid in-
struments for the difference (see Wooldridge, 2002).
   Table 6 reports estimates of models (i) and (ii) in first-differences over fund-quarters via a two-
step GMM with an optimal weighting matrix, robust to heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation.
Results are reported separately for buyout (Panel A) and venture (Panel B) subsamples. All spec-
ifications except (3) use the instruments discussed above, namely: (Xit−1 Xit−2 Controlsit ). We
seek to further clarify the explanation for the effects we document in specification (3) by using Ex-
cessFundTiming and ResidualPeerChasing as instruments for X. The tabulated partial F-statistics
for the first stages suggest that we do not have a weak-instruments problem.
   We define ExcessFundTiming as a ratio of the time spent without a follow-on fund to the me-
dian time it took to raise a follow-on fund by vintage and strategy peers. In essence, we adjust the
temptation to fund-time by the average peer-pressure so that the potentially higher performance
bar (see section IV.A) is unlikely to interfere with the biased NAVs explanation. We define Resid-
ualPeerChasing as the residuals from a regression on four lags of median-IRR by peer group,
allowing for fund-varying slopes. Hence, this instrument should disregard the variation due to lack
of timely updating by some funds.
   Specifications (1) and (2) of Table 6 are very consistent with those in Table 4 although the
effects are larger in magnitude and stronger statistically (particularly, for venture fund-timing). A
comparison of (3) with (1) suggests that some of the peer-chasing effect might be explained with a
lag of peers’ returns but the residual effect is still significant.
   We only consider funds that are nearly resolved in specification (4) so that the final PME
value is known. Although the sample of fund-quarters drops by half, the coefficient estimates
on FundTiming and PeerChasing are close to those in specification (1) suggesting the model is
structuraly stable. The coefficient on the proxy of the self-correcting valuation error (the difference
from the final PME) is insignificant.



                                                    31
B. NAV reporting and SFAS 157

   In September of 2006, the U.S. Financial Accounting Standards Board adopted Statement of
Financial Accounting Standards 157 (SFAS 157) which effectively changed the NAV reporting
standard for PE funds. A part of SFAS 157 referred to as ASC 820 requires fair-value reporting
of balance sheet assets. Thus, the implementation of FAS 157 occurred during our sample period.
The earliest adopters began complying in the fourth quarter of 2006 with all U.S. funds complying
by the end of 2008. As a consequence, our sample may allow us to determine if FAS 157 had a
notable effect on reported NAVs.
   Unfortunately, the timing of the adoption coincides with the financial crisis of 2007-2008 which
confounds the analysis. We undertake several tests and find only weak evidence that the regulation
affected systematically affected reporting for venture funds and no evidence for buyout funds. For
brevity, we discuss these results in the appendix.


VII. Conclusion

   We investigate whether private equity firms manipulate their NAV reports to investors. We find
that the data are consistent with an equilibrium where overstatement has different costs and benefits
to different GPs. In this equilibrium, LPs do not assume the interim performance reports are
unbiased; they punish GPs for the appearance of overstated performance by not providing capital
to subsequent funds. Correspondingly, top performing GPs may try to safeguard their long-term
reputation from bad luck by reporting conservative NAVs. They are more likely to do this when
it does not jeopardize their high relative performance rank. For underperforming GPs, these long-
term reputational concerns appear to be dominated by a short-term concern related to firm survival
(and possibly a lack of credible ways to signal that valuations are conservative). Therefore, certain
poorly performing funds appear incentivized to boost interim NAVs.
   An assessment of the welfare effects of such a performance-gaming equilibrium hinges on the
degree to which relatively unskilled LPs misallocate capital. In light of our results, sophisticated
LPs are, on average, unlikely to misallocate capital and may therefore prefer the current stance to
one with more regulation and (possibly) less gaming.

                                                 32
References

Axelson, Ulf, Tim Jenkinson, Per Strömberg, and Michael S Weisbach, 2013, Borrow cheap, buy
 high? the determinants of leverage and pricing in buyouts, The Journal of Finance 68, 2223–
 2267.

Barber, Brad M, and Ayako Yasuda, 2014, Interim fund performance and fundraising in private
  equity, University of California – Davis Working Paper.

Brealey, Richard, Hayne E Leland, and David H Pyle, 1977, Informational asymmetries, financial
  structure, and financial intermediation, The journal of Finance 32, 371–387.

Brown, Gregory W, Robert S Harris, Tim Jenkinson, Steven N Kaplan, and David T Robinson,
  2015, What do different commercial data sets tell us about private equity performance?, Univer-
  sity of North Carolina Working Paper.

Chakraborty, Indraneel, and Michael Ewens, 2014, When reputation is not enough: Portfolio ma-
 nipulation and fund-raising in venture capital, Southern Methodist University Working Paper.

Chung, Ji-Woong, Berk Sensoy, Lea Stern, and Michael Weisbach, 2011, Pay for performance
 from future fund flows: The case of private equity, Review of Financial Studies 25 (11), 3259-
 3304.

Cumming, Douglas, and Uwe Walz, 2009, Private equity returns and disclosure around the world,
 Journal of International Business Studies 41, 727–754.

Da Rin, Marco, and Ludovic Phalippou, 2014, There is something special about large investors:
 evidence from a survey of private equity limited partners, University of Oxford Working Paper.

Franzoni, Francesco, Eric Nowak, and Ludovic Phalippou, 2012, Private equity performance and
  liquidity risk, The Journal of Finance 67, 2341–2373.

Gompers, Paul, Anna Kovner, Josh Lerner, and David Scharfstein, 2010, Performance persistence
 in entrepreneurship, Journal of Financial Economics 96, 18–32.

Harris, Robert, Tim Jenkinson, and Rüdiger Stucke, 2012, Are too many private equity funds top
 quartile?, Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 24, 77–89.

Harris, Robert S, Tim Jenkinson, and Steven N Kaplan, 2014, Private equity performance: What
 do we know?, The Journal of Finance 69, 1851–1882.



                                               33
Harris, Robert S., Tim Jenkinson, Steven N. Kaplan, and Rüdiger Stucke, 2012, Has persistence
 persisted in private equity? evidence from buyout and venture capital funds, University of Vir-
 ginia Working Paper.

Harris, Robert S., Tim Jenkinson, and Rüdiger Stucke, 2010, A white paper on private equity data
 and research, UAI foundation working paper Private Equity Research Consortium.

Hochberg, Yael V., Alexander Ljungqvist, and Yang Lu, 2010, Networking as a barrier to entry
 and the competitive supply of venture capital, The Journal of Finance 65, 829–859.

Hochberg, Yael V, Alexander Ljungqvist, and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen, 2014, Informational
 holdup and performance persistence in venture capital, Review of Financial Studies 27, 102–
 152.

Jenkinson, Tim, Miguel Sousa, and Rüdiger Stucke, 2013, How fair are the valuations of private
  equity funds?, Oxford University Working Paper.

Kaplan, Steven N, and Antoinette Schoar, 2005, Private equity performance: Returns, persistence,
 and capital flows, The Journal of Finance 60, 1791–1823.

Kaplan, Steven N., and Per Strömberg, 2008, Leveraged buyouts and private equity, Journal of
 Economic Perspectives 22(4).

Kocis, James M., James C. Bachman, Austin M. Long, and Craig J. Nickels, 2009, Inside Private
 Equity (John Wiley & Sons, Inc.: Hoboken, N.J., USA).

Korteweg, Arthur, and Stefan Nagel, 2016, Risk-adjusting the returns to venture capital, The Jour-
 nal of Finance.

Korteweg, Arthur, and Morten Sorensen, 2010, Risk and return characteristics of venture capital-
 backed entrepreneurial companies, Review of Financial Studies 23, 3738–3772.

Lerner, Josh, Antoinette Schoar, and Jialan Wang, 2008, Secrets of the academy: The drivers of
  university endowment success, The Journal of Economic Perspectives 22, 207–222.

Lerner, Josh, Antoinette Schoar, and Wan Wongsunwai, 2007, Smart institutions, foolish choices:
  The limited partner performance puzzle, The Journal of Finance 62, 731–764.

Metrick, Andrew, and Ayako Yasuda, 2010, The economics of private equity funds, Review of
 Financial Studies 23, 2303–2341.

Phalippou, Ludovic, 2009, Beware of venturing into private equity, Journal of Economic Perspec-
  tives 23, 147–166.

                                               34
       , 2010, The performance of private equity funds, Journal of Banking and Finance 34,
  568–577.

       , 2014, Performance of buyout funds revisited?, Review of Finance 18, 189–218.

        , and Oliver Gottschalg, 2009, The performance of private equity funds, Review of Finan-
  cial Studies 22, 1747–1776.

Roberts, Michael R., and Toni M. Whited, 2012, Endogeneity in empirical corporate finance, Uni-
 versity of Pennsylvania Working Paper.

Robinson, David, and Berk Sensoy, 2011, Cyclicality, performance measurement, and cash flow
 liquidity in private equity, NBER Working Paper.

Robinson, David T, and Berk A Sensoy, 2013, Do private equity fund managers earn their fees?
 compensation, ownership, and cash flow performance, Review of Financial Studies 26, 2760–
 2797.

Sorensen, Morten, 2007, How smart is smart money? a two-sided matching model of venture
  capital, The Journal of Finance 62, 2725–2762.

Sorensen, Morten, and Ravi Jagannathan, 2015, The public market equivalent and private equity
  performance, Financial Analysts Journal 71, 2013–039.

Stein, Jeremy C, 1989, Efficient capital markets, inefficient firms: A model of myopic corporate
  behavior, The Quarterly Journal of Economics pp. 655–669.

Stucke, Rüdiger, 2011, Updating history, Oxford University Working Paper.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M., 2002, Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data (MIT Press:
 Cambridge, M.A., USA).




                                              35
                                            Figure 1: Average Fund Performance
This figure reports cumulative NAV-weighted excess returns of private equity funds over the public market index.
Panel A plots values since inception and Panel B plots values twelve quarters before and after the follow-on fund’s
first capital call. In cases where no follow-on fund exists, the event quarter is the 13th quarter preceding the last NAV
report for resolved funds or the 10-year mark for unresolved funds. As described in equations (1) and (2), the change
in a given quarter is a mean PME-to-date change from the previous period across a subset of funds multiplied by the
average ratio of NAV to market-adjusted paid-in capital (to date). Appendix A shows that this is equal to a weighted-
average excess return and that the inference about the path is robust to misspecification of fund-level systematic risk.

                                                        Panel A: Since Inception
                                        Buyout
                            1.3




                                        Venture
                            1.2
                            1.1
                            1




                                        5        10       15         20       25       30      35    40
                                                               Fund Life in Quarters



                                                      Panel B: Around Fundraising
                            1.4




                                            Buyout
                                            Venture
                            1.3
                            1.2
                            1.1
                            1




                                  -12            -8        -4            0          4           8     12
                                                Quarters Relative to 1st Capital Call of Next Fund
                    Figure 2: Average Performance Paths by Time Until Next Fund

This figure reports cumulative NAV-weighted excess returns of private equity funds over the public market index.
Panel A plots values since inception and Panel B plots values twelve quarters before and after the follow-on funds
first capital call. As described in equations (1) and (2), the change in a given quarter is a mean PME-to-date change
from the previous period across a subset of funds multiplied by the average ratio of NAV to market-adjusted paid-in
capital (to date). Appendix A shows that this is equal to a weighted-average excess return and that the inference about
the path is robust to funds risk misspecification. We define subsets of funds in the legends of respective subfigures.
In cases where no follow-on fund exists (No Next Fund), the event quarter is the 13th quarter preceding the last NAV
report for resolved funds or the 10-year mark for unresolved funds. Late(Early) denotes whether the follow-on fund
was later(earlier) than the sample median across all buyout and venture funds respectively.

                                                                Panel A: Since Inception
                                                  Buyout                                                              Venture
                  2.5




                                                                                       2.5
                              Late Next Fund                                                       Late Next Fund
                              Early Next Fund                                                      Early Next Fund
                              No Next Fund                                                         No Next Fund
                  2




                                                                                       2
                  1.5




                                                                                       1.5
                  1




                                                                                       1
                  .5




                                                                                       .5




                              5        10    15     20     25       30       35   40               5        10    15    20   25       30       35   40


                                                                Fund Life in Quarters


                                                           Panel B: Around Fundraising
                                                  Buyout                                                              Venture
                  2.5




                                                                                       2.5




                              Early Next Fund                                                      Early Next Fund
                              Late Next Fund                                                       Late Next Fund
                              No Next Fund                                                         No Next Fund
                  2




                                                                                       2
                  1.5




                                                                                       1.5
                  1




                                                                                       1
                  .5




                                                                                       .5




                        -12       -8        -4      0           4        8        12         -12       -8        -4      0        4        8        12


                                            Quarters Relative to 1st Capital Call of Next Fund
                    Figure 3: Average Fund Performance Path Around Fundraising

This figure reports cumulative NAV-weighted excess returns of private equity funds over the public market index. Panel
A plots values since inception and Panel B plots values values twelve quarters before and after the follow-on funds
first capital call. As described in equations (1) and (2), the change in a given quarter is a mean PME-to-date change
from the previous period across a subset of funds multiplied by the average ratio of NAV to market-adjusted paid-in
capital (to date). Appendix A shows that this is equal to a weighted-average excess return and that the inference about
the path is robust to funds risk misspecification. We define subsets of funds in the legends of respective subfigures.
In cases where no follow-on fund exists (No Next Fund), the event quarter is the 13th quarter preceding the last NAV
report for resolved funds or the 10-year mark for unresolved funds. Late(Early) Next denotes whether the follow-on
fund was later(earlier) than the sample median across all buyout and venture funds respectively. Low Mkt plots excess
returns for funds where the public markets 5-year rolling return was below the sample median as of the 13th quarter of
fund life.

                                                          Panel A: Buyout
                                               All                                               Early Next Fund
                    1.6




                                All




                                                                      1.8
                                Low Mkt


                                                                      1.6
                    1.4




                                                                      1.4
                    1.2




                                                                      1.2
                    1




                                                                      1




                          -12    -8       -4    0     4     8    12                   -12   -8    -4    0    4     8   12

                                      Late Next Fund                                              No Next Fund
                    1.8




                                                                      1.8
                    1.6




                                                                      1.6
                    1.4




                                                                      1.4
                    1.2




                                                                      1.2
                    1




                                                                      1




                          -12    -8       -4    0     4     8    12                   -12   -8    -4    0    4     8   12

                                          Quarters Relative to 1st Capital Call of Next Fund


                                                          Panel B: Venture
                                               All                                               Early Next Fund
                                                                      2.5
                    3




                                All
                                Low Mkt
                    2.5




                                                                      2
                    2




                                                                      1.5
                    1.5




                                                                      1
                    1




                          -12    -8       -4    0     4     8    12                   -12   -8    -4    0    4     8   12

                                      Late Next Fund                                              No Next Fund
                    3




                                                                      1 1.1 1.2 1.3
                    2.5
                    2
                    1.5




                                                                      .9
                                                                      .8
                    1




                          -12    -8       -4    0     4     8    12                   -12   -8    -4    0    4     8   12

                                          Quarters Relative to 1st Capital Call of Next Fund
               Figure 4: Next Year PME Growth Conditional on To-Date Performance

This figure reports the probabilities of a fund’s excess returns over the next 4 quarters being in the top(bottom) tercile
conditional on the fund’s to-date performance tercile. We plot results separately for Buyout (Panel A) and Venture
funds (Panel B). We define the fund peer group for to-date and next year terciles as all funds of the same strategy
incepted within one year from the fund vintage year. The top chart of each panel reports results for top to-date tercile
funds as of 8 to 17 quarters since inception (∼3yrs), 18 to 27 quarters since inception (∼5yrs), and more than 27
quarters (>7yrs). The bottom chart of each panel reports values for the bottom tercile to-date funds.

                                                  Panel A: Buyout funds

                                         Bottom Tercile Next Year              Middle Tercile Next Year
                                                         Top To-Date Tercile
                .5
                .333
                .2




                               ~3 yrs                           ~5 yrs                              >7 yrs
                                                       Bottom To-Date Tercile
                .5
                .333
                .2




                               ~3 yrs                           ~5 yrs                              >7 yrs


                                                  Panel B: Venture funds

                                         Bottom Tercile Next Year              Middle Tercile Next Year
                                                         Top To-Date Tercile
                .5
                .333
                .2




                               ~3 yrs                           ~5 yrs                              >7 yrs
                                                       Bottom To-Date Tercile
                .5
                .333
                .2




                               ~3 yrs                           ~5 yrs                              >7 yrs
                                                                  Table 1: Summary Statistics
This table reports summary statistics for the 997 buyout and 1,074 venture funds in our sample. Panel A provides
basic statistics for buyout and venture funds separately. We also report common performance statistics conditional
on whether or not the fund is resolved (or older than 8 years). Panel B provides detailed statistics on the timing of
subsequent funds for buyout and venture funds separately. We provide statistics for subgroups based on number of
prior funds and market return terciles (low, mid, high) in the 3 years prior to the fundraising period.

                                                                          Panel A: Basic Statistics
                                                                                 Buyout                                                           Venture
                                                       Mean     StDev     5        25       50       75       95         Mean     StDev    5        25       50       75           95
                           Funds Per Firm                2.0      2.0      1.0      1.0      2.0      3.0      5.0         3.0      2.0     1.0      1.0      2.0      4.0          8.0
                    All    Fund Size ($ mln)           1,324    5,755     80      220      450      1,070    4,210       390      2,288    26       74      170      330          740
                           Vintage Year                2002       6      1989     1998     2004     2006     2008        1999       7     1984     1995     2000     2005         2008
                           Funds Per Firm                3.0      2.0      2.0      2.0      3.0      4.0         6.0      4.0      2.0     2.0      2.0      3.0         5.0      8.0
    if >1 Fund
                           Median interval per Firm      3.5      3.1      1.5      2.8      3.8      4.8         5.8      3.5      2.5     1.0      2.3      2.8         4.3     10.3
                           Life (years)                 12.1      3.0    7.8      10.0     12.0      13.8     17.3        13.1      3.2    8.3  11.3         12.5        14.8     19.3
       If Already          IRR (%)                      13.63    18.62 −10.48      4.22    11.29     22.27    38.83       14.48    48.53 −18.76 −6.12         3.46       16.00    86.31
        Resolved           TVPI                          1.72     1.00   0.60      1.18     1.56      2.03     3.38        2.00     3.25   0.31  0.72         1.19        1.98     5.87
                           PME                           1.27     0.58   0.48      0.89     1.22      1.53     2.16        1.26     1.95   0.21  0.52         0.80        1.22     3.61
                           Life (years)                  5.3      1.1    3.5        4.3      5.3      6.3      7.3         5.3      1.1    3.5   4.5          5.3         6.3      7.3
                If Still   IRR (%)                       6.37    12.17 −12.93       0.03     6.87    12.69    23.69        4.44    14.63 −14.83 −4.72         3.82       11.77    30.57
                 Alive     TVPI                          1.21     0.40   0.72       1.00     1.18     1.35     1.78        1.19     0.46   0.67  0.88         1.11        1.35     2.01
                           PME                           1.04     0.35   0.62       0.85     1.00     1.17     1.59        0.98     0.39   0.55  0.72         0.93        1.13     1.67
   If Resolved             Number of Distributions      38       30       9       19       30        47       92          23       16      5        11       19          31       52
       or Older            Number of Capital Calls      38       31       7       20       32        48       86          20       17      3         9       16          24       48
      than 8yrs            % of Quarters w/ Flows       32.4      9.1    18.0     26.0     32.0      38.0     48.0        25.5      8.0   13.0      20.0     25.0        31.0     38.0




                           Panel B: Follow-on Fundraising by Current Fund Age (if Resolved or Older than 8 years)
                                                                            Years Before Next Fund Raised                                           During     After            None
                                                1        2         3        4       5       6      7      8                        9      10+        Life      Finish           So Far
                                                                                           Buyout
                All Buyout                       6      55        86       71         76      41             17           3         4       8        369             2           94
                 No Previous Funds               1      15        23       32         28      17              6           3         3       1        129             0           40
   Fund Count




                 One Previous Fund               2       8        21       16         16       9              5           0         0       3         80             0           22
                 Two or More                     3      32        42       23         32      15              6           0         1       4        160             2           32
                 Low Market                      1      25        45       20         12       4              2           0         0       3        112             0           27
                 Med Market                      3      23        26       32         24      14              7           2         4       5        141             1           35
                 High Market                     2       7        15       19         40      23              8           1         0       0        116             1           32
   Fund Means




                Vintage Year                1999       1997      1998     1998 1998 1998                1998            1995      1996    1992       1998       1999            1998
                Size ($ mln)               1036.7      919.3     969.5    654.5 1008.8 895.1            969.9           159.3     206.8   923.9      884.5      665.0           497.0
                Final PME                     1.6        1.3       1.4      1.3    1.4     1.1            1.5             1.7       1.6     1.1        1.3        0.9             1.0
                Final IRR                    30.0       10.0      20.0     20.0   20.0    10.0           20.0            20.0      20.0    10.0       20.0        3.0             5.0
                                                                                      Venture
                All Venture                     37     116       123       88     71      27                 18           6         2      10        527            29          193
                 No Previous Funds               4      26        24       22     15       5                  4           3         1       7        115             4           54
   Fund Count




                 One Previous Fund               9      14        16       17     17       7                  5           2         1       1         95             6           51
                 Two or More                    24      76        83       49     39      15                  9           1         0       2        317            19           88
                 Low Market                      1      48        66       25     19       6                  6           0         0       5        180             4           38
                 Med Market                     19      40        37       33     18       5                  5           5         1       4        182            15           75
                 High Market                    17      28        20       30     34      16                  7           1         1       1        165            10           80
   Fund Means




                Vintage Year                   1998    1996      1995     1995      1995      1996      1994            1994      1993    1990       1995       1996            1996
                Size ($ mln)                   305.4   217.1     182.9    233.1     283.1     358.4     186.8           121.2      43.5   199.4      231.8      236.0           279.1
                Final PME                        1.2     2.3       1.6      0.9       1.0       1.0       1.0             1.0       1.1     1.4        1.4        0.9             0.7
                Final IRR                        2.0    40.0      30.0      8.0       8.0      20.0       9.0             1.0      10.0    20.0       20.0       10.0           −0.3
                           Table 2: Performance Tercile Transition Probabilities
This table reports transition probabilities between interim and final performance terciles. We define performance based
on IRR-to-date within each fund peer group (vintage year and strategy). Panel A reports results for buyout funds and
Panel B reports results for venture funds. Only the funds that have raised a follow-on fund within ten years since
inception are included. The first row of each panel reports the probability of being in the respective to-date tercile at
the end of a funds life (Final), conditional on being in the bottom to-date tercile in the quarter preceding the follow-on
funds first capital call (At Fundraising). Similarly, the second (third) row reports Final performance tercile conditional
on being in the middle (top) performance tercile At Fundraising. The last row of each panel reports the unconditional
distribution of funds across Final terciles, while the last column reports how many funds were in each fundraising
tercile and the respective fraction in the total number of funds in this analysis. The peer group is all funds of the same
strategy incepted within one year from the fund vintage year. Since follow-on fundraising occurs at a different time
for each of the funds and fund life varies, neither At Fundraising nor Final terciles need to have an equal number of
funds.


                                                                Panel A: Buyout

                                                                    Final
                                                        Btm        Mid       Top     Fund Count
                                 At Fundraising




                                                  Btm   61.2%      26.9%     11.9%   67    (18.8%)
                                                  Mid   36.9%      42.3%     20.8%   130   (36.5%)
                                                  Top   13.2%      25.2%     61.6%   159   (44.7%)

                                                  All   30.9%      31.7%     37.4%   356   (100%)




                                                                Panel B: Venture

                                                                    Final
                                                        Btm        Mid       Top     Fund Count
                                 At Fundraising




                                                  Btm   55.6%      36.7%      7.7%   117   (22.9%)
                                                  Mid   31.8%      41.3%     26.8%   179   (35.1%)
                                                  Top   14.5%      25.2%     60.3%   214   (42.0%)

                                                  All   30.0%      33.5%     36.5%   510   (100%)
                                    Table 3: Do LPs Vote With Their Feet?
This table reports results from a linear probability model of a follow-on fund being raised. Results are reported
separately for buyout (Panel A) and venture (Panel B) funds. We only include funds that were resolved or operated
for at least 10 years. The event time is defined by the quarter in which the follow-on fund made its first capital call
or, in the case of unsuccessful fundraising, the 13th quarter preceding the last NAV report if the fund is resolved or
10th year of fund life if the fund is unresolved. The main explanatory variables are defined as: PME drop (after)
equals 1 if the value of Kaplan-Schoar PME at resolution is lower that at the event time; PME run-up (before) equals
1 if the value of Kaplan-Schoar PME 1 year before the event time is lower than at the event time; Large Distribution
(before) equals 1 if the sum of distributions over the year preceding the event time exceeds 20% of NAV; Top tercile-
to-date equals 1 if fund is in the top (highest) IRR-tercile across vintage and strategy peers at the event time and zero
otherwise, and Bottom tercile-to-date equals 1 if the fund is in the bottom (lowest) IRR-tercile at the event time and
zero otherwise. All specifications include the interaction of the fund vintage year and industry (GICS sectors) fixed
effects. In specifications (3) and (4) we include the level of PME at the event-time as well a dummy indicating where
market return was positive in the pre-event year. t-statistics reported in parentheses are robust to error clustering at the
event year, */**/*** denotes significance at 10/5/1% confidence level.

                                         Panel A Buyout                                  Panel B Venture
                              (1)        (2)        (3)           (4)        (1)          (2)       (3)          (4)

   PME drop after           −0.132∗∗ −0.116∗∗ −0.127∗∗ −0.111∗∗            −0.106∗∗ −0.085∗ −0.090∗ −0.087∗
                           (−2.65)   (−2.54)  (−2.74)  (−2.66)            (−2.05)   (−1.84)  (−1.92)  (−1.88)
   PME run-up before        −0.076∗ −0.064∗ −0.088∗∗ −0.170∗∗∗             −0.122∗∗ −0.129∗∗ −0.131∗∗ −0.183∗∗∗
                           (−1.73)   (−1.74)  (−2.40)  (−3.07)            (−2.29)   (−2.58)  (−2.74)  (−3.37)
   Large Distribution                                     0.007                                          0.019
                                                         (0.23)                                         (0.36)
   Large Distribution ×                                   0.157∗∗                                        0.180∗∗
   PME run-up before                                     (2.17)                                         (2.29)
   Top IRR Tercile                       0.095∗∗∗    0.049∗∗    0.048∗∗                 0.102∗∗∗ 0.085∗∗∗    0.075∗∗∗
                                        (0.23)      (0.23)     (0.23)                  (0.36)     (0.36)    (0.36)
   Bottom IRR Tercile                  −0.188∗ −0.154∗ −0.142∗                        −0.064∗∗ −0.059∗ −0.058∗∗
                                      (−2.04)     (−1.81)    (−1.82)                (−2.07)     (−1.97)   (−2.05)
   PME level (event)                                 0.116∗∗    0.097∗∗                            0.018     0.014
                                                    (2.26)     (2.12)                             (1.57)    (1.35)
   Market run-up before                              0.042      0.055                              0.049     0.052
                                                    (0.50)     (0.64)                             (0.85)    (0.91)
   Controls                                                Vintage Year × Industry FE
   Observations              541         541         541         541        763         763        763       763
   R-squared (%)             26.5        33.0        34.4       35.6        26.6        29.3       29.7      31.0
                                   Table 4: Fund Timing and Peer-Chasing

This table reports the parameter estimates a linear regression model estimated separately for buyout (Panel A) and
venture (Panel B) funds. The dependant variable measures risk- and cash flow-adjusted changes in NAV for quarter
t that is constructed to be unpredictable under the null of reported NAVs being unbiased estimators of true asset
values. The market beta of the fund assets is assumed to be 1.7 [2.4] in specifications (3) and (4) for buyout [venture]
subsample and 1 everywhere else. Explanatory variables of interest include FundTiming which is the natural log of one
plus time spent to-date without a follow-on fund in excess of two years, PeerChasing which is the difference between
fund i reported Internal Rate of Return to-date for the calendar quarter corresponding to t − 1 quarter of fund i life and
its peers as measured by the median IRR-to-date across all funds of the same strategy incepted within one year from
fund i vintage year. Specifications (2) and (4) also include the interaction of FundTiming and PeerChasing variables.
All specifications include fund fixed effects, fund distributions and capital calls over the current quarter scaled by the
end of quarter NAVs, and year-quarter fixed effects. t-statistics reported in parentheses are robust to heteroskedasticity
and autocorrelation, */**/*** denotes significance at 10/5/1% confidence level.


                                                  Panel A Buyout                                     Panel B Venture
                                        β = 1.0                    β = 1.70                β = 1.0                    β = 2.40
                                  (1)             (2)        (3)              (4)    (1)             (2)        (3)              (4)

   FundTiming                      0.080∗∗∗      0.057∗∗∗ 0.076∗∗∗    0.053∗∗    0.051∗∗∗ 0.043∗∗∗     0.054∗∗∗    0.046∗∗∗
                                  (4.22)        (3.00)     (3.63)    (2.57)     (3.62)     (3.08)     (3.78)      (3.26)
   PeerChasing                   −0.205∗∗∗       0.131∗∗ −0.202∗∗∗    0.117∗∗ −0.175∗∗∗ 0.045        −0.180∗∗∗     0.037
                                (−6.51)         (2.55)   (−5.46)     (2.09)   (−9.18)      (1.21)   (−9.21)       (0.99)
   FundTiming × PeerChasing                    −0.304∗∗∗            −0.289∗∗∗             −0.202∗∗∗              −0.200∗∗∗
                                              (−6.61)              (−5.62)               (−6.52)                (−6.29)
   Observations                 12,150        12,150        12,150       12,150     15,124      15,124        15,124        15,124
   R-squared                    0.237         0.242         0.420        0.423      0.305       0.309         0.607         0.608
   RMSE                         0.158         0.158         0.180        0.180      0.120       0.120         0.124         0.124
   Controls                                         Cash Flows, Fund Fixed Effects, and Year-Qtr Fixed Effects
                              Table 5: Cross-Section of To-Date Performance
This table reports results of estimating a linear regression model explaining fund abnormal performance. The depen-
dent variable measures risk- and cash flow-adjusted changes in NAV for quarter t that is constructed to be unpredictable
under the null of reported NAVs being unbiased estimators of true asset values. The model is estimated separately for
buyout (Panel A) and venture (Panel B) funds. Explanatory variables include: FundTiming is the natural log of one
plus time spent to-date without a follow-on fund in excess of two years; PeerChasing is the difference between fund i
reported Internal Rate of Return to-date for the calendar quarter corresponding to t1 quarter of fund i life and its peers
as measured by the median IRR-to-date across all funds of the same strategy incepted within one year from fund i
vintage year. Rookie is indicator variable denoting if the PE firm had less than two funds before fund i, Top (Btm) is
indicator variables denoting if fund i was in the top (bottom) tercile as measured by IRR-to-date as of quarter t1 across
the fund’s peers. The market beta of each fund’s assets is assumed to be 1.7 (2.4) in specification (4) for buyout (ven-
ture) subsample and 1 everywhere else. Control variables in all specifications include fund fixed effects, year-quarter
fixed effects as well as fund distributions and capital calls over the current quarter scaled by the end-of-quarter NAVs.
t-statistics reported in parentheses are robust to heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation, */**/*** denotes significance
at 10/5/1% confidence level.

                                          Panel A Buyout                               Panel B Venture
                                         β = 1.0               β = 1.70               β = 1.0               β = 2.40
                                (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)        (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)

   FundTiming                   0.088∗∗∗ 0.082∗∗∗ 0.066∗∗∗ 0.063∗∗∗ 0.053∗∗∗ 0.053∗∗∗ 0.040∗∗∗ 0.043∗∗∗
                               (4.67)    (4.31)    (3.47)  (3.07)   (3.74)   (3.81)   (2.86)   (3.03)
   PeerChasing                −0.138∗∗∗ −0.191∗∗∗ −0.038 −0.025 −0.167∗∗∗ −0.182∗∗∗ −0.127∗∗∗ −0.126∗∗∗
                             (−3.03) (−4.99) (−0.64) (−0.38) (−7.55) (−6.81) (−3.23) (−3.10)
   Rookie × FundTiming        −0.015                −0.017∗ −0.019∗ −0.007                       −0.003      −0.002
                             (−1.43)               (−1.70) (−1.71) (−0.96)                      (−0.54)     (−0.55)
   Rookie × PeerChasing       −0.134∗∗              −0.114∗ −0.123 −0.022                        −0.025      −0.031
                             (−2.15)               (−1.77) (−1.62) (−0.54)                      (−0.46)     (−0.60)
   TopTercile-to-date                       0.046∗∗ 0.023         0.021                 0.024∗∗ 0.004          0.003
                                           (1.99)    (0.96)      (0.74)                (2.13)    (0.33)       (0.24)
   Top × FundTiming                       −0.041∗∗∗ −0.021      −0.017                −0.025∗∗∗ −0.019       −0.018
                                         (−2.92) (−1.38)       (−0.96)               (−3.49) (−1.43)        (−1.26)
   Top × PeerChasing                      −0.026 −0.111         −0.123                  0.045     0.005        0.010
                                         (−0.37) (−1.39)       (−1.35)                 (0.96)    (0.10)       (0.19)
   BtmTercile-to-date                               −0.073∗∗∗ −0.070∗∗∗                          −0.053∗∗∗ −0.050∗∗∗
                                                   (−3.94) (−3.50)                              (−4.21) (−3.90)
   Btm × FundTiming                                   0.051∗∗∗ 0.050∗∗∗                            0.041∗∗∗ 0.039∗∗∗
                                                     (5.03)    (4.74)                             (5.23)    (4.90)
   Btm × PeerChasing                                −0.206∗∗ −0.207∗                             −0.103 −0.107
                                                   (−2.11) (−1.89)                              (−1.59) (−1.63)

   Controls                               Cash Flows, Fund Fixed Effects, and Year-Qtr Fixed Effects
   Observations           12,150         12,150     12,150      12,150     15,124     15,124      15,124     15,124
   R-squared               0.238          0.238      0.241       0.423      0.305      0.306       0.323      0.608
   Pr(F-stat>F[FundTiming by Top])       0.301                                         0.234
               Table 6: Fund Timing and Peer-Chasing: Dynamic Panel Specifications
This table reports results of estimating a linear regression model explaining fund abnormal performance. The depen-
dent variable measures risk- and cash flow-adjusted changes in NAV for quarter t that is constructed to be unpredictable
under the null of reported NAVs being unbiased estimators of true asset values. Explanatory variables (X) include:
FundTiming is the natural log of one plus time spent to-date without a follow-on fund in excess of two years; PeerChas-
ing is the difference between fund i reported Internal Rate of Return to-date for the calendar quarter corresponding to
t-1 quarter of fund i life and its peers as measured by the median IRR-to-date across all funds of the same strategy
incepted within one year from fund i vintage year. Models are estimated separately for buyout (Panel A) and venture
(Panel B) funds. All specifications are estimated in first differences by fund-quarters via two-step GMM with the
optimal weighting matrix. Everywhere except in specifications (3), we use two lagged levels of X to instrument for the
difference whereas in (3) we use two lagged levels of ExcessFundTiming and ResidualPeerChasing as the instruments
(both defined in Section VI.A). In all specifications, control variables include year and quarter fixed effects as well as
fund distributions and capital calls over the current quarter scaled by the end of quarter NAVs. Specifications (4) also
includes (PMET − PMEt+1 ), a difference between the next period PME-to-date and the final PME for the funds that
were fully resolved by the end of March 2012. t-statistics reported in parentheses are robust to heteroskedasticity and
autocorrelation, */**/*** denotes significance at 10/5/1% confidence level.

                                             Panel A Buyout                              Panel B Venture
                                    (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)        (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)


   FundTiming                       0.165∗∗∗ 0.144∗∗ 0.143∗∗ 0.159∗∗ 0.235∗∗∗ 0.213∗∗∗ 0.157∗∗∗ 0.284∗∗∗
                                   (2.96)    (2.57)  (2.45)  (2.13)  (5.01)   (4.70)   (3.21)   (4.87)
   PeerChasing                    −0.315∗∗∗ 0.100 −0.196∗∗ −0.310∗∗∗ −0.366∗∗∗ 0.286∗∗∗ −0.117∗∗ −0.403∗∗∗
                                 (−5.72)    (0.72) (−2.50) (−3.67) (−7.80)     (2.80) (−1.97) (−6.25)
   FundTiming × PeerChasing                  −0.735∗∗∗                                  −1.253∗∗∗
                                            (−3.07)                                    (−6.60)
   (PMET -PMEt+1 )                                                −0.036                                       0.023
                                                                 (−1.27)                                      (1.00)

   Fund Effects                                                 First-Differences
   Controls                                         Year and Quarter Fixed Effects, Cash-Flows
   Observations                   12,003     12,003   12,003    5,875      14,979     14,979   14,979         7,119
   R-squared                      0.099      0.146     0.08     0.108       0.106      0.211   0.064          0.112
   F-stat[1st stage]               35.3       33.8     33.2       9.2       16.8       18.5     14.5           7.4
Appendix A.

   In this Appendix, we provide a more detailed discussion of the primary variables we utilize
in our analysis. We start by explaining why simple measures such as changes in IRR-to-date
and PME-to-date can provide misleading metrics (where ’to-date’ measures utilize the NAV at
a particular date as though it were the final cash flow from a fund). Figure A.1 illustrates the
inconsistency of IRR-to-date for the purpose of measuring NAV bias by studying the cash flow
and abnormal return patterns of two hypothetical funds (1 and 2). Fund 1 considers a hypothetical
fund in existence from 1993 through 2003 and Fund 2 considers a different hypothetical fund in
existence from 1998 through 2008. The value process in both cases is defined as, FundValuet =
FundValuet−1 (1+rS&P500,t +αt )+Callst −Distribt . That is, the fund’s return over a period equals
the return to the S&P 500 plus an abnormal return (αt ).
   Panel A of A.1 plots the alpha and the cash-flow patterns for both cases. For Fund 1, the alpha
is fixed at 4% across all periods. Whereas for Fund 2, the alpha is initially 5% per period but than
decays to zero over the life of the fund. Panel B plots the total return to the S&P 500 index over
each hypothetical fund’s life. Panel C plots the resulting PMEs-to-date and IRRs-to-date. These
two cases show that IRR-to-date may provide completely misleading indications of when ’gaming’
of fund NAVs could be taking place. Specifically, the fund with constant alpha (Fund 1) exhibits an
apparent decline in IRR-to-date after the fund’s fifth year. In contrast, the fund with declining alpha
(Fund 2) shows an increasing IRR-to-date after the fund’s fifth year. The PME-to-date analysis
exhibits nearly similar patterns for each fund and therefore may not be informative either. These
examples show the challenges of measuring interim abnormal performance for closed in investment
vehicles like buyout and venture funds. Consequently, we subsequently develop a method for
identifying abnormal returns that unwinds the flattening effect that intermediate distributions have
on the PME-to-date.
   Next, we show how the intuitive approach of regressing the fund-level changes in NAVs on
dummies measuring the time since fundraising is prone to revealing non-existent patterns in ex-

                                                   i
cess returns. Using our sample of funds discussed in the main text, we examine the finding of
Jenkinson et al. (2013) with regards to the unrealized performance peaking around the quarter of
a follow-on fund closing. Specification (1) in Panel A of Table A.1 replicates the Jenkenson et al.
methodology. Using their interpretation of the results, the evidence of NAV overstating around the
new fund launch dates appears convincing. Just as in Table 3 of Jenkinson et al., quarters shortly
before the new fund launch have significantly positive coefficients, suggesting abnormally positive
growth rate in NAVs of the existing fund while GPs are seeking new capital commitments from
investors. Meanwhile, the negative coefficients on years after fundraising indicate abnormally low
growth rate in NAVs, consistent with the previously built-up upward valuation bias getting grad-
ually unwound. We note also that the coefficient estimates on cash flows and market returns are
also very similar to those in Jenkinson et al.
   However, specification (2) and (1) of Panel A A.1 should raise concerns about consistency of
these estimates. Dropping cash flows and market return should increase the noise in the disturbance
(if no NAV overstating is indeed the null hypothesis of this statistical model). Instead, we see that
the humped shape in the reported returns around the next fund launch gets more pronounced. To
determine if these results are caused by mispecification of the Jenkinson et al. model, we apply
their methodology to funds where the actual growth in NAV is replaced with a placebo based on
public equity portfolios (defined in detail later in this appendix). The results of this experiment
are reported in Panel B A.1. Similar to Panel A, we see that some coefficients are significantly
positive in the quarters before launch of a new fund and some are significantly negative after the
launch of a new fund in. Just as in Panel A, we see that the humped-shape returns trajectory
gets more pronounced as we remove cash flow controls in specification (2), and then the market
return in specification (3). These results indicate that the methodology of Jenkinson et al. is likely
generating at least part of the pattern of excess returns they document.
   The inconsistency of estimates in Table A.1 arises from two sources: (i) a positive correlation
between public market returns and private equity fund formation, and (ii) the correlation between
cash flow measurement and the dependant variable. The former is essentially the result of insuf-
ficient risk adjustment. Specifically, controlling for contemporaneous market returns should be

                                                  ii
absorbing market risk, however, unlike the placebo series in Panel B, the actual fund quarterly re-
turns are subject to appraisal smoothing as evidenced by a very low coefficient on the market return
in Panel A (implying a beta of just 0.26). Thus, including just the contemporaneous market return
results in an insufficient risk adjustment. As for (ii), section V discusses why this measurement
error is present in the panel when the dependant variable is a function of fund-level NAVs (and
how our analysis navigates this challenge). With such correlated events like PE fund distributions
and fundraising, it is hard to assess the impact of this measurement error. For example, as one
can see from specification (3) of Panel B, a dummy variable for the fourth (calendar) quarter is a
significant explanatory variable for excess returns when the placebo series are not risk-adjusted.
So the “Santa Clause Effect” that Jenkinson et al. document is also likely to be (at least partially)
driven by the combination of (i) and (ii) rather than a tendency for PE funds to indeed report higher
returns in the December quarter.
   Even absent econometric biases, the interpretation of results in the framework of Jenkinson et
al. is difficult because the fund (and time since inception) fixed effects obscure the inference about
whether the abnormal returns are on average negative after fundraising. The negative coefficients
in A.1 only say that the changes in NAVs tend to be lower than the average of other periods. Mean-
while, as discussed in Section IV.A, lower but still positive abnormal returns after fundraising, are
consistent with many other alternative explanations besides the NAVs being overstated ahead of
the launch of a follow-on fund.

I. Key Variable Definitions

   We start by considering the Kaplan and Schoar (2005) Public Market Equivalent index
            T −1        −1
           ∑t=0  {Dt ∏Tτ=t Rτ+1 } + DT
      PME = T −1      T −1
                                       ,                                                           (A.1)
           ∑t=0 {Ct ∏τ=t Rτ+1 } +CT
where Dt and Ct are, respectively, the fund distributions and capital calls end of period t while
Rτ is public market gross return over period τ. While PME is typically calculated using all cash
flows associated with a fund (i.e., the full life of a fund), our analysis requires the use of an interim
measure of performance. Consequently, we define a measure of performance from fund inception


                                                   iii
through an interim date that is analogous to PME. Intuitively, we think of it as a measure of PME-
to-date for any time t∗, 0 < t∗ < T . To construct the measure we simply consider the stated net
asset value (NAV ) at date t∗ as a terminal distribution and ignore all subsequent cash flows. Thus,
we can define PME-to-date at time t∗ as

                      ∑t∗−1      t∗−1
                       t=0 {Dt ∏τ=t Rτ+1 } + Dt∗ + NAVt∗
          PMEt∗ =
                          ∑t∗−1       t∗−1
                            t=0 {Ct ∏τ=t Rτ+1 } +Ct∗
                   ∑t∗−1     t∗
                    t=0 {Dt ∏τ=t Rτ+1 } + Dt∗        NAVt∗
                  = t∗−1                      + t∗−1                                                                               (A.2)
                   ∑t=0 Ct ∏τ=t Rτ+1 } +Ct∗ ∑t=0 Ct ∏t∗−1
                            t∗−1
                                                     τ=t Rτ+1 } +Ct∗

To simplify the notation, we can rewrite A.2 as:

                                        NAVt
          PMEt = PMEtexNav +                    ,                                                                                  (A.3)
                                       f vt (C)

so that f vt (C) represents the time t future value of all capital calls calculated using the public
market returns from the respective date of each capital call while PMEtexNav is the PME-to-date
value as of time t if NAV is assumed to be 0.
       The change in PME-to-date from the previous period can be thought of as a product of the
abnormal fund return over the period t and the ratio of NAVt to the future value of cumulative
capital calls to date. This is the case because, absent capital calls at t, it follows from A.1 and A.2
that:31

                                   Rt      Dt
          PMEtexNav = PMEt−1
                         exNav
                               ·      +
                                   Rt f vt (C)
                            exNav      Dt
                       = PMEt−1   +                                                                                                (A.4)
                                    f vt (C)



  31  The assumption that Ct = 0 applies through equation A.7 only and does not affect the intuition. If we drop this assumption,
                             C ·PME exNav                                               exNav is not just a R scale of PME exNav
(A.3) will in addition have − ftvt−1 Rtt−1
                                       +Ct on the right-hand (as the denominator of PMEt                     t             t−1
in this case) while (A.7) will have three additional terms:       Ct
                                                               f vt (C)
                                                                          +              exNav
                                                                              (kt − 1)PMEt−1        +    (Rtnav − Rt ) NAV  t−1
                                                                                                                       f v (C)
                                                                                                                                , where kt =
                                                                                                                        t
f vt−1 (C)Rt
          ∈ (0, 1) (e.g. for t = 3, kt = [(C1 R2 +C2 )R3 ] / [C1 R2 R3 +C2 R3 +C3 ]. The first term is positive and tends to be large when
   f vt (C)
kt  1, the second term has a negative sign and cancels out with the first term when PMEt−1       exNav = 1. The sign on the third term is

negative while the magnitude increases in the first term too. We study the implications of this measurement error via a simulation.




                                                                    iv
where we are adding the ratio of period t distributions to the period t value of cumulative capital
                    exNav . Because we can express reported return, Rnav , as a solution to
calls to-date to PMEt−1                                              t


           NAVt = NAVt−1 Rtnav − Dt +Ct ,                                                                                      (A.5)

the change in PME from t − 1 to t can written as

                                               NAVt     NAVt−1
       ∆PMEt = PMEtexNav − PMEt−1
                              exNav
                                    +                 −
                                              f vt (C) f vt−1 (C)
                       Dt       NAVt   NAVt−1 Rt            Dt     NAVt      NAVt−1 Rt
                  =         +        −              · =          +         −
                    f vt (C) f vt (C) f vt−1 (C) Rt      f vt (C) f vt (C)    f vt (C)
                    NAVt + Dt − NAVt−1 Rt
                  =                       .                                                                                    (A.6)
                            f vt (C)

After substituting NAVt from A.5 into A.6, a change in PME can be witten as

                                      NAVt−1
       ∆PMEt = (Rtnav − Rt )                   .                                                                               (A.7)
                                      f vt (C)

    The intuition behind this expression is that the excess return of the fund (as a difference be-
tween fund return as implied by NAV -change and the public market return) gets scaled down by
the prior-period NAV as a percent of paid-in-capital adjusted for the market returns. Thus, keeping
the mean and variance of excess return unchanged, one would observe a leveling-out in abnor-
mal performance (as measured by PME-to-date) once a fund starts distributions, as the ratio of
NAVt−1 / f vt (C) will typically drift downwards. That is, ∆PMEt will keep the sign but trend toward
0 over time, all else the same.32 The same leveling-out will occur to the money-multiple (TV PI)
which can be thought of as a special case of PME-to-date where Rτ is assumed to equal 1 for all τ.
    When analyzing a cross-section of funds, the ∆PMEt is a useful metric since it effectively rep-
resents a weighting scheme for fund returns. The weight is proportional to the sensitivity of the
performance-to-date to NAV . Multiplying the cross-sectional mean ∆PMEt by mean NAVt−1 / f vt (C)
removes the downward bias due to the scale effect and obtains the average fund returns weighted

   32 Again, with net-negative cash flows in period t the expression get less clear but the intuition remains the same: ∆PME tends
                                                                                                                                t
to be positive so long as Rnav − R is positive. In simulation (Section I.1), we verify that the additional terms (when Ct are positive)
do no affect the inference about the path of the PME to-date pooled over a cross-section of funds.



                                                                  v
by the fraction of unrealized NAVs in the market-return-adjusted sum of capital calls-to-date. The
same re-weighting can be applied to mean money-multiple changes. Similarly, weighted-∆PMEt
nests mean fund NAV -returns and excess returns (Rtnav − Rt ) as special cases with NAVt−1 / f vt (C)
being equal across funds in both cases (and market returns being zero in the former).
      We design a Monte-Carlo experiment to study the time-series properties of weighted PME-to-
date. We draw a fund’s β from two normal distributions, N(1, 0.125) and N(2, 0.166) whereas
α’s come from a common distribution, N(0.05, 0.05). Here α and β are in the context of the
standard market model. The same Poisson process drives all cash flows independent of market and
idiosyncratic shocks to returns. Figure A.2 suggests that a misspecification of fund-level β does
not confound inference about the question of interest, i.e., the trajectory of cross-sectional mean
abnormal returns. Also, it follows that if more successful funds (higher α) tend to not distribute
capital as fast as their less successful peers, WPME should be convex in time since inception under
the null hypothesis of constant lifetime excess returns. This is because funds with higher excess
returns tend to have relatively higher ratios of residual NAV-to-capital as fund life progresses.
Introducing heteroscedasticity and reasonable correlations in the data generating process does not
change these conclusions.33

I.1. Monte Carlo Experiment

      Because our weighted PME change measure of returns has not been utilized in previous studies,
we conduct a series of Monte-Carlo experiments and examine how this measure of excess returns
compares to simpler measures based on raw returns and money-multiples (that we show to be its
special cases). For this exercise, we assume that fund i asset value at time t (Vi,t ) evolves as:

        Vi,t = Vi,t−1 exp {αi + βi rm,t + ei,t } ,

where αi = ᾱ + eα is the abnormal return for fund i; βi = βH(L) + eH(L) is the level of systematic
(factor) risk for fund i; rm,t = µ+em,t is the net return on the market index; e(·) are all independently

 33   For brevity, we do not report these results.



                                                     vi
drawn from a normal distribution N(0, σ2(·) ). For our experiments we let µ = 0.04 per annum and
ᾱ = 0.05 per annum. The specification for βi allows us to have funds with low risk (βL = 1.0) or
high risk βH = 2.0). We set the standard deviations of e(·) al follows: σi = σm = 0.300 per annum;
σL = 0.125; σH = 0.167; σα = 0.05.
   At time t fund i distributions, Dit , and contributions, Ct , are independent Poisson processes.
The parameters of the cash flow process are calibrated so they closely match the cross-sectional
moments of actual funds cash flows in our sample. Specifically, we set

     Ds = Vs ϕηds i f s > b fd · T c

      Cs = ϕηcs i f s < b fc · T c ,

where we set T = 300 as a fund maximum life in bi-weekly intervals, η(·) are independent Poisson
distributions Pois(λ(·) ) with λd = 0.1 and λc = 0.07. We let fc = 0.5, fd = 0.3, and ϕ = 0.2.
   For our experiment we draw 30 paths of market returns, rm,t , at a daily frequency. For each
market path we draw 40 αi and βi , half with a mean of βL and half with βH . Given the set of αi and
βi , we draw 40 paths of idiosyncratic returns at a daily frequency, and 40 paths of distributions and
contributions at a bi-weekly frequency. We then construct the series of quarterly NAV s and cash
flows for each market path. Finally, we compute PMEs-to-date for the simulated funds and average
∆PMEq and NAVq−1 / f vq (C) across all (30 × 40) market paths and funds. Results are presented in
Figure A.2 and discussed in Appendix AI.

II. A proxy for NAV bias change

   Central to our analysis is the idea that reported NAV can be a biased estimate of the true value.
We next formulate our specific measure of the NAV bias that we examine in our empirical tests
in section V. We start by defining Vt as the true (unbiased) asset value at the end of period t and
Γt as a gross valuation bias such that reported NAVt ≡ Vt · Γt . We next define the gross abnormal
return in period t as Rtε = exp{δ · εt } where δ is a constant (for a given fund) and εt is a mean-
zero random error arbitrary distributed. If we further define Rβ,t as gross return due to risk factor



                                                 vii
(market) exposure β then,

       Vt + Dt = Vt−1 Rtε Rβ,t +Ct .                                                                                             (A.8)

Recalling that Dt and Ct are, respectively, the fund distributions and capital calls at t, we define the
evolution of the gross valuation bias as Γt = Γt−1 eg(·) . Substituting this definition into A.8 yields
the following NAV identity:

           NAVt = NAVt−1 Rtε Rβ,t eg(·) + Γt−1 eg(·) (Ct − Dt ).                                                                 (A.9)

We assume that returns Rβ,t+1 and εt+1 are unpredictable. We would like to estimate per period
change in bias, gi (·), for each fund (henceforth we add subscript i to each variable) from the
following model:
                                                                                         
                                                  NAVi,t                                   = g(·)i,t + δi + εi,t .
           log                                         Γi,t−1
                                                                                                                                (A.10)
                      NAVi,t−1 Rβi ,t −                 Rε i,t      (Dit −Cit )

Since we have relatively few observations per fund and do not know βi and Γi,t−1 /Rεi,t , a feasible
alternative to estimating A.10 is an average effects linear panel model:
                                               
                               NAV i,t
           ^it ≡ log
           ∆bias                                  = γ0 Xi,t + δi + ηi + εi,t + ζi,t ,                                           (A.11)
                     NAVi,t−1 Rβ=1,t − Dit +Cit

where ηi and ζi,t are (additional to δi and εi,t ) fund fixed effects and disturbance shocks that arise
due to the mismeasurement of the left-hand side and the misspecification of the right-hand side of
A.11 relative to A.10.34 We note that the measurement error also constrains the set of covariates
Xi,t to not be contemporaneously correlated with market returns and fund cash flows, Dit and Cit .
    Unlike in A.10, the expression in the logarithm in A.11 is not guaranteed to be positive. There-
fore, in our implementation we Winsorize the values at the 2% level which results in all arguments
for the log being greater than zero in our sample. In addition, we drop fund-quarters where end-
ing Net Asset Values represent less than 2% of capital committed, and fund-quarters where the

                 "                                            #
                                                                          h                                   i
 34 i.e.                           NAVi,t                                                NAVi,t
           log                        Γ                           = log       NAVi,t−1 Rβ=1,t −1(Dit −Cit )
                                                                                                                  + ηi + ζi,t
                     NAVi,t−1 Rβi ,t − i,t−1
                                        Rεi,t
                                                (Dit −Cit )




                                                                                                   viii
previous available report was more than one quarter ago.
      To verify that A.11 is a sensible estimator of γ, the average bias loading on the covariates of
interest, we also use a placebo dependent variable constructed as follows:
                          "                                                  #
            placebo                         NAVit R{FF100},t
       ] it
      ∆bias         ≡ log                                                                                             (A.12)
                            NAVit Rβ=1,t − (R{FF100},t − Rβ=1,t )(Dti −Cit )
                                          placebo
where R{FF100},t , referred to Rt                   in the main text, is the return in period t of a public equity
portfolio constructed from Fama-French 100 U.S. Equity Research Portfolios (henceforth, FF100).
We randomly select a subset of the FF100 portfolios and take average returns for these to generate
a placebo return series for a specific fund. Once assigned, the portfolio remains the same across
all periods for the given fund. For buyout funds we limit our selection to the subset of FF100 that
includes only the 25 highest Book-to-Market portfolios out of the 50 lowest market value portfolios
and scale (lever) each return series by a factor of 2 (by taking gross returns squared).
      For venture funds we select returns from the 25 lowest Book-to-Market portfolios out of the
50 smallest market value portfolios. In the random placebo portfolio matching, we only condition
on placebo to-date returns for a given fund being in the same tercile among its peers as the actual
fund IRR as of the 28th quarter since inception.35 Peers are funds incepted in the same or adjacent
vintage years and having the same strategy (Buyout, Early Stage Venture, Biotech Venture, Other
Venture).
                                                         placebo
                                      ] it
      We arrive at the expression for ∆bias                        by substituting NAVit /R{FF100},t for NAVit−1 in
A.11 in order to obtain the growth in NAV s from the previous period that would have occurred if
R{FF100},t had been the return generating process. In addition, A.12 allows us to test whether the
cash flow dependency of the disturbance term in A.11 is sufficiently attenuated by controlling for
                                   ^it , we Winsorize the right-hand side of the expression at
concurrent cash flows. Just as for ∆bias
the 2% level before taking the log.

 35   or the last quarter in the sample for funds younger than 28 quarters as of the sample end date, December 2011




                                                                ix
III. FASB 157 Adoption

   We undertake two simple tests in an attempt to identify effects that might be attributable to
accounting changes related to SFAS 157. First, Figure B.5 plots median fund performance during
this period based on changes in PME indexed to 2003:Q4 value of 1.0. The figure shows that in
2008 PMEs for both buyout and venture funds increase significantly, regardless of the performance
and fundraising success. This is consistent with funds marking-to-market undervalued investments
en masse. However, if this were the case, we would expect PMEs to stay at this new level after
being marked up. Instead PMEs drop substantially in 2009 so that the combined net change in
PME is close to zero over the period from 2007-2009. Panel A also shows that the net effect is
similar for both funds that are, and are not, successful at raising a next fund though it is more
pronounced for those that are not. A likely explanation for the pattern in PMEs is that funds did
not mark their portfolios down as far as the public market returns in 2008 nor up as much in 2009.
Consequently, PMEs give the appearance of outperforming in 2008 and underperforming in 2009.
Panel B shows similar plots based on performance tercile as of 2006:Q1. Panel C shows similar
plots based on performance tercile as of the end of a funds life. In all cases fund relative returns as
measured by PME appear to jump in 2008 and then drop in 2009 and it is difficult to attribute this
return pattern to SFAS 157.
   Our second test compares estimates of return autocorrelation before and after the adoption of
SFAS 157. Specifically, we estimate the following AR(1) model:
            NAV retit = µ + f as157t + ρ1 · NAV retit−1 + ρ2 · NAV retit−1 · f as157t + νi,t
and compare the estimates of ρ1 and ρ2 . Given our previous analysis (as well as many others in
context of marking illiquid assets), we expect to find positive values of ρ1 consistent with positive
return autocorrelation. A material impact from SFAS 157 (in the direction of timely and unbiased
marking) would be consistent with a negative ρ2 and the sum of ρ1 and ρ2 being insignificantly
different from zero.
   Table B.7 reports results from the AR(1) model above for both buyout and venture funds for
the full sample of funds and a variety of subsamples. We also examine both raw returns and
de-meaned returns (i.e., returns accounting for fund fixed effects). Panel A reveals the expected

                                                   x
significant positive values for ρ1 in most samples. Values for ρ2 are sometimes negative, but
only weakly significant in two cases for de-meaned returns (i.e., specifications 3 and 6 which are
for funds with weaker performance). Panel B reports results for venture funds. We again find
generally positive and significant coefficients for 1 . However, for venture funds values for   2   are
often negative and significant. These results suggest that adoption of SFAS 157 may have had an
important impact on NAV reporting for venture funds but not for buyout funds. The results for
venture funds are consistent with the findings of Cumming and Walz (2009) regarding the effects
of accounting standards on the private equity fund financial reporting.




                                                xi
           Figure A.1: Why not simply plot IRRs since inception? A Simple Case Study
This figure illustrates the inconsistency of IRR-to-date for the purpose of NAV bias assessment by studying two
hypothetical cash-flow and abnormal return patterns (i.e., funds) described in Appendix AI. Panel A plots the alpha
and the cash-flow patterns for both cases. Panel B plots the total return to the S&P 500 index over each hypothetical
fund’s life (rescaled to 1.0 at inception). Panel C plots the resulting PMEs-to-date and IRRs-to-date.


                                  Panel A: Cash-flows and true abnormal returns




                                           Panel B: Public market paths




                                   Panel C: Fund to-date performance indicators




                                                         xii
                    Figure A.2: Average Fund Performance Paths: Simulated Data
This figure reports results of the Monte Carlo Experiment described in Appendix AI.1 to suggest a null hypothesis
appropriate for average fund to-date performance as measured by the proposed metric: weighted-PME cumulative
changes. A change in a given quarter is a weighted average of PME-to-date changes from the previous period across
the simulated funds for a given quarter since inception. The weights are ratios of NAV to cumulative capital calls
since inception adjusted for market returns. The simulated funds differ by their market betas and abnormal returns.
Fund cohorts have different market return paths as well. The solid line represents the mean over 600 funds drawn
from a distribution with a high mean β. The dashed line stands for the mean over 600 funds drawn from a distribution
with a low mean β. The top-right panel reports weighted money-multiple cumulative changes while bottom-left(right)
panel reports mean NAV excess(raw) returns. All are shown to be a special case of the NAV-weighted PME change in
Appendix AI.




                                               Quarters since inception




                                                        xiii
                    Table A.1: NAV-based returns and Fundraising Quarter dummies
This table reports the parameter estimates a panel regression model of quarterly changes of PE fund NAVs as a function
of time periods around the quarter a follow-on fund was raised by the same GP. For example, I(4th quarter before NF)
is a dummy variable that is equal to zero unless fund i had a follow-on fund started making investments 5 quarters
after quarter t. The sample includes all buyout and venture capital non-missing NAV fund-quarters. Distributions
and capital calls during quarter t are present as additional explanatory variables in specification (1) while market
return in quarter t is included in specifications (1) and (2). All specifications also include a dummy denoting 4th
quarter (i.e. ending in December), quarter since fund inception fixed effects, and fund fixed effects. In Panel A, the
dependant variable is a change in fund NAV from quarter t − 1 to t. In Panel B, NAVt values are replaced with the
                                          pla                             pla
following placebo counterpart: NAVt · Rt − NetDistributiont , where Rt is a gross return of style- and size-matched
public equity portfolio. Public equity portfolios returns are constructed using subsets of Fama-French 100 U.S. Equity
research portfolios as described in Appendix A. NAVs, capital calls, and distributions are normalized by the fund size.
t-statistics reported in parentheses are robust to heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation, */**/*** denotes significance
at 10/5/1% confidence level.

                                               Panel A Fund returns                  Panel B Placebo returns
                                         (1)           (2)          (3)           (1)          (2)          (3)
  Cash in                              1.040∗∗∗                                   0.957∗∗∗
                                     (39.98)                                    (22.02)
  Cash out                           −0.503∗∗∗                                  −0.372∗∗∗
                                    (−7.82)                                    (−3.14)
  Market return                        0.271∗∗∗    0.262∗∗∗                       1.078∗∗∗    1.073∗∗∗
                                     (15.10)     (14.50)                        (50.26)     (48.24)
  I(Fourth calendar quarter)           0.0040∗     0.0041∗         0.0116∗∗∗      0.0050      0.0053      0.0372∗∗∗
                                      (1.84)      (1.69)          (4.68)         (1.00)      (1.00)      (6.89)
  I(5th quarter before NF)             0.0058      0.0085          0.0105       −0.0009       0.0023      0.0117
                                      (0.63)      (0.81)          (0.99)       (−0.06)       (0.17)      (0.82)
  I(4th quarter before NF)             0.0246∗∗∗   0.0262∗∗∗       0.0273∗∗∗    −0.0023       0.0007      0.0073
                                      (2.71)      (2.71)          (2.82)       (−0.16)       (0.05)      (0.51)
  I(3rd quarter before NF              0.0329∗∗∗   0.0341∗∗∗       0.0347∗∗∗      0.0031      0.0059      0.0152∗
                                      (3.57)      (3.88)          (3.93)         (0.16)      (0.31)      (1.73)
  I(2nd quarter before NF)             0.0308∗∗    0.0305∗∗        0.0305∗∗       0.0366∗∗    0.0386∗∗    0.0408∗∗
                                      (2.27)      (2.15)          (2.13)         (2.09)      (2.22)      (2.29)
  I(1st quarter before NF)             0.0212∗     0.0183          0.0147         0.0345∗     0.0339∗     0.0211
                                      (1.93)      (1.56)          (1.25)         (1.68)      (1.75)      (1.07)
  I(Next fund start quarter [∼ NF])    0.0034      0.0185          0.0126         0.0033    −0.0081     −0.0308
                                      (0.66)      (1.40)          (0.95)         (0.15)    (−0.37)     (−1.39)
  I(1st year after NF)                  0.0110      −0.0132∗∗ −0.0169∗∗∗         0.0217∗∗      0.0020      −0.0105
                                       (1.48)      (−2.05)     (−2.58)          (2.35)        (0.28)      (−1.45)
  I(2nd year after NF)                  0.0029      −0.0187∗∗ −0.0230∗∗∗         0.0073      −0.0103       −0.0246∗∗∗
                                       (0.43)      (−2.53)     (−3.03)          (0.80)      (−1.46)       (−3.38)
  I(3rd year after NF)                −0.0095∗∗     −0.0204∗∗∗ −0.0250∗∗∗        0.0030      −0.0105∗      −0.0261∗∗∗
                                     (−2.26)       (−3.97)     (−4.81)          (0.44)      (−1.74)       (−4.39)
  I(4th year after NF)                −0.0068∗      −0.0167∗∗∗ −0.0178∗∗∗ −0.0085            −0.0203∗∗∗    −0.0229∗∗∗
                                     (−1.71)       (−5.25)     (−5.62)        (−1.41)       (−4.09)       (−4.79)
  I(5th year after NF)                −0.0048∗      −0.0129∗∗∗ −0.0116∗∗∗ −0.0083∗ −0.0160∗∗∗              −0.0095∗∗
                                     (−1.66)       (−3.89)     (−3.53)        (−1.70)       (−3.32)       (−2.07)
  I(6th year after NF)                −0.0038       −0.0072∗∗ −0.0061∗ −0.0089∗ −0.0139∗∗∗                 −0.0086∗
                                     (−1.18)       (−2.13)     (−1.81)        (−1.76)       (−2.68)       (−1.75)
  Controls                                            Fund fixed effects, Life-quarter fixed effects
  Observations                         56,602        56,602      56,602         56,602        56,602        56,602
  R-squared (%)                         17.6           2.0          1.1           8.0           5.0           0.5




                                                           xiv
Appendix B. Supplementary Figures and Tables


                     Table B.2: Performance Tercile Transition Probabilities: PME
This table reports transition probabilities between interim and final performance terciles. We define performance based
on PME-to-Date within each fund peer group (vintage year and strategy). Panel A reports results for buyout funds
and Panel B reports results for venture funds. Only the funds that have raised a follow-on fund within ten years since
inception are included. The first row of each panel reports the probability of being in the respective to-date tercile at
the end of a funds life (Final), conditional on being in the bottom to-date tercile in the quarter preceding the follow-on
funds first capital call (At Fundraising). Similarly, the second (third) row reports Final performance tercile conditional
on being in the middle (top) performance tercile At Fundraising. The last row of each panel reports the unconditional
distribution of funds across Final terciles, while the last column reports how many funds were in each fundraising
tercile and the respective fraction in the total number of funds in this analysis. The peer group is all funds of the same
strategy incepted within one year from the fund vintage year. Since follow-on fundraising occurs at a different time
for each of the funds and fund life varies, neither At Fundraising nor Final terciles need to have an equal number of
funds.


                                                             Panel A: Buyout

                                                                 Final
                                                     Btm        Mid        Top     Fund Count
                              At Fundraising




                                               Btm   61.2%      26.9%      11.9%   67    (18.8%)
                                               Mid   36.9%      42.3%      20.8%   130   (36.5%)
                                               Top   13.2%      25.2%      61.6%   159   (44.7%)

                                               All   30.9%      31.7%      37.4%   356   (100%)




                                                             Panel B: Venture

                                                                 Final
                                                     Btm        Mid        Top     Fund Count
                              At Fundraising




                                               Btm   56.7%      31.3%      11.9%   67    (21.8%)
                                               Mid   32.0%      43.2%      24.8%   125   (35.8%)
                                               Top   10.4%      21.6%      68.1%   214   (42.4%)

                                               All   26.8%      31.0%      42.2%   355   (100%)




                                                                      xv
                      Table B.3: Performance Quartile Transition Probabilities: IRR
This table reports transition probabilities between interim and final performance quartiles. We define performance
based on IRR-to-date within each fund peer group (vintage year and strategy). Panel A reports results for buyout
funds and Panel B reports results for venture funds. Only the funds that have raised a follow-on fund within ten
years since inception are included. The first row of each panel reports the probability of being in the respective to-date
quartile at the end of a funds life (Final), conditional on being in the bottom to-date quartile in the quarter preceding the
follow-on funds first capital call (At Fundraising). Similarly, the second (third) row reports Final performance quartile
conditional on being in the middle (top) performance quartile At Fundraising. The last row of each panel reports the
unconditional distribution of funds across Final quartiles, while the last column reports how many funds were in each
fundraising quartile and the respective fraction in the total number of funds in this analysis. The peer group is all
funds of the same strategy incepted within one year from the fund vintage year. Since follow-on fundraising occurs at
a different time for each of the funds and fund life varies, neither At Fundraising nor Final quartiles need to have an
equal number of funds.


                                                            Panel A: Buyout

                                                                  Final
                                                  Btm     3rd             2nd     Top     Fund Count
                           At Fundraising




                                            Btm   55.0%   20.0%           17.5%    7.5%   40 (11.2%)
                                            3rd   40.7%   34.1%           16.7%    6.6%   91 (25.6%)
                                            2nd   16.4%   22.7%           40.0%   20.9%   110 (30.9%)
                                            Top   12.2%    9.6%           22.6%   55.6%   115 (32.3%)
                                            All   25.6%   21.1%           26.4%   27.0%   356   (100%)




                                                            Panel B: Venture

                                                             Final
                                                  Btm     3rd             2nd     Top     Fund Count
                           At Fundraising




                                            Btm   48.1%   27.3%           20.8%    3.9%   77 (15.1%)
                                            3rd   33.0%   36.5%           20.9%    9.6%   115 (22.5%)
                                            2nd   18.5%   23.8%           29.1%   28.5%   151 (29.6%)
                                            Top    7.2%   11.4%           23.9%   57.5%   167 (32.8%)
                                            All   22.5%   23.1%           24.3%   30.0%   510   (100%)




                                                                  xvi
                                   Table B.4: Additional Summary Statistics
This table reports summary statistics for the variables used in section V as defined in the main text. Appendix A
provides details on variable construction.

                                               Panel A: Buyout sample

                                  mean       sd       min          p5      p25      p50       p75      p95

    ^it|β = 1
   ∆bias                            0.0069    0.19    −3.11       −0.19    −0.066   −0.004     0.087    0.26
   ∆bias it|β = 1.7
    ^                             −0.0047     0.25    −4.10       −0.28    −0.11    −0.021     0.12     0.32
        placebo
   ] it
   ∆bias          |β = 1          −0.0061     0.36    −1.07       −0.65    −0.23     0.015     0.23     0.58
        placebo
   ] it
   ∆bias          |β = 1.7        −0.015      0.34    −0.95       −0.60    −0.24    −0.003     0.21     0.54
   FundTiming                       1.26      0.38     0           0.56     1.01     1.32      1.56     1.79
   Excess FundTiming                1.35      0.39     0           0.56     1.01     1.39      1.66     1.91
   PeerChasing                      0.004     0.13    −0.30       −0.22    −0.086    0         0.086    0.22
   Residual PeerChasing           −0.078      0.20    −1.35       −0.43    −0.18    −0.061     0.036    0.22
   Placebo PeerChasing              0.005     0.087   −0.98       −0.11    −0.028    0.007     0.044    0.13
   Distributions /NAV               0.059     0.25     0           0        0        0         0.038    0.26
   Capital Calls /NAV               0.12      6.07     0           0        0        0.0094    0.072    0.27
   Distributions/Fund size          0.030     0.079    0           0        0        0         0.025    0.16
   Capital Calls/Fund size          0.031     0.052    0           0        0        0.0054    0.042    0.14
   Calender year of the quarter   2004.7     5.24     1987        1994     2002     2006      2009     2011

                                               Panel B: Venture sample

                                  mean       sd       min          p5      p25      p50       p75      p95

    ^it|β = 1
   ∆bias                          −0.017      0.16    −2.05       −0.22    −0.089   −0.026     0.050    0.22
   ∆bias it|β = 1.7
    ^                             −0.043      0.24    −2.12       −0.39    −0.18    −0.062     0.066    0.38
        placebo
   ] it
   ∆bias          |β = 1          −0.0099     0.30    −0.78       −0.50    −0.21    −0.0064    0.19     0.48
        placebo
   ] it
   ∆bias          |β = 1.7        −0.036      0.31    −0.85       −0.55    −0.25    −0.037     0.17     0.48
   FundTiming                       1.25      0.40     0           0.56     0.92     1.32      1.56     1.83
   Excess FundTiming                1.36      0.40     0           0.56     1.10     1.45      1.70     1.91
   PeerChasing                    −0.0060     0.12    −0.30       −0.21    −0.084   −0.0013    0.072    0.20
   Residual PeerChasing           −0.059      0.19    −1.77       −0.39    −0.14    −0.038     0.045    0.21
   Placebo PeerChasing              0.0041    0.057   −0.77       −0.069   −0.019    0.0016    0.026    0.083
   Distributions NAV                0.035     0.17     0           0        0        0         0        0.18
   Capital Calls NAV                0.058     0.087    0           0        0        0.0069    0.093    0.24
   DistributionsFundsize            0.022     0.10     0           0        0        0         0        0.11
   Capital CallsFundsize            0.027     0.040    0           0        0        0.0042    0.049    0.10
   Calendar year of the quarter   2003.2     6.06     1986        1991     2001     2004      2008     2011




                                                           xvii
                 Table B.5: Fund Timing and Peer-Chasing: Additional Specifications
This table reports the parameter estimates a linear regression model estimated separately for buyout (Panel A) and
venture (Panel B) funds. The dependant variable measures risk- and cash flow-adjusted changes in NAV for quarter
t that is constructed to be unpredictable under the null of reported NAVs being unbiased estimators of true asset
values. The market beta of the fund assets is assumed to be 1.7 [2.4] in specifications (6) and (7) for buyout [venture]
subsample and 1 everywhere else. Explanatory variables of interest include FundTiming which is the natural log of
one plus time spent to-date without a follow-on fund in excess of two years, PeerChasing which is the difference
between fund i reported Internal Rate of Return to-date for the calendar quarter corresponding to t − 1 quarter of
fund i life and its peers as measured by the median IRR-to-date across all funds of the same strategy incepted within
one year from fund i vintage year. Specifications (4), (5) and (7) also include the interaction of FundTiming and
PeerChasing variables. All specifications include fund fixed effects, all except (1) include fund distributions and
capital calls over the current quarter scaled by the end of quarter NAVs. Specifications (3) and (5) through (7) include
year-quarter fixed effects, others have year and quarter fixed effects instead. t-statistics reported in parentheses are
robust to heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation, */**/*** denotes significance at 10/5/1% confidence level.

                                                           β=1                                  β = 1.70B/2.4V
                                     (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)       (7)

                                                   Panel A: Buyout
   FundTiming                        0.060∗∗∗    0.059∗∗∗ 0.080∗∗∗       0.038∗∗    0.057∗∗∗ 0.076∗∗∗    0.053∗∗
                                    (2.78)      (3.13)     (4.22)       (2.02)     (3.00)     (3.63)    (2.57)
   PeerChasing                     −0.198∗∗∗ −0.202∗∗∗ −0.205∗∗∗         0.123∗∗    0.131∗∗ −0.202∗∗∗    0.117∗∗
                                  (−5.95)     (−6.31)    (−6.51)        (2.31)     (2.55)   (−5.46)     (2.09)
   FundTiming × PeerChasing                                            −0.295∗∗∗ −0.304∗∗∗             −0.289∗∗∗
                                                                      (−6.22)    (−6.61)              (−5.62)
   Observations                    12,150      12,150      12,150      12,150      12,150      12,150      12,150
   R-squared                       0.046       0.094       0.237       0.098       0.242       0.420       0.423
   RMSE                            0.184       0.172       0.158       0.172       0.158       0.180       0.180

                                                   Panel B: Venture
   FundTiming                        0.029∗∗    0.026∗    0.051∗∗∗       0.018     0.043∗∗∗ 0.054∗∗∗     0.046∗∗∗
                                    (2.08)     (1.89)    (3.62)         (1.34)    (3.08)     (3.78)     (3.26)
   PeerChasing                     −0.151∗∗∗ −0.168∗∗∗ −0.175∗∗∗         0.068∗    0.045    −0.180∗∗∗    0.037
                                  (−7.91)    (−8.53)   (−9.18)          (1.79)    (1.21)   (−9.21)      (0.99)
   FundTiming × PeerChasing                                            −0.217∗∗∗ −0.202∗∗∗             −0.200∗∗∗
                                                                      (−6.88)   (−6.52)               (−6.29)
   Observations                    15,124      15,124      15,124      15,124      15,124      15,124      15,124
   R-squared                       0.110       0.118       0.305       0.121       0.309       0.607       0.608
   RMSE                            0.136       0.135       0.120       0.135       0.120       0.124       0.124

                                              Controls in Both Panels:
   Fund FE                          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes
   Cash Flows                       No          Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes
   Year FE                          Yes         Yes         No           Yes        No           No          No
   Quarter FE                       Yes         Yes         No           Yes        No           No          No
   Year-Qtr FE                      No          No          Yes          No         Yes          Yes         Yes




                                                         xviii
                        Table B.6: Cross-Section of To-Date Performance: Placebo
This table reports the parameter estimates a linear regression model estimated separately for buyout (Panel A) and
venture (Panel B) funds. The dependant variable measures a fund adjusted return for quarter t if its NAVs were
tracking a same style public equity portfolio based Fama-French 100 U.S. equity portfolios (Appendix A provides
details). FundTiming is the natural log of one plus, essentially, time spent to-date without a follow-on fund in excess
of two years. Specifications (1) through (4) have PeerChasing is a difference between fund i to-date average public
portfolio cumulative return-to-date for the calendar quarter corresponding to t − 1 quarter of fund i life and that of its
peers. Rookie is a dummy for whether the PE firm had less than two funds before i. Top and Btm are dummies denoting
if to-date return of the assigned public equity portfolio was in Top(Bottom) tercile by return-to-date as of quarter t − 1
among those assigned to the fund peers. Control variables in all specifications include funds fixed effects, year-quarter
fixed effects as well as fund distributions and capital calls over the current quarter scaled by the end of quarter NAVs.
t-statistics reported in parentheses are robust to heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation, */**/*** denotes significance
at 10/5/1% confidence level.

                                          Panel A Buyout                               Panel B Venture
                                (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)       (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)
   FundTiming                 −0.002       0.013       0.007     0.018     0.017 −0.013           −0.005 −0.013
                             (−0.08)      (0.51)      (0.36)    (0.61)    (0.73) (−0.76)         (−0.35) (−0.61)
   PeerChasing                  0.039      0.014       0.031∗∗ 0.015 −0.011          0.007        −0.009      0.001
                               (1.26)     (0.72)      (2.00)    (0.67) (−0.38)      (0.48)       (−0.56)     (0.06)
   Rookie × FundTiming                     0.011                 0.005               0.007                    0.008
                                          (0.32)                (0.15)              (0.28)                   (0.32)
   Rookie × PeerChasing                    0.009                 0.008             −0.001                     0.006
                                          (0.34)                (0.32)            (−0.06)                    (0.24)
   TopTercile-to-date                                −0.030∗ −0.029∗                              −0.008 −0.008
                                                    (−1.86) (−1.79)                              (−0.64) (−0.67)
   Top × FundTiming                                    0.049     0.036                            −0.018 −0.015
                                                      (0.99)    (0.71)                           (−0.52) (−0.41)
   Top × PeerChasing                                 −0.011 −0.000                                  0.046∗∗ 0.035
                                                    (−0.32) (−0.01)                                (2.03)    (1.42)
   BtmTercile-to-date                                            0.003                                        0.002
                                                                (0.19)                                       (0.15)
   Btm × FundTiming                                            −0.033                                         0.011
                                                              (−0.91)                                        (0.40)
   Btm × PeerChasing                                             0.078                                      −0.044
                                                                (1.10)                                     (−1.21)
   Controls                                            Fund FE, Year-Qtr FE, Cash-Flows
   Observations               12,150     12,150      12,150    12,150    15,131    15,131         15,131     15,131
   R-squared                   0.467      0.477       0.436     0.436     0.191     0.194          0.169      0.169




                                                             xix
             Table B.7: Autocorrelation of Reported Returns Before and After FAS157
This table reports the parameter estimates for the following linear regression model::
                       NAV retit = µ + f as157t + ρ1 · NAV retit−1 + ρ2 · NAV retit−1 · f as157t + νi,t                 .
The model is estimated separately for buyout (Panel A) and venture (Panel B) funds. We report results from two
estimation methods, Fund FE and Pooled, and four subsamples. In the Pooled method NAV retit is fund i reported
return for quarter t as measured by NAV change adjusted for net distributions during that quarter. In Fund FE,
NAV retit is fund i reported return for quarter t de-meaned over each funds lifetime. f as157t is an indicator variable
taking a value of one for quarters after 2Q09 and zero otherwise. All includes all Funds in our sample, so that
the control group includes funds already resolved by end of 2006 as well as earlier reports by fund that remained
active after 2Q09. Btm, Mid, Top are subsamples of funds that remain active end of 2006 and were in the respective
performance tercile according to reported IRR-to-date. We drop reports for 10 quarters between 1Q07 and 2Q09
for all funds in each subsample to insure that our inference is not confounded by developments during the adoption
period, the onset of the 2008 crisis and the subsequent rebound in liquid market prices. Also, we drop all reports by
funds younger than 8 quarters since inception. t-statistics reported in parentheses are robust to heteroskedasticity and
autocorrelation, */**/*** denotes significance at 10/5/1% confidence level.


                                            Fund FE                                        Pooled
                               All     Btm’06 Mid’06              Top’06     All     Btm’06 Mid’06         Top’06
                               (1)       (2)       (3)              (4)      (5)       (6)        (7)        (8)

                                                                  Panel A: Buyout
   ρ1                          0.137∗∗∗ 0.204∗        0.023        0.130∗∗∗ 0.116∗∗ 0.207∗        0.001      0.0943∗∗
                              (3.30)    (2.02)       (0.44)       (3.18)    (2.20)  (1.98)       (0.02)     (2.24)
   ρ2                        −0.069 −0.278∗∗ −0.149                0.041 −0.030 −0.236 −0.026                0.228
                            (−0.80) (−2.44) (−1.29)               (0.39) (−0.50) (−1.76) (−0.19)            (1.65)
   Pr(F-stat> [ρ1 + ρ2 ])      0.423      0.356       0.203        0.237     0.145     0.766      0.820      0.078
   Observations              9,181       1,675       2,047        1,867     9,181     1,675      2,047      1,867

                                                                  Panel B: Venture
   ρ1                          0.063      0.172∗∗∗    0.108∗       0.182∗∗∗ 0.0781∗ 0.190∗∗∗ 0.112∗          0.178∗∗∗
                              (1.62)     (6.18)      (1.93)       (5.15)    (1.93)  (7.59)   (1.95)         (4.83)
   ρ2                        −0.216∗∗∗ −0.344∗∗∗ −0.279∗∗ −0.292∗∗∗ −0.125 −0.322∗∗∗ −0.241 −0.180∗∗∗
                            (−3.75) (−3.93) (−2.43) (−5.83) (−1.45) (−3.69) (−1.76) (−3.19)
   Pr(F-stat> [ρ1 + ρ2 ])      0.000      0.090       0.131        0.034     0.490     0.230      0.316      0.965
   Observations              15,230      2,624       2,873        3,430     15,23     2,624      2,873      3,430




                                                             xx
                   Figure B.3: Alternative Definitions of the Fundraising Event Date
Panel A plots values starting 25 quarters preceding the minimum of the fund resolution quarter or the funds 10th
anniversary. Panel B plots values since the quarter that corresponds to inception plus the median time it took to raise a
follow-on fund by the fund’s vintage-year peers. As described in equations (1) and (2), the change in a given quarter
is a mean PME-to-date change (or TVPI-to date change) from the previous period across a subset of funds multiplied
by the average ratio of NAV to market-adjusted paid-in capital to date. Appendix A shows that the inference about the
path of the PME-based variable is robust to misspecification of the fund’s systematic risk while the TVPI-based path
is a special case where the market return is assumed to be zero. No Next (At Least One) denotes the subset of funds
without (with) at least one follow-on fund for in our sample.

                                         Panel A: Event = 12 Quarters Before the Resolution
                                            Buyout PME                                            Venture PME
                      1.6




                                                                     1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4
                                  No Next
                                  At Least One
                      1.4
                      1.2




                                                                     1
                                                                     .9
                      1




                            -12     -8      -4   0    4    8    12                     -12   -8   -4   0    4    8   12

                                            Buyout TVPI                                           Venture TVPI
                      2.5




                                                                     2.5
                      2




                                                                     2
                      1.5




                                                                     1.5
                      1




                                                                     1




                            -12     -8      -4   0    4    8    12                     -12   -8   -4   0    4    8   12




                                  Panel B: Event = 12 Quarters After the Median Fundraising
                                            Buyout PME                                            Venture PME
                      1.6




                                                                     1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4




                                  No Next
                                  At Least One
                      1.4
                      1.2
                      1




                                                                     1
                                                                     .9
                      .8




                            -12     -8      -4   0    4    8    12                     -12   -8   -4   0    4    8   12

                                            Buyout TVPI                                           Venture TVPI
                      3




                                                                     3
                      2.5




                                                                     2.5
                      2




                                                                     2
                      1.5




                                                                     1.5
                      1




                                                                     1




                            -12     -8      -4   0    4    8    12                     -12   -8   -4   0    4    8   12




                                                                xxi
        Figure B.4: Next Year PME Growth Conditional on To-Date Performance: Placebo

This figure reports the probabilities of a fund’s excess returns over the next 4 quarters being in the top (bottom) tercile
conditional on the fund’s to-date performance tercile. We plot results separately for Buyout (Panel A) and Venture
funds (Panel B). We define the fund peer group for to-date and next year terciles as all funds of the same strategy
incepted within one year from the fund vintage year. The top chart of each panel reports results for top to-date tercile
funds as of 8 to 17 quarters since inception (∼3yrs), 18 to 27 quarters since inception (∼5yrs), and more than 27
quarters (>7yrs). The bottom chart of each panel reports values for the bottom tercile to-date funds. Unlike Figure 4
which uses actual fund returns and IRRs-to-date, here we randomly assign public equity portfolios to the same set of
funds and compute to-date performance as the average return of that portfolio since the fund inception. Public equity
portfolios returns are constructed using subsets of Fama-French 100 U.S. Equity research portfolios as described in
Appendix A.

                                      Panel A: Buyout funds mimicking portfolios
                                            Bottom Tercile Next Year              Middle Tercile Next Year
                                                            Top To-Date Tercile
                     .5
                     .333
                     .2




                                   ~3 yrs                          ~5 yrs                              >7 yrs
                                                          Bottom To-Date Tercile
                     .5
                     .333
                     .2




                                   ~3 yrs                          ~5 yrs                              >7 yrs



                                      Panel B: Venture funds mimicking portfolios
                                            Bottom Tercile Next Year              Middle Tercile Next Year
                                                            Top To-Date Tercile
                     .5
                     .333
                     .2




                                   ~3 yrs                          ~5 yrs                              >7 yrs
                                                          Bottom To-Date Tercile
                     .5
                     .333
                     .2




                                   ~3 yrs                          ~5 yrs                              >7 yrs


                                                                 xxii
              Figure B.5: Median Fund Performance Over SFAS157 Adoption Period
This figure reports cumulative excess returns over a public equity index as measured by PME around SFAS157 adop-
tion period. We plot results separately for buyout and venture funds. Panel A splits the sample into groups based on
whether or not a follow-on fund was raised. Panel B (C) splits the sample into groups based on performance rank as
of the end of 2006 (upon resolution). A change in a given quarter is a median PME-to-date change from the previous
period across the respective subset of funds.

                                         Panel A: By Fundraising Success




                                   Panel B: By Performance Tercile as of 4Q’06




                                   Panel C: By Performance Tercile End of Life




                                                       xxiii
                          Figure B.6: Peer-Chasing: Non-Parametric Evidence
This figure reports local polynomial regression fits of fund excess returns on lagged to-date IRR relative to that of
peer median. The models are estimated separately for buyout and venture funds. Reported returns orthogonalized
with respect to fund cash flows are in Panel A with one and two period lagged IRR being in the top and bottom row,
respectively. Panel B reports results from a similar exercise based on placebo returns. Placebo returns are constructed
using subsets of Fama-French 100 U.S. Equity research portfolios as described in Appendix A.

                                                Panel A: Actual Data




                                     Panel B: Placebo - Public Equity Portfolios




                                                         xxiv
