NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LEVEL VERSUS VARIABILITY TRADE-OFFS IN WIND AND SOLAR GENERATION INVESTMENTS:
THE CASE OF CALIFORNIA
Frank A. Wolak
Working Paper 22494
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22494

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016

I would like to thank Reinhard Madlener and Carlo Andrea Bollino and two anonymous referees
for helpful comments on a previous draft. Chris Bruegge provided outstanding research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Frank A. Wolak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Level versus Variability Trade-offs in Wind and Solar Generation Investments: The Case
of California
Frank A. Wolak
NBER Working Paper No. 22494
August 2016
JEL No. Q2,Q4,Q5
ABSTRACT
Hourly plant-level wind and solar generation output and real-time price data for one year from the
California ISO control area is used to estimate the vector of means and the contemporaneous
covariance matrix of hourly output and revenues across all wind and solar locations in the state.
Annual hourly output and annual hourly revenues mean/standard deviation efficient frontiers for
wind and solar resource locations are computed from this information. For both efficient
frontiers, economically meaningful differences between portfolios on the efficient frontier and the
actual wind and solar generation capacity mix are found. The relative difference is significantly
larger for aggregate hourly output relative to aggregate hourly revenues, consistent with expected
profit-maximizing unilateral entry decisions by renewable resource owners. Most of the hourly
output and hourly revenue risk-reducing benefits from the optimal choice of locational generation
capacities is captured by a small number of wind resource locations, with the addition of a small
number of solar resource locations only slightly increasing the set of feasible portfolio mean and
standard deviation combinations. Measures of non-diversifiable wind and solar energy and
revenue risk are computed using the actual market portfolio and the risk-adjusted expected hourly
output or hourly revenue maximizing portfolios.

Frank A. Wolak
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
wolak@zia.stanford.edu

1. Introduction
This paper quantifies the total renewable energy output and revenue consequences of
different combinations of wind and solar generation investments in California using hourly output
and real-time market revenue data for all wind and solar generation units in the California
Independent System Operator (ISO) control area from April 1, 2011 to March 31, 2012. This data
is used to construct an economic model that provides an estimate of the average annual mean and
covariance matrix of the hourly energy production and the hourly real-time revenues for all
existing wind and solar locations in California for any amount of renewable generation capacity at
each existing renewable location.
The economic model is used to compute the shares of statewide wind and solar capacity at
existing wind and solar locations in California that yield the highest annual average hourly output
for a given value of the annual variability of hourly output, or equivalently the lowest annual
variability in hourly output for a given value of the average hourly output. These pairs

of

annual average hourly output and annual variability in hourly output define the mean output and
standard deviation of output efficient frontier for wind and solar investments at existing wind and
solar locations in California. Points on this efficient frontier are compared to the actual average
hourly output and annual variability in hourly output from actual wind and solar generation units.
This same exercise is repeated for the annual average hourly revenue and annual variability
in hourly revenue for wind and solar generation locations in California. Locational capacity shares
at all existing wind and solar locations in California are computed that yield the highest annual
average hourly revenues for a given value of the annual variability of hourly revenues, or
equivalently the lowest annual variability in hourly revenues for a given value of the average
hourly revenues. These annual average hourly revenues and annual variability in hourly revenues

1

pairs define the mean hourly revenue and standard deviation of hourly revenue efficient frontier
of wind and solar investments at existing wind and solar locations in California. Points on this
efficient frontier are compared to the actual hourly average revenue and annual variability in hourly
revenue from actual wind and solar generation units.
Although the renewable generation locations are distributed throughout a state with a
geographic area slightly smaller than France and slightly larger than Germany, these two analyses
reveal a high degree of contemporaneous correlation between the hourly output of the 13 solar
locations and 40 wind locations in California that produced energy throughout the 2011-2012 fiscal
year. This result suggests modest opportunities to reduce the variability in the total hourly output
and hourly revenue of wind and solar resource owners by optimizing where and how much solar
and wind generation capacity is placed at each existing location in California. Nevertheless, the
hourly output efficient frontier implies that a 48 percent increase in the annual average hourly
output of solar and wind units is possible without increasing the annual standard deviation of
hourly output only by changing the state-wide capacity shares of the wind and solar investments
at the existing wind and solar locations in California. More modest increases in the average hourly
revenue for solar and wind generation units can be obtained by optimizing the locational capacity
shares of these investments. The hourly revenue efficient frontier implies that by changing the
state-wide capacity shares of the wind and solar investments at the existing wind and solar
locations, a 26 percent increase in the annual average hourly real-time revenue of the solar and
wind generation capacity is possible without increasing the annual standard deviation in hourly
revenues by changing the state-wide capacity shares of the wind and solar investments at the
existing wind and solar locations. This 26 percent increase in the annual average hourly revenue

2

is found to be statistically significantly smaller than the 48 percentage increase in annual average
hourly output.
To assess the extent to which the results described above are robust across hours of the
day, separate efficient frontiers are computed for four groups of hours of the day. The largest gains
in expected output or reductions in the standard deviation of output as a result of moving from the
actual capacity shares of wind and solar investments to the efficient frontier appears to be during
the late morning and afternoon hours of the day.
The capacity shares of wind and solar investments on the annual hourly output and annual
hourly revenue efficient frontiers are similar, however they are both very different from the actual
capacity shares. The capacity shares on both efficient frontiers concentrate the statewide capacity
of wind and solar investments on a substantially smaller number of locations than actual wind and
solar capacity investments.
Taken together, these empirical results have implications for the design of policies to
stimulate the deployment of renewable generation capacity. As the share of annual energy
production provided by intermittent generation resources in a region increases, the cost of
managing the real-time supply and demand balance increases.1 For the same annual average
hourly output from wind and solar resources, a more variable hourly output from these generation
units implies that more operating reserves are required to maintain grid reliability standards.
Consequently, a substantial amount of the increased hourly renewable energy output variability
associated with scaling wind and solar energy production in California could be mitigated by

Many jurisdictions have significant renewable energy goals. California has a legislative mandate to achieve a 33%
qualified renewable energy share by 2020 and a 50% share by 2030. Three-fifths of US states have similar mandated
renewables portfolio standards.

1

3

constructing additional wind and solar capacity in resource areas that minimize the increase in the
annual standard deviation of hourly output.
To demonstrate the empirical content of this statement, the elasticity of annual average
hourly output with respect to the annual standard deviation of hourly output for a 1 MW increase
in capacity at that location is computed for each existing wind and solar location in California
starting from the current statewide locational capacity shares for wind and solar generation
capacity. There is substantial heterogeneity in these elasticities across locations. For some
locations the elasticity is as much as ten times larger than the typical California wind and solar
location,, indicating that at these locations a 1 MW increase in wind or solar capacity would have
a significantly larger increase in the annual average wind and solar output for the same increase in
the annual standard deviation in hourly output from these units. There are even some locations
where the elasticity is negative, meaning that a 1 MW increase in wind or solar capacity at that
location would increase the annual average hourly output and reduce the annual standard deviation
of hourly output. Wind and solar investments at locations with the highest values of these
elasticities are likely to minimize the system reliability costs and operating costs associated with
achieving any statewide renewable energy goal.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section provides a discussion
of related research. Section 3 presents a model of output and revenue risk diversification for wind
and solar generation investments. Section 4 contains descriptive statistics on the California
electricity market and discusses the data used to construct the efficient frontiers.

Section 5

discusses the computation of the efficient frontiers and the procedure used to compute the
maximum risk-adjusted expected output and the expected revenue points on these curves as well
as location-specific measures of non-diversifiable wind and solar output and revenue risk. Section

4

6 presents the empirical results. Section 7 discusses the implications of these results and the design
of potential policies to minimize the reliability and operating costs associated with meeting any
renewable energy goal. Section 8 concludes.
2. Portfolio-Based Approaches to New Generation Investment Decisions
A number of papers have formulated electricity generation capacity technology mix
decisions as portfolio choice problems. Bar-Lev and Katz (1976) first applied expected return and
risk (standard deviation return) portfolio theory to the choice of the mix fossil fuel generation
capacity—coal, natural gas, and oil—used to produce electricity. Awerbuch and Berger (2003)
employed mean-variance portfolio theory to derive European Union (EU) generation portfolios
that enhance energy securities objectives.

They quantified the investment return risk

diversification benefits of increasing the amount of renewable generation capacity in the EU.
Roques, Newbery and Nuttal (2008) employ Monte Carlo simulations of natural gas, coal, and
nuclear generation unit investment return distributions to solve a mean-variance portfolio choice
problem for an optimal mix of these generation technologies for firms in a re-structured wholesale
electricity market. Bazilian and Roques (2008) contains a number of papers that extend in a
number of directions the application of expected return and risk portfolio theory to the electricity
supply industry investment decision-making processes.
Westner and Madlener (2010) apply mean-variance portfolio theory to Monte Carlo
simulations of distributions of the net present value (NPV) of individual combined heat and power
technologies in the four largest Western European countries to study the potential for regional
diversification benefits of investments in these technologies. Westner and Madlener (2011)
consider investments in four combined heat and power technologies in Germany and employ
Monte Carlo simulations of the joint distribution of the NPVs of each technology, and from this
5

compute the NPV mean-variance efficient frontier for the four technologies. Delarue, De Jongho,
Belmans, and D’haeseleer (2011) apply mean-variance portfolio theory and Monte Carlo
simulations to compute distributions of the cost per MWh by technology to derive the efficient
frontier in cost per MWh and standard deviation-of-cost per MWh space of investments in nuclear,
coal, gas, oil and wind generation units. Bhattacharya and Kojima (2012) assess the impact of
adding renewable generation investments to the existing generation capacity mix on the portfoliolevel return and risk profile for the Japanese electricity sector.
Several papers have also applied mean/variance portfolio theory across geographic
locations. Yu (2003) considers the question of choosing efficient portfolios of energy and ancillary
services sales by generation owners able to sell in spatially distributed wholesale electricity
markets. Roques, Hiroux, and Saguan (2010) consider the optimal country-level deployment of
wind generation units for France, Denmark, Austria, Germany and Spain, using a sample of
country-level hourly wind output in these five countries. They derive a mean hourly output and
standard deviation of hourly output efficient frontier for wind deployment across these five
countries.
Madlener (2012) provides an accessible and comprehensive survey of this growing
literature. Garnier and Madlener (2016) expands the set of risks that a potential investor faces by
incorporating regulatory regime risk into a portfolio choice model for an investor in a virtual power
plant composed of a mix of distributed renewable energy resources where the investor must
manage both intraday energy balancing cost risk and policy regime risk.
The present paper builds on this previous work by applying the mean-variance portfolio
theory to generation investment decisions in order to understand how substantial intermittent
renewable energy goals can be met with minimal reliability consequences. To this end, using

6

actual hourly output data, I characterize the trade-offs between aggregate renewable energy output
and intermittency risk for any portfolio of wind and solar resource locations in California. I then
quantify the magnitude of the deviations of the actual mix of renewable generation capacity from
the mix capacity on the hourly output and hourly standard deviation efficient frontier. I also
explore the extent to which the location decisions of existing renewable generation capacity in
California are consistent with maximizing the unit owner’s expected profits. I accomplish this by
comparing the actual portfolio of renewable generation investments to the portfolios on the
expected revenue and standard deviation of renewable generation revenues efficient frontier.
Finally, I compute location-specific measures of output and revenue risk and find that only a few
actual renewable locations are necessary to achieve a frontier of the highest expected hourly
capacity factor or highly hourly revenue per MW of capacity for a given value of these two
location-specific risk measures.
3. Model of Renewable Output and Revenue Risk Diversification
The level versus variability tradeoffs in the system-wide hourly output and hourly total
revenues for wind and solar resource locations studied in this paper can be conveyed through a
simple example with N intermittent renewable resource areas. The contemporaneous correlation
between the hourly output at each intermittent energy location and the impact of the level of hourly
output on real-time prices at each intermittent renewable energy location determines the output
and revenue volatility reductions that are possible from different intermittent renewable energy
investment policies.
Suppose that during a typical hour of the day at each of these N locations 1 megawatt-hour
(MWh) of intermittent renewable energy is available to be harvested with probability p. If the
availability of 1 MWh energy at one location is distributed independently of the availability of 1

7

MWh energy at any other location, then the expected number of MWh produced in an hour across
these N locations is pN MWh, in other words the probability of the event times the number of
resource areas. The variance of the hourly output from the N intermittent renewable resources is
equal to Np(1-p). Now consider the opposite extreme in terms of correlation between the hourly
outputs of the N locations. Suppose that there is perfect positive correlation between the hourly
outputs at these same N locations. The expected hourly output of the facilities is still equal to pN,
but the variance of the aggregate hourly output measure is equal to p(1-p)N2 because of the perfect
positive correlation between the hourly output across the N locations. The hourly variance is N
times larger than it is for the case in which the hourly availability of energy is independently
distributed across locations.
This example shows that for the same aggregate amount of renewable generation capacity
in a region, the variance in the total hourly output of wind and solar generation facilities can be as
much as N times larger as a result of correlation in the output across the N locations. Conversely,
by accounting for the contemporaneous correlation between the hourly outputs at pairs of the N
renewable energy locations, the variance in the total hourly output of renewable energy units can
be reduced by installing different amounts of capacity at each of the N available locations.
To understand how this hourly renewable output variability reduction can be realized,
consider the following wind and solar investment portfolio choice problem. Suppose that Qjh is
hourly output in megawatt-hours (MWh) at location j during hour h and Kj is the MW capacity at
location j for j=1,2,…,J. Define fjh = Qjh/Kj as the hourly capacity factor at location j, which is the
ratio of the wind or solar energy actually produced during the hour at location j divided by the
amount energy that could be produced during one hour at location j by fully utilizing the Kj MWs
of capacity for an entire hour. Note that fjh is continuously distributed on the interval [0,1]. Let

8

KT = ∑

equal the total amount of wind and solar generation capacity in the control area. Let

wjact = Kj/KT equal the actual share of total wind and solar generation capacity at location j.
The total renewable energy produced during hour h is equal to
∑

. The second equality illustrates that

∑

can be written as the capacity-share-

weighted sum of the hourly capacity factors of the individual wind and solar resource locations
multiplied by the total amount of wind and solar capacity in the control area. This result implies
that the mean and standard deviation of

depends on the J-dimensional mean and (J x J)

covariance matrix of the vector of hourly location specific capacity factors Fh = (f1h,f2h,…,fJh)’.
Let the expected value of Fh, E(Fh), equal the J-dimensional vector μ and the covariance matrix of
Fh, E[(Fh – μ)(Fh – μ)’], equal the (J x J) symmetric, positive definite matrix, Ω.2 In terms of this
notation, the mean and standard deviation of
∑

can be expressed as:

and

∑

where μj is the jth element of μ and ωjk is the (j,k)th element of Ω.
expected value of

/

∑

.

(1)

This result shows that the

is equal to the expected value of the capacity-share-weighted sum of the

location-specific hourly capacity factors,

∑

renewable capacity, KT. The standard deviation of

, multiplied by the total amount of
is equal to the standard deviation of the

capacity share weighted sum of the location-specific capacity factors multiplied by the total
amount of renewable capacity, KT. These decompositions imply the following two results:
and

,

(2)

which implies that for a fixed amount of renewable generation capacity, KT, the capacity shares
that yield the highest expected hourly output are those that maximize the expected value of

2

Throughout the paper E(X) denotes the expectation of a random variable X.

9

,

and the capacity shares that yield the lowest standard deviation of hourly output are those that
minimize the standard deviation of

.

To compute the hourly total revenues earned by wind and solar resources, let Pjh equal the
real-time price at location j during hour h. The total revenues earned by a wind or solar resource
at location j is equal to TRj = Pjh*fjh*Kj. The expected revenues earned by renewable resources
at location j is equal to E(TRj) = [E(Pjh)*E(fjh) + Cov(Pjh,fjh)]Kj, where Cov(X,Y) denotes the
covariance between the random variables X and Y. This expression implies that there are several
ways to increase expected renewable energy revenues at a location. A higher expected value of
the hourly capacity factor, E(fjh), and a higher expected price, E(Pjh), both increase the expected
revenues of the renewable resources at location j. Note that a positive covariance between the
hourly real-time price and hourly capacity factor at location j also increases expected revenues at
that location. The variance of total revenues at location j depends on higher-order moments of
the hourly capacity factor and hourly price at location j. Specifically,
Var(TRj) = {E[(Pjh)2]E[(fjh)2] + Cov[(Pjh)2,(fjh)2] - [E(Pjh)*E(fjh) + Cov(Pjh,fjh)]2}(Kj)2.
The total revenues earned by renewable resources during hour h,
∑

(3)

can be expressed as
(4)

.

Let rjh= Pjh*fjh equal the revenue per MW of capacity paid to resources at location j during hour
h. Let Rh = (r1h,r2h,…,rJh)’ be the vector of locational revenues per MW of capacity during hour
h. Let the expected value of Rh, E(Rh), equals the J-dimensional vector λ and the covariance matrix
of Rh, E[(Rh – λ)(Rh – λ)’], equals the (J x J) symmetric, positive definite matrix, Γ. In terms of
this notation, the mean and standard deviation of
∑

can be expressed as:
∑

and

10

∑

/

,

(5)

where λj is the jth element of λ and γjk is the (j,k)th element of Γ. This result shows that the expected
value of

is equal to the expected value of the capacity-share-weighted sum of the location-

specific revenues per MW of capacity,

∑

, multiplied by the total amount of

renewable capacity, KT in MWs. The standard deviation of

is equal to the product of the

standard deviation of the capacity-share-weighted sum of the location-specific revenues per MW
of capacity multiplied by the total amount of renewable capacity, KT. These decompositions imply
the following two results:
and

,

(6)

which implies that for a fixed total amount of renewable capacity, KT, the capacity shares that yield
the highest expected hourly revenue are those that maximize the expected value of

and the

capacity shares that yield the lowest standard deviation of hourly revenue are those that minimize
the standard deviation of

.

4. Renewables Output and Revenues in California Electricity Market
This section describes the data used to estimate the parameters of the mean and covariance
matrices of Fh, the vector of hourly location-specific capacity factors, and Rh, the vector of hourly
location-specific revenues per MW of capacity. To motivate the efficient frontier modeling results
presented in Section 6, this section first presents summary statistics on the California wholesale
electricity market.
4.1.

Descriptive Statistics for California Wholesale Electricity Market
The sample period is the California ISO fiscal year from April 1, 2011 to March 31, 2012.

There were 40 wind generation locations and 13 utility-scale solar locations in the California ISO
control area, with 3,040 MW of wind capacity and 499 MW of solar capacity, available to operate
throughout this time period. Table 1 lists the amount of generation capacity in the California ISO
11

control area by technology as of April 1, 2011. The vast majority of generation capacity is natural
gas-fired. There is also a significant amount of hydroelectric capacity and nuclear capacity.
[Insert Table 1 Here]
[Insert Figure 1 Here]
The left panel of Figure 1 graphs the mean within-day pattern of aggregate demand and the
within-day pattern of the standard deviations of each hour-of-the-day demand level. If QDhd is
the aggregate demand for hour h of day d, then each point along the curve is equal to
, which is the mean of the demand during hour-of-the-day h over the D = 365 days

∑

in the sample.

Each point along the hourly standard deviation curve is equal to
/

∑

, the standard deviation of Qhd over all days in the sample period.

The left panel of Figure 1 repeats these two graphs for the QWSdh, the total output of wind and
solar generation units during hour h of day d. The graph of SD(QWS)h is only slightly lower than
the graph of

, ranging between 70 and 60 percent of

contrast, the graph of SD(QD)h is substantially below the graph of
and 16 percent of

across all hours of the day. In
, ranging between 9 percent

across all hours of the day. The volatility (as measured by the standard

deviation) of hourly wind and solar production is a much larger fraction of the mean hourly wind
and solar production than the volatility of hourly demand is relative to the mean of hourly demand.
The California ISO and all other formal wholesale markets in the United States operate a
multi-settlement locational marginal pricing market which sets a potentially different price at each
generation unit or load withdrawal location in the control area for every hour of the day. The price
depends on the configuration transmission network, the location of electricity demand, the location
and level of output of dispatchable generation units, and the level of wind and solar energy

12

production.3 High levels of close-to-zero marginal cost of wind and solar energy production are
likely to displace the more costly fossil fuel energy production to the extent that the configuration
of the transmission network and the location of demand allow it. Conversely, low levels of wind
and solar energy production are likely to require significantly more production from fossil fuel
generation units to the extent that the transmission network and location of demand allow it. If
either of these outcomes is limited by transmission capacity or other operating constraints, this will
result in different prices at different locations in the transmission network. Generation-rich
locations will have lower locational marginal prices (LMPs) and generation-deficient locations
will have higher LMPs, so that no more than the amount of energy equal to the capacity of each
transmission link will flow between any two locations in the transmission network.
The other important feature of the California market and all United States electricity
markets in general, is that they have at least one formal forward market prior to real-time in which
participants can purchase and sell firm financial commitments to buy or sell electricity.

For

example, the California ISO operates a day-ahead market where participants submit offers to sell
and bids to buy electricity in each of the 24 hours of the following day.

The total amount of

energy sold in the day-ahead market by a specific generation unit is typically referred to as the
unit’s day-ahead energy schedule.
This day-ahead energy schedule is a firm financial commitment that must be settled in the
real-time market, which operates every five minutes in the California ISO control area. For
example, a generation unit owner that sells 100 MWh of energy from a generation unit during the
10 am to 11 am period of the following day must either produce that amount of energy from its
unit to cover this sale or purchase the 100 MWh from the real-time market at the real-time LMP
Jha and Wolak (2013) provide a description of the key features of the operation of a multi-settlement, locational
marginal pricing wholesale electricity market.
3

13

at that location. By similar logic, a load that purchased 70 MWh in the day-ahead market for this
same hour can sell some or all of this energy in the real-time market at the real-time LMP at that
location by consuming less than 70 MWh during that hour. Alternatively, if the load consumes
more than 70 MWh during the 10 am to 11 am hour, then it must purchase the additional energy
from the real-time market at the real-time price for that location.
generation unit.

Similar logic applies to a

If it produces more than the 100 MWh it sold in the day-ahead market, this

additional energy is paid the real-time price at that location.
The above logic implies that the real-time price at a generation unit’s location is the
relevant price for valuing any deviations from a supplier’s day-ahead schedule. Because wind
and solar resources are intermittent and their actual output can differ significantly from what might
be scheduled in the day-ahead market, they face exposure to the real-time price. The hourly realtime price is computed as the arithmetic mean of the twelve five-minute real-time prices during
that hour. Because the real-time price is the opportunity cost of energy consumed or produced
within the hour, this is the hourly price used to compute a generation unit owner’s revenue stream
throughout the remainder of this paper.
[Insert Figure 2 Here]
Suppose that pjhd is the real-time LMP at location j during hour h of day d and qihd is the
actual energy produced by generation units at location j during hour h of day d. For each hour of
the sample, I compute the quantity-weighted average LMP for all J = 630 generation units in the
California ISO control area. For each day d and hour of the day h, this price, pwhd, is equal to
∑
∑

. I also compute the quantity-weighted average price for all 53 wind and solar

generation units in the California ISO control area for each hour in the sample. The left panel of
Figure 2 reports the hourly mean and standard deviation of pwhd for h=1,2,…,24 across all days in
14

our sample for all generation units. The right panel of Figure 2 repeats these same two plots for
the quantity-weighted average LMP for all wind and solar generation units. Although significantly
less pronounced than was the case for the hourly demand versus the hourly output of all wind and
solar units, the coefficient of variation of the quantity-weighted average price paid to wind and
solar resources is uniformly higher than the coefficient of variation for the quantity-weighted
average price for all generation units. This result is consistent with the greater hour-to-hour
variability in the energy produced from wind and solar resources, which can also result in greater
hour-to-hour variation in the LMPs paid to wind and solar units when transmission and other
relevant operating constraints are binding.
To provide a measure of the extent of variability in prices across locations within each hour
during our sample period, I construct the following measure of the hourly range of real-time prices
paid to different generation units. Define
max

min

,

(7)

which is the difference between the maximum real-time LMP over all J = 630 generation units
during hour h of day d and the minimum real-time LMP over all J = 630 generation units during
hour h of day d. The upper panel of Figure 3 plots the hourly means of DFhd and the pointwise
upper and lower 95 percent confidence intervals on realizations of DFhd across days of our sample
for each hour of the day.
[Insert Figure 3 Here]
I also compute a version of DFhd taking the maximum over all of the real-time LMPs paid
to all 53 wind and solar generation units during hour h of day d and the minimum of the real-time
LMPs over these same units during the same hour and day. The lower panel of Figure 3 plots the
hourly means of DFhd and the pointwise upper and lower 95 percent confidence intervals on
15

realizations of DFhd across days of our sample for each hour of the day all wind and solar
generation units.
Two results emerge from Figure 3. First, the mean of the DFhd for h=1,2,…, 24 across
days is largest for the highest demand hours of the day. This is consistent with the logic described
earlier that high demand hours are more likely to require managing transmission and other
operating constraints by setting different prices at different locations in the transmission network.
The second result is that although the hourly means and length of the 95 percent confidence interval
of DFhd is larger for the all 630 generation units in the California ISO control area, the
corresponding features of the distribution of DFhd for the 53 wind and solar generation units
account for a significant fraction of the total spatial variation in prices within each hour of the day.
[Insert Table 2 Here]
[Insert Table 3 Here]
Tables 2 and 3 present the location-specific coefficients of variation for the hourly output
and the hourly real-time price for all wind and solar locations in the California ISO control area.
The final column of each table contains the sample correlation between the hourly output at each
location and the hourly real-time price at that location. For each of the wind locations, the hourly
output is negatively correlated with the hourly price, consistent with most of the energy production
from wind units occurring during the low-priced periods of the day.

For each of the solar

locations, hourly output is positively correlated with the hourly price, consistent with most energy
production from solar units occurring during the high-priced periods of the day.
4.2.

Potential for Diversification to Reduce Output and Revenue Variability
A final descriptive analysis assesses the extent which is possible to construct a portfolio of

wind and solar generation units that significantly reduces the standard deviation of the hourly

16

capacity factor,

, and the standard deviation of the hourly revenue per MW of capacity,

,

relative to the values of these variables using the actual capacity shares. If the off-diagonal
elements of the covariance matrices of Fh and Rh are positive and large (relative to the diagonal
elements of these matrices), meaning there is significant positive correlation between elements of
Fh and Rh, then the potential aggregate output or revenue variability reduction from optimizing the
sizes of wind and solar generation units at existing locations in California is limited.
The spectral decomposition of a covariance matrix yields a useful summary measure of the
degree of contemporaneous correlation between elements of a random vector that can be used to
assess the extent to which diversification can significantly reduce the variability in aggregate
output or revenues. Recall that Fh, the J-dimensional vector of hourly location specific capacity
factors of the wind and solar units in the California ISO control area, is assumed to have mean
vector μ and covariance matrix Ω. This covariance matrix has the spectral decomposition Ω =
QDQꞌ, where D is a diagonal matrix composed of the eigenvalues of Ω, ordered from the largest
to smallest, and Q is an orthonormal matrix composed of the eigenvectors of Ω. Let d11 ≥ d22, …,
≥ dJJ be these eigenvalues sorted from largest to smallest. Note that because Ω is a positive definite
matrix, all of its eigenvalues are positive. The relative magnitude of the J eigenvalues quantifies
the extent to which elements of Fh can be explained by common factors that cause them to be
correlated. Note that if the elements of Fh were uncorrelated and all had the same variance, then
all of the eigenvalues of Ω would be equal.4
The spectral decomposition theorem of a symmetric matrix can be used to reduce the
matrix Ω into J orthogonal factors, where the sum of the variances of each factor is equal to the
sum of the variances of the elements of Fh. This result is derived as follows. Let qi equal the
The example presented at the beginning of Section 3 of N locations with the same independently distributed
probability of providing 1 MWh of energy during the hour satisfies these conditions.

4

17

normalized eigenvalue (which is also the ith column of Qꞌ) associated with the ith eigenvector, dii.
Because the eigenvectors are orthonormal, qi’qi = 1 for all i and qi’qj = 0 for i ≠ j. Using the
definition of an eigenvalue and eigenvector yields the following equation for each i (i=1,2,..,J),
Ωqi = diiqi. Pre-multiplying both sides of the equation by qi’ yields qi’Ωqi = dii, because qi’qi =
1. Note that qi’Ωqi is also equal to the variance of qi’Fh, and because qi’qj = 0, the covariance
between qi’Fh, and qj’Fh is zero for i ≠ j. Thus, the ith orthogonal factor is qi’Fh and the variance
of this factor is dii.
Because the trace of Ω is equal to the sum of the eigenvalues of Ω and each random variable
zih ≡ qi’Fh has variance equal to dii and is uncorrelated with all other zjh, the sum of the variances
of the elements of Fh, the trace of Ω, is equal to the sum of the variances of the zih for i=1,2,…,J.
Consequently, one measure of the extent of correlation among elements of Fh is to normalize each
eigenvalue by the sum of the eigenvalues of Ω, or the sum of the diagonal elements of Ω. Compute
∑

for k=1,2,…,J .

∑

(8)

The larger Sk is for a given value of k, the greater is the correlation between the elements of Zh. Sk
is the proportion of the sum of the variances of elements of Fh that is explained by the first k
orthogonal factors, zih ≡ qi’Fh for i=1,2,…,k, each term of which has variance dii.
Figure 4 plots the values of Sk for k=1,2,..,J, for the solar units separately, the wind units
separately, and the combination of wind and solar units. For a given k, the value of Sk is largest
for all of the solar units. Next largest value of Sk is for the wind units alone. The combination of
wind and solar units has the smallest value of Sk for a given value of k.
Each plot also contains the values of Sk for the hypothetical case that the hourly capacity
factor at each of the N locations is independently distributed of the hourly capacity factor at all
other locations and each location has the same variance of the hourly capacity factor. For each
18

generation technology, these values are straight lines using the same line-type as the actual values
of Sk from the origin to the point (N,N), where N is the number of locations with that technology.
For example, for the case of just the solar units, this is the dotted line in Figure 4 from (0,0) to
(13,13).
The results in Figure 4 demonstrate substantial differences between the case of independent
hourly capacity factors with the same variance at all locations and the actual covariance matrix of
hourly capacity factors across locations for: (1) solar locations, (2) wind locations, and (3) the
combination of wind and solar locations. These results show that a single common factor is
responsible for more than 80% of the hourly variation in the 13 solar generation units and more
than 60% of the hourly variation in the 40 wind units. Even for the case of the 53 wind and solar
units, one factor is responsible for more than 50% of the hourly variation.
[Insert Figure 4 Here]
[Insert Figure 5 Here]
Figure 5 presents the same calculation for Rh, the vector of unit-specific revenues per MW
of capacity. The graph of the Sk for the hypothetical case of independent elements of Rh with the
same variance is also presented for each of the three sets of generation locations. The actual Sk
function rises at least as fast as it does for the vector of hourly capacity factors. The first factor
accounts for more than 80% of hourly variation in the revenues earned by the 13 solar units. The
first factor accounts for more than 70% of the hourly variation in the revenues earned by the 40
wind units. For the 53 wind and solar units, almost 60 percent of the hourly variation in revenues
is accounted for by the first factor.
The results of applying the spectral decomposition theorem to the covariance matrices of
Fh and Rh suggests that because of the high degree of contemporaneous correlation between the

19

elements of each of these vectors, there are likely to be modest reductions in the standard deviation
in the aggregate of output of wind and solar units and more modest reductions in the standard
deviation in the total revenues for wind and solar units from optimizing where these units are
located within the state. Virtually all of the area in Figures 4 and 5 above the Sk lines that assume
uncorrelated elements of Fh and Rh with identical variance is below the actual Sk curve for that
combination of generation locations. Nevertheless, as we demonstrate in the next section, even
with this potential for modest gains (relative to the uncorrelated and same variance for all locations
case) from optimizing the portfolio of wind and solar units, significant increases in the average
hourly output of renewable energy providers are possible without increasing the variability in
hourly output by optimizing the locations and sizes of these generation units.
The magnitudes of the pairwise spatial correlations in the hourly capacity factors at 53
wind and solar locations in California are significantly larger in absolute value than those
computed by Roques, Hiroux and Saguan (2010) for the country-level hourly wind capacity factors
for Spain, Germany, Austria, Denmark and France. These capacity factors were computed using
2006 and 2007 hourly wind output data for each country normalized by the total amount of
installed capacity in each country. With the exception of Austria and Germany, which have a
pairwise correlation in their hourly wind outputs of 0.362, and France and Germany, which have
a pairwise correlation in their hourly wind outputs of 0.147, none of the eight remaining pairwise
correlations in hourly wind output is above 0.062 in absolute value.
The results in Figures 4 and 5 suggest that the use of country-wide aggregate hourly wind
output may mask a higher contemporaneous correlation between nearby locations in the adjacent
countries and which implies greater reliability benefits from diversification than is actually
possible.

20

5. Computation of Efficient Frontier for Wind and Solar Output and Revenues
This section describes the computation of the mean-standard deviation of output and
revenue efficient frontiers for wind investments, solar investments, and combined wind and solar
investments. Each point along the efficient frontier computes the capacity shares for each existing
wind and solar location that minimize the standard deviation of hourly output or hourly revenues
subject to achieving a given level of expected hourly output or expected hourly revenues. This
section also describes the computation of the maximum output risk-adjusted portfolio and the
maximum revenue risk-adjusted portfolio and two measures of location-specific non-diversifiable
wind and solar risk.
In terms of the notation from Section 3, each point on the hourly output efficient frontier
is the solution to the following optimization problem in the J-dimensional vector w, for a given
value C,
, ,…,

where

∑

∑

is the estimate of

∑

subject to

and ̂ is the estimate of

̂ and 1

∑

(9)

based on the sample values of Fh and

J is equal to the number of solar locations, the number of wind locations, or the number of
combined wind and solar locations. If H is the set of hours of data that forms our sample, then
is the (j,k) element of Ω and ̂ is the jth element of ̂ , where
∑

∈

̂

̂ ′ and ̂

∑

∈

(10)

and card(H) is equal to the number of elements in the set H. This problem can be solved using
standard quadratic programming methods. Solving the problem for each value of C from the
minimum element of ̂ to the maximum element of ̂ yields the set of mean and standard deviation
pairs along the efficient frontier.

21

Specifically, if

∗

for j=1,2,…,J is the solution to this optimization problem for a given

value of C, then the point on the efficient frontier corresponding this value of C is equal to the
mean-standard deviation pair:
(∑

∗

̂ , ∑

∗

∑

∗

/

(11)

).

The actual capacity-weighted hourly mean output and standard deviation of hourly output is
plotted on the same diagram as the mean-standard deviation efficient frontier to illustrate how far
this portfolio is from the efficient frontier. The actual capacity-weighted share point is equal to
the portfolio mean-standard deviation pair:
̂ , ∑

(∑
where the

/

∑

(12)

),

(j=1,2,…,J) are the actual installed capacity weighted shares defined in Section 3.

I compute three efficient frontiers which involve different dimensions for the vector Fh.
The first involves just the solar units, so that J = 13. The second involves just the wind units, so
that J = 40. The third involves both wind and solar units, so that J = 53. In solving for the efficient
frontier with both wind and solar units, the constraint is imposed that the overall capacity share of
solar units must equal the actual capacity share of solar units. Suppose that the first 13 units are
solar units, so this constraint becomes

. This implies that the efficient frontier

∑

for the combination of wind and solar units is the solution to:
, ,…,

subject to

∑

∑
∑

̂ , 1

(13)

∑
,

∑

.

This efficient frontier minimizes the standard deviation of the portfolio-level hourly capacity factor
subject to achieving a given expected hourly capacity factor and maintaining the same total
capacity shares for wind and solar capacity as actually exists.
22

Two sets of hours, H, are used to compute the estimates of μ and Ω. The first uses all hours
of the day and all days of the sample, so that card(H) is equal to 8760 = 24 hours x 365 days. The
second computes efficient frontiers for groups of hours of the day to quantify how far the actual
portfolio is from the efficient frontier for different groups of hours of the day. For this calculation,
hours of the day are separated into four groups, hours 1-6, 7-12, 13-18, and 19-24, so that in this
case, card(H) = 365 x 4 = 1460.
For each efficient frontier, I also compute the risk-adjusted maximum (RA-Max) output
portfolio for that frontier. This is the point on the wind and solar efficient frontier that has the
largest value of the ratio of the expected hourly output divided by the standard deviation of the
hourly output. Let

∗

for j=1,2,…,J equal the set of portfolio weights that solve this problem

and , the value C for these portfolio weights. The RA-Max expected hourly output portfolio is
equal to:
∗

∑
∑

where

∑

∗

∗

/

(14)

,

is the value of C that yields the largest value of this ratio.
Computing the efficient frontier for expected hourly revenues and the standard deviation

of hourly revenues follows the exact same process but with the vector Fh replaced by the vector
Rh. Each point on the hourly revenues efficient frontier is the solution to the following optimization
problem in the J-dimensional vector w, for a given value D,
, ,…,

where

∑

is the estimate of

∑
and

subject to
is the estimate of

each of the sets of hours, H, defined above

∑

and 1

23

(15)

based on the sample values of Rh. For

is the (j,k) element of Γ and

, where

∑

is the jth element of

∑

∑

′ and

∈

Increasing the value of D from the minimum element of

.

∈

(16)

to the maximum element of , and

solving the problem for each value of D, yields the mean and standard deviation pairs along the
efficient frontier.
Points along the efficient frontier take the form
(∑

∗

, ∑

∗

∑

∗

/

).

(17)

We also plot the actual capacity-weighted expected hourly revenues per MW of capacity and
standard deviation of hourly revenues per MW of capacity on the same diagram as the efficient
mean-standard deviation frontier to demonstrate how far the actual portfolio of wind and solar
resources is from this efficient frontier. The actual capacity-weighted share point is equal to the
portfolio mean-standard deviation pair:
, ∑

(∑
where the

/

∑

),

(18)

(j=1,2,…,J) are the actual installed capacity shares defined in Section 3. Similar

to the case of the hourly output efficient frontier, for the combined wind and solar hourly revenues
efficient frontier the constraint that the efficient capacity share of solar resources must equal the
actual capacity shares of solar resources is imposed.
The same two sets of hours that are used to compute the efficient frontiers for hourly output
are used to compute the estimates of λ and Γ. The RA-Max expected hourly revenue portfolio is
equal to:
∗

∑
∑

where

∑

∗

∗

/

,

is the value of D that yields the largest value of this ratio.

24

(19)

Following the logic of the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM), the actual capacity-shareweighted portfolio and the risk-adjusted maximum expected hourly output portfolio can be used
to compute measures of the non-diversifiable hourly output risk associated with each wind and
solar location in the California ISO control area. These measures of risk can be computed using
the following linear regression:
fjh = αj + βjfmkt,h + εjh

(20)

where fmkt,h is the weighted average of location-specific capacity factors that is computed as either
the actual capacity share weighted average (
weighted average (

,

∑

∗

).

) or as the RA-Max share

∑

,

The coefficient βj is the measure of the non-

diversifiable risk associated with wind and solar production at location j. It measures the
sensitivity of movements in fjh to movements in fmkt,h, the hourly weighted average capacity factor
across all wind and solar locations.
A similar non-diversifiable wind and solar risk measure can be derived for the hourly
revenue per MW of capacity from the linear regression
rjh = αj + βjrmkt,h + εjh

(21)

where rmkt,h is the weighted average of location-specific revenues per MW that is computed as
either the actual capacity share weighted average (
weighted average (

,

∑

∗

).

,

∑

) or as the RA-Max share

The coefficient βj is the measure of the non-

diversifiable risk associated with hourly wind and solar revenues at location j. It measures the
sensitivity of movements in hourly revenues per MW of capacity at location j, rjh, to movements
in the hourly weighted average of revenues per MW of capacity across all wind and solar locations.

25

6. Hourly Output and Hourly Revenue Efficient Frontiers
This section presents the results of computing the hourly output-per-unit-of-capacity and
hourly-revenues-per-unit-of-capacity efficient frontiers. For each efficient frontier, the riskadjusted maximum expected hourly output or expected hourly revenues portfolio is computed.
The location-specific measures of non-diversifiable risk are computed for both the actual capacityweighted-share output and revenue portfolios and the RA-Max expected-hourly-output or RAMax expected hourly-revenues-portfolios.
[Insert Figure 6 Here]
[Insert Figure 7 Here]
Figure 6 plots the annual hourly output per MW of capacity efficient frontier for solar units
alone, wind units alone, and the combination of wind and solar units. This efficient frontier
computes the estimates of μ and Ω using the set H that contains all hours of the day and all days
in the sample period. The actual capacity share-weighted portfolio is plotted with a “+” and the
RA-Max expected hourly output maximizing portfolio is plotted with an “o”.
Several results emerge from this figure. First, the efficient frontier composed of only solar
generation units lies to the right of the efficient portfolio of only wind units, suggesting that on an
annual hourly basis, almost any efficient portfolio of only wind units dominates any efficient
portfolio of only solar units. Second, the addition of solar units to a wind-only efficient portfolio
only slightly increases the expected hourly output per MW of capacity for the same standard
deviation of hourly output per MW of capacity. Third, a 48 percent increase in the expected hourly
output per MW of capacity of the actual portfolio of wind and solar units (denoted by “+” in the
figure) can be obtained without increasing the annual hourly variability in renewable output per
MW by optimizing the capacity shares of individual wind and solar locations subject to the

26

constraint that the aggregate wind and solar capacity shares are equal to the actual total wind and
solar capacity shares. The risk-adjusted expected hourly output per MW of capacity maximizing
portfolio selects a 15 percent lower expected hourly output per MW of capacity but a 50% lower
standard deviation of the hourly expected output per MW of capacity relative to the actual
capacity-weighted-share portfolio.
Figure 7 presents efficient frontiers for solar, wind and the combined wind and solar
resource locations for four 6-hour periods of the day. In this case, the estimates of μ and Ω are
computed separately for four groups of hours of the day (1-6, 7-12, 13-18, and 19-24). For all of
these groups of hours of the day, the actual portfolio of wind and solar units is significantly to the
right of the efficient frontier. Moreover, this distance gets even greater during the hours of the
day when there is significant wind and solar output.

During hours 13-18, the benefits of

combining wind and solar resources yields the greatest hourly output risk reductions relative to the
efficient portfolios that contain only one of these generation technologies. This is confirmed by
the larger horizontal distance between the wind only efficient frontier and the wind and solar
efficient frontier for these hours.
During the daylight hours (7-12 and 13-18), the risk-adjusted output maximizing portfolio
yields a lower expected hourly output per MW of capacity and a smaller standard deviation of
hourly output per MW of capacity.

During the night-time hours, the risk-adjusted output

maximizing portfolio selects a higher expected hourly output per MW and a higher standard
deviation of hourly output per MW of capacity.

This result is consistent with the within-day

pattern of wind output in the California ISO control area. Typically, the highest hourly capacity
factors occur during the night-time hours.
[Insert Figure 8 Here]

27

[Insert Figure 9 Here]
Figure 8 computes the efficient frontier for hourly revenues per MW of capacity for all
hours of the year. The set of hours used to estimate λ and Γ is composed of all hours of the day
and all days of the sample period. The actual portfolio of wind and solar generation units yields
higher expected revenues per MW of capacity than an efficient portfolio with the same hourly
revenue risk composed of only solar units. The relative distance between the actual portfolio and
portfolios on the efficient frontier for hourly revenue is smaller than is the case for hourly output.
One explanation for this result is the positive correlation between hourly prices at solar facility
locations and the hourly output at these locations shown in Table 3. For same amount of revenue
risk per MW as the actual-capacity-weighted portfolio, moving to the efficient frontier increases
expected hourly revenues per MW of capacity by 26 percent. Although these are sizeable percent
changes, they are not as large in absolute value as the percent change for the hourly output per
MW.
A bootstrap procedure can be used to compute the standard error of the difference between
the 48 percent increase in the average hourly output to move to the output efficient frontier
described earlier to the 26 percent increase in the average hourly revenue to move to the revenue
efficient frontier. Although the actual portfolio of wind and solar generation units remains the
same, the closest portfolio on each efficient frontier in terms of increasing the annual average value
of output or revenue depends on the estimated values of the mean and variance of Fh and Rh. To
compute this standard error, daily realizations of these two vectors are re-sampled to construct a
bootstrap resample of the 8760 values of Fh and Rh. Estimates of the mean and variance of Fh and
Rh are computed and the minimum distance to each efficient frontier is computed. The difference
between the percentage change in the annual average hourly output to reach the efficient frontier

28

and the percentage change in the average hourly revenue to reach the efficient frontier is computed
for each resample. This process is repeated B times and the standard deviation of these re-samples
is a consistent estimate of the standard error of the difference. Dividing the observed difference,
(48-26) by this standard error estimate yields at Z-statistic of 2.97 which is larger than the 0.01
percentile of a N(0,1) random variable, which implies rejection of the size 0.01 test of the null
hypothesis that the two percentage changes are equal.
Figure 9 shows the hourly revenue per MW of capacity efficient frontiers for the four 6hour periods of the day for solar locations, wind locations, and the combined wind and solar
locations.

In this case, the estimates of λ and Γ are computed using the 4 sets of hours, Hj,

described above. These results for hourly revenue per MW of capacity are broadly similar to the
results for the hourly output per MW of capacity. They demonstrate that for all hours of the day,
the actual portfolio of wind and solar units is significantly to the right of the efficient frontier for
that hour. The greatest revenue diversification benefits from combining wind and solar generation
units occurs during the 13-18 hours of the day.
One question that immediately arises from the results in Figures 6 to 9 is: How do the
capacity shares on the hourly-output-per-MW-of-capacity and hourly-revenue-per-MW-ofcapacity efficient frontiers compare to the actual capacity shares?

Figure 10 addresses this

question for the hourly output per MW capacity frontier. The solid line in Figure 10 orders the
wind and solar energy locations by the values of

∗

, j=1,2,…,J, the risk-adjusted expected-

hourly-output-maximizing portfolio shares. The “squares” are the values of the actual capacity
shares in the same order.

The most glaring difference between the two sets of weights is the

relatively small number of non-zero values for the

∗

relative to the

, which are non-zero

for all j=1,2,…,J. This figure also plots the weights associated with the point on the efficient
29

frontier that has the same annual standard deviation of hourly output as the actual capacity shareweighted portfolio but with a higher annual average capacity factor. These weights, in the same
order of locations as the

∗

, are denoted by “+” in the figure. The final series, denoted by “o”

in the figure, plots the weights associated with the point on the efficient frontier that has the same
annual average hourly output as the actual capacity share-weighted portfolio, but a lower standard
deviation of hourly output. Both these portfolios on the efficient frontier have very few non-zero
weights. No more than 15 of the 53 locations have non-zero weights in all of these portfolios.
For both the “+” and “o” weights, the locations that are non-zero are very similar in relative
magnitude to the RA-Max portfolio.
[Insert Figure 10 Here]
[Insert Figure 11 Here]
Figure 11 repeats the calculations in Figure 10 for the case of the hourly revenues per
MW of capacity. The solid line in Figure 11 orders the wind and solar energy locations by the
values of

∗

, j=1,2,…,J, the RA-Max expected hourly revenue per MW of capacity portfolio

shares. The “squares” are the values of the actual capacity shares in the same order. Again, the
most glaring difference between the two sets of weights is the relatively small number of non-zero
values for the

∗

relative to the

, which are all non-zero.

This figure also plots the

weights associated with the point on the efficient frontier that has the same annual standard
deviation of the hourly revenue per MW as the actual capacity share-weighted portfolio but a
higher annual average hourly revenue per MW. These weights, in the same order of locations as
the

∗

, are denoted by “+” in the figure. The final series, denoted by “o” in the figure, plots

the weights associated with the point on the efficient frontier that has the same annual average
hourly revenue per MW as the actual capacity share-weighted portfolio, but a lower annual
30

standard deviation of hourly revenue per MW.

Both these portfolios have very few non-zero

weights and the ones that are non-zero are very similar in relative magnitude to the RA-Max
portfolio.
[Insert Figure 12 Here]
Figure 12 compares the RA-Max hourly output and RA-Max hourly revenue per MW
portfolio weights. The solid line orders the weights according to the RA-Max mean hourly output
weights. The RA-Max mean hourly revenue weights in the same order of locations are denoted
by “o”. With five exceptions, the same wind and solar locations have non-zero weights for both
sets of weights. In addition, for the non-zero weights, there appears to be a positive correlation
between the value of the RA-Max hourly output weight and the RA-Max hourly revenue weight.
To determine whether the actual capacity shares and the three sets of portfolio weights
shown in Figures 10 and 12 are statistically different, I perform the following hypothesis test:
:
where

for i=1,2,…,53 versus

:

,

(22)

is the weight for wind or solar location i in efficient portfolio M, where M is either the

(1) RA-Max portfolio, (2) the efficient portfolio with same mean but lower standard deviation (LS)
than the actual portfolio, or (3) the efficient portfolio with the same standard deviation but higher
mean (HM) than the actual portfolio. Because the portfolio weights for each of these efficient
portfolios depends on the estimates of the mean and covariance matrix of Fh or Rh, I use a movingblocks bootstrap to compute an estimate of the covariance matrix of the vector estimated portfolio
weights for the RA-Max, LS and HM portfolios. For each of the b=1,2,…,B bootstrap resamples
of the estimated portfolio weights, I sample blocks of 7 consecutive days from the original sample
with replacement to construct a new 365 values of Fh or Rh. Blocks of days of data on Fh and Rh

31

are resampled to account for the fact that the values of Fh or Rh are correlated across days.
However, this correlation dies out as the time between observations increases.
The values of each set of efficient frontier portfolio weights are computed based on the
estimates of the mean and covariance matrix of Fh or Rh using the resampled annual time series of
values. The sample covariance matrix of the B resampled portfolio weight vectors is the moving
blocks bootstrap covariance matrix estimate, Var(WM), that is used construct the test statistic
,

(23)

where Wact is the 52-dimensional vector of the 52 largest capacity shares for the actual portfolio,
WM is the 52-dimensional vector of capacity shares for these same locations for portfolio M, and
Var(WM) is the moving blocks bootstrap estimate of the covariance matrix of WM. (Note that the
test statistic drops one capacity share because the sum of all capacity shares in all of the portfolios
is equal to one.) This test statistic is asymptotically distributed as a χ2-distribution with 52 degrees
of freedom under the null hypothesis. Table 4 reports the test statistics for the three hypothesis
tests for the hourly output and hourly revenue efficient frontiers. For all cases the null hypothesis
is overwhelmingly rejected, which implies that the three portfolios on the hourly output and hourly
revenue efficient frontiers all have statistically different portfolio weights from the actual capacity
shares.
[Insert Table 4 Here]
The results in Figures 10 to 12 imply that by concentrating California’s total wind and solar
capacity investments at fewer locations a capacity mix can be achieved that has either a higher
annual average hourly output and a lower annual variability in hourly output or a higher average
hourly revenue and lower annual variability in hourly revenue. Moreover, because of the high
degree of positive correlation between the non-zero weights for the two RA-Max portfolios, it is

32

possible to move closer to both the hourly output and hourly revenue efficient frontiers with a
different capacity mix from the present one.
[Insert Table 5 Here]
[Insert Table 6 Here]
The upper left panel of Figure 13 plots pairs of
energy output risk at location j, using

,

, the estimated market-specific renewable
as the market portfolio and the value

∑

of ̂ , the mean hourly capacity factor associated with location j. The upper right panel repeats
this same plot using

,

∑

∗

as the market portfolio. Both of these figures

also plot two estimates of the analogue of the Security Market Line from the Capital Asset Pricing
Model (CAPM) relating the market-specific output risk at a location j to the expected capacity
factor at location j. The solid line in the figure is the ordinary least squares fit from regressing ̂
on

for all wind and solar locations and the dotted line is the fit using only observations with a

non-zero capacity shares in the RA-Max portfolio on the hourly output efficient frontier. The
bottom two panels of Figure 13 repeats these calculations for the market-specific measures of
renewable energy revenue risk at each location, where the

in the bottom left panel are estimated

using the actual capacity shares to compute the market portfolio revenue per MW of capacity and
the

in the bottom right panel are estimated using the RA-Max portfolio weights on the hourly

revenue efficient frontier to compute the market portfolio.
[Insert Figure 13 Here]
Several conclusions emerge from this figure. First, across all four panels, the fitted lines
relating expected output and expected revenues to their respective market-specific risk measures
using only wind and solar resource locations with non-zero shares in the RA-Max portfolios yield
uniformly higher expected output and expected revenue for the same value of market-specific risk
33

than the fitted lines that use all wind and solar resource locations. This result clarifies why many
of the actual wind and solar locations did not receive a positive weight on the output or revenue
efficient frontiers. A higher expected hourly capacity factor or a higher expected revenue per MW
of capacity can be obtained for the market-specific risk measure value at locations with zero
weights in the RA-Max portfolio by taking a weighted average of locations with non-zero weights
in the RA-Max portfolio.
Second, using the RA-Max output or revenue portfolio as the market portfolio implies a
much greater range of values of market-specific risk measures across locations. The range of
estimated values of the market-specific measure is roughly double the range of values for the case
in which actual portfolio shares are used to compute the market portfolio. This occurs because
many actual wind and solar resources locations have zero weights in the efficient RA-Max output
and revenue portfolios.
Third, the fit of pairs of expected output and market-specific risk and pairs of expected
revenue and market-specific risk measures to the analogue to the Security Market Line are far
superior for market-specific risk measures computed using the RA-Max portfolio as the market
portfolio. Consistent with our earlier result that the actual portfolio is relatively closer to the hourly
revenue efficient frontier than to the hourly output efficient frontier, the fit of the expected revenue
and market-specific risk line, using only locations with non-zero weights in the RA-Max revenue
portfolio, is far better than the fit of the expected output and market-specific risk line which uses
only locations with non-zero weights in the RA-Max output portfolio.
6.1. Qualifications and Caveats with Counterfactual Results
The empirical results presented in this section demonstrate the possibility of increasing the
annual average hourly output of wind and solar resources in the California ISO control area without

34

increasing the annual standard deviation of this hourly output by changing the locational capacity
shares of the state’s wind and solar generation capacity. It is important to emphasize what is being
assumed in constructing the counterfactual capacity investments implied by these efficient
frontiers. Each point along the efficient frontier assumes that the mean and covariance matrix of
Fh would be same regardless of how much generation capacity at each location is constructed,
subject to the constraint that the total amount of wind and solar capacity built in California is equal
to the aggregate amount that has actually been built.
Clearly, one explanation for higher mean capacity factors and lower standard deviation of
capacity factors at some locations in the California ISO control area is the vintage of the technology
installed at that location. However, the sample correlation between the age of the generation units
at each wind location and the average annual capacity factor at that location does allow rejection
of the 0.05 test of the null hypothesis of zero correlation. This could be explained by the fact that
although wind capacity was installed at locations with the best wind resources first, the efficiency
of the turbines installed over time increased fast enough to counteract this effect.
An alternative approach to this analysis would be to use wind speed data at each location
and assume standardized wind energy to electricity conversion factors to compute an estimated
hourly capacity factor at each location. Green and Vasilakos (2010) take this approach in their
study of the impact of large amounts of wind generation on the behavior of hourly prices in the
Great Britain electricity market in 2020. The strength of their approach is that a standardized
technology for converting wind energy to electricity can be applied across all wind resource
locations. However, this approach does not account for how the generation technology actually
performs at each wind resource location. Using the actual hourly wind energy production at each
wind resource location, addresses this concern. A topic for future research is to compare the hourly

35

output of a wind generation unit at each location estimated using hourly wind speed measurements
to the actual hourly output of the wind units at that location and the hourly solar output at each
location estimating using hourly solar irradiance data to the actual hourly output of the solar units
at that location.
7. Implications for Wholesale Market Design with Significant Wind and Solar Goals
The empirical results presented in the previous section demonstrate the reliability and
operating cost benefits of accounting for the impact on the annual average hourly output and annual
variability in the hourly output of renewable energy in making wind and solar capacity investment
decisions. Locating wind and solar facilities to maximize the increase in the annual average hourly
output for a given increase in the annual standard deviation in hourly output can yield significant
reliability benefits and operating cost savings.
The results from Section 6 argue in favor of taking these reliability and operating reserves
cost savings into account in making wind and solar generation investment decisions. By doing so,
investments in wind or solar generation capacity could provide the largest possible increase in
average hourly renewable energy output while limiting the aggregate reliability consequences of
this investment. Conversely, investments made in this manner would minimize increases in the
annual variability of hourly wind and solar output for a given increase in the average hourly energy
output from these generation units.
The difference between the relative distance to the hourly revenue frontier versus the
hourly output frontier for the actual portfolio of wind and solar investments provides a rough
measure of the extent to which failing to account for these reliability and operating cost savings
distorts wind and solar location decisions. If one is willing to assume that the cost per megawatt
of constructing a wind or solar generation unit is roughly the same for all existing locations in

36

California, then an expected profit-maximizing investor in wind or solar generation capacity in
California will choose the location that yields the highest expected revenues, because the cost of
constructing and operating the unit is roughly the same at all locations. As the analyses in the
previous section have demonstrated, this choice will likely increase the annual standard deviation
in the hourly output of all wind and solar units in the California ISO control area because the
supplier does not take into consideration the impact of its investment decision on overall grid
reliability and only considers the expected profits this individual investment will earn. If prices at
that location are sufficiently high and/or positively correlated with renewable energy output at that
location, the expected profit-maximizing location decision may not even increase the annual
average hourly output of wind and solar energy.
This logic is consistent with the results presented earlier that the closest portfolio on hourly
revenue efficient frontier with the same annual variability in hourly revenues as the actual portfolio
of wind and solar generation investments has a 26 percent higher annual average hourly revenue,
whereas the closest portfolio on the hourly output frontier with the same annual variability in
hourly output as the actual portfolio has a 48 percent higher annual average hourly output. As
shown in Section 6, the annual average hourly output percent increase is statistically significantly
larger than the annual average hourly revenue increase. The difference in these estimates points
towards significant reliability improvements and operating reserves cost savings from accounting
for these reliability benefits in wind and solar capacity location decisions.
To provide quantitative evidence in favor of this claim, the left panel of Figure 14 reports
a histogram of values of following variable for each location. Starting from the actual portfolio of
wind and solar generation capacity in California, compute the percentage increase in the annual
average hourly output of all wind and solar units associated with adding one more 1 MW of wind

37

(if it is a wind location) or solar capacity (if it is a solar location) at wind or solar location k. Call
this variable %ΔE(Q)/ΔMW(k). For each location compute the percentage increase in the annual
standard deviation of hourly output of all wind and solar units associated with adding one more 1
MW of wind or solar capacity at each wind or solar location k. Call this variable %Δσ(Q)/ΔMW(k).
Compute

the

ratio

of

[%ΔE(Q)/ΔMW(k)]/[%Δσ(Q)/ΔMW(k)]

and

call

this

variable

%ΔE(Q)/%Δσ(Q)(k). This variable measures the percentage increase in the annual average hourly
renewable output for a one unit increase in the annual standard deviation of hourly renewable
output that results from a 1 MW investment at location k.

Following this same procedure for

hourly revenue produces the variable %ΔE(R)/%Δσ(R)(k), the percentage increase in the annual
average hourly wind and solar revenue for a one unit increase in the annual standard deviation of
hourly wind and solar revenue associated with a 1 MW investment at location k. The histogram
of values of %ΔE(R)/%Δσ(R)(k) are plotted in the right panel of Figure 14.
[Insert Figure 14 Here]
The histogram of values of %ΔE(Q)/%Δσ(Q)(k) demonstrate that substantial reliability and
cost savings that are possible from a policy that sites wind and solar facilities based on the value
of %ΔE(Q)/%Δσ(Q)(k) at that location.

There are renewable locations with values of

%ΔE(Q)/%Δσ(Q)(k) that are ten times larger than the values at the majority of locations. There
are a significant number of locations where the value of %ΔE(Q)/%Δσ(Q)(k) is 5 times larger than
the majority of values, and even a small number of locations where an additional MW of renewable
capacity would both increase the annual average hourly output and reduce the annual standard
deviation of hourly output, which yields a negative value of %ΔE(Q)/%Δσ(Q)(k).

The

heterogeneity in values of %ΔE(R)/%Δσ(R)(k) is substantially less than the heterogeneity in values
of %ΔE(Q)/%Δσ(Q)(k). The values of %ΔE(Q)/%Δσ(Q)(k) range from slightly more than -5 to

38

less than 12, whereas the values of %ΔE(R)/%Δσ(R)(k) range from slightly more than 0.5 to 2.5,
which is consistent with the logic that profit-maximizing entry decisions focus on maximizing
expected revenues.
[Insert Figure 15 Here]
[Insert Figure 16 Here]
Figure 15 repeats these calculations for just wind generation capacity. Figure 16 repeats
them for just the solar generation capacity. The major result to emerge from these figures is that
accounting for the reliability and cost savings associated with wind investments and combinations
of wind and solar investments is likely to yield greater operating cost savings than for solar
investments alone. The heterogeneity in the values of %ΔE(Q)/%Δσ(Q)(k) for the wind-only
portfolio is substantially greater than for solar-only portfolio. This result is consistent with the
results presented in Figure 4 and 5 showing much greater contemporaneous correlation in both
hourly output and hourly revenues across solar locations than wind locations.
7.1. Methods for Incorporating Reliability and Costs Benefits
These results emphasize that a major challenge in wholesale electricity markets with
significant wind and solar energy goals is to provide the appropriate incentives for wind and solar
project developers to locate and size these investments to maximize system-wide wind and solar
output subject to a given increase in the standard deviation in system-wide hourly wind and solar
output. By providing incentives for wind and solar project developers to internalize the impact
their location decisions impose on the cost of managing real-time system balance, a lower systemwide cost of achieving a given wind and solar energy production goal can be achieved.
There are a number of potential approaches to achieving this goal. A first step is for control
areas to compile and make publicly available information similar to what is reported in the

39

previous section. Values for %ΔE(Q)/%Δσ(Q)(k) at each wind or solar resource location would
provide valuable information to the control area operator, new wind and solar capacity investors,
and transmission planners on the reliability implications of different new capacity investment
decisions, because they would know which locations result in the greatest risk-adjusted increase
in the annual average hourly output of renewable energy.
The aggregate wind and solar energy risk associated with the location and scale of
investments in these technologies could be made a factor in the transmission planning process to
support wind and solar energy capacity expansion in any control area. Specifically, keeping all
other factors the same, expanding transmission capacity into wind and solar resource regions with
the largest values of %ΔE(Q)/%Δσ(Q)(k) would yield significant savings in real-time system
operating costs.
The next step could be to eliminate any implicit support mechanisms for renewable
investments that unnecessarily increase the incentive of wind and solar developers to build new
capacity at locations that increase the aggregate volatility of wind and solar energy production.
Long-term contracts or feed-in-tariffs (FITs) for wind and solar resources that pay a fixed per
MWh price for all of the energy produced each hour of the year are prime example of the sort of
financing scheme that provides strong incentives to enhance, rather than reduce, hourly energy
output volatility from wind and solar resources. Transitioning wind and solar forward contracting
to the standard fixed-price and fixed-quantity contract used to finance dispatchable generation
units would reduce this incentive to enhance wind and solar output volatility.
In the multi-settlement markets that exist throughout the United States, making wind and
solar generation unit owners liable for the hourly imbalance charges associated with deviations
between the amount of energy they sell in the day-ahead market and the amount of energy the units

40

actually produce in real-time would increase the likelihood that new wind and solar investments
are made with some consideration for the aggregate wind and solar output volatility associated
with these investments.
A final mechanism could be to charge differential grid interconnection fees inversely
related to the value of %ΔE(Q)/%Δσ(Q)(k) to provide the price signals necessary to cause investors
in new renewable generation capacity to take into account the increased system operating costs
associated with their location decisions. However, given the substantial complexity associated with
the determining the appropriate interconnection fees, this kind of policy must be implemented with
great care.
8. Conclusions
Because a growing number of jurisdictions have set ambitious renewable energy goals,
understanding how the aggregate output risk of intermittent wind and solar resources scale with
the location and magnitude of these capacity investments is increasingly important to maintaining
a reliable supply of electricity. The mean and standard deviation efficient frontiers for the hourly
output and hourly revenues derived above are important tools for determining the magnitude of
the level versus variability trade-offs in total wind and solar output.
Using hourly output data from the California ISO control area for a one-year time period,
this paper computed the hourly output and hourly revenue efficient frontier for all wind and solar
resource locations in the California ISO control area.

Points along the efficient frontier are

compared to the actual capacity-weighted portfolio of wind and solar resources in California. For
both mean/standard deviation efficient frontiers, economically meaningful differences between
portfolios on the efficient frontier and the actual wind and solar capacity mix are found.

The

relative difference was particularly large for the hourly wind and solar output frontier, with a 48

41

percent increase in the expected hourly output of wind and solar energy possible without increasing
the standard deviation of the total renewable hourly output beyond its actual level. For the hourly
revenues efficient frontier, a 26 percent increase in mean hourly total renewable revenues was
found to be possible without increasing the standard deviation of hourly revenues beyond its
current level. These result were shown to be consistent with expected profit-maximizing behavior
by solar and wind capacity investors under the current renewables interconnection policies.
Most of the hourly output and hourly revenue risk-reducing benefits of optimal wind and
solar generation capacity location decisions in California can be captured by employing a mix of
wind resources, with the addition of solar resources only slightly increasing the set of feasible
portfolio mean and standard deviation combinations. The diversification benefit from including
solar generation units in the portfolio of renewable resources is particularly modest for the hourly
revenue efficient frontier.
The risk-adjusted maximum expected hourly output portfolio on the efficient hourly output
frontier and the risk-adjusted maximum expected hourly revenue maximizing portfolio on the
efficient hourly revenue frontier were computed.

In both cases, weights for these portfolios

focused on a small number of wind and solar locations, with the vast majority of existing locations
having a zero portfolio weight. The market-specific risk measures for the risk-adjusted maximum
output portfolio and the risk-adjusted maximum revenue portfolio found approximately linear
relationships between the actual expected output at a location and the market-specific risk output
measure at that location and actual expected revenue at a location and the market-specific revenue
risk measure at that location, particularly for the locations with non-zero portfolio weights in riskadjusted maximum output and revenue portfolios.

42

References
Awerbuch, Shimon, and Berger, Martin (2003) “Applying portfolio theory to EU electricity
planning and policy-making,” IEA/EET Working paper No. EET/2003/03, IEA/OECD,
Paris.
Bar-Lev, Dan and Katz, Steven (1976) “A portfolio approach to fossil fuel procurement in the
electricity utility industry,” Journal of Finance, 31(3), 933-947.
Bazilian, Morgan and Roques, Fabien (editors) (2008) Analytical methods for energy diversity and
security—portfolio optimization in the energy sector: a tribute to the work of Dr. Shimon
Awerbuch, Elsevier, Oxford/Amsterdam.
Jha, Akshaya, and Wolak, Frank A. (2013) “Testing for Market Efficiency with Transactions
Costs: An Application to Financial Trading in Wholesale Electricity Markets,” available
from http://www.stanford.edu/~wolak.
Bhattacharya, Anindya and Kojima, Satoshi (2012) “Power sector investment risk and renewable
energy: A Japanese case study using portfolio risk optimization method,” Energy Policy,
40, 69-80.
Delarue, Erik; Jonghe, Cedric; Belmans, Ronnie; and D’haeseleer, William (2011) “Applying
portfolio theory to the electricity sector: Energy versus power,” Energy Economics, 33,
12-23.
Garnier, Ernesto and Madlener, Reinhard (2016) “The Influence of Regime Risks on Investments
on Innovative Energy Technology,” The Energy Journal, this issue. (please insert correct
page numbers).
Green, Richard and Vasilakos, Nicholas (2010) “Market behavior with large amounts of
intermittent generation,” Energy Policy, 38, 3211-3220.
Madlener, Reinhard (2012) “Portfolio Optimization of Power Generation,” in Zheng, Qipeng P.;
Rebennack, Steffen; Pardalos, Panos M.; Pereira, Mario V.F.; and Iliadis, Nikos A.
(editors) Handbook of CO2 in Power Systems, Springer, Berlin/New York, 275-296.
Roques, Fabian; Newbery, David M.; and Nuttal, William J. (2008) “ Fuel mix diversification
incentives in liberalized electricity markets: A Mean-Variance Portfolio theory approach,”
Energy Economics, 30, 1831-1849.
Roques, Fabian; Hiroux, Celine; and Saguan, Marcelo (2010) “Optimal wind power deployment
in Europe—A portfolio approach,” Energy Policy, 38, 3245-3256.
White, Halbert (1980) “Using Least Squares to Approximate Unknown Regression Functions,”
International Economic Review, vol. 21, no. 1, 149-170.
Westner, Günther, and Madlener, Reinhard (2010) “The benefit of regional diversification of
cogeneration investments in Europe: A mean-variance portfolio analysis,” Energy Policy,
38, 7911-7920.
43

Westner, Gṻnther, Madlener, Reinhard (2011) Development of cogeneration in Germany: A
mean-variance portfolio analysis of individual technology’s prospects in view of the new
regulatory framework,” Energy, 36, 5301-5313.
Yu, Zuwei (2003) “A spatial mean-variance MIP model for energy market risk analysis, Energy
Economics, 25(3), 255-268.

44

Table 1: Total Generation Capacity by Technology
Fuel Type
Wind
Solar
Small Hydro
Large Hydro
Biomass
Geothermal
Nuclear
Gas
Other
Total

Total Capacity (MW)
3,040
499
1,144
7,776
502
1,404
4,550
32,428
4,252
55,595

Table 2: Hourly Output and Hourly Price Coeﬃcient of Variations by Wind Location
Plant ID
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40

Output CV
1.285
1.244
0.950
1.110
1.024
1.530
1.071
1.084
0.979
1.019
1.114
0.930
0.847
1.008
1.246
0.987
1.080
0.986
1.299
1.508
1.390
0.899
0.933
0.976
0.969
1.023
1.615
1.010
1.354
1.379
1.008
1.122
1.299
1.404
2.022
1.084
1.070
0.939
1.164
1.360

Price CV
1.764
1.764
1.766
1.765
1.765
1.382
1.198
1.198
1.198
1.198
1.326
1.325
1.464
1.191
1.191
1.326
1.326
1.242
1.188
1.191
1.191
1.805
1.323
1.323
1.323
1.326
1.190
1.326
1.191
1.192
1.206
1.198
1.198
1.191
1.200
1.690
1.687
1.326
1.319
1.191

Corr(Output,Price)
-0.083
-0.081
-0.100
-0.094
-0.092
-0.090
-0.105
-0.116
-0.106
-0.114
-0.049
-0.047
-0.099
-0.130
-0.114
-0.037
-0.069
-0.016
-0.066
-0.108
-0.094
-0.107
-0.068
-0.064
-0.058
-0.078
-0.120
-0.043
-0.103
-0.097
-0.120
-0.114
-0.098
-0.095
-0.094
-0.076
-0.080
-0.066
-0.114
-0.106

Table 3: Hourly Output and Hourly Price Coeﬃcient of Variations by Solar Location
Plant ID
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

Output CV
1.325
1.404
1.353
1.881
1.288
1.309
6.655
1.512
1.417
1.676
2.136
1.431
1.377

Price CV
1.333
1.317
1.367
1.301
1.303
1.305
1.752
1.193
1.228
1.306
1.300
1.190
1.316

Corr(Output,Price)
0.083
0.126
0.072
0.095
0.116
0.119
0.080
0.098
0.088
0.091
0.126
0.090
0.120

Table 4: Hypothesis Tests that Eﬃcient Frontier Portfolio Weights Equal Actual Capacity
Shares
Portfolio

𝜒2 Statistic

Hourly Output Eﬃcient Portﬁlio Weights
RA-Max
Lower SD
Higher Mean

356
407
961

Hourly Revenue Eﬃcient Portﬁlio Weights
RA-Max
Lower SD
Higher Mean

389
261
639

99% Critical Value from 𝜒252

78.62

Figure 1: Within-Day Hourly Means and Standard Deviations of System Demand and
Wind and Solar Output

3.5

All

#10 4

Renewable

1000
900

3
800
2.5

700
600

MW

2

500
1.5

400
300

1

200
0.5
100
0

0
5

10

15

20

Hour
E(Output)
SD(Output)

5

10

15

20

Hour
E(Output)
SD(Output)

Figure 2: Within-Day Hourly Means and Standard Deviations of Weighted Average RealTime Price and Weighted Average Wind and Solar Real-Time Price

$/MW

All

Renewable

70

70

60

60

50

50

40

40

30

30

20

20

10

10

0

0
5

10

15

20

Hour
E(Price)
SD(Price)

5

10

15

Hour
E(Price)
SD(Price)

20

Figure 3: Hourly Means and 95 Percent Conﬁdence Intervals for Spatial Price Range
All

600

Max - Min Price Difference ($/MW)

500

400

300

200

100

0
5

10

15

20

15

20

Hour

Renewable

Max - Min Price Difference ($/MW)

150

100

50

0
5

10

Hour

Figure 4: Sum of Normalized Eigenvalues of Covariance Matrix of Hourly Location-Speciﬁc
Capacity Factors–Ω

100

90

80

Percent of Explained Variation

70

60

50

40

30

20
Wind + Solar
Wind Only
Solar Only

10

0
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

Number of Principal Components

40

45

50

Figure 5: Sum of Normalized Eigenvalues of Covariance Matrix of Hourly Location-Speciﬁc
Revenues per MW–Γ

100

90

80

Percent of Explained Variation

70

60

50

40

30

20
Wind + Solar
Wind Only
Solar Only

10

0
5

10

15

20

25

30

35

Number of Principal Components

40

45

50

Figure 6: Expected Hourly Output per MW and Standard Deviation of Hourly Output
per MW Eﬃcient Frontier

0.45
0.4

Expected Capacity Factor

0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1

Wind + Solar
Wind Only
Solar Only
Actual Allocation
R.A. Max

0.05
0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

Standard Deviation

0.4

0.5

Figure 7: Expected Hourly Output per MW and Standard Deviation of Hourly Output
per MW Eﬃcient Frontier by Groups of Hours of the Day
Minimium Variance Frontier for Hours 1 to 6

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

Minimium Variance Frontier for Hours 7 to 12

0.7

Expected Capacity Factor

Expected Capacity Factor

0.7

0.4

0.3

0.2
Wind + Solar
Wind Only
Solar Only
Actual Allocation
R.A. - Max

0.1

Wind
Actual Allocation
R.A. - Max

0

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0

0.1

Standard Deviation

Minimium Variance Frontier for Hours 13 to 18

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

Expected Capacity Factor

Expected Capacity Factor

0.7

0.4

0.3

0.2
Wind + Solar
Wind Only
Solar Only
Actual Allocation
R.A. - Max

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Standard Deviation

Minimium Variance Frontier for Hours 19 to 24

0.4

0.3

0.2
Wind + Solar
Wind Only
Solar Only
Actual Allocation
R.A. - Max

0.1

0

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

Standard Deviation

0.4

0.5

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

Standard Deviation

0.4

0.5

Figure 8: Expected Hourly Revenues per MW and Standard Deviation of Hourly Revenues
per MW Eﬃcient Frontier

12

Expected Revenue ($/MW of Capacity)

10

8

6

4

Wind + Solar
Wind Only
Solar Only
Actual Allocation
R.A. Max

2

0
0

5

10

15

20

Standard Deviation

25

30

Figure 9: Expected Hourly Revenues per MW and Standard Deviation of Hourly Revenues
per MW Eﬃcient Frontier by Groups of Hours of the Day
Minimium Variance Frontier for Hours 1 to 6

Minimium Variance Frontier for Hours 7 to 12

25

20

Expected Revenue ($/MW of Capacity)

Expected Revenue ($/MW of Capacity)

25

15

10

5
Wind
Actual Allocation
R.A. - Max

0

20

15

10

Wind + Solar
Wind Only
Solar Only
Actual Allocation
R.A. - Max

5

0
0

10

20

30

40

50

0

10

Standard Deviation

Minimium Variance Frontier for Hours 13 to 18

25

20

Expected Revenue ($/MW of Capacity)

Expected Revenue ($/MW of Capacity)

25

15

10

Wind + Solar
Wind Only
Solar Only
Actual Allocation
R.A. - Max

5

20

30

40

50

Standard Deviation

0

Minimium Variance Frontier for Hours 19 to 24

20

15

10

Wind + Solar
Wind Only
Solar Only
Actual Allocation
R.A. - Max

5

0
0

10

20

30

Standard Deviation

40

50

0

10

20

30

Standard Deviation

40

50

Figure 10: Wind and Solar Hourly Output Portfolio Weights Ordered from Largest to
Smallest RA-Max Portfolio Weights

0.35
R.A. Max
Min Variance
Max Capacity Factor
Actual Allocation

0.3

Share of Total Capacity

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0
0

10

20

30

Location Number

40

50

60

Figure 11: Wind and Solar Hourly Revenue Portfolio Weights Ordered from Largest to
Smallest RA-Max Portfolio Weights

0.3
R.A. Max
Min Variance
Max Ex Revenue
Actual Allocation

Share of Total Capacity

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0
0

10

20

30

Location Number

40

50

60

Figure 12: Comparison RA-Max Output versus RA-Max Revenue Portfolio Weights Ordered by RA-Max Output Weights

0.35
R.A. Max Output
R.A. Max Revenue

0.3

Share of Total Capacity

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0
0

10

20

30

Location Number

40

50

60

Figure 13: Market-Speciﬁc Output Risk and Expected Capacity Factor and Market-Speciﬁc
Revenue Risk and Expected Revenue
Market Portfolio Computed Using R.A. Max Weights

0.5

0.5

0.45

0.45

0.4

0.4

0.35

0.35

Expected Capacity Factor

Expected Capacity Factor

Market Portfolio Computed Using Actual System Capacity Weights

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1

Non-Zero RA Max Weight
Fit (Non-zero R.A. Max Locations)
Fit (All Locations)

0.05

Non-Zero RA Max Weight
Fit (All Locations)
Fit (Non-zero R.A. Max Locations)

0.05

0

0
0

1

2

3

4

0

1

CAPM Market Portfolio Computed Using Actual System Capacity Weights

3

4

Market Portfolio Computed Using R.A. Max Weights

12

12

10

10

Expected Revenue ($/MW of Capacity)

Expected Revenue ($/MW of Capacity)

2

CAPM -

8

6

4

2
Non-Zero RA Max Weight
Fit (Non-zero R.A. Max Locations)
Fit (All Locations)

0

8

6

4

2
Non-Zero RA Max Weight
Fit (All Locations)
Fit (Non-zero R.A. Max Locations)

0
0

1

2

CAPM -

3

4

0

1

2

CAPM -

3

4

Figure 14: % Δ E(X))/ % Δ(𝜎(X)) for X=Output, Revenue - All Locations
All Locations

40

All Locations

30

35
25
30
20

Count

Count

25

20

15

15
10
10
5
5

0
-5

0

5

10

0
0.5

15

1

% "E(Q T) / % "<(Q T)

1.5

2

2.5

% "E(RT) / % "<(R T)

Figure 15: % Δ E(X))/ % Δ(𝜎(X)) for X=Output, Revenue - Wind Locations
Wind Locations

25

Wind Locations

25

15

15

Count

20

Count

20

10

10

5

5

0
0

1

2

3

4

% "E(Q T) / % "<(Q T)

5

6

0
0.5

1

1.5

% "E(RT) / % "<(R T)

2

2.5

Figure 16: % Δ E(X))/ % Δ(𝜎(X)) for X=Output, Revenue - Solar Locations
Solar Locations

Solar Locations

4

3.5

3.5

3

3

2.5

2.5

Count

Count

4

2

2

1.5

1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

0
0.8

0.9

1

1.1

% "E(Q T) / % "<(Q T)

1.2

1.3

0.8

1

1.2

% "E(RT) / % "<(R T)

1.4

