NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHY DOES IDIOSYNCRATIC RISK INCREASE WITH MARKET RISK?
Söhnke M. Bartram
Gregory Brown
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 22492
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22492

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016

We thank Laura Veldkamp for providing uncertainty index data. The paper has been improved by
thoughtful comments from Francesco Franzoni, Andrei Gonçalves, Luigi Guiso, Camelia
Kuhnen, Jacob Sagi, Andrei Salem, Sheridan Titman and workshop participants at ANU, Bank of
Italy, EIEF, Frankfurt School of Finance and Management, IWH, Lancaster University, Queens
University Belfast, University of Basel, University of North Carolina, University of Reading and
University of Surrey. The authors acknowledge financial support from the British Academy/
Leverhulme Trust, Center for Financial Studies and Inquire Europe. Bartram gratefully
acknowledges the warm hospitality of the UCLA Anderson School of Management, London
Business School, CFS House of Finance, and EIEF during visits to these institutions. William
Waller provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22492.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Söhnke M. Bartram, Gregory Brown, and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Why Does Idiosyncratic Risk Increase with Market Risk?
Söhnke M. Bartram, Gregory Brown, and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 22492
August 2016
JEL No. G10,G11,G12
ABSTRACT
From 1963 through 2015, idiosyncratic risk (IR) is high when market risk (MR) is high. We show
that the positive relation between IR and MR is highly stable through time and is robust across
exchanges, firm size, liquidity, and market-to-book groupings. Though stock liquidity affects the
strength of the relation, the relation is strong for the most liquid stocks. The relation has roots in
fundamentals as higher market risk predicts greater idiosyncratic earnings volatility and as firm
characteristics related to the ability of firms to adjust to higher uncertainty help explain the
strength of the relation. Consistent with the view that growth options provide a hedge against
macroeconomic uncertainty, we find evidence that the relation is weaker for firms with more
growth options.
Söhnke M. Bartram
Warwick University
Warwick Buisiness School
Department of Finance
Coventry
CV4 7AL
United Kingdom
s.m.bartram@wbs.ac.uk
Gregory Brown
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Kenan-Flagler Business School
gregwbrown@unc.edu

René M. Stulz
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
806A Fisher Hall
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu

In this paper, we investigate how a firm’s idiosyncratic risk (IR) is related to its market risk (MR) and to
aggregate uncertainty. Using the market model, we find that firm market risk averages 9.2% when the
within-month volatility of the CRSP value-weighted index, a proxy for macroeconomic or aggregate uncertainty (Bloom, 2009), is below the median and 17.7% when it is above the median. The comparable
figures for idiosyncratic risk are 30.1% when uncertainty is low and 38.2% when it is high. Consequently,
average market risk is higher by 8.5 percentage points when aggregate uncertainty is high, and average
idiosyncratic risk is higher by 8.1 percentage points. Similar results hold for other proxies for macroeconomic or aggregate uncertainty. After showing that there is a very robust and economically significant
positive relation between MR and IR, we investigate possible explanations for that relation and find that
liquidity and firm fundamentals help explain it. Specifically, we find that the relation is weaker for more
liquid stocks and for growth stocks. Further, an increase in a firm’s market risk is associated with an increase in its idiosyncratic earnings volatility.
Since a stock’s idiosyncratic return is, by definition, uncorrelated with the return of the market, one
might be tempted to conclude that MR and IR should be unrelated as well. Alternatively, it would seem
plausible that when the market is highly volatile, market movements would drive stock returns, so that IR
would be low. Both of these hypotheses are strongly rejected in the data. While some previous research has
noted that there is a positive relation between IR and MR, no analysis to date has shown that this relation
persists since 1963, holds across a variety of subsamples, or attempted to explain it.1 In this paper, we
demonstrate that the relation is extremely persistent across a variety of subsamples. We examine several
possible explanations for this relation and show that it arises partly because shocks to aggregate uncertainty
are magnified at the firm level and that the extent to which these shocks are magnified depends on firm
characteristics.

1

A positive correlation between idiosyncratic and market risk was first noted by Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel and Xu
(2001). More recently, Duarte, Kamara, Siegel, and Sun (2012) identify common components in measures of idiosyncratic volatility and show that these are related to business cycles and a variety of pricing anomalies including the
IVOL anomaly of Ang, Hodrick, Xing and Zhang (2006). In a recent paper, Kalay, Nallareddy and Sadka (2016) find
that the effects of firm-level and aggregate-level uncertainty are exacerbated in the presence of the other.

1

The relation between MR and IR is important for many issues in finance and macroeconomics. There
is a growing recent literature that relates investment to idiosyncratic uncertainty. For instance, Gilchrist,
Sim and Zakrajsek (2014) show that firm-level investment is negatively related to the firm’s idiosyncratic
uncertainty which they measure with idiosyncratic risk from a market model regression. A positive relation
between MR and IR has implications for business-cycle theories, as it implies that aggregate uncertainty
may be magnified at the firm level through changes in firm-level uncertainty. Shocks to idiosyncratic risk
adversely affect a firm’s distance to default in a structural debt pricing model such as Merton (1973). In a
recent paper, Atkeson, Eisfeldt, and Weill (2014) show that changes in idiosyncratic risk are a more important factor in explaining changes in the financial soundness of firms than changes in stock price. Hence,
understanding why idiosyncratic risk changes is important to assess both firm-level financial soundness as
well as the financial soundness of the corporate sector as a whole. In corporate finance, it is frequently
noted that insiders cannot diversify their stake in their firm, so that they have to bear large amounts of
idiosyncratic risk. Idiosyncratic risk shocks mean that these insiders have to bear more risk, which can
affect the policies of their firms. For instance, Dou (2016) shows that idiosyncratic shocks can lead insiders
to invest less when they find it difficult to share firm-specific risks. A positive relation between MR and IR
also has important implications for the benefits of portfolio diversification since it predicts that the costs of
under-diversification are highest when the market is most volatile. In theories of asset pricing, if IR is high
when MR is high, the value of firm-specific growth options is higher in times of higher market volatility,
everything else equal, so that growth firms would be affected differently by increases in MR than value
firms.
The first possible explanation for the positive correlation between IR and MR is what we call the illiquidity hypothesis. The literature has shown that illiquidity and IR are positively related (see, for instance,
Spiegel and Wang (2005)). For less liquid stocks, information from market changes should be incorporated
in prices less quickly than for the most liquid stocks. Consequently, for less liquid stocks, the lagged incorporation of market information could be misconstrued as idiosyncratic risk, since market information would
be incorporated with a lag and hence unrelated to contemporaneous market shocks. This hypothesis predicts
2

that the relation should be strongest for the most illiquid firms. When we control for additional firm characteristics, we find that the relation becomes stronger as illiquidity increases, which is consistent with the
illiquidity hypothesis. However, the relation holds strongly even for the most liquid firms, so that the relation cannot be explained by illiquidity alone.
Our second potential explanation, the arbitrage cost hypothesis, is that, as markets become more volatile, there is potentially less funding for arbitrage transactions, and such transactions become riskier. As a
result, prices should deviate more from fundamentals, which leads to more idiosyncratic risk if deviations
from fundamentals are uncorrelated with market returns. Therefore, this explanation predicts that the relation between IR and MR should be strongest for firms where arbitrage is more difficult. Following the
literature, we use the level of lagged IR as a measure of arbitrage risk. We do not find consistent evidence
that the relation between MR and IR is stronger for stocks with higher lagged IR, so that there is not consistent support for the arbitrage cost hypothesis. The literature also suggests that pricing mistakes should
be more likely for smaller firms, as short-selling is more difficult and less information is available. We find
that the relation between IR and MR is generally stronger for smaller firms.
Our third potential explanation, the fundamental uncertainty hypothesis, is that, as increases in aggregate fundamental uncertainty propagate through firms, they generate increased firm-specific uncertainty.
To motivate this hypothesis, consider a simple two-state model for the economy with the states being expansion and recession. Suppose uncertainty increases in that the states become farther apart – the expansion
is better and the recession is worse. We would expect that, as the states of the economy are farther apart,
there is more uncertainty about how firms will adjust to these more extreme states, so that there is increased
firm-level uncertainty. For some firms, the adjustment will be more predictable, so that these firms experience less of an increase in uncertainty.
A direct prediction of the fundamental uncertainty hypothesis is that an increase in market risk should
be associated with an increase in firm-level idiosyncratic earnings volatility. We find evidence supportive
of this prediction but, perhaps not surprisingly, the explanatory power of the regressions is low. Further, if,

3

as advanced in the literature, increases in aggregate uncertainty have adverse effects for firms, growth options are hedges against these adverse effects since the value of growth options increases with uncertainty.
Consistent with the view that growth options provide a hedge against macroeconomic uncertainty, we find
that the relation between MR and IR is weaker for firms with more growth options.
In our analysis, we examine all publicly traded U.S. firms from 1963-2015. We construct monthly
measures of market and idiosyncratic risk using daily data on individual stock returns and market returns
from CRSP. These measures, combined with variables constructed from firm-level accounting data, as well
as several market-wide and economic variables, allow us to examine the determinants of the relation between market risk and idiosyncratic risk. We first document the relation between market risk and idiosyncratic risk by splitting the sample into periods of high and low market risk as defined by different proxies.
We find that the strong positive relation is evident regardless of which subperiod we examine, for
NYSE/AMEX and NASDAQ firms, and in a variety of economic and market conditions. We explicitly
investigate the possibility that measurement error in the estimation of market risk could explain the relation
and show that this is not the case.
We estimate time-series regressions with monthly measures of average IR as the dependent variable
and average MR as the independent variable. These regressions show that changes in MR explain more
than half of the time-series variation in IR for the whole sample. The adjusted R-squareds of the regressions
increase minimally when we add variables that proxy for economic conditions. We find that the IR/MR
relation is nonlinear in that it is much stronger when MR is high. We also examine the IR/MR relation in
regressions with different control variables, for subperiods, and for sorts based on firm characteristics such
as illiquidity, lagged IR, book-to-market, and market capitalization. We find that the IR/MR relation holds
for all subperiods and subsamples created by sorting on firm characteristics.
In order to test our hypotheses for explanations of the IR/MR relation, we estimate two different sets
of panel regressions. With the first set of regressions, idiosyncratic earnings volatility is the dependent
variable and contemporaneous as well as four lags of market risk are the independent variables. We find

4

that all market risk variables have a positive significant coefficient. We find similar results when we repeat
the exercise using alternative proxies for idiosyncratic risk in fundamentals.
With the second set of regressions, we use IR as the dependent variable. The independent variables
include market risk, squared market risk, lagged idiosyncratic and market risk, as well as proxies for the
different explanatory hypotheses (i.e. illiquidity, the percentage of zero returns, lagged IR, book/market,
earnings/price, etc.). By interacting these proxies with our firm-specific measure of market risk, we are able
to determine how the relation between IR and MR is related to firm characteristics. We find that firms with
higher proportions of zero-return days (i.e., less liquid stocks) tend to have a stronger relation between
increases in market risk and idiosyncratic risk. With the Amihud illiquidity measure, the same result holds
only when we control for additional firm characteristics. However, these tests find mixed support for the
limits to arbitrage hypothesis. At the same time, we find consistent results that the relation is weaker for
growth firms with lower B/M and E/P ratios, and firms with a higher level of R&D expenses. Nevertheless,
in the panel regressions, the marginal effect of MR dwarfs the marginal effect of the proxies for our hypotheses, so that, while some of these proxies help explain the IR/MR relation, they explain only a fraction
of it. Similar results hold for when we split the sample and examine NYSE/AMEX firms and NASDAQ
firms separately.
The next section provides a summary of the related literature and more details on our hypotheses. Section 2 describes our data and construction of risk variables. Section 3 presents the results of univariate and
multivariate tests from time-series regressions. Section 4 investigates the relation between idiosyncratic
earnings volatility and market risk, while Section 5 uses firm characteristics to explain the IR/MR relation.
Section 6 offers additional robustness tests. Finally, Section 7 concludes.

1

Related Literature and Hypotheses

Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel, and Xu (2001, hereafter CLMX) find that not only does the idiosyncratic component comprise the majority of total firm risk, but also that idiosyncratic risk more than doubled for the
average U.S. public firm between 1962 to 1997. More related to our study is the observation by CLMX that

5

their measures of market risk and idiosyncratic risk appear correlated over time. Subsequent research has
primarily addressed the CLMX finding of a trend in risk and attributed it to changes in a variety of firm
characteristics over the last five decades including industry growth rates, institutional ownership, average
firm size, growth options, firm age, and profitability risk (Brown and Kapadia, 2007; Wei and Zhang, 2004;
Malkiel and Xu, 2003; Bennett and Sias, 2006; Cao, Simin and Zhao, 2004). Researchers have also questioned whether the conclusions of CLMX were overly influenced by the behavior of stocks in the second
half of the 1990s (Brandt, Graham, and Kumar, 2010).
Another strand of recent research has found that the idiosyncratic component of stock price volatility
may be a priced risk factor (Ghysels, Santa-Clara and Valkanov, 2005; Goyal and Santa-Clara, 2003; Ang,
Hodrick, Xing and Zhang, 2006, 2009; Spiegel and Wang, 2005). Herskovic, Kelly, Lustig, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2014) find that a common component to idiosyncratic volatility is priced. Other research has
related fundamental economic risks to priced risk factors in equity markets (see, for example, Vassalou,
2003). At the firm level, Pástor and Veronesi (2003) show how investor uncertainty about firm profitability
is an important determinant of idiosyncratic risk and firm value. Recent work has also analyzed differences
in idiosyncratic risk (as well as market risk and R-Squared) across firms and countries (e.g., Bartram, Brown
and Stulz, 2012). At the aggregate level, Engle, Ghysels and Sohn (2009) relate business cycle risks to stock
market volatility using a GARCH model incorporating macroeconomic variables.
Our paper is also related to a developing literature on how uncertainty affects individual firms. Real
options theory suggests higher incentives to delay irreversible investment, hiring and consumption as uncertainty increases. On the other hand, uncertainty can have a positive effect on investment and growth,
because growth options become more valuable. Using structural models, Bloom et al. (2012) and Bachmann
and Bayer (2012, 2013) show that uncertainty shocks generate drops in output due to their effect on investment and labor, and empirical studies also show evidence of a negative relationship between uncertainty
and investment (see, e.g. Gilchrist, Sim and Zakrajsek, 2014; Kellogg, 2014; Bloom et al., 2007; Guiso and
Parigi, 1999; Leahy and Whited, 1996). At the same time, uncertainty appears to increase research and
development spending (Stein and Stone, 2012). Firms with more growth opportunities also have cash flows
6

with longer duration, which is positively related to their level of firm-specific risk (Dechow, Sloan and
Soliman, 2004).
Despite this large and growing literature examining idiosyncratic risk, a yet unexplored phenomenon
is the observation of a strong positive correlation between contemporaneous levels of idiosyncratic risk and
market risk. In this study, we document the ubiquitous nature of this relation and try to explain why there
is an economically important relation between idiosyncratic risk and market risk. We consider three possible explanations that are not mutually exclusive: illiquidity, limits to arbitrage, and fundamental uncertainty
propagation.
First, we consider the possibility that illiquidity drives the strong relation between market risk and
idiosyncratic risk. If stocks differ in liquidity, we would expect information about the market to be incorporated in more liquid stocks faster than in less liquid stocks. We therefore expect that the relation between
market risk and idiosyncratic risk to be strongest for firms with low liquidity.
Second, we consider the possibility that limits to arbitrage may explain the relation between IR and
MR. As markets become more volatile, we would expect financial intermediaries to decrease funding for
arbitrage transactions and for such transactions to become riskier.2 As a result, prices are more likely to
deviate from fundamental value, which leads to more idiosyncratic risk. With this hypothesis, we would
expect that IR should increase more for firms where arbitrage is more difficult because it is riskier. The
literature generally considers that mispriced firms are more likely to be firms that are small, have high
idiosyncratic risk, and face obstacles to short sales (see, e.g., Pontiff, 2006, and Shleifer and Vishny, 1997).
We therefore investigate whether the relation between MR and IR is stronger for smaller firms and for firms
with high lagged idiosyncratic risk.
Third, we consider if uncertainty about economic fundamentals can explain the relation between MR
and IR. Consider an economy with two equally likely states of the world (recession and expansion) and

2

See Adrian and Shin (2013) for evidence that availability of credit is inversely related to the value-at-risk of financial
intermediaries.

7

suppose firms plan for the expected value, which is mid-way between recession and expansion. If there is
an increase in uncertainty, which is equivalent to the two states becoming farther apart, firms will have to
adjust more when they find out what the state of the economy is. If the process of adjusting involves uncertainty and if this uncertainty increases as the adjustment is larger, we would expect that the idiosyncratic
uncertainty would increase with aggregate uncertainty.
The value of firms depends on assets in place and on growth options. As uncertainty increases, growth
options become more valuable and growth firms will therefore be affected less by increases in uncertainty
if these increases have an adverse impact on firm value. This reasoning implies that, under this fundamental
uncertainty hypothesis, firms with more growth options have a weaker IR/MR relation. However, more
limited credit in times of high uncertainty might affect growth firms more adversely because they invest
more. It could be possible, therefore, that adverse effects of increases in market risk on growth firms dominate, so that growth firms are more affected by increases in uncertainty than value firms.

2

Data and Variable Construction

Our sample includes all publicly traded U.S. firms for the period 1963-2015. We use daily data on individual stock returns and market returns from CRSP as well as quarterly and annual accounting data and firm
characteristics from Compustat.3 We limit our analysis to common stocks (CRSP share codes 10 and 11)
listed on the NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ markets. We exclude micro-cap stocks by dropping firms that
are in the bottom 20% of the distribution of NYSE market capitalization based on the one-month lagged
value as well as penny stocks with prices less than $1.00 (in January 2006 dollars), in order to avoid concerns that small-size effects might confound our tests. Our final sample covers an average of 93.9% of the
market capitalization of all stocks with available data on CRSP. Coverage is only an issue for a few years

3

We sum quarterly flow variables over the most recent four quarters. We combine annual and quarterly accounting
data by replacing missing values in the 4th quarter with the respective annual observation. We replace missing values
in other fiscal quarters with prior observations from fiscal quarters in the same fiscal year or the 4th quarter from the
prior fiscal year. Results are robust to using only annual accounting data.

8

early in our sample period (1963-1966) when Compustat coverage is relatively poor. Since 1966 our sample
covers an average of 96.3% of total market capitalization.
We use two primary methods for defining market risk and idiosyncratic risk. Our first method is based
on standard market-model regressions to allow for monthly firm-specific measures of risk, following the
literature. Specifically, using daily data, we estimate (for each firm and month in our sample) the model
Rt = α + β RMt + εt

(1)

where Rt is the firm’s stock return on day t, and RMt is the return on the CRSP value-weighted market index
on day t. Our estimate of idiosyncratic risk, σIR, is the (annualized) standard deviation of εt, and our estimate
of market risk, σMM, is beta times the (annualized) standard deviation of RMt.
We estimate the market model for all firm-months with at least 15 daily return observations available
in CRSP and drop any firm-months with idiosyncratic risk, σIR, less than 0.001. Estimating this model
monthly for all stocks provides a panel of volatility estimates across firms and months as well as aggregated
time-series of market and idiosyncratic risk by averaging the respective firm-level measures by month. Our
second method utilizes the approach of CLMX to create aggregated time-series for market risk and idiosyncratic risk for all firms. Daily data are used to construct monthly observations for each month. Alternatively, we also construct these risk measures using daily series of overlapping 5-day returns.
From CRSP we also obtain information on market capitalization (MarketCap), and the percentage of
zero returns in the observation month (PctZeroReturns). As a measure of illiquidity, we calculate the Amihud (2002) ILLIQ measure for each firm for each month in our sample by taking the average of daily
absolute stock returns divided by dollar volume. Poor liquidity in some stocks could cause asynchronous
price movements that would affect risk estimates. These effects should be mitigated by considering returns
over longer periods. Thus, to examine our liquidity hypothesis we also calculate our market-model risk
measure using daily 5-day returns instead of daily 1-day returns.

9

For our firm-level analysis we combine data from CRSP and Compustat. We drop observations for
which Compustat data are unavailable. For our measures of idiosyncratic earnings risk, we denote the earnings-to-sales ratio for firm i in quarter t as ESi(t). The respective measure for the market is MES(t), and it is
calculated as the value-weighted average of firm-level ESi(t) using prior period market capitalization. The
idiosyncratic earnings risk for firm i for quarter t is then:
IdioEarningsRiski(t) = ((ESi(t) – MESi(t)) – (ESi(t-4) – MESi(t-4))2

(2)

We proceed in the same way for idiosyncratic profitability risk (IdioProfitRiski(t)), where we define profitability as operating income divided by net sales, and for idiosyncratic profit margin risk (IdioMarginRiski(t)), where profit margin is defined as net sales minus cost of goods sold, depreciation and amortization,
divided by net sales.
Using Compustat data, we define monthly values for firm-level variables of interest by using the most
recent quarterly/annual values. We calculate the book-to-market ratio as the ratio of the sum of common
equity and balance sheet deferred taxes to market capitalization (BookToMarket). The earnings-to-price
(EarningsToPrice) ratio is defined as income before extraordinary items plus deferred taxes minus preferred
dividends all divided by market capitalization. We also calculate the natural logarithm of one plus the ratio
of the sum of cash and short-term investments to total assets (LogCashAndSTInvToTA), and the ratio of
research and development (R&D) expenses to the sum of R&D and capital expenditures (RAndDShare).4
Financial leverage (Leverage) is measured as the sum of long-term debt plus preferred stock divided by the
market value of the firm’s assets (calculated as the sum of market capitalization, preferred stock and total
debt).

4

We set RAndDShare equal to zero when R&D expenses are missing and set capital expenditures equal to zero when
capital expenditures are missing. Thus, a firm with reported R&D expenses but missing capital expenditures will have
RAndDShare equal to 1.

10

We augment our dataset of firm-level risk estimates and fundamental characteristics with a range of
economic and financial measures that are alternative proxies for aggregate market risk. In particular, we
define the credit spread (CreditSpread) as the difference between Moody’s seasoned Baa corporate bond
yield and the 10-year U.S. Treasury constant maturity rate, both provided by the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System. We source the S&P 500 volatility index (VIX) from the CBOE website. NBER
business cycle dates are from the NBER website. The Chicago Fed National Activity Index (CFNAITot) is
sourced from the Chicago Fed website. We use a regression analysis to construct values of CFNAITot prior
to March 1967 using available subcomponents. We obtain the value-weighted stock market return from
CRSP (CRSP-VW-Return) and the uncertainty index (Uncertainty Index) from Kozeniauskas, Orlik and
Veldkamp (2014). Appendix A defines all the variables used in our analysis.

3

The Relation between Idiosyncratic Volatility and Market Risk

3.1

Preliminary Evidence

Figure 1 plots our time-series estimates for market risk and idiosyncratic risk for both the market-model
(MM) (Panel A) and the CLMX methods (Panel B). Several features are immediately obvious. First, the
two different methods provide nearly indistinguishable patterns. This is a useful feature for our firm-level
analysis that relies on firm-specific measures of risk and firm characteristics (thus, allowing us to examine
a panel of firms instead of just an aggregate time series).5 Second and most importantly, the market risk
series and the idiosyncratic risk series appear highly correlated over the full sample period and subperiods.
We have adjusted the scales so that changes in levels are more obvious. This reveals that while IR is generally higher than MR, the ratio is fairly constant except during the period from roughly 1990 to 2000, when
IR is much higher than MR, and the period immediately before the credit crisis and most recently, when IR
falls to a level that is markedly below MR. Finally, we note that almost every MR spike coincides with a
spike in IR, but that the strong correlation is not limited to these episodes.

5

We also note that the correlation between the CLMX idiosyncratic measure and the MM risk measure is 0.942.

11

Panels A and B of Figure 2 show the same figure, but separately for the NYSE and for NASDAQ. As
with Figure 1, IR and MR are typically very similar until the early 1990s for both exchanges. However, IR
is much higher relative to MR for NASDAQ stocks in the 1990s. For NYSE stocks, there is no evidence
that IR is higher relative to MR in the 1990s. In contrast, IR falls more for NYSE stocks relative to MR
before and after the credit crisis than it does for NASDAQ stocks.
Table 1 provides some preliminary evidence on drivers of differences in firm risk as well as descriptive
statistics for our risk measures. For the risk measures, we report results using both the market model (MM)
approach and the CLMX approach. Panel A shows differences in risk measures after splitting the monthly
sample based on alternative proxies for macroeconomic conditions. The first section reports values based
on splitting the sample evenly between periods of high and low monthly market volatility measured using
the standard deviation of daily CRSP value-weighted index returns. By construction, market risk measures
will be higher when the standard deviation of the daily CRSP value-weighted index returns is higher. However, IR could fall or increase when the standard deviation of the index increases. We see that IR increases
by about the same amount as MR during periods of high MR. This is true for both the market model and
CLMX results. In all cases the differences are statistically significant at the 1% level. From these results
we also see no support for the illiquidity hypothesis: Differences for risk measures using 5-day returns are
very similar to those using 1-day returns.
The next part of Panel A splits the sample based on whether the month is an NBER recession (High)
or expansion (Low). Here we see evidence of the strong business-cycle component of risk identified by
other researchers with recessions having significantly higher MR. However, it is again the case that IR
increases by about the same amount as market risk for each of the three measures we examine. The next
section provides results for a similar comparison using the Chicago Fed index, splitting the sample evenly
based on whether economic activity (e.g., output growth) is above or below median. The results again show
a strong relation between risk and economic activity, but a relation that is slightly stronger for IR than MR.
Credit spreads have been utilized in prior research as measures of economic conditions, financial stress,
and market liquidity. When we split the sample evenly based on the level of the credit spread, we find that
12

all measures of risk are higher when credit spreads are higher, but differences for IR tend to be larger than
differences for MR.
We next split the sample based on the VIX index which is a good measure of expected volatility. Even
though the VIX is only available since 1986, the results based on VIX are very similar to those based on
the realized volatility of the CRSP index for the full sample. However, the differences between MR and IR
are even more pronounced when splitting on VIX over the more recent sample period. Finally, we split the
sample based on the Economic Uncertainty Index described in Bloom (2012) and Kozeniauskas, Orlik and
Veldkamp (2014). Though this series is also not available for our full sample period (and only in quarterly
frequency), we again find that idiosyncratic risk is high when economic uncertainty is high.
Panel B of Table 1 reports differences in risk measures for three subperiods for the splits based on
CRSP index volatility. As was the case in Panel A, each of the MR and IR measures is higher when the
CRSP index volatility is higher, and this is true in all three subperiods. The 1980-1999 subperiod shows the
smallest differences in each of the risk measures, and the 2000-2015 period shows the largest differences.
However, the differences in risk measures track each other closely in each subperiod. Only in the 19801999 subperiod are the IR differences notably less than the MR differences.
Panel C of Table 1 examines differences in volatility for other subsamples to further gauge the robustness of the results in Panels A and B. During our sample period many small firms entered the sample when
the CRSP database began to include stocks listed on NASDAQ. To see if our results are affected by this
change, the first section of Panel C reports results only for stocks listed on the NYSE. These results are
quite similar to those for the full sample overall, but show a slightly lower increase in IR than for the full
sample. These results together suggest both that the results are not driven by the emergence of NASDAQ
stocks and that the small illiquid stocks more commonly found on NASDAQ do not drive the relation
between MR and IR. Panel C also reports results excluding the technology bubble years of 1995-2002,
which some previous research associates with the trend in IR documented by CLMX. The last section of

13

Panel C examines only NYSE stocks and excludes 1995-2002. Overall, the conclusions for these subsamples are very similar to those for the full sample and other subsamples suggesting a strong and robust relationship between high MR and high IR.
Though we do not tabulate the results, we also examine whether the results of Table 1 Panel A hold if
we weight the observations by the market value of firms instead of weighting the observations equally. We
find that with value-weighted averages, IR increases for all splits of Table 1 Panel A. The difference in IR
between high uncertainty regimes and low uncertainty regimes is lower, but not dramatically so. For instance, for IR estimated using the market model, the difference in IR between the periods with high and
low CRSP index standard deviation is 0.081 for the equally-weighted average and is 0.062 for the valueweighted average.
3.2

Time-series Regressions

We now turn to a more detailed analysis of the time-series relations between market risk and idiosyncratic
risk. We first estimate regressions of idiosyncratic risk measures on contemporaneous and lagged measures
of market risk as well as other time-series indicators to determine the strength and consistency of the relations. We conduct the analysis after taking the natural logarithm of the risk variables to reduce the importance of the large volatility spikes in 1987, 2000, and 2008. Results without taking logs are generally
stronger. We also include the square of contemporaneous risk variables to better model the positive skewness inherent in volatility time-series.
Table 2 presents results of this analysis. We show results for both approaches of estimating idiosyncratic risk. The results indicate that idiosyncratic risk is strongly related to contemporaneous market risk
even after accounting for the strong autocorrelation in idiosyncratic risk. The coefficients on the market
risk variables of around 0.5 suggest an economically strong effect. Since the average level of idiosyncratic
risk is about twice the level of market risk, a coefficient of 0.5 when we use logarithms implies that a change
of a given absolute amount in market risk is associated with a change of the same absolute amount for
idiosyncratic risk (which is consistent with IR and MR increasing by about the same amount in Table 1).

14

The positive coefficients on the squared terms suggest that the effect is even stronger for large moves
in market risk. After accounting for the contemporaneous effects, lagged market risk has a small negative
relation with idiosyncratic risk. The insignificant coefficient on the Chicago Fed Index suggests that it may
be hard to identify precise business-cycle effects on risk since both economic conditions and volatility are
highly persistent.
We include a time trend in the regression to account for the possibility of an unexplained trend in risk
and find no evidence of such a trend. While some studies find evidence of a trend in idiosyncratic risk, the
fact that we are controlling for market risk and lagged idiosyncratic risk makes these tests substantially
different from those performed in earlier studies.
We note that the results for both the CLMX and MM methods are very similar and that the adjusted Rsquareds for both methods are very high (0.88). Panels B and C of Table 2 show results separately for
NYSE/AMEX-listed firms and NASDAQ-listed firms. The results are quite similar in that the very strong
relation between market risk (and squared market risk) and idiosyncratic risk is independent of exchange
listing. That said, the relation between IR and MR for NASDAQ firms is stronger (when using the CLMX
method). In results not reported, we repeat the analysis for the three subperiods examined in Panel B of
Table 1 and find nearly identical results in each case. Overall, the results in Table 2 show that there is a
strong contemporaneous relation, both economically and statistically, between market risk and idiosyncratic risk even after accounting for the persistence of each variable.
Because the risk variables are persistent, we also conduct an analysis similar to that in Table 2 in first
differences. We report the results in Table 3. Regressions (1) and (2) use the CLMX method to estimate
idiosyncratic risk, and regressions (3) and (4) use the market model method. In regressions (1) and (3), we
include only an intercept, the time trend, and the change in market risk. We again observe the very strong
statistical relation between changes in market risk and changes in idiosyncratic risk. The estimated coefficients of, respectively, 0.632 and 0.527, and high adjusted R-squareds suggest a very strong economic
relation.

15

Adding economic and market characteristics in regressions (2) and (4) does not change the relation
between market risk and idiosyncratic risk and, in addition to the change in market risk, only the change in
the credit spread and the return on the CRSP value-weighted index are consistently significant. Both an
increase in credit spreads and an increase in the value-weighted index are associated with higher idiosyncratic volatility. It is notable that adding these variables has almost no effect on the coefficient on market
risk and has little impact on R-squareds. Panels B through D of Table 3 repeat the analysis for the various
subperiods we examine in Table 1. We always find a statistically significant positive relation between
changes in market risk and changes in idiosyncratic risk with coefficients in the range of 0.335 to 0.755.
The only economic or financial factor that is consistently significant in these regressions is the change in
the credit spread.
The last set of time-series regressions estimates the relation between idiosyncratic risk and market risk
for portfolio sorts over our whole sample period. Each month, we sort all stocks into five portfolios with
the same number of stocks based on alternative lagged characteristics. It is important to note that this analysis is strictly in the time-series and does not represent tests of how these factors affect the relation between
market risk and idiosyncratic risk in the cross-section. For example, the level of idiosyncratic risk varies
across the sorts, so comparing coefficient magnitudes across sorts is not straightforward. In Section 5, we
estimate firm-level regressions where we allow these variables to be related to idiosyncratic risk both directly and through an interaction with market risk. Our hypotheses to explain the IR/MR relation can then
be tested by examining the interaction of these variables with market risk.
Table 4 presents results of separate regressions based on quintile sorts across the characteristics of
interest. Remarkably, in every one of these tests we again find the strong relation between the level of
market risk and the level of idiosyncratic risk. Results for the quadratic market risk term vary depending
on the characteristic quantile, but the relation is always positive (convex) and in almost all cases statistically
significant. Controlling for lagged market and idiosyncratic risk does not affect the significance of the relation between market risk and idiosyncratic risk. Furthermore, in all of the regressions we estimate, the
adjusted R-squareds are in the vicinity of 0.90.
16

In summary, this section has shown a strong and consistent positive relation between market risk and
idiosyncratic risk that is robust to considering various subsamples, exchange listings, and explanatory variables.
4

Market Risk and Idiosyncratic Earnings Volatility

The fundamental uncertainty hypothesis predicts that greater market risk is associated with greater idiosyncratic earnings volatility. Intuitively, if higher economy-wide uncertainty results in higher firm-specific risk
we should find higher market risk today resulting in higher idiosyncratic earnings risk in subsequent quarters.
To test this hypothesis, we estimate panel regressions where we regress our measures of idiosyncratic
volatility of firm fundamental performance, namely idiosyncratic earnings risk for firm i for quarter t (IdioEarningsRiski(t)), idiosyncratic profitability risk (IdioProfitRiski(t)), and idiosyncratic profit margin risk
(IdioMarginRiski(t)), on contemporaneous market risk and four lags of market risk and idiosyncratic risk.
We include lags of market risk because we would expect there to be a lag between the time that the market
expects higher uncertainty and the time it is realized in earnings measures. We examine several lags because
the length of the lag may depend on the specific circumstances generating the economic uncertainty and
the effects may be persistent. We examine standard errors corrected for clustering by quarter. The results
are shown in Table 5.
Regression (1) in Table 5 shows estimates for our idiosyncratic earnings risk measure. We find that all
the coefficients on market risk are positive and significant at the 1% level. The largest coefficient is the
coefficient on contemporaneous market risk, and the coefficients on the lagged terms are each about half
the magnitude of the contemporaneous coefficient so that together the lagged effects are larger than the
contemporaneous relation. The fundamental uncertainty hypothesis predicts positive coefficients. Consequently, these results are supportive of that hypothesis. To gauge the economic significance of the relation
between market risk and idiosyncratic earnings risk we calculate how a one standard deviation (SD) change
in market risk (across all lagged quarters) would change idiosyncratic earnings risk. We find that such a

17

change in market risk would result in an increase of about 0.346 standard deviations in idiosyncratic earnings risk. We interpret this as a fairly large effect given the coarse nature of our proxies and analysis.6
We find quite similar results when we use our other two measures of idiosyncratic volatility of firm
fundamental performance. Regression (2) shows the results for idiosyncratic profitability risk. All coefficients on the market risk variables are significant at the 1% level. The marginal effects are somewhat smaller
but still economically significant. Finally, we provide the results for idiosyncratic gross margin risk in the
third set of regression results. As before, all coefficients on the market risk variables are positive and significant at the 1% level. All regressions have rather small R-squareds, which is not surprising since we
attempt to explain the volatility of firm-level accounting performance with stock market volatility.
It is also interesting to note that the relation between a firm’s idiosyncratic stock return risk and its
idiosyncratic earnings risk is generally positive but always weaker than the relation with market risk (and
not statistically significant for idiosyncratic profitability or gross margin risk). This finding suggests that
changes in economy-wide uncertainty driving market risk (that we have previously shown to be correlated
with idiosyncratic stock return risk) may be the primary driver of changes in firm-specific risk at the firm’s
operating level.

5

Using Firm Characteristics to Explain the Relation between Idiosyncratic Volatility and Market
Risk

We now turn to panel regressions with idiosyncratic risk from the market model as the dependent variable
to investigate further our hypotheses about the determinants of the IR/MR relation. These hypotheses focus
on how this relation depends on a firm’s illiquidity for the illiquidity hypothesis, its level of idiosyncratic
risk for the limits to arbitrage hypothesis, and its prospects for growth for the firm fundamentals hypothesis.
To test our hypotheses, we estimate regressions using our panel data in Table 6. We cluster the standard

6

Of course, it is not often that market risk in all contemporaneous and lagged quarters increases by one standard
deviation. However, in about 13% of years the average level of market risk is more than 1.0 standard deviations higher
than the average level in the previous year. In addition, volatility is quite persistent so this increases the frequency of
sequentially high (or low) values of market risk.

18

errors by month. Because the proxies for our hypotheses are sometimes highly correlated, we estimate
regressions with just one proxy in regressions (2) to (8). We then include all proxies in regression (9).
In regression (1) of Table 6, we regress the log of IR on the log of MR and an intercept. As we would
expect given the results already shown, there is also a strong positive relation between the log of IR and the
log of MR when using this panel approach. To examine whether a specific variable helps explain the relation between IR and MR, we use interactions. In regression (2), we consider how the IR/MR relation is
related to illiquidity. When we use Amihud’s illiquidity measure, we find that more illiquid firms actually
have a weaker IR/MR relation, which is contrary to the illiquidity hypothesis. In unreported results, we find
that the IR/MR relation is stronger for firms with more zero returns, but adding the zero returns variable to
the regression adds very little explanatory power. In contrast, the adjusted R-squared of the regression with
the Amihud illiquidity measure is substantially higher than the adjusted R-squared of the regression that
uses only the log of MR.
Next, we investigate in regression (3) how the IR/MR relation is related to the lagged log of idiosyncratic risk. With the limits to arbitrage hypothesis, we would expect firms with higher lagged idiosyncratic
risk to become more mispriced as market risk increases, so that their idiosyncratic risk should increase. We
find that the interaction between market risk and lagged idiosyncratic risk is positive and significant, which
is supportive of the limits to arbitrage hypothesis.
We turn next to variables related to growth opportunities. In regression (4), we examine whether firms
with a higher book-to-market ratio (BM) have a stronger relation between IR and MR as predicted by the
fundamentals explanation for the relation, which can be evaluated by introducing an interaction between
MR and BM in the regression. We see in regression (4) that the IR/MR relation is indeed stronger for firms
with a higher BM. In regression (5), we use Earnings/Price (EP). We find that IR falls as EP increases, but
the relation between MR and IR is stronger for firms with higher EP. In regression (6), we use the R&D
share as an explanatory variable. Since regressions (4) and (5) show that value firms have a stronger IR/MR
relation, we would expect that firms with higher R&D share should have a weaker IR/MR relation. This is
what we find. We also investigate whether firm size and leverage condition the IR/MR relation. We find
19

no evidence in regression (7) that the IR/MR relation is related to size and no evidence in regressions (8)
that it is related to leverage.
In the last regression of Table 6, regression (9), we include all the variables used in regressions (1)
through (8). In regression (9), the slopes for the interactions are similar to the slopes when we include the
proxies for our hypotheses one at a time, except those for lagged IR, market capitalization and leverage,
which are now negative and significant. Consequently, while regression (3) was supportive of the arbitrage
hypothesis, regression (9) provides evidence against that hypothesis. In contrast, the evidence in favor of
the illiquidity hypothesis and the fundamental uncertainty hypothesis from the regressions that include one
variable at a time is confirmed by regression (9). We also report estimates of marginal effects. These marginal effects are computed as the product of the standard deviation of the dependent variable and the regression coefficient. The highest marginal effects are by far those for lagged IR, market risk and market
capitalization. An increase of one standard deviation of market risk increases IR by roughly 17%, controlling for last month’s IR, which is large relative to the average IR of 36% across the firms in our sample.
Without controlling for lagged IR, the increase is roughly 28%. The largest economic effect for the interactions is for market capitalization, followed by illiquidity. Regression (9) effectively estimates the effect
of explanatory variables on changes in IR as we control for lagged IR. When we do not include lagged IR
in the regression, the (absolute values of the) marginal effects increase for all interaction variables.
To obtain a clearer picture of the IR/MR relation, we estimate panel regressions of idiosyncratic risk
on market risk in Table 7 that allow for the relation between IR and MR to be nonlinear, allow for IR to be
related to the lag of MR and its squared value, and control for additional firm characteristics in all regressions, namely the log of lagged cash to assets, lagged leverage, and the contemporaneous stock return. The
additional firm characteristics help alleviate the following concerns. First, cash holdings and leverage are
related to growth opportunities empirically (see, for instance, Opler, Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson,
1999), so that the proxies for growth opportunities we use could actually proxy for cash holdings and leverage. Hence, by controlling for these firm characteristics, we help alleviate the concern that our variables
that proxy for growth could be proxies for factors other than growth. Another concern is that IR could be
20

high because the stock moved a lot. It is important to note, however, that the additional firm characteristics
we consider are likely to depend on IR, so that they are not truly exogenous. As before, we cluster the
standard errors by month.
In Table 7, all the additional variables related to MR (MR squared, lagged MR, and lagged MR squared)
are significant and have a positive coefficient except that the lagged market risk variables have a negative
significant coefficient in regression (2), which includes idiosyncratic risk, and are insignificant in regression
(8). The coefficients on MR in Table 7 are all larger than in the corresponding regressions in Table 6. The
coefficient on MR squared is positive and significant in all regressions, indicating that the relation between
IR and MR is nonlinear, so that the slope in the relation becomes steeper as MR increases. All three additional firm characteristics (i.e. lagged leverage, lagged cash, and contemporaneous stock return) have a
positive significant coefficient, and the coefficient on lagged cash-to-assets is quite large. The additional
firm characteristics add substantially to the explanatory power of the regressions.
When we control for the additional firm characteristics in Table 7, the coefficient on the illiquidity ratio
turns positive and significant (and, in unreported results, the coefficient on the PctZeroReturns variable
also remains positive and significant). However, the interaction of MR with lagged IR now has a negative
significant coefficient. The results for the proxies of fundamental uncertainty are robust to including the
additional variables. In particular, as in Table 7, we find that the IR/MR relation is stronger for value firms
than it is for growth firms, and the coefficient on the interaction between book-to-market and MR increases
from 0.016 to 0.025. Similarly, earnings-to-price and R&D share have the same sign as in Table 6 but larger
regression coefficients. Finally, the coefficient on the interaction with market capitalization becomes negative, while the interaction of leverage and MR is significant and positive.
As before, we estimate a regression specification that uses all the proxies for our hypotheses similar to
regression (9) in Table 6, and we also report the marginal effects. In regression (8) of Table 7, the coefficient
on MR is more than twice as large as in the comparable regression of Table 6 (0.303 versus 0.139) and the
marginal effect is also more than twice as large (0.360 versus 0.166). Adding the additional variables therefore does not reduce the effect of MR on IR that we document. The marginal effect on MR is such that if
21

MR increases by one standard deviation, IR increases by one third. In addition, we find large economic
significance for squared MR: A one-standard deviation increase in MR squared increases IR by roughly
22%.
We repeat the analysis presented in Panel A of Table 7 after splitting firms based on listing exchange.
Panel B shows results for just NYSE/AMEX-listed firms, and Panel C shows results for just NASDAQlisted firms. Results in both panels confirm the strong relation between market risk and idiosyncratic risk.
The marginal effect of MR is slightly larger for NASDAQ stocks (0.381) compared to NYSE/AMEX stocks
(0.318). Apart from two exceptions, all interactions of firm characteristics with market risk are significant
in the regressions of Panels B and C, and the marginal effects are consistent with the marginal effects
reported in Panel A. The first exception is the interaction of the illiquidity ratio with market risk in the
comprehensive specification for NASDAQ stocks, where the coefficient is negative; however it is positive
and significant in that specification when excluding market capitalization which is correlated with liquidity.
The second exception is that the interaction with leverage is not significant in regression (8) of Panel B and
significantly negative in Panel C in the same regression.
This section has documented evidence largely supporting the hypothesis that growth firms have a
weaker relation between market risk and idiosyncratic risk because growth opportunities represent options
on future projects whose value should be less related to short-run variation in economic fundamentals. We
find conflicting support for the limits to arbitrage hypothesis. We find some evidence that the relation is
stronger for smaller and less liquid firms.
6

Robustness Checks and Other Tests

Our results are robust to a wide array of alternative specifications and analysis permutations. For example,
we have conducted all of our analysis using value-weighted averages of idiosyncratic and market risk and
find very similar results to those reported in the tables. Because the value-weighted series will be less affected by small stocks which are more volatile, the level of the relation differs somewhat, but patterns for

22

changes and differences in risk are nearly identical. We have also estimated a variety of alternative specifications in our regression analysis, such as using equal-weighted CRSP market returns to estimate risk
measures, and find results that are always consistent with the strong contemporaneous relation between
market risk and idiosyncratic risk. We also find a positive relation between MR and IR when estimating
time-series regressions by industry (using 17 Fama French industries).
One concern about our main finding is whether market risk is exogenous to idiosyncratic risk, or
whether the causality is reversed. To this end, we estimate a bivariate VAR model with IR and MR. The
lag lengths are selected by minimizing the Akaike information criterion. The results show that while the
hypothesis that MR is independent of IR can rejected (p-value = 0.01; χ2 = 16.6), the evidence is much
stronger that IR is not exogenous to MR (p-value < 0.0001; χ2 = 29.0). Thus, market risk appears to forecast
idiosyncratic risk, but less so the other way round. However, in both MR and IR equations the autoregressive component vastly dominates the other variable, so these may not be informative tests for economically
significant causality.
One could also be concerned that there is some mechanical relation driven by estimation error of idiosyncratic risk. Specifically, if the risk models we are using are not sufficient to decompose total risk into
market risk and idiosyncratic risk when risks are asymmetric and time-varying, we could be miscategorizing some market risk as idiosyncratic risk. To investigate this possibility we conduct a simulation exercise
that suggests our methodology and results are robust to random time-variation in both market risk and
idiosyncratic risk.
Specifically, we conduct the following experiment: We create simulated daily returns for 1,000 firms
for 60 months. Each firm’s simulated return series is created by adding together the returns from i) a market
return series generated by an EGARCH(1,1) model with parameters calibrated to our historical market risk
series and with a random CAPM β distributed uniformly on the interval [0.5, 1.5], and ii) an orthogonal
idiosyncratic risk factor generated by an EGARCH(1) model with parameters roughly calibrated to our

23

historical idiosyncratic risk series.7 We then apply the same CLMX and market-model methods to calculate
the monthly risk measures that we use in the main analysis. The differences between idiosyncratic risk
measures in high and low market risk periods are close to zero for both methods. This suggests that there
is nothing obviously wrong with our approaches to risk decomposition that would lead to our results when
risks vary randomly over time.
As another robustness check to address estimation error, we estimate market models over 3-month
periods corresponding to calendar quarters over the full sample period, which provides more degrees of
freedom and more precision in the regression estimates. Moreover, the quarterly volatility estimates are in
similar frequency to the quarterly accounting data. Using these quarterly observations yields similar results
to those reported in the paper for monthly frequency and nearly identical results for the time series relations
presented in Table 1-4. We have also explored the use of alternative risk models in our analysis. Specifically, we have estimated idiosyncratic risk using residuals from the Fama and French 3-factor and 5-factor
models (Fama and French, 1993, 2014) or using a GARCH (1,1) model. The relations between market risk
and idiosyncratic risk remain both economically and statistically very strong.8 In short, we have undertaken
our analysis examining the relation between idiosyncratic risk and market risk in a variety of ways and
always find very similar results.

7

Conclusion

We document a remarkably strong and consistently positive relation between measures of idiosyncratic risk
and market risk. This relation holds in all subperiods, across listing exchanges, and after accounting for
economic conditions, market conditions, and firm-specific factors. In panel regressions, this effect is
stronger for less liquid firms but still strong for the most liquid firms. We find strong evidence that higher

7

See Nelson (1991) for a detailed discussion of GARCH models in asset pricing.

8

Because the models include factors based on firm size and book-to-market, we do not utilize panel regression results
from these models.

24

market risk causes subsequent measures of idiosyncratic earnings risk to increase. Further, the relation between idiosyncratic risk and market risk seems to be attenuated for growth firms, which is consistent with
the hypothesis that the value of these firms derives more from long-term idiosyncratic growth options that
are less sensitive to short-term fluctuations in risk. However, most of the relation between idiosyncratic risk
and market risk cannot be explained by the firm characteristics we investigate. Overall, our evidence is
consistent with the existence of an “uncertainty” risk factor that drives both broad market risk and firmspecific risks.
Our findings have implications for corporate finance, asset pricing, and macroeconomics. For corporate
finance, our results show that the impact of high uncertainty is magnified for firms through an increase in
firm-specific uncertainty. This magnification effect means, for instance, that the cost of debt of firms in
periods of high uncertainty increases by more than would be predicted by the increase in aggregate uncertainty alone.
Our results suggest that investors not holding fully diversified portfolios need to consider time-variation
in idiosyncratic risk in addition to time-variation in market risk. This additional risk may complicate risk
management and portfolio rebalancing decisions especially when considering that the time-series patterns
of risk are important for many dynamic investment strategies (e.g., style timing).
Our results also suggest that regulators need to consider a broader set of time-varying risks than just
those captured by existing factor models when assessing systemic risk or when assessing the risks to which
financial institutions are exposed. From a macroeconomic perspective, the increased firm-specific uncertainty associated with greater aggregate uncertainty means that firms whose value is affected adversely by
uncertainty shocks will suffer more from aggregate uncertainty shocks and that their ability to raise funding
will be further limited.

25

References
Adrian, T., and H. Shin, 2014, Procyclical leverage and Value-at-Risk, Review of Financial Studies 27,
373-403.
Amihud, Y., 2002, Illiquidity and stock returns: cross-section and time-series effect, Journal of Financial
Markets 5, 31-56.
Ang, A., R. Hodrick, Y. Xing, and X. Zhang, 2006, The cross-section of volatility and expected returns,
Journal of Finance 61, 259-299.
Ang, A., R. Hodrick, Y. Xing, and X. Zhang, 2009, High idiosyncratic volatility and low returns: international and further U.S. evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 91, 1-23.
Atkeson, A., A. Eisfeldt, and P.-O. Weill, 2014, Measuring the financial soundness of U.S. Firms, 19262012, UCLA, working paper.
Bachmann, R., and C. Bayer, 2012, Investment dispersion and the business cycle, NBER, working paper.
Bachmann, R., and C. Bayer, 2013, Wait-and-see business cycles? Journal of Monetary Economics 60,
704-719.
Barinov, A., 2011, Idiosyncratic volatility, growth options, and the cross-section of returns, University of
Georgia, working paper.
Bartram, S.M., G.W. Brown, and R.M. Stulz, 2012, Why Are U.S. Stocks More Volatile? Journal of Finance 67, 1329-1370.
Bennett, J., and R. Sias, 2006, Why Company-Specific Risk Changes Over Time. Financial Analysts Journal 62, 89-100.
Bloom, N., 2009, The impact of uncertainty shocks, Econometrica 77, 623-685.
Bloom, N., 2014, Fluctuations in Uncertainty, Journal of Economic Perspectives 28, 153-176.
Bloom, N., M. Floetotto, N. Jaimovich, I. Sapora-Eksten, and S. Terry, 2012, Really uncertain business
cycles, NBER working paper.
Bloom, N., S. Bond, and J. Van Reenen, 2007, Uncertainty and investment dynamics. Review of Economic
Studies 74, 391-415.
Brandt, M., J. Graham, and A. Kumar, 2010, The idiosyncratic volatility puzzle: Time trend or speculative
episodes? Review of Financial Studies 23, 863-899.
Brown, G., and N. Kapadia, 2007, Firm-specific risk and equity market development. Journal of Financial
Economics 84, 358-388.
Campbell, J., M. Lettau, B. Malkiel, and Y. Xu, 2001. Have individual stocks become more volatile? An
empirical exploration of idiosyncratic risk. Journal of Finance 56, 1-43.
Cao, C., T. Simin, and J. Zhao, 2008, Can growth options explain the trend in idiosyncratic risk? Review of
Financial Studies 21, 2599-2633.
Dechow, P.M., R.G. Sloan and M.T. Soliman, 2004, Implied Equity Duration: A New Measure of Equity
Risk. Review of Accounting Studies 9, 197-228.
Dou, W.W., 2016, Embrace or Fear Uncertainty: Growth Options, Limited Risk Sharing, and Asset Prices,
MIT, working paper.
Duarte, J., S. Siegel, and C. Sun, 2012, The common components of idiosyncratic volatility. Rice University, working paper.
26

Engle, R., E. Ghysels, and B. Sohn, 2009, On the economic sources of stock market volatility, New York
University, working paper.
Fama, E. F., K. R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33(3), 3-56.
Fama, E. F., K. R. French, 2014, A five-factor asset pricing model, University of Chicago working paper.
Ghysels, E., P. Santa-Clara, and R. Valkanov, 2005, There is a risk-return trade-off after all, Journal of
Financial Economics 76, 509-548.
Gilchrist, S., J. Sim, and E. Zakrajsek, 2014, Uncertainty, financial frictions, and investment dynamics,
Federal Reserve Board, FEDS working paper.
Goyal, A., and P. Santa-Clara, 2003, Idiosyncratic risk matters! Journal of Finance 58, 975-1008.
Guiso, L., and G. Parigi, 1999, Investment and demand uncertainty, Quarterly Journal of Economics 114,
185-227.
Herskovic, B., B.T. Kelly, H.N. Lustig, and S. van Nieuwerburgh, 2014, The common factor in idiosyncratic volatility: Quantitative asset pricing implications, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Kalay, A., S. Nallareddy, and G. Sadka, 2016. Macroeconomic Activity Under Uncertainty: How FirmLevel and Aggregate-Level Uncertainties Interact, Columbia University working paper.
Kellogg, R., 2014, The effect of uncertainty on investment: Evidence from Texas oil drilling, American
Economic Review 104, 1698-1734.
Leahy, J., and T. Whited, 1996, The Effect of Uncertainty on Investment: Some Stylized Facts. Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking 28, 64-83.
Lintner, J., 1965, The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky portfolios and capital budgets,
Review of Economics and Statistics 47, 13-37.
Malkiel, B., and Y. Xu, 2003, Investigating the behavior of idiosyncratic volatility, Journal of Business 76,
613-644.
Nelson, D., 1991, Conditional heteroskedasticity in asset returns: A new approach. Econometrica 59, 347370.
Newey, W.K., and K.D. West, 1987, A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix, Econometrica 55, 703-708.
Opler, T., L. Pinkowitz, R. Stulz, and Rohan Williamson, 1999, The determinants and implications of corporate cash holdings, Journal of Financial Economics 52, 3-46.
Orlik, A., and L. Veldkamp, 2014, Understanding uncertainty shocks and the role of the black swan, New
York University, working paper.
Orlik, A., N. Kozeniauskas, and L. Veldkamp, 2014, Black swans and the many shades of uncertainty, New
York University, working paper.
Pástor, L., and P. Veronesi, 2003, Stock valuation and learning about profitability, Journal of Finance 58,
1749-1789.
Pontiff, J., 2006, Costly arbitrage and the myth of idiosyncratic risk, Journal of Accounting and Economics
42, 35-52.
Sharpe, W., 1964, Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions of risk, Journal of
Finance 19, 425-442.
27

Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny, 1997, The limits of arbitrage, Journal of Finance 52, 35-55.
Spiegel, M., and X. Wang, 2005, Cross-sectional variation in stock returns: Liquidity and idiosyncratic risk,
Yale University, working paper.
Stein, L.C.D., and E. Stone, 2012, The effect of uncertainty on investment, hiring, and R&D: Causal evidence from equity options, Stanford University, working paper.
Vassalou, M., 2003, News related to future GDP growth as a risk factor in equity returns, Journal of Financial Economics 68, 47-73.
Wei, S., and C. Zhang, 2006, Why did individual stocks become more volatile? Journal of Business 79,
259-292.

28

Figure 1. Measures of Market Risk and Idiosyncratic Risk
This figure plots average measures of monthly idiosyncratic and market risk. Panel A plots measures using the market
model method in Equation (1), and Panel B plots measures using the method of CLMX.

Panel A: Market-Model Method
0.90

0.70

0.80

0.60
IdioRisk (left axis)

0.70

MarketRisk

0.50

0.60

0.40

0.50

0.30

0.40

0.20

0.30

0.10

0.20
1963

0.00

1968

1973

1978

1983

1988

1993

1998

2003

2008

2013

Panel B: CLMX Method
1.00

0.60

0.90
IdioRisk (left axis)

0.50

MarketRisk

0.80

0.40
0.70

0.60

0.30

0.50
0.20
0.40
0.10
0.30

0.20
1963

0.00
1968

1973

1978

1983

1988

1993

29

1998

2003

2008

2013

Figure 2. Market Risk and Idiosyncratic Risk by Exchange Listing
This figure plots average measures of monthly idiosyncratic and market risk using the market model method in Equation (1). Panel A plots measures based on NYSE/AMEX stocks, and Panel B plots measures based on NASDAQ
stocks.

Panel A: NYSE/AMEX
0.80

0.70

0.60

0.70
IdioRisk (left axis)

0.50

MarketRisk
0.60

0.40
0.50
0.30
0.40
0.20

0.30

0.20
1963

0.10

0.00
1968

1973

1978

1983

1988

1993

1998

2003

2008

2013

Panel B: NASDAQ
1.10
1.00
0.90

0.70

Idiosyncratic Risk (left axis)

0.60

Market Risk (right axis)
0.50

0.80
0.70

0.40

0.60

0.30

0.50

0.20
0.40
0.10
0.30

0.20
1973

0.00
1978

1983

1988

1993

1998

30

2003

2008

2013

Table 1. Differences in Risk Measures
The table reports means and median of average risk levels from the monthly time-series estimates of risk based on the
CLMX method and market-model (MM) method. We present difference in means and medians and p-values for differences in sample means and medians based on non-parametric Wilcoxon tests. Panel A shows results by market and
economic conditions based on various factors such as market risk, NBER recessions, the Chicago Fed National Activity Index, the level of the Credit Spread, the VIX index, and the uncertainty index. Panel B shows results for subperiods, and Panel C shows results for NYSE/AMEX only and excluding the period 1995-2002. p-values reported as
[0.00] are significant at better than the 1% level. Appendix A provides definitions of all variables.

Panel A: Results by Market and Economic Condition
High
Risk Measure
N
Mean
CRSP Volatility (CRSPVol)
Total Risk-MM
318
0.440
Market Risk-CLMX
318
0.182
Market Risk-MM
318
0.177
Market Risk-CLMX 5 Days
318
0.184
Idio Risk-CLMX
318
0.416
Idio Risk-MM
318
0.382
Idio Risk-CLMX 5 Days
318
0.385
NBER Recessions
Total Risk-MM
83
0.489
Market Risk-CLMX
83
0.203
Market Risk-MM
83
0.201
Market Risk-CLMX 5 Days
83
0.214
Idio Risk-CLMX
83
0.457
Idio Risk-MM
83
0.420
Idio Risk-CLMX 5 Days
83
0.425
Chicago Fed National Activity Index (CFNAITot)
Total Risk-MM
318
0.353
Market Risk-CLMX
318
0.114
Market Risk-MM
318
0.116
Market Risk-CLMX 5 Days
318
0.125
Idio Risk-CLMX
318
0.345
Idio Risk-MM
318
0.322
Idio Risk-CLMX 5 Days
318
0.320
Credit Spread
Total Risk-MM
317
0.420
Market Risk-CLMX
317
0.160
Market Risk-MM
317
0.162
Market Risk-CLMX 5 Days
317
0.161
Idio Risk-CLMX
317
0.397
Idio Risk-MM
317
0.368
Idio Risk-CLMX 5 Days
317
0.372
VIX Index
Total Risk-MM
177
0.494
Market Risk-CLMX
177
0.200
Market Risk-MM
177
0.193
Market Risk-CLMX 5 Days
177
0.192
Idio Risk-CLMX
177
0.468
Idio Risk-MM
177
0.429
Idio Risk-CLMX 5 Days
177
0.428

Median

N

Low
Mean

Median

Mean

Difference
p-value Median

0.405
0.156
0.155
0.167
0.386
0.355
0.363

318
318
318
318
318
318
318

0.322
0.085
0.092
0.096
0.320
0.301
0.298

0.316
0.089
0.091
0.095
0.312
0.294
0.295

0.118
0.097
0.085
0.089
0.095
0.081
0.088

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.088
0.066
0.064
0.072
0.075
0.061
0.068

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.464
0.181
0.160
0.189
0.446
0.411
0.411

553
553
553
553
553
553
553

0.365
0.123
0.125
0.129
0.354
0.330
0.329

0.342
0.108
0.109
0.116
0.336
0.313
0.313

0.124
0.080
0.076
0.085
0.103
0.090
0.096

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.122
0.073
0.051
0.072
0.110
0.098
0.098

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.339
0.102
0.103
0.115
0.331
0.310
0.312

318
318
318
318
318
318
318

0.409
0.153
0.154
0.155
0.391
0.361
0.363

0.377
0.132
0.129
0.136
0.364
0.335
0.339

-0.056
-0.039
-0.038
-0.031
-0.045
-0.039
-0.043

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

-0.039
-0.030
-0.027
-0.021
-0.033
-0.025
-0.027

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.379
0.138
0.140
0.142
0.360
0.334
0.342

319
319
319
319
319
319
319

0.343
0.107
0.108
0.120
0.339
0.316
0.312

0.330
0.099
0.099
0.110
0.325
0.305
0.309

0.077
0.053
0.055
0.041
0.059
0.052
0.060

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.048
0.039
0.042
0.032
0.035
0.030
0.034

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.453
0.172
0.159
0.169
0.433
0.400
0.399

178
178
178
178
178
178
178

0.351
0.103
0.120
0.102
0.338
0.318
0.309

0.341
0.098
0.112
0.101
0.332
0.311
0.307

0.142
0.097
0.073
0.090
0.130
0.111
0.119

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.112
0.073
0.047
0.068
0.101
0.089
0.092

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

p-value

(continued)

31

Table 1. Differences in Risk Measures (continued)
Panel A: Results by Market and Economic Condition (continued)
Risk Measure
Uncertainty Index
Total Risk-MM
Market Risk-CLMX
Market Risk-MM
Market Risk-CLMX 5 Days
Idio Risk-CLMX
Idio Risk-MM
Idio Risk-CLMX 5 Days

N
258
258
258
258
258
258
258

High
Mean
0.427
0.156
0.155
0.158
0.411
0.379
0.379

Median

N

Low
Mean

Median

Mean

0.394
0.130
0.123
0.140
0.385
0.359
0.356

261
261
261
261
261
261
261

0.379
0.128
0.127
0.139
0.372
0.345
0.346

0.358
0.112
0.111
0.126
0.347
0.324
0.326

0.048
0.028
0.028
0.019
0.039
0.035
0.033

Difference
p-value Median
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.036
0.018
0.011
0.015
0.039
0.036
0.030

p-value
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.04]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

Panel B: Results by Subperiod
High CRSP Vol
N
Mean
Median

N

Low CRSP Vol
Mean Median

Mean

Difference
p-value Median

Risk Measure
1963-2015
Total Risk-MM
Market Risk-CLMX
Market Risk-MM
Market Risk-CLMX 5 Days
Idio Risk-CLMX
Idio Risk-MM
Idio Risk-CLMX 5 Days

p-value

318
318
318
318
318
318
318

0.440
0.182
0.177
0.184
0.416
0.382
0.385

0.405
0.156
0.155
0.167
0.386
0.355
0.363

318
318
318
318
318
318
318

0.322
0.085
0.092
0.096
0.320
0.301
0.298

0.316
0.089
0.091
0.095
0.312
0.294
0.295

0.118
0.097
0.085
0.089
0.095
0.081
0.088

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.088
0.066
0.064
0.072
0.075
0.061
0.068

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

1963-1979
Total Risk-MM
Market Risk-CLMX
Market Risk-MM
Market Risk-CLMX 5 Days
Idio Risk-CLMX
Idio Risk-MM
Idio Risk-CLMX 5 Days

102
102
102
102
102
102
102

0.374
0.142
0.138
0.170
0.363
0.335
0.339

0.363
0.127
0.124
0.157
0.354
0.328
0.327

102
102
102
102
102
102
102

0.276
0.067
0.074
0.085
0.274
0.260
0.260

0.282
0.069
0.074
0.083
0.282
0.267
0.269

0.098
0.075
0.063
0.085
0.089
0.075
0.080

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.081
0.057
0.050
0.074
0.072
0.061
0.058

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

1980-1999
Total Risk-MM
Market Risk-CLMX
Market Risk-MM
Market Risk-CLMX 5 Days
Idio Risk-CLMX
Idio Risk-MM
Idio Risk-CLMX 5 Days

120
120
120
120
120
120
120

0.422
0.163
0.138
0.172
0.419
0.385
0.386

0.400
0.146
0.123
0.160
0.395
0.364
0.368

120
120
120
120
120
120
120

0.369
0.090
0.091
0.099
0.376
0.351
0.339

0.371
0.095
0.089
0.098
0.372
0.352
0.336

0.053
0.073
0.047
0.074
0.044
0.034
0.047

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.029
0.051
0.034
0.062
0.023
0.012
0.032

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

2000-2015
Total Risk-MM
Market Risk-CLMX
Market Risk-MM
Market Risk-CLMX 5 Days
Idio Risk-CLMX
Idio Risk-MM
Idio Risk-CLMX 5 Days

96
96
96
96
96
96
96

0.523
0.237
0.249
0.215
0.466
0.427
0.432

0.481
0.201
0.219
0.189
0.426
0.396
0.407

96
96
96
96
96
96
96

0.323
0.108
0.131
0.104
0.300
0.284
0.288

0.314
0.106
0.130
0.104
0.292
0.276
0.280

0.200
0.129
0.118
0.111
0.166
0.143
0.144

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.167
0.094
0.089
0.085
0.135
0.120
0.127

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

(continued)

32

Table 1. Differences in Risk Measures (continued)
Panel C: Results for NYSE/AMEX Only and Excluding 1995-2002
High CRSP Vol
Mean Median

Low CRSP Vol
Mean Median

Difference
Mean p-value Median

Risk Measure
NYSE/AMEX
Total Risk-MM
Market Risk-CLMX
Market Risk-MM
Market Risk-CLMX 5 Days
Idio Risk-CLMX
Idio Risk-MM
Idio Risk-CLMX 5 Days

318
318
318
318
318
318
318

0.395
0.182
0.171
0.184
0.362
0.336
0.337

0.364
0.156
0.145
0.167
0.341
0.317
0.320

318
318
318
318
318
318
318

0.290
0.085
0.088
0.096
0.284
0.269
0.268

0.292
0.089
0.088
0.095
0.291
0.271
0.270

0.105
0.097
0.083
0.089
0.078
0.067
0.069

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.072
0.066
0.057
0.072
0.051
0.047
0.051

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

Excluding 1995-2002
Total Risk-MM
Market Risk-CLMX
Market Risk-MM
Market Risk-CLMX 5 Days
Idio Risk-CLMX
Idio Risk-MM
Idio Risk-CLMX 5 Days

270
270
270
270
270
270
270

0.405
0.170
0.173
0.175
0.376
0.347
0.351

0.372
0.148
0.151
0.158
0.355
0.327
0.335

270
270
270
270
270
270
270

0.314
0.083
0.090
0.094
0.311
0.293
0.290

0.312
0.086
0.089
0.091
0.305
0.290
0.290

0.091
0.087
0.082
0.082
0.065
0.054
0.061

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.061
0.062
0.062
0.067
0.050
0.037
0.046

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

NYSE/AMEX, Excluding 1995-2002
Total Risk-MM
270
Market Risk-CLMX
270
Market Risk-MM
270
Market Risk-CLMX 5 Days 270
Idio Risk-CLMX
270
Idio Risk-MM
270
Idio Risk-CLMX 5 Days
270

0.384
0.170
0.174
0.175
0.345
0.322
0.320

0.350
0.148
0.148
0.158
0.329
0.309
0.308

270
270
270
270
270
270
270

0.287
0.083
0.087
0.094
0.280
0.266
0.264

0.292
0.086
0.088
0.091
0.288
0.270
0.266

0.097
0.087
0.087
0.082
0.064
0.056
0.056

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.058
0.062
0.060
0.067
0.041
0.038
0.042

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

N

N

33

p-value

Table 2. Time-Series Regressions of Risk Measures
The table presents results of time-series regressions with monthly measures of idiosyncratic risk as the dependent
variables. Average risk variables are alternatively from the market model or the CLMX model. Regressions include
data from 1963-2015. Explanatory variables include lagged risk measures and market returns as well as the Chicago
Fed economic activity index. Panel A shows results for all firms, Panel B for NYSE/AMEX firms, and Panel C for
NASDAQ firms. p-values reported as [0.00] are significant at better than the 1% level. Appendix A provides definitions of all variables.

Panel A: All Firms
Log Idiosyncratic Risk CLMX

Log Market Risk
2

Log Market Risk
Lag Log Idio Risk
Lag Log Market Risk
Chicago Fed Index
CRSP-VW-Return
Time
Intercept
Adjusted R2
Observations

Log Idiosyncratic Risk MM

(1)
Coef p-value

(2)
Coef p-value

(3)
Coef p-value

(4)
Coef p-value

0.529

[0.00]

0.539

[0.00]

0.455

[0.00]

0.459

[0.00]

0.068
0.839
-0.159

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

[0.00]
[0.08]
[0.00]

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.18]
[0.00]
[0.10]
[0.00]

0.054
0.887
-0.149

0.294
-0.040
0.281

0.070
0.841
-0.157
0.006
0.300
-0.037
0.299

0.271
0.009
0.196

[0.00]
[0.72]
[0.00]

0.055
0.889
-0.148
0.003
0.275
0.009
0.206

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.49]
[0.00]
[0.72]
[0.00]

0.88
636

0.88
636

0.88
636

0.88
636

Panel B: NYSE/AMEX Firms
Log Idiosyncratic Risk CLMX

Log Market Risk
2

Log Market Risk
Lag Log Idio Risk
Lag Log Market Risk
Chicago Fed Index
CRSP-VW-Return
Time
Intercept
Adjusted R2
Observations

Log Idiosyncratic Risk MM

(1)
Coef p-value

(2)
Coef p-value

(3)
Coef p-value

(4)
Coef p-value

0.548

[0.00]

0.550

[0.00]

0.447

[0.00]

0.448

[0.00]

0.069
0.726
-0.119

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.76]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.053
0.843
-0.132

0.319
-0.180
0.285

0.070
0.727
-0.119
0.001
0.321
-0.179
0.289

0.266
-0.057
0.188

[0.00]
[0.02]
[0.00]

0.053
0.844
-0.132
0.001
0.266
-0.056
0.190

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.87]
[0.00]
[0.03]
[0.00]

0.86
636

0.86
636

0.85
636

0.85
636

(continued)

34

Table 2. Time-Series Regressions of Risk Measures (continued)
Panel C: NASDAQ Firms
Log Idiosyncratic Risk CLMX
Coef
Log Market Risk
2

Log Market Risk
Lag Log Idio Risk
Lag Log Market Risk
Chicago Fed Index
CRSP-VW-Return
Time
Intercept
Adjusted R2
Observations

(1)
p-value

Coef

(2)
p-value

Log Idiosyncratic Risk MM
Coef

(3)
p-value

Coef

(4)
p-value

0.679

[0.00]

0.681

[0.00]

0.419

[0.00]

0.407

[0.00]

0.111
0.854
-0.181

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

[0.06]
[0.00]
[0.00]

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.92]
[0.06]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.047
0.910
-0.170

0.238
-0.205
0.478

0.112
0.854
-0.181
0.001
0.240
-0.203
0.480

0.107
-0.033
0.167

[0.35]
[0.71]
[0.00]

0.045
0.907
-0.172
-0.005
0.100
-0.043
0.152

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.41]
[0.39]
[0.63]
[0.01]

0.89
396

0.89
396

35

0.90
396

0.90
396

Table 3. Time-Series Regressions with Changes in Idiosyncratic Risk
This table presents results of time-series regressions with first-differences in monthly idiosyncratic risk as the dependent variables. Average risk variables are alternatively from the market model or the CLMX model. Regressions include
data from 1963-2015. Explanatory variables include changes in market risk, market returns, a time trend and levels
and changes of various economic/market indicators. p-values reported as [0.00] are significant at better than the 1%
level. Appendix A provides definitions of all variables.
Change Idiosyncratic Risk-CLMX

Panel A: Full Sample
Change Market Risk
Change Credit Spread
NBER Recession
Chicago Fed Index (CFNAITot)
Change Chicago Fed Index (CFNAITot)
CRSP-VW Return
Time
Intercept
Adjusted R2
Observations
Panel B: 1963-1979
Change Market Risk
Change Credit Spread
NBER Recession
Chicago Fed Index (CFNAITot)
Change Chicago Fed Index (CFNAITot)
CRSP-VW Return
Time
Intercept
Adjusted R2
Observations
Panel C: 1980-1999
Change Market Risk
Change Credit Spread
NBER Recession
Chicago Fed Index (CFNAITot)
Change Chicago Fed Index (CFNAITot)
CRSP-VW Return
Time
Intercept
Adjusted R2
Observations

Change Idiosyncratic Risk-MM

(1)
Coef p-value

(2)
Coef p-value

(3)
Coef p-value

(4)
Coef p-value

0.632 [0.00]

0.637
0.053
0.005
0.003
0.000
0.093
0.003
-0.005

0.527

[0.00]

-0.002
-0.001

[0.75]
[0.72]

0.531
0.046
0.008
0.005
-0.001
0.089
0.004
-0.005

-0.002 [0.84]
-0.001 [0.72]
0.44
636

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.46]
[0.19]
[0.85]
[0.01]
[0.76]
[0.24]

0.48
636

0.562 [0.00]

0.630
0.042
0.005
0.003
0.001
0.128
-0.010
-0.003

-0.013 [0.70]
0.000 [0.98]
0.38
204

0.45
636
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.49]
[0.19]
[0.79]
[0.01]
[0.76]
[0.47]

0.45
204

0.755 [0.00]

0.763
0.036
0.005
0.003
-0.004
0.037
0.021
-0.01

0.021 [0.58]
-0.008 [0.53]
0.53
240

0.53
240

0.335 [0.00]

-0.015 [0.63]
0.000 [0.92]
0.23
204

[0.00]
[0.01]
[0.70]
[0.51]
[0.33]
[0.55]
[0.59]
[0.50]

0.647 [0.00]

0.016 [0.54]
-0.006 [0.48]
0.63
240

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.14]
[0.03]
[0.44]
[0.00]
[0.58]
[0.09]

0.49
636
0.413
0.047
0.008
0.005
-0.001
0.106
-0.012
-0.004

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.26]
[0.03]
[0.69]
[0.02]
[0.68]
[0.35]

0.34
204
0.68
0.032
0.006
0.003
-0.005
0.105
0.018
-0.009

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.45]
[0.33]
[0.05]
[0.01]
[0.50]
[0.33]

0.66
240

(continued)

36

Table 3. Time-Series Regressions with Changes in Idiosyncratic Risk (continued)

Change Idiosyncratic Risk-CLMX

Panel D: 2000-2015
Change Market Risk
Change Credit Spread
NBER Recession
Chicago Fed Index (CFNAITot)
Change Chicago Fed Index (CFNAITot)
CRSP-VW Return
Time
Intercept
Adjusted R2
Observations

Change Idiosyncratic Risk-MM

(1)
Coef p-value

(2)
Coef p-value

(3)
Coef p-value

(4)
Coef p-value

0.564 [0.00]

0.531
0.099
0.002
-0.001
0.008
0.214
0.030
-0.022

0.511 [0.00]

0.45
0.062
0.009
0.004
0.004
0.065
0.043
-0.028

0.042 [0.52]
-0.026 [0.46]
0.40
192

0.48
192

37

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.90]
[0.92]
[0.18]
[0.01]
[0.63]
[0.53]

0.044 [0.44]
-0.027 [0.38]
0.40
192

0.43
192

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.53]
[0.53]
[0.52]
[0.38]
[0.43]
[0.37]

Table 4. Regression Analysis of Idiosyncratic Risk by Characteristic Quintile
The table presents results of regressions of monthly idiosyncratic risk on contemporaneous and lagged market risk
and lagged idiosyncratic risk. Separate results are presented for portfolios sorted on characteristic quintiles. Average
risk measures are obtained from the market model method. Results are for firms from all exchanges. Data are from
1963-2015. p-values reported as [0.00] are significant at better than the 1% level. Appendix A provides definitions of
all variables.

Lag Log Illiquidity Ratio Log Market Risk
Log Market Risk2
Lag Log Market Risk
Lag Log Idio Risk
Intercept
Adjusted R2
Observations
Lag PctZeroReturns

Log Market Risk
Log Market Risk2
Lag Log Market Risk
Lag Log Idio Risk
Intercept
Adjusted R2
Observations

Lag IdioRisk

Log Market Risk
Log Market Risk2
Lag Log Market Risk
Lag Log Idio Risk
Intercept
Adjusted R2
Observations

Lag BookToMarket

Log Market Risk
Log Market Risk2
Lag Log Market Risk
Lag Log Idio Risk
Intercept
Adjusted R2
Observations

Lag EarningsToPrice

Log Market Risk
Log Market Risk2
Lag Log Market Risk
Lag Log Idio Risk
Intercept
Adjusted R2
Observations

Low
Coef p-value
0.576 [0.00]
0.084
-0.110
0.815
0.250

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.85
636

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.86
636

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.82
636

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.89
636

0.91
636

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.385 [0.00]
0.036
-0.127
0.837
0.206

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.90
636

0.548 [0.00]
0.067
-0.104
0.875
0.444

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.86
636

0.410 [0.00]
0.042
-0.138
0.889
0.240

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.85
636

0.199 [0.00]
0.001
-0.226
0.983
-0.056

[0.89]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.33]

0.507 [0.00]
0.092
-0.129
0.957
-0.021

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.59]

0.394 [0.00]
0.043
-0.150
0.899
0.154

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.90
636

0.462 [0.00]
0.055
-0.149
0.864
0.164

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.01]

0.86
636

0.412 [0.00]
0.046
-0.146
0.874
0.140

0.028
-0.150
0.916
0.111

0.86
636

0.393 [0.00]
0.051
-0.120
0.922
0.144

High
Coef p-value
0.322 [0.00]

0.89
636

0.86
636

0.422 [0.00]
0.049
-0.137
0.878
0.165

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.89
636

0.373 [0.00]
0.040
-0.140
0.888
0.123

0.032
-0.134
0.900
0.117

0.89
551

0.356 [0.00]
0.037
-0.123
0.884
0.164

4
Coef p-value
0.325 [0.00]

0.88
636

0.86
636

0.334 [0.00]
0.033
-0.132
0.904
0.122

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.88
636

0.344 [0.00]
0.035
-0.135
0.909
0.130

0.046
-0.124
0.898
0.169

0.92
462

0.88
636

0.373 [0.00]
0.047
-0.117
0.915
0.185

0.448 [0.00]
0.055
-0.098
0.846
0.227

3
Coef p-value
0.383 [0.00]

0.88
636

0.87
636

0.454 [0.00]
0.062
-0.113
0.886
0.235

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.89
636

0.454 [0.00]
0.042
-0.167
0.826
0.285

0.053
-0.114
0.866
0.171
0.87
636

0.465 [0.00]
0.064
-0.076
0.814
0.190

2
Coef p-value
0.418 [0.00]

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.415 [0.00]
0.048
-0.144
0.877
0.152

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.86
636

(continued)

38

Table 4. Regression Analysis of Idiosyncratic Risk by Characteristic Quintile (continued)

Lag R&D-Share

Log Market Risk
Log Market Risk2
Lag Log Market Risk
Lag Log Idio Risk
Intercept
Adjusted R2
Observations

Lag MarketCap

Log Market Risk
Log Market Risk2
Lag Log Market Risk
Lag Log Idio Risk
Intercept
Adjusted R2
Observations

Low
Coef p-value

2
Coef p-value

3
Coef p-value

4
Coef p-value

High
Coef p-value

0.433 [0.00]

0.245 [0.00]

0.283 [0.00]

0.127 [0.00]

0.213 [0.00]

0.052
-0.144
0.884
0.170

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.87
629

0.86
636

[0.00]
[0.03]
[0.00]
[0.93]

0.62
629

0.356 [0.00]
0.037
-0.149
0.907
0.126

0.024
-0.033
0.714
-0.005

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.85
636

39

[0.06]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.84]

0.61
548

0.425 [0.00]
0.054
-0.122
0.871
0.173

0.017
-0.052
0.665
0.013

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.86
636

[0.01]
[0.01]
[0.00]
[0.14]

0.68
591

0.393 [0.00]
0.045
-0.128
0.869
0.133

0.011
-0.037
0.800
-0.066

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.84
636

[0.16]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.42]

0.75
486

0.459 [0.00]
0.057
-0.120
0.835
0.168

0.016
-0.067
0.818
0.051

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.516 [0.00]
0.068
-0.106
0.801
0.195
0.84
636

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

Table 5. Regression Analysis of Idiosyncratic Earnings Risk
The table presents results of panel regressions with quarterly idiosyncratic risk of firm fundamentals as dependent
variable. In particular, alternative measures of idiosyncratic volatility of firm fundamental performance are idiosyncratic earnings risk (IdioEarningsRisk), idiosyncratic profitability risk (IdioProfitRisk), and idiosyncratic profit margin
risk (IdioMarginRisk). The explanatory variables are contemporaneous market risk and four lags of market risk as
well as contemporaneous idiosyncratic risk and four lags of idiosyncratic risk from the market model. The sample
period is 1963-2015. The table reports the regression coefficients, associated p-values as well as the R-Squared and
the number of observations. It also reports marginal effects calculated as the effect of a one standard deviation increase
in market risk across all quarters on idiosyncratic volatility of fundamental firm performance. Standard errors are
corrected for clustering by quarter. p-values reported as [0.00] are significant at better than the 1% level. Appendix A
provides definitions of all variables.

LogMarketRisk (t)
LogMarketRisk (t-1)
LogMarketRisk (t-2)
LogMarketRisk (t-3)
LogMarketRisk (t-4)
LogIdioRisk (t)
LogIdioRisk (t-1)
LogIdioRisk (t-2)
LogIdioRisk (t-3)
LogIdioRisk (t-4)
Intercept

IdioEarningsToSales
p -value
Coef
[0.00]
0.013
[0.00]
0.008
[0.00]
0.006
[0.00]
0.006
[0.00]
0.008
[0.02]
0.001
[0.00]
0.001
[0.02]
0.001
[0.02]
0.001
[0.01]
0.001
[0.00]
0.078

IdioProfitability
p -value
Coef
[0.00]
0.006
[0.00]
0.004
[0.00]
0.003
[0.00]
0.003
[0.00]
0.004
[0.55]
0.000
[0.11]
0.000
[0.59]
0.000
[0.35]
0.000
[0.27]
0.000
[0.00]
0.035

Marginal Effect of +1 SD MR

0.346

0.282

R2
Observations

0.031
413,746

0.019
410,300

40

IdioGrossProfitMargin
p -value
Coef
[0.00]
0.003
[0.00]
0.002
[0.00]
0.002
[0.00]
0.002
[0.00]
0.003
[0.55]
0.000
[0.22]
0.000
[0.25]
0.000
[0.63]
0.000
[0.33]
0.000
[0.00]
0.022
0.284
0.018
394,578

Table 6. Regression Analysis of Idiosyncratic Risk with Market Risk Interactions
The table presents results of panel regressions with (the natural logarithm of) monthly idiosyncratic risk as dependent variable. The explanatory variables include
(the natural logarithm of) market risk as well as its interactions with various firm characteristics. All risk variables are from the market model. The sample period
is 1963-2015. The table reports the regression coefficients, associated p-values as well as the R-Squared and the number of observations. Standard errors are
corrected for clustering by month. The last specification also reports marginal effects calculated as the regression coefficient multiplied with the standard deviation
of the regressor. p-values reported as [0.00] are significant at better than the 1% level. Appendix A provides definitions of all variables.

(1)
Coef p-value
0.172 [0.00]

Log Market Risk
Lag Log Illiquidity Ratio
Log Market Risk * Lag Log Illiquidity Ratio
Lag Log IdioRisk
Log Market Risk * Lag Log IdioRisk
Lag BookToMarket
Log Market Risk * Lag BookToMarket
Lag EarningsToPrice
Log Market Risk * Lag EarningsToPrice
Lag R&D-Share
Log Market Risk * Lag R&D-Share
Lag Log MarketCap
Log Market Risk * Lag Log MarketCap
Lag Leverage
Log Market Risk * Lag Leverage
Intercept

-0.771

Adjusted R2

0.114

Observations

(2)
Coef p-value
0.196 [0.00]
0.072 [0.00]
-0.004 [0.00]

(3)
Coef p-value
0.094 [0.00]

0.688
0.008

(4)
Coef p-value
0.161 [0.00]

(5)
Coef p-value
0.156 [0.00]

(6)
Coef p-value
0.16 [0.00]

(7)
Coef p-value
0.187 [0.00]

[0.00]
[0.00]
0.045
0.016

[0.00]
[0.00]
-0.916
0.035

[0.00]
[0.00]
0.332
-0.018

[0.00]
[0.05]
-0.136
0.002

[0.00]

1,547,083

-0.415

[0.00]

0.244
1,547,083

-0.168

(8)
Coef p-value
0.177 [0.00]

[0.00]

0.528
1,547,083

-0.802

[0.00]

0.115

-0.773

[0.00]

0.169

1,547,083

41

1,547,083

-0.844

[0.00]

0.142
1,547,083

0.101

[0.00]
[0.13]

[0.00]

0.276
1,547,083

-0.054
-0.016
-0.755

[0.11]
[0.11]
[0.00]

0.114
1,547,083

Coef
0.139
-0.013
-0.008
0.538
-0.007
-0.012
0.007
-0.303
0.004
0.108
-0.014
-0.088
-0.012
-0.019
-0.019
0.185

(9)
p-value
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.05]
[0.04]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.37]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.14]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.562
1,547,083

MarEff
0.166
-0.035
-0.058
0.324
-0.016
-0.007
0.013
-0.044
0.001
0.030
-0.009
-0.152
-0.088
-0.004
-0.015

Table 7. Regression Analysis of Idiosyncratic Risk with Additional Controls
The table presents results of panel regressions with (the natural logarithm of) monthly idiosyncratic risk as dependent variable. The explanatory variables include
(the natural logarithm of) market risk, lagged and squared market risk, interactions of market risk with various firm characteristics as well as a number of additional
controls. All risk variables are from the market model. Panel A reports results for all firms. Panel B reports results for only NYSE/AMEX firms. Panel C reports
results for only NASDAQ firms. The sample period is 1963-2015. The table reports the regression coefficients, associated p-values as well as the R-Squared and
the number of observations. Standard errors are corrected for clustering by month. The last specification also reports marginal effects calculated as the regression
coefficient multiplied with the standard deviation of the regressor. p-values reported as [0.00] are significant at better than the 1% level. Appendix A provides
definitions of all variables.

Panel A: All Firms
(1)

(2)
Coef p-value
0.223 [0.00]

(3)
Coef p-value
0.334 [0.00]

(4)
Coef p-value
0.332 [0.00]

(5)
Coef p-value
0.359 [0.00]

(6)
Coef p-value
0.433 [0.00]

(7)
Coef p-value
0.344 [0.00]

(8)
Coef p-value MarEff
0.303 [0.00] 0.360

Log Market Risk

Coef
0.421

p-value
[0.00]

Log Market Risk2
Lag Log Market Risk

0.038
0.202

[0.00]
[0.00]

0.024
-0.047

[0.00]
[0.00]

0.035
0.178

[0.00]
[0.00]

0.033
0.158

[0.00]
[0.00]

0.035
0.174

[0.00]
[0.00]

0.035
0.198

[0.00]
[0.00]

0.034
0.179

[0.00]
[0.00]

0.028
-0.002

[0.00]
[0.79]

0.222
-0.002

Lag Log Market Risk2
Lag Log Illiquidity Ratio
Log Market Risk * Lag Log Illiquidity Ratio
Lag Log IdioRisk
Log Market Risk * Lag Log IdioRisk
Lag BookToMarket
Log Market Risk * Lag BookToMarket
Lag EarningsToPrice
Log Market Risk * Lag EarningsToPrice
Lag R&D-Share
Log Market Risk * Lag R&D-Share
Lag Log MarketCap
Log Market Risk * Lag Log MarketCap
Lag Leverage
Log Market Risk * Lag Leverage
Lag Log Cash&STI-to-TA
Return
Intercept

0.019
0.103
0.006

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

-0.004

[0.00]

0.019

[0.00]

0.017

[0.00]

0.018

[0.00]

0.018

[0.00]

0.019

[0.00]

0.606
-0.018

[0.00]
[0.00]
0.090
0.025

[0.00]
[0.00]
-0.560
0.094

[0.00]
[0.00]
0.014
-0.066

[0.40]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.14]
[0.00]

0.258
0.023
0.841
0.077
-0.471

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.13]
[0.00]

0.000
0.010
-0.002
0.432
-0.036
-0.027
0.003
-0.275
0.013
0.048
-0.021
-0.078
-0.011
0.024
-0.014
0.189
0.121
0.307

[0.85]
[0.00]
[0.05]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.08]
[0.00]
[0.01]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.04]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

-0.001
0.028
-0.013
0.260
-0.087
-0.016
0.005
-0.040
0.004
0.013
-0.014
-0.136
-0.081
0.006
-0.011
0.027
0.016

Adjusted R2
Observations

0.107

[0.00]

0.077

[0.00]

0.170

[0.00]

0.142

[0.00]

0.213

[0.00]

-0.168
-0.010
0.073

0.839
0.075
0.112

[0.00]
[0.09]
[0.00]

0.288
0.122
-0.195

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.852
0.070
-0.506

[0.00]
[0.16]
[0.00]

0.681
0.108
-0.455

[0.00]
[0.03]
[0.00]

0.697
0.074
-0.452

[0.00]
[0.14]
[0.00]

0.688
0.066
0.702

0.358
1,526,630

0.539
1,526,630

0.206
1,526,630

0.235
1,526,630

0.209
1,526,630

0.371
1,526,630

0.205
1,526,630

0.574
1,526,630

(continued)

42

Table 7. Regression Analysis of Idiosyncratic Risk with Additional Controls (continued)
Panel B: NYSE/AMEX Firms
Log Market Risk

(1)
Coef p-value
0.422 [0.00]

(2)
Coef p-value
0.228 [0.00]

(3)
Coef p-value
0.341 [0.00]

(4)
Coef p-value
0.342 [0.00]

(5)
Coef p-value
0.361 [0.00]

(6)
Coef p-value
0.431 [0.00]

(7)
Coef p-value
0.345 [0.00]

(8)
Coef p-value MarEff
0.274 [0.00] 0.318

Log Market Risk2
Lag Log Market Risk

0.038
0.201

[0.00]
[0.00]

0.025
-0.039

[0.00]
[0.00]

0.035
0.184

[0.00]
[0.00]

0.034
0.171

[0.00]
[0.00]

0.036
0.185

[0.00]
[0.00]

0.035
0.197

[0.00]
[0.00]

0.035
0.184

[0.00]
[0.00]

0.029
0.010

[0.00]
[0.14]

0.231
0.011

Lag Log Market Risk2
Lag Log Illiquidity Ratio
Log Market Risk * Lag Log Illiquidity Ratio
Lag Log IdioRisk
Log Market Risk * Lag Log IdioRisk
Lag BookToMarket
Log Market Risk * Lag BookToMarket
Lag EarningsToPrice
Log Market Risk * Lag EarningsToPrice
Lag R&D-Share
Log Market Risk * Lag R&D-Share
Lag Log MarketCap
Log Market Risk * Lag Log MarketCap
Lag Leverage
Log Market Risk * Lag Leverage
Lag Log Cash&STI-to-TA
Return
Intercept

0.019
0.095
0.007

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

-0.003

[0.00]

0.019

[0.00]

0.018

[0.00]

0.019

[0.00]

0.018

[0.00]

0.019

[0.00]

0.590
-0.016

[0.00]
[0.00]
0.128
0.019

[0.00]
[0.00]
-0.439
0.062

[0.00]
[0.00]
-0.125
-0.063

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.361
0.031
0.388
0.188
-0.553

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.001
0.017
0.002
0.394
-0.042
-0.006
0.004
-0.277
0.009
0.078
-0.011
-0.062
-0.005
0.089
0.000
0.072
0.213
0.148

[0.24]
[0.00]
[0.09]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.17]
[0.01]
[0.00]
[0.05]
[0.00]
[0.04]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.91]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.007
0.049
0.017
0.218
-0.100
-0.004
0.007
-0.039
0.003
0.013
-0.005
-0.119
-0.043
0.021
0.000
0.007
0.025

Adjusted R2
Observations

0.342

0.198

[0.00]

0.110

[0.00]

0.192

[0.00]

0.250

[0.00]

0.286

[0.00]

-0.145
-0.009
0.159

0.349
0.170
0.004

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.83]

0.136
0.218
-0.233

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.406
0.172
-0.590

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.335
0.216
-0.524

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.385
0.189
-0.517

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

0.268
0.164
0.497

0.504
919,008

0.187
919,008

0.200
919,008

0.180
919,008

0.354
919,008

0.180
919,008

0.543
919,008

919,008

(continued)

43

Table 7. Regression Analysis of Idiosyncratic Risk with Additional Controls (continued)
Panel C: NASDAQ Firms
(2)
Coef p-value
0.210 [0.00]

(3)
Coef p-value
0.291 [0.00]

(4)
Coef p-value
0.296 [0.00]

(5)
Coef p-value
0.334 [0.00]

(6)
Coef p-value
0.387 [0.00]

(7)
Coef p-value
0.302 [0.00]

(8)
Coef p-value MarEff
0.312 [0.00] 0.381

Log Market Risk

(1)
Coef p-value
0.391 [0.00]

Log Market Risk2
Lag Log Market Risk

0.034
0.178

[0.00]
[0.00]

0.022
-0.053

[0.00]
[0.00]

0.029
0.140

[0.00]
[0.00]

0.028
0.119

[0.00]
[0.00]

0.030
0.137

[0.00]
[0.00]

0.032
0.180

[0.00]
[0.00]

0.029
0.142

[0.00]
[0.00]

0.027
-0.004

[0.00]
[0.57]

0.215
-0.005

Lag Log Market Risk2
Lag Log Illiquidity Ratio
Log Market Risk * Lag Log Illiquidity Ratio
Lag Log IdioRisk
Log Market Risk * Lag Log IdioRisk
Lag BookToMarket
Log Market Risk * Lag BookToMarket
Lag EarningsToPrice
Log Market Risk * Lag EarningsToPrice
Lag R&D-Share
Log Market Risk * Lag R&D-Share
Lag Log MarketCap
Log Market Risk * Lag Log MarketCap
Lag Leverage
Log Market Risk * Lag Leverage
Lag Log Cash&STI-to-TA
Return
Intercept

0.016
0.109
0.005

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]

-0.004

[0.00]

0.014

[0.00]

0.012

[0.00]

0.014

[0.00]

0.016

[0.00]

0.014

[0.00]

0.571
-0.025

[0.00]
[0.00]
0.060
0.040

[0.00]
[0.00]
-0.549
0.128

[0.00]
[0.00]
-0.078
-0.077

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.05]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.87]
[0.00]

0.323
0.037
0.642
-0.014
-0.413

[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.81]
[0.00]

0.000
0.010
-0.004
0.426
-0.036
-0.046
0.002
-0.245
0.017
-0.018
-0.035
-0.090
-0.012
-0.012
-0.016
0.173
0.044
0.452

[0.74]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.45]
[0.00]
[0.01]
[0.07]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.41]
[0.00]
[0.00]
[0.21]
[0.00]

-0.002
0.025
-0.026
0.260
-0.082
-0.021
0.003
-0.036
0.006
-0.007
-0.029
-0.122
-0.084
-0.002
-0.010
0.031
0.007

Adjusted R2
Observations

0.329

0.079

[0.00]

0.095

[0.00]

0.256

[0.00]

0.111

[0.00]

0.243

[0.00]

-0.196
-0.005
0.029

0.720
0.001
0.211

[0.00]
[0.99]
[0.00]

0.231
0.039
-0.184

[0.00]
[0.27]
[0.00]

0.634
-0.015
-0.430

[0.00]
[0.81]
[0.00]

0.452
0.013
-0.384

[0.00]
[0.82]
[0.00]

0.553
-0.017
-0.360

[0.00]
[0.78]
[0.00]

0.582
-0.009
0.942

607,622

607,622

607,622

44

607,622

0.541

0.186

0.337

0.190

0.218

0.188

0.507
607,622

607,622

607,622

607,622

Appendix A. Variable Definitions
The table shows the names and definitions of the main variables used in the paper.
Variable
Panel A: Macro economic variables
Change Credit Spread
Change Chicago Fed Index (CFNAITot)
CreditSpread
CRSP Volatility (CRSPVol)
CRSP-VW-Return
BAA
GS10

NBER Recessions
Chicago Fed Index (CFNAITot)
Uncertainty Index
VIX Index
Panel B: Firm-level variables
BookToMarket
Cash&STI-to-TA
Change Idio Risk-CLMX
Change Idio Risk-MM
Change Market Risk-CLMX
Change Market Risk-MM
Change Return
EarningsToPrice
Idio Risk-CLMX
Idio Risk-CLMX 5 Days
Idio Risk-MM
IdioEarningsRisk

IdioMarginRisk

IdioProfitRisk

Illiquidity Ratio
Leverage
Log Cash&STI-to-TA
Market Risk-CLMX
Market Risk-CLMX 5 Days
Market Risk-MM

Definition
First difference of monthly CreditSpread
First difference of monthly Chicago Fed Index (CFNAITot)
BAA - GS10
Annualized monthly volatility of CRSP value-weighted market return calculated using
daily return observations.
Value-weighted CRSP stock market index (incl. dividends)
Moody's seasoned Baa corporate bond yield provided by Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, averages of business days (H.15 release)
Constant maturity 10-year U.S. Treasury yield provided by Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, averages of business days (H.15 release)
Equal to 1.0 for months during an NBER-dated recession. 0 otherwise
Chicago Fed National Activity Index: Total. Prior to March 1967, this series is the
sum of the subcomponents listed above.
From Kozeniauskas, Orlik and Velkamp (2014)
Implied Volatility Index (CBOE)
(CommonEquity + DeferredTaxesBS)/MarketCap
Cash and Short-term Investments / Total Assets
First difference of monthly IdioRisk from CLMX model
First difference of monthly IdioRiskMM
First difference of monthly MarketRisk from CLMX model
First difference of monthly MarketRiskMM
First difference of monthly Return
(IncomeBeforeExtraItems + DeferredTaxesIS - PreferredDividends)/ MarketCap
Idiosyncratic risk from CLMX model using daily returns in a month
Idiosyncratic risk from CLMX model using daily returns of rolling 5-day returns in a
month
Idiosyncratic risk from market model
((ESi(t) – MESi(t)) – (ESi(t-4) – MESi(t-4)) 2, where ESi(t) is the earnings-to-sales
ratio for quarter t for firm i and MES(t) is the value-weighted average of firm-level
ESi(t) using prior period market capitalization
((GPMi(t) – MGPMi(t)) – (GPMi(t-4) – MGPMi(t-4)) 2, where GPMi(t) is the gross
profit margin (defined as net sales or revenues minus cost of goods sold and minus
depreciation and amortization, divided by net sales or revenues) for quarter t for firm
i and MGPM(t) is the value-weighted average of firm-level GPM i(t) using prior
period market capitalization
((Pi(t) – MPi(t)) – (Pi(t-4) – MPi(t-4)) 2, where Pi(t) is operating income divided by net
sales or revenues for quarter t for firm i and MP(t) is the value-weighted average of
firm-level Pi(t) using prior period market capitalization
Monthly average of (Absolute Stock Return (stock i)/Trading Volume (stock i))
(TotalDebt + PreferredStock) / Size
log (1 + Cash&STI-to-TA)
Market risk from CLMX model
Market risk from market model using daily returns of rolling 5-day returns in a
month
Market risk from market model using daily returns in a month

(continued)

45

Appendix A. Variable Definitions (continued)
Variable
MarketCap
PctZeroReturns
R&DShare
Return
Size
TotalRisk-MM

Definition
Market capitalization in millions
Percentage of zero returns (%)
Max(R&Dexpense, 0) / (Max(R&Dexpense, 0) + Max(CapEx, 0))
Stock Return
Total debt + Market capitalization
Total risk (standard deviation of daily returns in a month)

46

