NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNION ARMY VETERANS, ALL GROWN UP
Dora L. Costa
Heather DeSomer
Eric Hanss
Christopher Roudiez
Sven E. Wilson
Noelle Yetter
Working Paper 22497
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22497

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016

The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of NIA P01 AG10120. Dora Costa also has
benefited from the use of facilities and resources at the California Center for Population
Research, UCLA, which is supported in part by NICHD grant R24HD041022. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Dora L. Costa, Heather DeSomer, Eric Hanss, Christopher Roudiez, Sven E. Wilson,
and Noelle Yetter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Union Army Veterans, All Grown Up
Dora L. Costa, Heather DeSomer, Eric Hanss, Christopher Roudiez, Sven E. Wilson, and
Noelle Yetter
NBER Working Paper No. 22497
August 2016
JEL No. I10,J10,N11
ABSTRACT
This paper overviews the research opportunities made possible by a NIA-funded program project,
Early Indicators, Intergenerational Processes, and Aging. Data collection began almost three
decades ago on 40,000 soldiers from the Union Army in the US Civil War. The sample contains
extensive demographic, economic, and medical data from childhood to death. In recent years, a
large sample of African-American soldiers and an oversampling of soldiers from major US cities
have been added. Hundreds of historical maps containing public health data have been geocoded
to place soldiers and their family members in a geospatial context. With newly granted funding,
thousands of veterans will be linked to the demographic information available from the census
and vital records of their children.
Dora L. Costa
Bunche Hall 9272
Department of Economics
UCLA
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
costa@econ.ucla.edu
Heather DeSomer
NBER
2565 Chain Bridge Rd
Vienna, VA 22181
hdesomer@nber.org
Eric Hanss
Chicago Department of Transportation
30 N. LaSalle Street #1100
Chicago, IL 60602
evgeny.zamyatin@gmail.com

Christopher Roudiez
NBER
2565 Chain Bridge Rd
Vienna, VA 22181
croudiez@gmail.com
Sven E. Wilson
Brigham Young University
722 SWKT
Provo, UT 84602
sven_wilson@byu.edu
Noelle Yetter
NBER
2565 Chain Bridge Rd
Vienna, VA 22181
Noelle.Yetter@verizon.net

I.

Overview
A growing body of literature in the social sciences and in epidemiology

and medicine focuses on the life cycle and intergenerational determinants of
death, disease, and socioeconomic status (Costa 2015). Unfortunately, few
datasets permit such studies. Social scientists can study recent cohorts through
the HRS and the PSID but if we wish to understand long-run trends we need to
examine historical cohorts. Historical data sets, however, tend to be
geographically constrained, narrow in scope, and tied to a particular period of
time. In contrast, the NIA funded Early Indicators project which traces the life
histories of the first US cohort to reach age 65 in the twentieth century captures
demographic, socioeconomic and health data on a broadly representative sample
of tens of thousands of men and their families, linked over time, for a century.
Still expanding, the data collections include high-quality individual, household,
and company-level data coming from a period of immense economic
(industrialization, urbanization) and demographic (mortality and fertility
transitions) change.
Data in the Early Indicators collections are centered on random samples of
over 70,000 soldiers—black and white, urban and rural, immigrant and nativeborn--serving in the Union Army (UA) during the US Civil War. The UA
veterans are observed in all the surviving federal censuses from 1850-1930s, as

2

children residing with their parents, as soldiers, and later as beneficiaries of a
federal pension system that collected detailed health, demographic and economic
data until they died. Supplemental collections have augmented the original sample
of almost 40,000 white recruits with over 21,000 African-American soldiers and
an oversampling of 12,500 recruits from major cities in 19th century America (in
addition to the urban recruits already in the main sample). Because the rate of
participation in the Union Army was so high, the sample is largely representative
of the men in the North who were late teens and early twenties during the Civil
War. And because all data were collected from public sources, there are no
confidentiality requirements for using these data, and all data can be accessed
through the website UAdata.org.
In recent years, the UA sample has been complemented with a vast
ecological dataset that contains a century’s worth of public health, economic, and
demographic detail from large US cities. Researchers have merged thousands of
city maps, including detailed street-level changes over time, with thousands of
tables of data that are linked to specific urban locations or to wards and
neighborhoods. Because urban veterans in the pension system have street
addresses in their pension files, veterans can be precisely located and geocoded.
This allows analysis not only of urban living patterns but also of the
environmental risk factors faced by urban veterans.

3

Over the next five years, the research team will use powerful new
genealogical tools to link tens of thousands of children of UA veterans to their
death records and to the surviving manuscript schedules of the federal census
from 1860-1940, as well as constructing a similar non-UA intergenerational
sample from published family histories. These new efforts allow a truly
intergenerational and geospatial analysis of demographic processes.
This paper illustrates the wide-ranging research potential now available in
the Early Indicators collection and highlights the exciting new developments and
ongoing collections that will soon be available to researchers. Though many
papers have been published using the Early Indicators collections, in many
respects it is a collection that is only now coming of age. In the following
sections, we hope to provide an impetus and guide for new research with the
Early Indicators collections. We outline briefly the history of the project and
provide a detailed review of both data that have already come online and those
that are in process. We then provide numerous examples of research topics that
interested scholars might pursue using the Early Indicators data, and we discuss
several issues that researchers should be aware of when using the data. Though
the project has been underway for three decades, new research opportunities with
the Early Indicators collections are abundant.

II. Background

4

In the 1970s, an international group of scholars began using new data
sources to understand long-term mortality trends, including the secular decline in
mortality since the 1600s (Fogel et al. 1978). Research by McKeown (1976,
1978) in the preceding decades had emphasized the role of improved nutrition on
mortality decline, which challenged the prior consensus (United Nations, 1973)
that mortality decline was due to public health, medical knowledge, hygiene, and
income. Efforts by scholars working with these new data sources came up with
refined evidence on trends and more nuanced explanations of those trends.
(Haines 1978; Fogel 1986; Pope 1992).
Robert Fogel was a driving force behind much of the new data collection
and analysis. He and Stanley Engerman had used data on heights from probate
records to study the mortality of slaves in their path-breaking work Time on the
Cross (1974). Their work expanded the possibility of using anthropometric
measures, such as height and BMI, to study the role of chronic malnutrition on
health and longevity, which seemed to be important in explaining the new finding
that health and mortality could go through periods of decline even during periods
of strong economic growth (Margo and Steckel 1983; Fogel 1986; Komlos 1987).
As part of the effort to explain that paradox and to further understand secular
mortality decline, Fogel envisioned a vast new collection of data based on the
military and pension records from the US Civil War found in the National
Archives (Wimmer 2003).

5

The scope of Fogel’s proposal was daunting. It involved collecting and
digitizing very large archives and linking individuals across data sources. Today,
these tasks remain a significant technical and logistical challenge. In the 1980s it
was almost inconceivable. Nothing of this scale had ever been done before. A
grant application in 1986 was rejected on the grounds that such a massive and
wide-ranging data collection project was not feasible. Fogel, ever the optimist,
was determined to prove the critics wrong. With assistance from the National
Bureau of Economic Research, he began collecting a pilot sample of 20 Union
Army companies, developing at the same time the detailed software and
collection methods necessary to capture the soldiers’ experiences during the war,
their family background from the federal censuses, and their health histories
found in the pension records housed in the National Archives. Armed with the
evidence of a successful pilot, Fogel’s 1991 application to the National Institute
on Aging and the National Science Foundation, Early Indicators of Later Work
Levels, Disease and Death, was successful, which initiated the large-scale
collection of veteran data. From the beginning, the project involved scholars from
many universities. Larry Wimmer at Brigham Young University oversaw the
logistics and training of the data collectors at the National Archives, as well as
inputters in Chicago and Provo, Utah. Medical oversight was provided by doctors
Nevin Scrimshaw, Irv Rosenberg, and Louis Nguyen (Wimmer 2003).

6

The Early Indicators collections have re-shaped knowledge of health and
aging. Based on what they were seeing in the veterans’ pension records, Fogel
and Costa (1997) proposed a new theory of human physiology, which they
entitled “technophysio evolution.” The theory was that technologically induced
changes in the environment had induced a form of human evolution that was
“biological but not genetic, culturally transmitted, and not necessarily stable.” (p.
49) As the vast medical data in the pension files (referred to as the “surgeon’s
certificates”) started accumulating, it became apparent that these veterans had a
host of negative health conditions. At the time, the idea was still in vogue that the
elderly in pre-transition societies would be in relatively good health and free from
disability because, it was thought, the robust survived and the frail died
(Verbrugge, 1984; Alter and Riley 1989; Riley and Alter 1989; Myers, Lamb, and
Agree 2003). This idea was sharply challenged by the new data showing high
rates (relative to the mid-twentieth century) of disease (Costa 2000) and disability
(Costa 2002). The composition of disabling conditions had also shifted
considerably given that many non-fatal conditions became less disabling over
time because of both improving medical treatment and the declines in the physical
requirements of work (Wilson and Nguyen 1998; Song and Nguyen, 2003;
Wilson, Burton and Howel, 2005).
Since the 1990s, scholars have pursued a variety of other important
research topics made possible by the Union Army data. These include the benefits

7

of social networks (Costa and Kahn 2007a, 2007b, 2008, 2010); labor force
participation and retirement (Costa 1998; Lee 1998, 2001, 2007); the relationship
between wealth accumulation, economic mobility and health (Lee 2005, 2008);
marriage patterns (Hacker 2008); survival in urban environments (Cain and Hong,
2009); extreme aging (Costa and Lahey, 2005); and the epidemiology, social
ecology, and economic consequences of important diseases, such as
arteriosclerosis (Costa, Helmchen and Wilson 2005), arthritis (Canavese and
Fogel 2009), malaria (Hong 2007), and chronic respiratory disease (Wilson 2003).

III. Union Army Veterans and Related Collections
Since the initial successful grant in 1991, the Early Indicators project has
expanded its scope considerably. In addition to the original sample of over
39,000 white enlisted men from the Union Army, Project researchers have added
a sample of (21,000) African-American veterans from the United States Colored
Troops (USCT); an oversample of 12,500 urban recruits from the largest US
cities; 1,000 POWs from the infamous Andersonville camp; and a collection of
1,700 veterans who lived to at least the age of 95. The project has also added a
detailed set of urban ecological data (HUE) collected from thousands of historical
maps, which will allow the ability to place veterans in a rich geographical context.
Finally, our researchers are now collecting data on the children of Union Army
veterans, both black and white, facilitating an unprecedented opportunity to study

8

the intergenerational aspects of aging. As a complement to that new
intergenerational sample, funding will also be used to release publicly the sample
of US family history data originally collected by economic historian Clayne Pope.
The following sections provide more detail on each of these collections.

A. Completed Veteran Collections
1. Union Army Veterans (UAV)
The main thrust of that first major grant in 1991 was a sample of 39,340
recruits consisting of the complete enlistment of 331 randomly drawn companies
in the Union Army. Recruits in the sample were enlisted white soldiers in infantry
units from all Northern states. Wartime data are drawn first from the Compiled
Military Service Records (CMSRs), which contain information on the recruit
from his enlistment record (residence, occupation, age, height) and variables from
a monthly muster record, which includes health, battles, wounds, hospitalization,
desertion, POW status, and cause of death or muster-out. These data are
supplemented by variables from the Carded Medical Records (CMRs), which
contain information from military hospitals. The cluster-sample approach allows
researchers to calculate company-level variables, such as the company mortality
or ethnic diversity of the company.
From the starting point of the CMSR and CMR records, researchers then
go both forward and backward in the soldier’s life. Using the index of pensions,

9

they locate the pension records for those soldiers who lived long enough to enter
the pension system. From the pension files and the accompanying “Surgeons'
Certificates,” researchers draw a wealth of information, often covering several
decades, that includes demographic and economic information and the medical
records from examinations that were conducted by the Pension Bureau to
determine eligibility for pension support. Pension records can be dozens and
sometimes hundreds of pages in length, and they constitute the primary source of
data in the Union Army collection.
The final source of records come from the federal census. When the
project began, the most recent publicly-available census was 1910, so the veterans
were linked forward to the 1900 and 1910 census and backward to the 1850 and
1860 census records. These linkages allow demographic data to be collected not
only for the veteran, but also his childhood and adult families. Newer samples of
veterans have also been linked to the 1870 and 1880 census and the 1920 and
1930 censuses that have become publicly available since the collection project
began.

(Table 1: Linkage Rates by Sample and Record Type – HERE)

A data base with such rich information could not be created for
Confederate soldiers because they were not eligible for the Union Army pension.

10

Although the Confederate states later provided pensions for their veterans, this
pension information does not contain detailed medical information. In addition,
because the Confederate states had to pay for pensions out of state funds (Union
Army pensions were funded by tariffs), the pensions covered fewer men.

2. United States Colored Troops (USCT)
The most important addition to the project has been the collection of black
veterans from the USCT. These were conducted in two waves, an initial sample of
approximately 6,000 black soldiers and their white officers, which has recently
been supplemented by an additional 15,000 black soldiers and white officers.
African-American companies did not begin to be formed until mid-way through
the war, and their wartime experiences were quite different from the white
soldiers. However, the basic records and collection procedures for the black and
white soldiers are essentially the same. Furthermore, the USCT have been linked
to all available federal census records from 1850-1940, with the exception of the
fire-destroyed 1890 records.
The legacy of slavery easily can be seen in many dimensions of the USCT
sample. For instance, linkage rates to the 1850 and 1860 censuses were much
lower, especially for recruits who were slaves prior to the war. In later life, black
veterans faced discrimination in obtaining pension support, and their linkage rates
to later census years were lower than for whites, partly because their life

11

expectancy was lower than white veterans. The USCT collection is an invaluable
source of data for studying the lives of black veterans in the decades following the
war.

3. Urban Veterans Supplement
The Urban sample is a stand-alone oversampling of Civil War veterans
who enlisted in the largest US cities. Drawn in proportion to city size in 1860, the
sample was designed to allow researchers to examine intra-city disparities in
environmental conditions and draw inferences about the impact of ward
conditions on the recruits’ life-cycle aging process. A random sample of
companies with over 50% of the company members residing in one of five target
cities: Boston, Chicago, Philadelphia, New York, and Baltimore. The Urban
sample consists of over 12,500 soldiers, who were then located within these five
cities at the ward level.
The varying quality of records available for each city necessitated
different procedures for sample identification. Using Dyer’s Compendium of the
War of the Rebellion, State Adjutant Generals reports, and various online
resources, researchers compiled a list of companies that had more than 50% of
their recruits enlisting in each target city. Researchers then extracted names and
identifying information from the Regimental Books for those companies until the
sample size was reached. Military, pension, medical and census records were

12

collected for these urban recruits using the same procedures as the main Union
Army Veterans sample, though census linkage rates have improved because of
new electronic resources, such as Ancestry.com

4. Andersonville POW Supplement
The CMSRs and CMRs provide information on stressors faced by soldiers
in the army. We know the battles they fought in and have a record of their wounds
and injuries. We also know the location and length of service. Regimental
histories can also be exploited to gain more information on the wartime events
encountered by the veterans of a given company.
Soldiers taken as POWs were under conditions of extreme stress,
including, in some cases, long periods of malnutrition and even starvation. A
recent supplement to the data includes the records of 1,000 survivors of the
Andersonville POW Confederate prison. Andersonville was the most notorious
Confederate prison and the men who passed through there in our sample had a
mortality rate of 40 percent. In 2007, our researchers began collecting data on
survivors of Andersonville, using the index developed by the National Park
Service.
The Andersonville sample is drawn from those recruits who survived to
1900. These survivors were linked to their CMSR, CMR, pension records and the
eight federal census years with surviving manuscripts between 1850 and 1930. Of

13

the 1000 veterans in the sample, 197 are linked to their siblings who were
soldiers, whose complete data is also collected and will be included in a future
data release.

5. Oldest-Old Supplement
Studying extreme longevity often requires drawing individuals from
populations large enough to generate a sufficient number of very old members.
Given 19th century life expectancy, even the large Union Army collections have a
relatively small number of members reaching very old ages. The oldest-old is an
over-sampling of 1,700 individuals with an age of death confirmed to be at least
95 years old that will soon be available on-line.
To reach the target sample of 1,700 oldest-old, a list of nearly 6,000
potential nonagenarians was compiled from many sources, including gravestone
databases, obituaries, newspaper accounts, veterans associations and the 1930 and
1940 censuses. Death dates were confirmed from the pension files and the
veterans were linked to all the census years from 1850 to 1940.
The oldest-old supplement contains the same records present in the other
Veteran’s collections, but often additional records are available in later years,
including physician affidavits and home visits by the Veterans Administration
representatives. These records contain information on care arrangements,
disabilities and cognitive limitations not generally present for younger veterans.

14

B. Historical Urban Ecological (HUE) Data
For more than a decade, the Early Indicators team has been collecting data
on the public health environment of the following major US cities: Baltimore,
Boston, Chicago, Cincinnati, New York (Brooklyn), and Philadelphia, from 1830
through 1930. This collection of geospatial data was drawn from thousands of
maps and published data tables and is now publicly available as the Historical
Urban Ecological (HUE) data and as ICPSR 35617. Detailed changes in ward
boundaries, street layouts and other built environment were meticulously traced
over a century. No comparable street-level data for studying US urban history is
available elsewhere.
Researchers selected the HUE study cities and variables in order to best
analyze the effects of intra-urban health disparities and public health interventions
on individual mortality and longevity as observed through the Union Army and
USCT cohorts. The HUE data set includes ward boundary changes, street
networks, and ward-level data on disease, mortality, crime, water, sanitation,
commerce, industry, public works, property values and many other variables
reported by municipal departments for each study city. Researchers scoured
archives in each of the seven cities, as well as obtaining ward-level maps from the
Library of Congress.

15

In sum, these materials constitute a framework that allows researchers to
create accurate historical spatial and tabular data and perform geospatial and
statistical analysis at many scales, giving researchers a deeper look into life in the
rapidly changing cities of the nineteenth century. The HUE data by itself provides
a fascinating and dynamic picture of urban American history. But even more
exciting is the ability to link the Union Army collections to the HUE data.
Veterans who resided in large cities and applied for the pension provided their
street address, which allows us to precisely pinpoint the urban environment the
veterans were living in. All soldiers in our target cities have been geo-located to
their street addresses and can be integrated into the HUE data set. Additionally,
all locations have been assigned county codes enabling researchers to track the
mobility of veterans over time.

C. New and Ongoing Collections
Sadly, Robert Fogel died in June of 2013. Leadership of the Early
Indicators project then passed to Dora Costa at UCLA. In 2014, the National
Institute on Aging awarded a five year grant extension under a slightly different
name, Early Indicators, Intergenerational Processes, and Aging. The change in
the grant’s name reflected the new push to create datasets appropriate for studying
human development and aging within an intergenerational framework.

16

1. Veterans’ Children's Census (VCC) Collection
The Early Indicators data provide a mechanism for studying
intergenerational processes that is unavailable in modern data. We can study the
aging and mortality not only of the veterans but also of their children and their
childrens’ households. The VCC collects all possible data on veterans’ children
and spouses from available census records from 1850-1940 and, where available,
from vital records. Because of the difficulty of obtaining later-life linkages for
children of soldiers who died in the war, the VCC collection is limited to those
veterans who survived until 1900.
The VCC consists of three new scientific projects, each of which collects
data on children and spouses of veterans. The collection consists of three parts: 1)
1,882 POWs who survived to 1900; 2) 8,500 white non-POWs; 3) 4,500 AfricanAmerican soldiers from the USCT.. These collections come at considerable cost,
since it takes, on average, about 5 hours of searching genealogical databases and
inputting the results in order to collect the descendant data for a single Union
Army veteran.
The aim of the VCC database is to facilitate the study of the causal
mechanisms of intergenerational transmission of health, including the
transmission of the effects of stressful events from parents to children. The data
also create a valuable new object of study: the aging and longevity of women. In

17

historical intergenerational databases, women are often neglected because it can
be hard to track them once they marry and change their surnames. However, the
initial findings from the VCC are that about 70% of veterans’ daughters are linked
to at least one census outside of their father’s household, even when we do not
have a married name from the pension record. Similarly, a high rate of linkage to
death records is possible for the daughters of the veterans (though linkage to death
certificates is a function of location and year of death).

2. Intergenerationally-Linked Aging Sample (ILAS)
Although the Union Army sample is broadly representative of the general
population because of the high rate of participation in the Army, it is still useful to
utilize data that is not confined to veterans. The ILAS data were originally
collected by economic historian Clayne Pope from printed family histories and
genealogies from across the United States. The sample covers 39 family lineages
consisting of about 15,000 households over time. The sample includes
intergenerationally-linked records of 118,162 males and females born between
1577 and 1983. About 27% of the individuals in ILAS are currently linked to at
least one of the federal censuses between 1850 and 1910.
The ILAS project will explore the feasibility of linking the sample
individuals to the 1920-1940 censuses and recollecting the 1850-1910 census
records, which were originally obtained without the assistance of modern online

18

search capabilities. It will also merge ecological and macroeconomic variables
available from the censuses and other sources. The ILAS is a valuable companion
to the UAV because it contains information from the same cohort as the UAV as
well as cohorts born before and after the Union Army cohort. It also includes
important demographic groups the UAV collections do not, namely women and
Southerners.

IV. Research Possibilities
In addition to describing the multiple data sources and new research tools
that have become available, this paper overviews a few of the exciting research
questions that can be illuminated with the Early Indicators data collections,
including social gradients in health, racial inequality, social network dynamics,
mobility in time and space, the long-term economic, demographic and health
effects of local environments and public health interventions, and the
intergenerational transmission of health, well-being, and longevity. We detail a
few of the important demographic topics that can be addressed with the Early
Indicators data.

A. Racial Inequality
The Early Indicators data sources provide a unique resource for studying
racial disparities in health and mortality. A special collection of over 21,000 black

19

soldiers from the US Colored Troops (USCT) allows direct comparison with
white veterans on a number of health-related dimensions. The life expectancy of
black and white soldiers provides an indicator of hardships suffered by the
African Americans in the decades both before and after the Civil War. Of soldiers
surviving their wartime service, only 28.1% of black soldiers survive to appear in
either the pension rolls or census records in 1900, compared to 44.1% of white
soldiers. As an illustration of this disparity, Table 2 below shows 10-year
mortality rates, by age, for white and black veterans alive in 1900 with a known
age and death date (an expanded analysis would account for those censored cases
where post-1900 data is available, but no death date exists).

(Table 2: 10-year Mortality Rates by Race and Age, 1900-1910
HERE)

These basic results can be explored further with the demographic data from the
1900 and 1910 censuses and from the pension files, which also contain detailed
medical examinations.
The Early Indicators data also contains detailed information from medical
exams conducted to determine eligibility for and level of pension support at
several points in time over the life course. Because the data from the USCT was

20

recently expanded to include 21,000 soldiers, sample sizes are now sufficient to
study racial differences in both common and uncommon conditions.
The pension files also provide a view on the social and institutional
consequences of racial prejudice in 19th century America. Wilson (2010), for
instance, studies the impact of informal liberalization in the pension system on
black and white veterans. Long before Congress officially acted to liberalize
pension eligibility in 1890, veterans’ groups were exerting political influence to
increase dramatically the numbers of people being covered by the system. But this
informal liberalization applied primarily to whites. Costa (2010) finds that the
responsiveness of retirement decisions and living arrangements to pension income
was much higher for black veterans than for whites, indicating the harsh
alternative black veterans faced without that income.

B. Socioeconomic Gradients
The data contain several indicators of socioeconomic status and
background, including household wealth, literacy, occupation and place of
residence. The health impacts of a life full of hard labor, for instance, are poorly
understood in today’s highly-mechanized world. Occupations indicate important
differences in socioeconomic background, and the occupations of Union Army
soldiers can be tracked, in many cases, from their early life to death. Pension
income also raised the economic welfare of many, particularly black veterans. By

21

1907, the pension becomes primarily aged-based, and it is possible to examine the
effect of income on later-life mortality while controlling for the presence of
chronic health conditions (Eli 2015) Recent work (Salisbury 2014) has extended
the analysis of income to widows of veterans.

C. Local Urban Environments
The Early Indicators collections provide an unprecedented perspective on
the long-term effects of local environments on health and longevity. Recently
expanded oversampling of Union Army recruits from major cities allows for
comparisons across cities and, more important, for analysis at the ward level.
Researchers have spent many years geocoding historical maps so that recruits can
be placed in a physical space that contains variables such as crime, disease,
employment, government, municipal, property, and vital statistics. Many veterans
return to their cities of origin, or they are part of the massive internal migration to
the cities that took place in the late 19th century. Veterans, in many cases, can be
mapped to the street-level and therefore linked to the geocoded public health
information contained in the public health maps and the ward-level
epidemiological and demographic data. Large-N studies that link individuals to
their local neighborhood and public health data, such as infant mortality or
infectious disease death rates, as well as tracking people over time, are not
available from other historical or modern data sources. The HUE have also been

22

used by themselves (without the veterans) to study long-run neighborhood trends
for a large number of variables (Costa and Kahn 2015; Shertzer 2015)
A useful feature of studying these urban environments is that scholars can
examine how social gradients affected health in an era where access to quality
health care was not a confounding factor. Simply put, no one—rich or poor—had
access to effective medical treatments for most conditions. Thus, the privileged
and well-to-do, in contrast to today, faced many of the same health challenges as
the poor. More privileged classes were able, however, to locate themselves in
cleaner less congested environments. The Early Indicators collections allow for
studying the impact of local environments at several points in time and space.
The HUE data allow the analysis of the local environment on health
outcomes. These data contain a variety of health indicators, including specific
diseases and overall mortality. As an example, the figure below shows the 1890
locations of veterans living in Philadelphia and Baltimore in 1890. Colors on the
map indicate the crude mortality rate of the ward, with red being the highest
quintile and blue the lowest. 1890 is the year that many soldiers entered the
pension system due to the liberalization of the law governing pension eligibility.

(Figure 1: Veterans’ Residences in 1890, by Ward Crude Mortality Quintile
HERE)

23

D. Acute Stress
A potential key indicator of later health and mortality is acute stress.
Almost all soldiers in the Union Army experienced a measure of stress, but
recruits varied significantly in their experiences. The military data files contain
records of which battles were experienced by recruits as well as their POW
history during the war.
A simple indicator of stress is the mortality rate experienced at the
company level. The distribution of company-level mortality is shown in Figure 2
below, which indicates the broad range of mortality risk that companies
experienced. This variation can be exploited as a measure of wartime stress.
Researchers can also use information in the military files to construct measures of
stress. Variables that researchers might use for such an index include the battles
fought, length and time of service, injuries, hospitalization and disease at the
company level. Company-level mortality has been shown to have significant
effects on rates of chronic disease (Pizzaro, Silver, and Prause 2006) and on laterlife mortality (Costa and Kahn 2010).

(Figure 2: Company-Level Mortality during the Civil War HERE)

The intense stress of serving in POW camps can be studied with the
Andersonville supplement discussed above. Costa and Kahn (2007) studied the

24

survival of POWs in the camps finding that the presence of friends significantly
increased the rate of survival. Costa (2012) has also examined the later life
mortality of these same POWs. She finds that older age mortality is significantly
linked to the age of imprisonment. Younger soldiers at Andersonville (age<30)
face higher old-age mortality than their peers, but those imprisoned after age 30
have lower mortality in old-age.

E. Early Life Risk Factors
Above we emphasized the role that acute stress during wartime had on the
later life health and economic outcomes. Part of the stress experienced by soldiers
was serious wounds and injuries, the consequences of which could follow soldiers
in many areas of their lives. For instance, Lee (2008) finds that wartime wounds
and illnesses significantly diminished the veterans’ geographic mobility after the
war. On the health front, Wilson (2003) found that soldiers hospitalized for
infectious disease during the war had significantly higher rates of chronic
respiratory disease later in life.
Other scholars have used the Early Indicators data to link pre-war factors
to later life outcomes. For example, Su (2009) finds that risk exposures in early
life, including season of birth, country of origin, residential region, city size, and
height at enlistment influence mortality risk many decades after the war. Hong
(2007) looks at a specific risk factor—exposure to malaria—to study the health of

25

soldiers during the war. Those soldiers with high exposure to malaria were
significantly shorter at enlistment due to malnutrition and were more susceptible
to infections during the war.
One of the earliest uses of UA data was to examine the determinants of
height, which is a proxy for the cumulative impact of infectious disease and
nutrition during childhood. This line of research on US soldiers was sparked by
Margo and Steckel (1983), who identified the puzzling “antebellum paradox” of
declining height in a period of economic growth. (See also Costa 1993; Costa and
Steckel 1997; Haines, Craig, and Weiss 2000) Wilson and Pope (2003) find
significant effects of urbanization, socioeconomic status, occupation, and
migration history on the adult height of soldiers in the UA collection. More
recently, Zehetmayer (2011) has found that height is positively correlated with
proximity to protein-rich nutrients during childhood and with geographic
mobility. Height can still be fruitfully explored with new data on AfricanAmerican troops and with the augmented collection of urban recruits, where it can
be combined with the wide array of ecological variables present in the HUE data.

F. Social Networks
The Early Indicators collections have linked individuals in ways that are
uncommon in modern datasets. Recruits were sampled as whole companies
(usually 100-150 men), and companies were typically drawn heavily from a

26

common location. Costa and Kahn (2010) have explored how these social
networks affected the strength and cohesiveness of military units, and new
research is examining how these social networks can persist for many decades by
following the residential clustering of company members in later life (Costa, et al.
2016).
Because of the extensive geocoding of the urban data, often to the streetlevel address, analysis of social networks can be facilitated by a geo-spatial
analysis. Figure 3 shows a close-up of a Chicago neighborhood, for example, with
two veterans living around the corner from one another who served in the same
Illinois company many years previous.

(Figure 3: Veterans’ Residential Patterns over Time, Chicago HERE)

Family ties are also an important part of the veterans’ network that can be
exploited in the collection. Sizable pieces of the veterans’ lives are obtained from
linkage to the US federal censuses from 1850-1930, allowing information about
both childhood family ties and living arrangements in later life. Socioeconomic
information at the family level can be used to study the family-level effects on life
outcomes. Census records could be used to construct neighborhood level variables
such as ethnic concentration, occupation distributions, or wealth inequality.

27

G. Elderly Living Arrangements
Census collections allow researchers to study the lives of veterans in the
context of the families and households in which they lived. By 1900, most
veterans were getting pension support and they were, roughly, in the age interval
55-65—an ideal point to begin studying various aspects of the aging process
related to living arrangements.
The table below gives one perspective on elderly living arrangements for
Union Army veterans. The census enumerator indicated what member of each
household was the “head,” and each additional household member was identified
by their relationship to the household head. As can be seen from Table 3, most
veterans are listed as head, a percentage that declines gradually over the next two
decades.

(Table 3: Living Arrangements among Veterans, by Race and Year – HERE)

The most striking feature of this preliminary analysis, in our view, is the
similarity between black and white living arrangements of elderly soldiers. In
both 1900 and 1910, blacks and whites were equally likely to be household heads.
The likelihood of living as a parent of the household head is, in 1910, 8.2% for
whites and 3.6% for blacks. It is likely the case that black veterans were more

28

likely to have adult children who were less likely to live independently, possibly
for economic reasons.
This analysis does not capture the rate at which white and black veterans
may have lived with adult children as household members (in other words, what
percentage of the veterans who were household heads had adult children or
grandchildren living with them). Future work includes bringing more of this detail
into the analysis, as well as information on the veterans’ health, disability, and
pension support. Of course bringing in national comparison data from the IPUMS
data will allow comparisons between veteran households and the general
population.

H. Chronic Disease Epidemiology
Research on the secular decline of chronic conditions and disabilities has
been published with earlier versions of the data that has re-shaped how scholars
think about the epidemiological transition (Fogel and Costa 1997; Costa 2000;
Wilson, Burton, and Howell 2005). In addition, the data collection remains a rich
source of information for studying specific chronic diseases. Past work includes
an examination of arteriosclerosis (Costa, Helmchen, and Wilson 2007),
respiratory disease (Wilson 2003), and hernias (Song and Nguyen 2003). Noymer
(2009) uses the UA data to test whether tuberculosis was a risk factor for

29

influenza epidemic, thereby reducing the prevalence of tuberculosis in the
population.
These examples above use only a small subset of the available data with
which to study chronic disease epidemiology across the life course. Researchers
on the Early Indicators team have worked for years to develop a system of
standardizing the findings from the medical examinations that allow for detailed
study of the epidemiology of dozens of chronic conditions in later life. Of course
an enormous advantage of the UA collections is that risk factors for those
conditions can be identified back to the early life experiences of the veterans.
There have been studies looking at the overall burden of chronic diseases
and disabilities using the UA collection. Costa (2000, 2002) and Fogel and Costa
(1997) document and explore the widespread decline in chronic disease rates and
the associated decline in functional limitations. Costa (2000) emphasizes the role
that the decline in manual labor and exposure to infectious disease as primary
contributors to the decline in condition prevalence over a wide number of
conditions. Wilson, Burton, and Howell (2005) emphasize the importance of the
decline in non-fatal conditions that in the 19th and early 20th century were highly
prevalent and disabling but today seldom lead to disability; these include hernias,
varicose veins, and a large number of gastrointestinal disorders.

I. Intergenerational Forces

30

As noted above, family connections are an important aspect of the data
collections. A recent renewal of funding by the NIA allows the collection of data
on the children (and the households of those children). The Early Indicators team
has already begun the process of linking the census and death information for the
children of the UA veterans, both white and black. The new collection will also
significantly increase the amount of data available on women, as the project
collects that same data for both the sons and daughters of the veterans. New
electronic search tools, such as those available from Ancestry.com, also yield
higher find rates for women than have been possible in the past.
We will thus be able to follow individuals across three generations and
study the factors in the lives of the veterans that affect life outcomes into the next
generation. For instance, from the 1850 and 1860 censuses, it is frequently
possible to find the occupations of the soldiers’ fathers, and the new data will give
the occupations of their children all the way through the 1940 census. We know
of no other data source that allows for the systematic study of multi-generational
social mobility and how that mobility intersects with health and longevity, not to
mention other social factors such as race or immigration history.
As an illustration, Table 4 below combines data from the POW sample
and a small VCC pilot done on white soldiers in the main sample. The table
shows the occupations of veterans’ sons as a function of age and birth order. In
this table, first-born sons in their 20s are less likely to start their adult lives as

31

laborers and more likely to be in professions or skilled trades, though that gap
narrows as the brothers age. Moreover, the younger brothers appear to move from
being laborers to farmers as they age, which doesn’t happen for 1st sons. Sample
sizes in this analysis are much too small to draw any conclusions, but one can
envision using the ultimate VCC sample, once it has been collected, to study a
host of demographic and economic factors related to social mobility in an
intergenerational context.

(Table 4: Occupation of Veterans’ Sons, by Birth Order HERE)

V. Persistent Challenges and Continuing Progress
The Union Army collections are a vast and complex set of data covering a
dynamic century of economic growth, industrialization, urbanization, and
technological innovation. These features make these data both immensely
valuable for research and immensely challenging to understand and use
appropriately. Any researcher using the collections needs to be aware of the
significant challenges involved in avoiding the many biases that can arise when
using the data.

A. Understanding and Accounting for Bias

32

A thorough discussion of potential biases in the UA collections can be
found on the uadata.org website and, to a large extent, in the many published
papers using the data. In this section we highlight, in broad terms, some of the key
issues that researchers need to consider when using the UA collections.
In an ideal situation, data on all sample members is generated by the same
data generating process with parameters that depend only on factors that all
sample individuals are at risk to experience at each point in time. The Union
Army collections deviate from this ideal in numerous ways. We highlight some
of these in the following paragraphs.

33

1. Bias due to event-generated data
As noted above, the data collection captures information across the
soldier’s life course. But the existence of data at one point in time often depends
on events that happen at a future date, which creates significant survival bias. The
most ubiquitous source of such survival bias is caused by the event of applying
for a Union Army pension. The pension application consists of a thick file of
documents that describe life for many decades before the pension, including
experiences during the war. Thus, some of the data in the collections during early
life, during the war, and after the war, exists because the veteran lived to enter the
pension system, often much later in life.
The obvious complication in conducting analysis is that the data on two
identical soldiers at a point in time, say 1870, will be very different if one of those
soldiers survived to apply for a pension at a later date, say 1880, but the other did
not. The pension also contains demographic and economic information, such as
marriage and family data and occupation for the period covered between the war
and the time of pension application. If the veteran dies without applying for this
pension this information is unavailable, even though he may have lived for many
decades beyond the end of the war.
One particularly problematic source of bias is when information from the
pension files is used to populate data fields describing the wartime experience,
such as claims of injuries or illnesses. In the main UAV file, data that comes from

34

military files and data coming from later pension applications is not distinguished.
However, special files have been created that give the information from CMSRs
and CMRs without using any information from the pension application.
Researchers needing an unbiased view of the wartime experience should utilize
these important auxiliary files.
Surviving to participate in the pension system increases the likelihood of
linking the veteran to the 1850 and 1860 censuses because information obtained
from the pension files and from the 1900 and 1910 censuses is very useful in
obtaining the census records from the veteran’s childhood. Thus an unbiased
analysis of early life effects on later life outcomes is best conducted by
conditioning on survival to a point in time where most veterans would have
entered the pension system. If one wanted to address, for instance, the effect of
early life environment on, say, survival during the war, the researcher must
account for the fact that the early life variables are much less likely to exist in the
data for soldiers who died during the war and, therefore, never obtained a pension.
Thus, the collection methods used to make linkages to the census impose serious
limitations on how the early life census data can be used for research.
Another significant event that further complicates the nature of survival
bias was the liberalization of the pension system in 1890. Prior to that point,
veterans had to make an argument that their disability was “war-related.” But
under the 1890 law, any disability, regardless of cause, that limited the capacity to

35

perform manual labor was eligible for pension support. This caused an immediate
and significant increase in pension enrollment, which in turn generated a host of
retrospective data of the kind we have been discussing. One important
complication of this change for research is that any time series of disease or
disability prevalence calculated from the medical data in the pension files must
account for the difference in eligibility (and hence existence of the data) that
occurred in 1890.

2. Variation and evolution in census linkage rates
Much of the important demographic information on the veterans’ lives
comes from the census records. An unavoidable problem in using these data is
that linkage to the census is not random; it is correlated with factors that may, in
turn, be correlated with the life outcome of interest. For example, urban
environments were known to be much less healthy than rural ones, but soldiers in
urban environments are also much harder to identify in the census because census
linkage is difficult in urban areas. Place of birth is another variable that may be
correlated with both the linkage rate and the outcome of interest.
The past decade has seen an explosion of new internet-based search tools
available through sites such as Ancestry.com. These tools are now the primary
method used to link veterans to both census records and vital records. This has led
to much higher linkage rates for the later collections, namely the USCT, Urban,

36

Andersonville and Oldest-Old samples. This increased linkage rate is very good
news for users of those samples but a problem for researchers comparing those
soldiers with the main Union Army collection, which was collected without those
tools.
For all data collection after the original Union Army sample, researchers
used Ancestry.com to link living veterans to all census decades available. Linkage
rates are high for veterans who survived to enter the pension system because
information from the Civil War pension record is used to identify soldiers on the
census. This information includes, but is not limited to, alternate name spellings
and aliases, birth date and place, death date and place, residences, family
information (spouse, children, and sometimes parents and siblings), and
occupation. A search begins with basic information, such as name, birth date,
birth place, and residence location. Other pension information is used to
determine if an individual found in the search results is the veteran. Each census
decade contains slightly different information, so the exact information used to
search and confirm a census link varies, but it is all information found in the
pension record. Linkage rates are high and the matches robust because so much is
known about the veteran and his family from the pension record.
Many researchers currently are exploring mechanized census linking.
Our preliminary work with mechanized census linkage has yielded lower linkage
rates and suggested a bias against finding men who were not upwardly mobile

37

relative to census linkage by highly-trained inputters. Martha Bailey (2016) has
compared the links created through clerical review by staff for her Longitudinal,
Intergenerational Family Electronic Microdata (LIFE-M) project to different
machine matching schemes. In her preliminary results, her matching rates were
similar to those of some of the machine algorithms but the machine algorithms
had false positive rates of up to 60 percent. Early Indicators avoids almost all
these false positives by employing highly-trained research assistants who use
pension information for searching and confirming matches.

3. Historical change
The pension data cover decades of time in which advances in technology,
medical knowledge and public health were occurring. These changes are reflected
in the medical records found from the pension files. A typical physical
examination record from 1870 looks vastly different from a typical examination
record fifty years later in 1920. The increase in knowledge and professionalization
of the examiners is readily apparent from even a casual observation. Such a
transformation does not necessarily cause bias, but researchers must be careful in
constructing time series of health outcomes from the pension files.

4. Administrative racial prejudice

38

One of the exciting new features of the Union Army collections is the
large, new collection of records on African-American soldiers in the USCT. One
of the first things many researchers will want to do is make comparisons between
white and black soldiers. This, indeed, is one of the primary motivating goals
behind the collection of the USCT data, but such may be biased by underlying
discrimination faced by black soldiers both during the war and in the pension
system.
Wilson (2010) provides a detailed discussion of how prejudice in the
pension system was very effective at keeping black soldiers’ rate of participation
low. Part of this lower participation is due to the fact that blacks were less likely
to be injured in battles than white soldiers, but a large part of the differential is
due to discrimination. The figure below shows estimated enrollment in the
pension system by race and by wartime medical history. Controlling for evidence
in the military records, by the time the 1890 Act was passed whites had
significantly higher enrollment than blacks in each category. Pension enrollment
rates for those with a war wound were about 60% for whites, but only 35% for
blacks. For those with an illness but no wound, whites were at 43% and blacks
were at 10%. And for those without any illness or wound, whites were at 22% and
blacks were at 8%.
In the Post-Reconstruction period, it is easy to see from Figure 4 the
informal liberalization of the pension system that was occurring between 1879

39

and 1889 prior to the formal liberalization in 1890. Starting with the passage of
the 1879 Arrears Act, which allowed back payments of pension support, this was
a period of intense political activism on behalf of veterans. But blacks did not
share equally from this liberalization. Their claims of war-related disabilities were
rejected at higher rates, and they had a harder time gathering documentation that
allowed them to verify their identities and their service. This was due to their
status as slaves prior to service and to treatment during the war.

(Figure 4: Pension Enrollment Proportions, By Race and Wartime Medical
History HERE)

In the Early Indicators data, 18.7% of the black sample died from disease
while in service, compared to only 9.6% of whites. Yet black troops were less
likely to be sent to the hospital for illness than white troops. Scholars have argued
that white medical officers “accused blacks of feigning sickness in much the same
way that masters and overseers accused slaves of shirking work. They mistreated,
abused, overworked, or neglected such soldiers, thereby contributing to further
deterioration of their health” (Berlin, 1998, 636). Humphreys (2008) notes that
black regiments were also understaffed compared to white regiments. The shortterm impact of this discrimination was higher disease mortality during the war.
The long-term impact was that blacks lacked documentation of their wartime

40

illnesses, leading to a greater difficulty in claiming pension support in the period
of informal liberalization.
In sum, the Union Army collections allow for detailed comparisons of the
health of aging veterans, both black and white. But the blatant discrimination in
the pension system is a fact that researchers must grapple with in making blackwhite comparisons using medical data from the pension files.

B. User Services
Early Indicators researchers have put extensive work into easing the challenging
task of using the Union Army collections, including cleaning and standardizing
the data values, many of which are free-form text. As a general principle, the data
inputters were trained to avoid making ad hoc corrections and standardizations.
The project leadership team has tried to strike a balance between preserving all
the relevant information and making individual variables as easy to use as
possible. This is ongoing work in the current grant cycle. Efforts include the
creation of “derived variables” that can be used easily in analysis. Data
standardization is most evident in the medical data from the Surgeon Certificates,
since most of that data is free-form entries from medical exams. On the
UAdata.org website, users can download sets of common standardized variables.
These user-friendly variables are available for several categories as “Data 101”
files.

There is no short-cut to carefully studying the accompanying

41

documentation, including sections on sample design and on the bias issues
discussed above. But there are tools available on UAdata.org that can flatten
considerably the learning curve.

(Figure 5: Union Army Data Searchable Extraction System HERE)

First, although the data collections and documentation can be downloaded
in bulk for users accustomed to working with the data, but the new data extraction
system can be a valuable tool for the new researcher. The extraction system is
organized topically, allowing a user to focus on a set of variables from all data
sources related to the topic of interest. For example, Figure 5 shows a subset of
the results from a search on the topic of marriage, illustrating both census and
pension-based variables. The columns shown in the extraction system provide the
user with quick links to the codes and formatting used for each variable. Each
variable is also linked to the data collection screen from which it comes. This is
an invaluable tool for learning how variables relate to each other and the user can
see, in this example, the marriage information available on Screen 2.A., as well as
a variety of other family information, including the variable names.

(Figure 6: Example of Data Inputting Screen HERE)

42

The data extraction system is a helpful tool for users to quickly obtain
needed variables. After selecting the variables they want, users can indicate on the
export page which collection they want to draw from (Whites, Blacks, Urban,
etc.), and how they want the data formatted (Excel, SAS, Stata, etc.). Each export
comes with a customized set of online documentation that provides general
background information as well as documentation that is unique to the exported
variables.
Despite its name, t the primary function of the extraction system is not
extraction, but teaching. The topic-based approach to the data, which can be
browsed or searched, is designed to help users understand the collections and to
ease the path of entry into these complex data collections. In addition, the website
provides a large set of topical user guides that provide the user with extensive
detail on the variables and the sample design and collection methods used to
obtain them. The extraction system is currently available for the UAV and
original USCT samples, with all other data sets to be added soon. Personal
assistance from the Early Indicators team is also readily available, and the staff
will respond to queries as soon as possible.

VI. Conclusion
The collection of the UA data began nearly 30 years ago. Since that time
these soldiers have been contributing to our understanding of health, mortality,

43

economic mobility, and a variety of scientific questions across many disciplines.
By this measure, the UA collections are old news.
But we have tried to illustrate with this essay many vital questions related
to the human experience that might be illuminated by the UA collections are still
to be explored and answered. Many of these questions are best served by having
data on a large set of individuals over their entire lifetimes. Some of the key
forces that seem to shape human health and well-being—poverty, stress,
inequality, discrimination, family dissolution, and environmental risks—can be
addressed with this remarkable and growing set of life histories.

References

Alter, G. and J. Riley. 1989. Frailty, sickness and death: models of morbidity and
mortality in historical populations." Population Studies 43:25-45.
Bailey, M. 2016. LIFE-M Longitudinal, Intergenerational Family Electronic
Microdata. NBER Cohort Studies Group presentation.
Berlin, I., J.P. Reidy, and I.S. Rowland. 1998. Freedom’s soldiers: The black
military experience in the Civil War. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
Cain L., S.C. Hong. 2009. Survival in 19th century cities: The larger the city, the
smaller your chances. Explorations in Economic History 46(4): 450-463
Canavese, P., and R. Fogel. 2010. Arthritis: Changes in its prevalence during the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries. In Health at older ages: The causes and
consequences of declining disability among the elderly, edited by D.M. Cutler and
D.A. Wise, 55-74. Chicago: NBER and University of Chicago Press.

44

Costa, D.L. 1993. Height, wealth, and disease among the native born in the rural
antebellum North. Social Science History 17: 355-83.
Costa, D.L. 2000. Understanding the 20th century decline in chronic conditions
among older men. Demography 37:53-72.
Costa, D.L. 2002. Changing chronic disease rates and long-term declines in
functional limitations among older men. Demography 39:119-138.
Costa, D.L. 2010. Pensions and retirement among black Union Army veterans.
Journal of Economic History. 70(3): 567-92.
Costa, D.L. 2012. Scarring and mortality selection among civil war POWs: A
long-term mortality, morbidity, and socioeconomic follow-up. Demography
49(4):1185-206.
Costa, Dora L. 2015. "Health and the Economy in the United States from 1750 to
the Present." Journal of Economic Literature, 53(3): 503-70.
Costa, D.L., L. Helmchen and S.E. Wilson. 2007. Race, infectious disease, and
arteriosclerosis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104: 1321913224.
Costa D.L., M.E. Kahn. 2007a. Surviving Andersonville: The benefits of social
networks in POW camps. American Economic Review. 97(4): 1467-1487.
Costa, D.L. and M.E. Kahn. 2007b. Deserters, social norms, and migration.
Journal of Law and Economics 50: 323-53.
Costa, D.L. and M.E. Kahn. 2008. Heroes and Cowards: The Social Face of
War. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Costa, D.L. and M. Kahn. 2010. Health, wartime stress, and unit cohesion:
Evidence from Union Army veterans. Demography 47(1): 45-66.
Costa, D.L. M.E. Kahn, Roudiez, C., and S.E. Wilson. 2016. Persistent social
networks: Civil War veterans who fought together co-locate in later life. NBER
Working Paper #22397.

45

Costa, D.L., and R. Steckel. 1997. Long-term trends in health, welfare, and
economic growth in the United States. In Health and welfare during
industrialization, edited by R.H. Steckel and R. Floud, 47-90. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Eli, S. 2015. Income effects on health: Evidence from the Union Army Pensions.
Journal of Economic History 75:448-478.
Fogel, R.W. 1986. Nutrition and the decline in mortality since 1700: Some
preliminary findings. In Long-term factors in American Economic Growth.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press
Fogel, R.W. 1993. New sources and new techniques for the study of secular
trends in nutritional status, health, mortality, and the process of aging. Historical
Methods 26: 5-43.
Fogel, R.W. 2003. Changes in the process of aging during the twentieth century:
Findings and procedures of the Early Indicators Project. NBER Working Paper,
No. 9941.
Fogel, R. W., and D. L. Costa. 1997. A theory of technophysio evolution, with
some implications for forecasting population, health care costs, and pension costs.
Demography 34: 49-66.
Fogel, Robert W., and Stanley L. Engerman. 1974. Time on the cross: The
economics of American negro slavery. Boston: Little, Brown.
Fogel, R.W., S.L. Engerman, J. Trussell, R. Floud, C.L. Pope and L. Wimmer.
1978. The economics of mortality in North America, 1650-1910: A description of
a research project. Historical Methods 11:75-108.
Hacker, J.D. 2008. Economic, demographic, and anthropometric correlates of
first marriage in the mid-nineteenth-century United States. Social Science History
32 307-345)
Haines, M.R. 1979. The use of model life tables to estimate mortality for the
United States in the late nineteenth century. Demography 16:289-312.
Haines, M. R., L. A. Craig, and T. Weiss. 2000. Development, health, nutrition,
and mortality: The case of the "antebellum puzzle" in the United States. NBER

46

Working Paper no. H0130. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Hong S. C. 2007. The burden of early exposure to malaria in the United States,
1850-1860: Malnutrition and immune disorders. Journal of Economic History
67(4): 1001-1035.
Hong, S.C. 2011. Malaria and economic productivity: A longitudinal analysis of
the American case. Journal of Economic History 71: 654-671.
Humphreys, M. 2008. Intensely human: The health of the black soldier in the
American Civil War. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Komlos, J. 1987. The height and weight of West Point cadets: Dietary change in
antebellum America. Journal of Economic History 47: 897-927.
Lee, C. 1998. Long-term unemployment and retirement in early-twentiethcentury America, Journal of Economic History 58, 844-856.
Lee, C. 2001. The expected length of male retirement in the United States, 18501990, Journal of Population Economics 14 : 641-650
Lee, C. 2005. Wealth accumulation and the health of Union Army Veterans,
1860-1870, Journal of Economic History 65 (June 2005), 352-385. Earlier version
published in NBER Working Paper No. 10035.
Lee, C. 2007. Military positions and post-service occupational mobility of Union
Army veterans, 1861-1880, Explorations in Economic History 44 (October 2007),
680-698. Earlier version published in NBER Working Paper No. 12415.
Lee C. 2008. Health, information, and migration: Geographic mobility of Union
Army veterans, 1860-1880. Journal of Economic History 68(3): 862-899.
Noymer A. 2009. Testing the influenza-tuberculosis selective mortality
hypothesis with Union Army data. Social Science Medicine 68(9): 1599-1608.
Margo, R. A., and R. H. Steckel. 1983. Heights of native-born whites during the
antebellum period. Journal of Economic History 43 (1): 167-74.
McKeown, T. 1976. The modern rise of population. New York: Academic Press.

47

McKeown, T. 1978. Fertility, mortality and cause of death: An examination of
issues related to the modem rise of population. Population Studies 32:535-42.
Myers, G.C., V.L. Lamb and E.M. Agree. 2003. Patterns of disability change
associated with the epidemiological transition. In Determining Health
Expectancies.
Pope, Clayne L. 1992. Adult mortality in America before 1900: A view from
family histories. In
in Strategic Factors in Nineteenth Century American Economic History, edited by
Claudia Goldin and Hugh Rockoff. Chicago: University of Chicago Press for
NBER, pp. 267–296.
Pizarro, J., R. C. Silver and J. Prause. 2006. Physical and mental health costs of
traumatic war experiences among civil war veterans. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 63: 193-200.
Riley, J.C. and G. Alter. 1989. The epidemiologic transition and morbidity.
Annales de De'mographie Historique 199-213.
Steckel, R.H. Stature and the Standard of Living. 1995. Journal of Economic
Literature 33: 1903-1940.
Salisbury, L. 2014. Women's income and marriage markets in the United States:
Evidence from the Civil War pension. NBER Working Paper No. 20201.
Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Shertzer, A. 2015. Immigrant group size and political mobilization: Evidence
from European migration to the United States. NBER Working Paper #18829
Song, C. and L. L. Nguyen. 2003. The Effect of hernias on labor force
participation of Union Army veterans. In Health and Labor Force Participation
over the Life Cycle: Evidence from the Past., edited by D. L. Costa, 253-310.
Chicago: NBER and University of Chicago Press.
Su, D. 2009. Risk exposure in early life and mortality at older ages: Evidence
from Union Army veterans. Population and Development Review. 35(2): 275-295.

48

Verbrugge, L.M. 1984. Longer life but worsening health? Trends in health and
mortality of middle-aged and older persons. The Milbank Memorial Fund
Quarterly, Health and Society 62: 475-519.
Wilson, S.E. 2003. The prevalence of chronic respiratory disease in the Industrial
Era: The United States, 1895-1910. In Health and Labor Force Participation over
the Life Cycle: Evidence from the Past, edited by D. L. Costa, 147-180. Chicago:
NBER and University of Chicago Press.
Wilson, S. E. 2010. Prejudice and policy: Racial discrimination in the Union
Army disability pension system, 1865-1906. American Journal of Public Health
100 : S56-S65.
Wilson, S. E., J. Burton and B. Howell. 2005. Work and the Disability Transition
in Twentieth Century America. NBER Working Paper No. 11036. Cambridge,
MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Wilson, S. E. and C. L. Pope. 2003. The Height of Union Army Recruits: Family
and Community Influences. In Health and Labor Force Participation over the
Life Cycle: Evidence from the Past, edited by D. L. Costa, 113-146. Chicago:
NBER and University of Chicago Press.
Wilson, S. E., C. Villarreal and J. Burton. 2014. “The Long-term Persistence of
Social Capital. Residential Clustering among Union Army Veterans.”
Unpublished manuscript.
Wimmer, L. 2003. Reflections on the Early Indicators Project A Partial History.
In Health and Labor Force Participation over the Life Cycle: Evidence from the
Past, edited by D. L. Costa, 1-10. Chicago: NBER and University of Chicago
Press.
Zehetmayer M. 2011. The continuation of the antebellum puzzle: Stature in the
US, 1847-1894. European Review of Economic History 15(2): 313-327.

49

Table 1: LINKAGE RATES BY SAMPLE AND RECORD TYPE (%)

UNION ARMY
(n=39340)
USCT (n=6141)
EXPANDED
USCT (n=15071)
URBAN BOSTON
(n=1682)
URBAN CHICAGO
(n=1589)
URBAN PHILADELPHIA
(n=2922)
URBAN - NEW
YORK (n=5017)
URBAN BALTIMORE
(n=1414)
OLDEST OLD
(n=2034)**
ANDERSONVILLE
(n=1049)***

PENSION

CMSR

CMR

SURG
CERT*

CENSUS

68.3

99.2

57.3

72.4

65.0

50.2

97.2

48.9

63.3

45.6

55.8

99.6

51.4

65.5

51.3

57.1

95.8

49.1

68.2

65.9

50.9

98.6

53.3

73.7

57.8

53.0

99.4

52.5

71.6

64.6

41.8

98.9

36.6

65.0

49.3

56.5

98.7

34.6

73.3

66.3

100

95.7

48.1

95.7

99.8

95.4

98.3

53.5

97.4

99.0

*Linkage to Surg Certs is contingent on having a pension.
**Only veterans who lived to age 95+, as confirmed by pension, were accepted into the
sample.
***Only veterans who were POWs at Andersonville prison and survived to 1900, as
confirmed by CMSR and pension, were accepted into sample. Pension link rate is not
100% because some soldiers who survived to 1900 (as confirmed on pension index) had
pensions in the custody of the VA which we were unable to access.

50

Table 2: 10-year Mortality Rates by Race and Age, 1900-1910
Age in 1900

Whites
(UA)

Blacks
(USCT)

50-54

16.6%

26.5%

55-59

22.6%

33.2%

60-64

31.4%

40.0%

65-69

44.6%

53.4%

70-74

60.2%

67.5%

51

Figure 1: Veterans’ Residences in 1890, by Ward Crude Mortality Quintile

52

Figure 2: Company-Level Mortality during the Civil War

53

Figure 3: Veterans’ Residential Patterns over Time, Chicago

54

Table 3: Living Arrangements among Veterans, by Race and Year
1900

1910

Relationship to Head

Whites

Blacks

Whites

Blacks

Head
Parent
Spouse or Relative
Non-Relative
Alive but not linked to
Census

88.7%
2.5%
2.0%
4.5%

88.8%
1.8%
1.9%
6.7%

82.0%
8.2%
2.0%
5.7%

83.3%
3.6%
3.4%
7.6%

2.3%

0.8%

2.2%

2.2%

N
Average Age (Census Age)
Age Range:

12,737
4,201
60.3
59.8
50-79

7,567
2,600
69.0
68.9
60-89

55

Table 4: Occupation of Veterans’ Sons, by Birth Order

Occupation in 1900
Laborer
Farmer (owner/operator)
Trade/Craft/Clerical
Manager/Professional

N=

Age in 1900: 20-29
1st
2nd
3rd
Son
Son
Son

Age in 1900: 30-39
1st
2nd
3rd
Son
Son
Son

33%
21%
40%
6%
100%

41%
18%
36%
5%
100%

43%
23%
32%
3%
100%

29%
20%
40%
11%
100%

25%
29%
40%
6%
100%

29%
31%
36%
4%
100%

349

253

160

159

164

107

56

Figure 4: Pension Enrollment Proportions, By Race and Wartime Medical History

Source: Wilson (2010)

57

Figure 5: Union Army Data Searchable Extraction System

58

Figure 6: Example of Data Inputting Screen

59

