                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            PARALYZED BY FEAR:
           RIGID AND DISCRETE PRICING UNDER DEMAND UNCERTAINTY

                                           Cosmin L. Ilut
                                           Rosen Valchev
                                           Nicolas Vincent

                                        Working Paper 22490
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w22490


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2016




We would like to thank Etienne Gagnon, Han Hong, Nir Jaimovich, John Leahy, Virgiliu Midrigan,
Krisztina Molnar, Martin Schneider and Luminita Stevens, as well as seminar and conference participants
at the 9th Annual CIGS conference on Macroeconomic Theory and Policy, 22nd Annual Research
Conference of the Dutch Central Bank, Ambiguity and Robustness in Macroeconomics and Finance
Workshop, Ambiguity and its Implications in Finance and Macroeconomics Conference, Behavioral
Aspects of Macroeconomics and Finance Conference, Boston Macro Juniors Workshop, Chicago Fed,
CIREQ Montréal Macro conference, Duke, ECB, ESWC, NBER Summer Institute, NBER EFG meeting,
Northwestern, SED, Stanford, UC San Diego, U Penn, UT Austin, UVA for helpful discussions and
comments. Vincent acknowledges nancial support from the Fondation HEC Montréal. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2016 by Cosmin L. Ilut, Rosen Valchev, and Nicolas Vincent. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Paralyzed by Fear: Rigid and Discrete Pricing under Demand Uncertainty
Cosmin L. Ilut, Rosen Valchev, and Nicolas Vincent
NBER Working Paper No. 22490
August 2016, Revised in September 2020
JEL No. C1,D8,E3,L11

                                          ABSTRACT

We propose a new theory of price rigidity based on firms’ Knightian uncertainty about their
competitive environment. This uncertainty has two key implications. First, firms learn about the
shape of their demand function from past observations of quantities sold. This learning gives rise
to kinks in the expected pro t function at previously observed prices, making those prices both
sticky and more likely to reoccur. Second, uncertainty about the relationship between aggregate
and industry-level inflation generates nominal rigidity. We prove the main insights analytically
and quantify the effects of our mechanism. Our estimated quantitative model is consistent with a
wide range of micro-level pricing facts that are typically challenging to match jointly. It also
implies significantly more persistent monetary non-neutrality than in standard models, allowing it
to generate large real effects from nominal shocks.

Cosmin L. Ilut                                  Nicolas Vincent
Department of Economics                         HEC Montreal
Duke University                                 Institute of Applied Economics
223 Social Sciences Building                    3000, chemin de la Côte-Sainte-Catherine
Box 90097                                       Montréal (Québec), H3T 2A7
Durham, NC 27708                                Canada
and NBER                                        nicolas.vincent@hec.ca
cosmin.ilut@duke.edu

Rosen Valchev
Boston College
Department of Economics
Maloney Hall 396
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
US
rosen.valchev@bc.edu
1       Introduction
Macroeconomists have long recognized that incomplete price adjustment plays a crucial role
in the ampliﬁcation and propagation of macroeconomic shocks. On the one hand, there
is ample evidence that aggregate inﬂation responds only slowly to monetary shocks (e.g.
Christiano et al. (2005)). On the other, numerous studies have shown that at the micro
level, prices are not as sticky as the aggregates imply. They do, however, display other
puzzling characteristics that could play a crucial macro role (e.g. Bils and Klenow (2004)).
   In this paper, we propose a new theory of price rigidity based on ﬁrms’ Knightian
uncertainty about the demand for their product. This uncertainty endogenously generates an
as-if kink in expected proﬁts, and hence a ﬁrst-order cost of moving away from a previously
posted price. The mechanism not only leads to price stickiness, but also price memory and a
number of additional micro-level pricing facts. These features allow it to generate signiﬁcant
monetary non-neutrality despite prices changing relatively frequently, as in the data.
   Our economy is composed of a continuum of industries, each populated with monopolistic
ﬁrms who face uncertainty about their competitive environment. In order to evaluate how
demand changes as a function of the nominal price they post, ﬁrms need to jointly assess (i)
the unknown demand curve, as a function of the relevant relative price; and (ii) the relative
price itself, which equals the ﬁrm’s nominal price minus the unobserved industry price index.
Uncertainty about both jointly leads to nominal rigidity.
    Standard models abstract from such uncertainty, typically assuming that ﬁrms know the
structure of the economy and observe the price index of the competition. In contrast, we
assume ﬁrms face speciﬁcation doubts about the model of demand. We capture such doubts
by drawing on the large experimental and theoretical work motivated by Ellsberg (1961)
that distinguishes between risk (uncertainty with known odds) and ambiguity, or Knightian
uncertainty (unknown odds).1 In particular, we model the aversion to ambiguity using the
multiple priors preferences axiomatized by Gilboa and Schmeidler (1989), and characterize
the ﬁrm’s lack of conﬁdence through a set of possible prior distributions over both the
unknown demand shape and the unknown relative price.
    To this end, we assume that the ﬁrm, similar to an econometrician, estimates its unknown
demand function from past observations of prices and quantities sold. In doing so, the
ﬁrm knows demand is a smooth, downward-sloping function, but is not conﬁdent (i) that
it belongs to a particular parametric family of functions, and (ii) in a unique probability
    1
    See Machina and Siniscalchi (2014) for a review of related theory and experiments. The latter conﬁrm the
basic conjecture in Ellsberg (1961) of prevalent aversion to ambiguity, and includes surveys and experiments
speciﬁcally involving business managers, such as in Einhorn and Hogarth (1986), March and Shapira (1987),
Kunreuther et al. (1993) and Maﬃoletti and Santoni (2005).



                                                     1
measure over the space of potential demand functions. In particular, while the ﬁrm knows
that its demand is the sum of a price-sensitive component and a temporary shock, it faces
a signal extraction problem because it does not observe each separately. The ﬁrm uses its
history of quantities sold at past prices, together with its set of priors, to form a set of
conditional beliefs about its demand function.
   The ﬁrm has two sources of information on the unknown industry-wide price level. The
ﬁrst are periodic marketing reviews that fully reveal its current value. The second is the
aggregate price level, which the ﬁrm observes freely, but is an imperfect signal of the ﬁrm’s
speciﬁc industry price, because the link between industry and aggregate prices is uncertain
and ambiguous – while the ﬁrm understands that the two indices are cointegrated in the long
run, it is not conﬁdent about their short-run relationship. Speciﬁcally, over short horizons,
observing a change in the aggregate price level does not convince the ﬁrm that the industry
price has evolved in the same way. We model this lack of conﬁdence as a set of potential
relationships, resulting in a set of conditional beliefs about the current industry price given
an observed value for the aggregate price level.2
   In the face of ambiguity about both its demand function and its eﬀective relative price,
the ﬁrm optimally selects a nominal price as if nature draws the joint prior distribution
that implies the lowest (i.e. worst-case) conditional expected demand. A key result is
that this joint worst-case belief changes endogenously around the level of previously posted
prices relative to the ﬁrm’s best, unambiguous estimate of industry inﬂation. The reason is
intuitive: an unambiguous price increase sets in motion a concern for a “double whammy” –
that nature draws (i) the most locally-elastic demand function allowed by the prior set and
(ii) the largest decrease in the unobserved industry price given the relevant set of conditional
beliefs. Hence, the ﬁrm fears the increase in its relative price is larger than expected and that
demand is especially sensitive to it. The opposite concern occurs in the case of a decrease
in price – the ﬁrm fears that demand is inelastic and the industry price index rose.
     This endogenous switch in the worst-case scenario is at the heart of our mechanism:
it generates kinks in expected demand and thus price rigidity.3 An unambiguous change
in the relative price would move the ﬁrm away from the safety of previously accumulated
information, and therefore expose it to increased uncertainty about the shape of demand.
     When interacted with ambiguity about the industry price, and therefore uncertainty
   2
     Using the BLS’ most disaggregated 130 CPI indices as well as aggregate CPI, we present evidence that
an econometrician would generally have very little conﬁdence that short-run aggregate inﬂation is related to
industry-level inﬂation, even though she can be conﬁdent that the two are cointegrated in the long-run.
   3
     Such endogeneity is the deﬁning feature of the Ellsberg experiment: when the agent evaluates a bet
on either a black or a white ball from the ambiguous urn, he does so as if the probability of drawing that
ball is less than 0.5 in either case. This behavior is inconsistent with any single probability measure on the
associated state space, but can be explained by the multiple-priors model.


                                                      2
about the relative price achieved by a speciﬁc choice of nominal price, the rigidity becomes
nominal. The key is that the optimal choice robust to the joint uncertainty is to price as
if short-run industry inﬂation is not forecastable, and thus keep nominal prices rigid to take
advantage of the perceived kinks in demand. Intuitively, a directly observed change in the
industry price index would lead to an immediate adjustment in the nominal price, since it
has an unambiguous eﬀect on the relative price. In contrast, the eﬀect of aggregate inﬂation
on the underlying industry price level is ambiguous: if the ﬁrm assumes a positive link and
responds by increasing its nominal price, this would be precisely the wrong action in case
the industry price actually fell, and vice versa if it were to act under the belief that the two
are negatively correlated. These fears make aggregate (or other) indexation suboptimal.
   In sum, a change in the relative price away from a previously observed value incurs
an endogenous, time-varying cost in terms of expected proﬁts, whose properties we derive
analytically. First, this cost is locally ﬁrst-order, so that a ﬁrm has an incentive to keep
its estimated relative price constant even when hit with marginal-cost shocks. Second,
conditional on changing, the ﬁrm is inclined to repeat a price it has already posted in the
past – such previously estimated relative prices are associated with kinks in expected proﬁts,
and become ‘reference’ price points. Third, the cost is perceived to be larger for prices that
have been observed more often in the past, as higher signal-to-noise ratios deepen the kinks.
Fourth, given the resulting time-variation in the ﬁrst-order cost, the ﬁrm may ﬁnd it optimal
to implement small or large price changes. Fifth, the perceived cost of changing a posted
price increases with the value of the demand shock at that price. Sixth, even though ﬁrms
are forward-looking, the optimal experimentation strategy may in fact reinforce stickiness.
    Since the worst-case belief is that aggregate inﬂation is uninformative about industry
prices, it follows that between marketing review periods, the ﬁrm faces a ﬁrst-order cost of
nominal adjustment with similar properties. This results in what looks like “price plans”,
where the price series tends to bounce around just a few repeated price points. One important
diﬀerence with standard “price plan” models is that in our framework, the endogenous price
plan evolves gradually over time, incorporating new prices one-by-one as the ﬁrm experiments
and learns about demand at new price points. We document that this novel implication of
gradual adjustment in price plans is prevalent in the data, and also show that it has important
implications for the aggregate transmission of monetary shocks in the model.
    In addition to the analytical results, we evaluate the model quantitatively. We solve
numerically for its stochastic steady state and estimate the parameters by targeting standard
micro-level pricing moments from the IRI Academic Dataset. We then show that our
learning mechanism is quantitatively consistent with a rich set of additional moments that
are typically considered challenging to match jointly: (i) memory in prices; (ii) co-existence


                                               3
of small and large price changes; (iii) pricing behavior over the product’s life-cycle; (iv)
downward-sloping hazard function of price changes; as well as a novel implication that (v) a
price with a positive demand innovation is less likely to change.4
    Lastly, we show that our quantitative model predicts large and persistent real eﬀects from
a nominal spending shock. These eﬀects occur even though the model is consistent with the
observed high frequency and large median absolute size of price changes, typically taken to
imply low monetary non-neutrality in standard state-dependent models due to the Golosov
and Lucas (2007) selection eﬀect. The reason lies in the endogenous memory of prices,
and in particular the slow adjustment of the eﬀective “price plan”, an empirically supported
feature unique to our model. Because it signiﬁcantly slows down the transmission of nominal
shocks, this type of memory delivers more persistent real eﬀects than in standard price-plan
models. As a result, our mechanism has important novel features that can arguably help ﬁt
the evidence of persistent monetary policy eﬀects (Christiano et al. (2005)).
   Next, we review the literature. Section 2 derives analytical results in a real model, while
Section 3 expands them to a nominal model. Section 4 quantiﬁes the mechanism.

Relation to the literature

By connecting learning under ambiguity to the problem of a ﬁrm setting prices, our paper
relates to multiple strands of the literature. First is the extensive body of work on theories
of real and nominal price rigidity. With respect to the former, it relates to work on kinked
demand curves, including Stigler (1947), Stiglitz (1979), Ball and Romer (1990), Kimball
(1995) and Dupraz (2016). While in these models the kinks are a feature of the true demand
curve, in our setup they arise only as a result of uncertainty about the shape of demand,
and an econometrician would not be expected to ﬁnd evidence of actual kinks.
    On nominal rigidity, we connect to the literature that emphasizes the role of imperfect
information in generating slow adjustment to aggregate nominal shocks, including Mankiw
and Reis (2002), Sims (2003), Woodford (2003), Reis (2006) and Mackowiak and Wiederholt
(2009). However, while in order to obtain fully rigid prices these models typically require
additional frictions, (e.g. a menu cost), we show that uncertainty alone can lead to inaction.5
    In testing our mechanism against a rich set of overidentifying restrictions, we connect to
    4
      Given the importance of controlling for unobserved heterogeneity in recovering the hazard function facts,
and the novelty of the role of demand signals for pricing decisions, our detailed documentations of these two
particular conditional moments is of independent empirical interest for the pricing literature.
    5
      Bonomo and Carvalho (2004) and Knotek and Edward (2010) are early examples of merging information
frictions with a physical cost or an exogenous probability of price adjustment. Recent models of rational
inattention (e.g. Woodford (2009) or Stevens (2014)) assume that memory, including assessing the passage
of time, is costly. Therefore, in periods when the ﬁrm is inattentive, it does not index to aggregate inﬂation.



                                                      4
several literatures on pricing models that have grappled with one or more of these facts.6
   First, in our model, prices tend to return to previous values, giving rise to discreteness
and memory. This empirical regularity has been well documented following the seminal work
of Eichenbaum et al. (2011), as it presents a challenge to standard state-dependent pricing
theories that rely on a single ﬁxed cost of a price change. To address this, the literature has
used exogenously deﬁned price plans (Eichenbaum et al. (2011)), heterogeneous menu costs
(Kehoe and Midrigan (2015)), and rational inattention, emphasizing the discrete nature of
the optimal signal structure under certain conditions (Matějka (2015) and Stevens (2014)).
As discussed in the introduction, our mechanism diﬀers from these frameworks both in terms
of its micro-foundations, testable predictions and aggregate implications.
    The second set of related models is on pricing under demand uncertainty. The standard
approach has been to analyze learning about a parametric demand curve under expected
utility.7 Unlike our environment, this does not result in kinks in conditional beliefs at old
prices, and thus price stickiness and memory. In fact, the objective in introducing learning
in existing models has not been to generate stickiness, but instead to match other facts, such
as the shape of hazard function (Bachmann and Moscarini (2011), Baley and Blanco (2018))
or the pricing behavior over the product life cycle (Argente and Yeh (2017)). Our model
also matches these facts, in addition to others such as stickiness and memory.
    At its core, our framework ﬁts within the literature motivated by the classic work of
Ellsberg (1961), such as Gilboa and Schmeidler (1989), Dow and Werlang (1992), and
Epstein and Schneider (2003). In the ﬁeld of industrial organization, Bergemann and Schlag
(2011) studies a static pricing problem with multiple priors over the distribution of buyers’
valuations, while Handel and Misra (2015) extends that analysis to a two-period model
with maxmin regret that allows for consumer heterogeneity. In contrast, we simplify the
consumer’s side of the market and instead develop a tractable learning environment to study
how the accumulation of information about a set of demand curves leads to pricing behavior
that is empirically supported and of interest for macroeconomic models.


2       Analytical Model
In this section, we develop the key insights of our mechanism in the context of a simple,
analytically-tractable model that does not distinguish between real and nominal prices. We
present the full nominal model in Section 3.
    6
     In this, we follow the spirit of a broad literature that documents micro-level facts aimed at disciplining
theoretical models of rigidity, such as Bils and Klenow (2004), Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008), Nakamura and
Steinsson (2008), Klenow and Malin (2010) and Campbell and Eden (2014), among many.
   7
     An early contribution is Rothschild (1974), who frames the learning process as a two-arm bandit problem.


                                                      5
   We study a monopolistic ﬁrm that each period sells a single good, facing the log demand

                                       y(pt ) = x(pt ) + zt ,                                  (1)

where pt is the log price. Demand consists of two components – the price-sensitive x(pt ) and
a price-insensitive component captured by zt . The ﬁrm’s time-t realized proﬁt is:

                                      υt = (ept − ect ) ey(pt ) ,                              (2)

where we have assumed a linear cost function, with ct denoting the time-t log marginal cost.
    The decomposition of demand in (1) serves two purposes. First, it generates a motive
for signal extraction. In this respect we assume that the ﬁrm only observes total quantity
sold, y(pt ), but not the underlying x(pt ) and zt separately. Furthermore, we model zt as iid,
and thus past demand realizations serve as noisy signals about the unknown function x(p).
    The second purpose is to diﬀerentiate between risk and ambiguity. We model zt as purely
risky, and give the ﬁrm full conﬁdence that it is iid and drawn from the known Gaussian
distribution zt ∼ N (0, σz2 ). On the other hand, the x(pt ) component is ambiguous, meaning
that the ﬁrm is not fully conﬁdent in the distribution from which it has been drawn and
does not have a unique prior over it.
    Instead, the ﬁrm entertains a whole set of possible priors, Υ0 , which is not restricted
to a given parametric family. Each individual prior in the set Υ0 is a Gaussian Process
distribution, GP (m(p), K(p, pt )), with mean function m(p) and covariance function K(p, pt ).
A Gaussian Process distribution is the generalization of the Gaussian distribution to inﬁnite-
sized collections of real-valued random variables, and is thus a convenient choice of a prior
for doing Bayesian inference on function spaces. It has the deﬁning feature that for any ﬁnite
sub-collection of function inputs, e.g. a vector of prices p = [p1 , ..., pN ] for some N > 1, the
corresponding vector of quantities demanded x(p) is distributed as
                            ⎛⎡       ⎤ ⎡                                    ⎤⎞
                              m(p1 )     K(p1 , p1 ) . . . K(p1 , pN )
                          ⎜⎢    .    ⎥ ⎢    ..                 ..           ⎥⎟
                 x(p) ∼ N ⎜
                          ⎝⎣
                            ⎢   ..   ⎥,⎢
                                     ⎦ ⎣     .
                                                     ...
                                                                .           ⎥⎟ ,
                                                                            ⎦⎠
                              m(pN )     K(pN , p1 ) . . . K(pN , pN )

where the mean function m(p) controls the average slope of the underlying functions x(p), and
the covariance function K(p, p ) controls their smoothness. In other words, this distribution
is a cloud of functions dispersed around m(p), according to the covariance function K(p, p ).
    We model ambiguity by assuming that all priors have the same covariance function, but
diﬀerent mean functions. We assume that the covariance function is of the widely-used


                                                  6
squared exponential class (see Rasmussen and Williams (2006)):

                                                                           2
                             K(p, p ) = Cov(x(p), x(p )) = σx2 e−ψ(p−p ) .

The function has two parameters: σx2 measures the prior variance about demand at any
given price, and ψ > 0 controls the extent to which information about demand at some
price p is informative about its value at a diﬀerent price p . The larger is ψ, the faster
the correlation between quantity demanded at diﬀerent prices declines with the distance
between those prices.8 This covariance function parsimoniously, yet ﬂexibly, captures the
natural prior view that there is an imperfect and declining correlation between demand at
diﬀerent prices. Additionally, this prior puts zero probability on demand functions that are
not inﬁnitely diﬀerentiable – thus any non-diﬀerentiability in the ﬁrm’s eventual worst-case
perceptions about demand are fully attributable to the ambiguity-aversion mechanism.
   The multiple priors diﬀer in their mean function m(p). We assume that the set of
entertained m(p) is centered around the true DGP of a standard log-linear demand function,
xDGP (p) = −bp, so that the potential m(p) lie within an interval of width 2γ around xDGP (p),

                                      m(p) ∈ [−γ − bp, γ − bp].                                        (3)

The parameter γ > 0 controls the size of perceived ambiguity and captures the ﬁrm’s lack
of conﬁdence in assigning probability assessments over the mean demand at a given price p.
    In addition, to preclude any ex ante built-in non-diﬀerentiability, we also bound the local
variability of admissible m(p). The ﬁrm only entertains diﬀerentiable m(p) functions with a
derivative that lies within an interval centered around the derivative of the true DGP,

                                       m (p) ∈ [−b − δ, −b + δ],                                      (4)

with δ > 0 controlling the size of that interval. Throughout we assume that δ ≤ b, hence the
ﬁrm is at least conﬁdent that demand is weakly downward-sloping. As an illustration, the left
panel of Figure 1 provides some examples of admissible demand schedules m(p), out of the
inﬁnite set of functions that satisfy (3) and (4). Later, we explain how an ambiguity-averse
ﬁrm extracts out of this set the kinked worst-case prior shown in the right panel.
   The overall interpretation of our setup is that the ﬁrm has some a priori information
on the true demand, but is not conﬁdent in a single probabilistic weighting of the potential
   8
   A Gaussian Process with a higher ψ has a higher rate of change (i.e. larger derivative) and its value is
more likely to experience a bigger change for the same change in p. For example, it can be shown that the
mean number of zero-crossings over a unit interval is given by √ψ2π .



                                                    7
                                                      




                                                                 m* ( p0 ; p′)



                                                                                                         m* ( p0 ; p′′)


                                                                                p′            p0       p′′               


                   (a) Set of priors                                             (b) Worst-case prior

                      Figure 1. Illustrative set of priors and worst-case prior

demand schedules (i.e. a single prior), nor is it able to restrict attention to a particular
parametric family of demand functions. The set of admissible beliefs may itself reﬂect the
disagreement between heterogeneous, but otherwise unique, prior beliefs expressed by various
agents inside the ﬁrm. The agent that takes the pricing decisions is not conﬁdent how to
probabilistically weigh them as these beliefs are all entertained as reasonable priors.9
   The parametrization of ambiguity characterizing the sets (3) and (4) serves two purposes.
First, it avoids overparameterizing Υ0 , so that we represent the ambiguity over a non-
parametric family of functions using only two parameters, γ and δ. Second, it contains
the minimal ingredients necessary for our main results. In particular, when γ = 0, the set
Υ0 collapses to a singleton, hence the ﬁrm has a unique prior and there is no ambiguity.
On the other hand, with δ = 0 the ﬁrm faces no ambiguity about the shape of the demand
function, which is the key ingredient of our theory. Uncertainty about the local elasticity of
demand (i.e. δ > 0) is at the heart of our mechanism.


2.1     Information and Preferences
The timing of choices and revelation of information is as follows: We assume that ct is known
at the end of t − 1 and that it is a continuous random variable following a Markov process
with a conditional density function g(ct |ct−1 ). The ﬁrm enters period t with information on
the history of all previously-sold quantities y t−1 = [y(p1 ), ..., y(pt−1 )] and the corresponding
prices at which those were observed pt−1 = [p1 , ..., pt−1 ] , where a superscript denotes history
   9
     The connection between the set of beliefs about m(p) to the dispersion of prior forecasts made by experts
inside a ﬁrm allows us to empirically discipline the magnitude of ambiguity in the model’s quantitative
evaluation. The view that uncertainty is not primarily a probabilistic concept is consistent with the survey
and experimental evidence involving business managers (see for example March and Shapira (1987)).


                                                      8
up to that time. The ﬁrm updates its beliefs about demand conditional on εt−1 = {y t−1 , pt−1 },
observes ct and posts a price pt that maximizes expected proﬁts, as detailed further below.
At the end of period t, the idiosyncratic demand shock zt is realized and the ﬁrm updates
its information set with the resulting quantity sold y(pt ), and the new cost ct+1 .
    The ﬁrm uses the available data εt−1 to update the set of initial priors Υ0 . Learning occurs
through standard Bayesian updating, prior-by-prior – for each prior in the initial set Υ0 , the
ﬁrm uses the new information and Bayes’ Rule to obtain a posterior distribution. Given that
there is a set of priors, the Bayesian update results in a set of posteriors. In particular, we
denote by xt−1 (p; m(p)) the posterior Gaussian distribution of x(p), conditional on εt−1 and
a particular prior m(p). We denote the conditional mean and variance of demand as:
                                                                              
                                        t−1 (pt ; m(p)) := E x(p)|εt−1 ; m(p)
                                        x
                                                                          
                                                t−1
                                                σ  2
                                                     (p) := V ar x(p)|εt−1 .

    While the conditional expectation depends on the prior m(p), the variance is the same for
all priors, as they diﬀer only in their means. The evolution of beliefs is analytically tractable
and follows the standard Bayesian-updating formulas derived in Online Appendix A.1.
    The ﬁrm is owned by an agent who is ambiguity averse and has recursive multiple priors
utility (Epstein and Schneider (2003)), so that she values the ﬁrm’s proﬁts as:
                                                                                   
                                                                  t        t−1
                V ε   t−1
                            , ct       = max min E υ(εt , ct ) + βV ε , ct+1 ε , ct ,           (5)
                                          pt   m(p)∈Υ0


where υ(εt , ct ) is the per-period proﬁt deﬁned in (2). The ﬁrm forms its conditional beliefs
and evaluates the expected proﬁts and continuation utility using the available information
εt−1 and the prior m∗ (p; pt ) that achieves the worst-case belief, given a pricing choice pt .
    Importantly, the minimization over the priors is conditional on the choice of pt . We
conjecture and verify that the minimizing prior m∗ (p; pt ) is such that, for a given price pt
and history εt−1 , it implies the lowest admissible expected demand x  t−1 (pt ; m∗ (p; pt )) at that
price. Thus, for any price pt the ﬁrm worries that, given the data it has seen, the underlying
demand is low and hence maximizes over pt under the worst-case belief x       t−1 (pt ; m∗ (p; pt )).


2.2     As-if kinks in demand from learning
To gain intuition on how updating and the basic mechanism work, we start by considering
the simplest case, where the information set εt−1 contains only observations of demand at
a single price point p0 that has been seen N0 times, and has an associated average demand
                               0
realization ȳ0 = x(p0 ) + N10 Ni=1 zi . For a given prior m(p), the joint distribution of the


                                                             9
signal and the unknown demand function x at any price p is:
                                                                                     2
                                                                                               
                    x(p)                 m(p)                  σx2            σx2 e−ψ(p−p0 )
                               ∼N                   ,                     2                         .
                     ȳ0                 m(p0 )          σx2 e−ψ(p−p0 )       σx2 + σz2 /N0

The distribution of x(p) conditional on ȳ0 is also Gaussian, and its expectation and variance
are given by the familiar prior plus signal-updating formulas:

                           E(x(p)|ȳ0 , m(p)) = m(p) + αt−1 (p) [ȳ0 − m(p0 )]                                   (6)
                               V ar(x(p)|ȳ0 ) = σx2 (1 − αt−1 (p)),

where the signal-to-noise ratio used to update beliefs of demand at a given price p is

                                                      σx2               2
                                    αt−1 (p) =     2     2
                                                              e−ψ(p−p0 ) .                                       (7)
                                                  σx + σz /N0

Thus, the Bayesian update of the conditional expectation in equation (6) combines the prior
for demand at that price, m(p), with the information revealed by the diﬀerence between the
observed signal realization ȳ0 , and the prior expected demand at that price, m(p0 ). Also note
that with ψ > 0, the signal-to-noise ratio αt−1 (p) and the resulting reduction in uncertainty
is largest right at the observed price p0 : as the correlation of quantity demanded at diﬀerent
prices decreases with the distance between them, the information obtained from the signal
at p0 is most useful in updating the ﬁrm’s beliefs about demand around that price.

Worst-case prior

The ﬁrm minimizes the conditional expectation of demand over the priors m(p) ∈ Υ0 . The
resulting worst-case prior m∗ (p; pt ) depends on the price pt at which the ﬁrm computes its
expected demand. From equation (6) we see that the conditional expectation of demand at
pt = p0 is decreasing in m(p0 ), since αt−1 (p) ∈ (0, 1). Hence, the worst-case belief corresponds
to the prior with the lowest value of m(p0 ), so m∗ (p0 ; pt ) = −γ − bp0 by equation (3).
    When updating demand at a price pt = p0 , the ﬁrm minimizes over m(pt ) and m(p0 ), as
both appear in the updating equation. It is useful to re-write equation (6) as

       E(x(pt )|ȳ0 , m(p)) = (1 − αt−1 (pt ))m(pt ) +           αt−1 (pt )(ȳ0 + m(pt ) − m(p0 ))           ,
                                                                                          
                                    Prior demand at pt        Signal at p0 + Δ in Demand between pt and p0


since it makes clear that uncertainty over the prior m(p) aﬀects both the overall level of
expected demand (through the ﬁrst term), and how the ﬁrm interprets its signal ȳ0 (second


                                                         10
term). The uncertainty about the shape of the demand function implies a lack of conﬁdence
in how information about demand at p0 translates into information about the quantity
demanded at pt . Consequently, the ﬁrm minimizes over both the prior level of demand at pt
and its likely change between pt and p0 , the position of the observed signal.
   First, minimizing over the prior at the entertained price, m(pt ), is straightforward – the
worst-case is that it lies at the lower bound of the set Υ0 , so that

                                           m∗ (pt ; pt ) = −γ − bpt .

    Second, the ﬁrm is worried that demand changes for the worse as the price moves from p0
to pt , implying a low value of m(pt ) − m(p0 ). Thus, the worst-case for m(p0 ) is to be as high
as possible given the constraints on the level and derivatives of the admissible m(p) and the
worst-case level for m(pt ). Crucially, this implies a switch in the worst-case demand shape
between pt and p0 , depending on whether the ﬁrm considers a price increase or a decrease.
    Conditional on a price increase, i.e. pt > p0 , the worst-case is that demand is elastic,
since this generates a larger drop in demand. The drop from m(p0 ) to m(pt ) is disciplined
by the constraints on Υ0 , which restrict both the derivative of m(p) at any price p, and the
maximal level of m(p0 ). Therefore, the worst-case prior for m(p0 ) when pt > p0 is

                         m∗ (p0 ; pt ) = min [γ − bp0 , −γ − bpt + (b + δ)(pt − p0 )] .                (8)

   On the other hand, when the ﬁrm considers a price cut, i.e. pt < p0 , it worries that
demand is inelastic and that the price decrease generates as small of an increase in demand
as possible. The worst-case is again restricted by the constraints on Υ0 , and in particular
the lower bound on the admissible derivative of demand in (4). Eﬀectively, the ﬁrm worries
demand is ﬂat to the left of p0 , hence, the worst-case m∗ (p0 ; pt ) in this case is

                         m∗ (p0 ; pt ) = min [γ − bp0 , −γ − bpt + (b − δ)(pt − p0 )] .                (9)

Worst-case conditional expectation and kinks

Having characterized the worst-case prior, we can now plug it in equation (6) to obtain
the worst-case conditional expectation at any entertained price pt . Since the worst-case
prior changes depending on whether pt is above or below p0 , the conditional expectation
∗t−1 (pt ) ≡ E(x(pt )|q0 , m∗ (p; pt )) equals the following piecewise function
x
                
                    −γ − bpt + αt−1 (pt )[ȳ0 − (−γ − bp0 )] − αt−1 (pt )δ|pt − p0 | if pt ∈ [p, p]
∗t−1 (pt ) =
x                                                                                                     (10)
                    −γ − bpt + αt−1 (pt ) [ȳ0 − (γ − bp0 )]                         if pt ∈
                                                                                           / [p, p]

                                                       11
where p = p0 − 2γδ
                   and p = p0 + 2γ δ
                                     . For prices pt ∈ [p, p], the worst-case prior demand at p0
is obtained by moving away from m∗ (pt ; pt ) = −γ − bpt along the steepest (ﬂattest) possible
demand curve, when pt is higher (lower) than p0 . At the threshold prices p, p, moving along
these worst-case elasticities intersects the upper bound of the set Υ0 , so the solution to the
worst-case prior in equations (8) and (9) for prices pt outside [p, p] is given by γ − bp0 .
    Thus, the multiple priors endogenously generate a kink in expected demand at p0 , as
captured by the absolute value term |pt − p0 | in (10). In essence, the overall worst-case
expectation is the result of splicing two diﬀerent priors together – an elastic one when
evaluating prices to the right of p0 , and an inelastic one to its left – which creates a kink, even
though all individual priors are diﬀerentiable. Going back to Figure 1, panel (b) illustrates
this splicing when entertaining setting some p < p0 or p > p0 , conditional on seeing a signal
equal to the true DGP at a single price point p0 and facing the set of priors in panel (a).
    Putting everything together, the left panel of Figure 2 shows the resulting worst-case
expected demand at any price pt (i.e. it plots equation (10)). Extending these derivations
to the case where εt−1 contains observations at more than one price point is straightforward
– Online Appendix A.1 describes the general formulas and an analytical approach to ﬁnding
the worst-case prior. The intuition is the same as for the case of a single previously observed
price: the worst-case is to set the prior at the entertained pt equal to the lowest bound of Υ0 ,
and the level of the prior at the prices in εt−1 as high as admissible, given the restrictions on
Υ0 . The main diﬀerence is that because the endogenous switch in the worst-case priors now
applies more generally at all previously-observed prices, the ﬁrm perceives kinks at all of
them. To illustrate, panel (b) of Figure 2 plots the worst-case expectation when the ﬁrm has
observed demand signals at two distinct price points p0 and p1 , and naturally the worst-case
expectation is kinked around both of these prices.


2.3    An as-if cost of changing the price
When choosing its price to maximize expected proﬁts under the worst-case beliefs, the
problem of the ﬁrm is dynamic: posting a price today aﬀects not only current proﬁts, but
also next period’s information set. Solving the full inﬁnite horizon optimization problem is
diﬃcult numerically, because the size of the state space is unbounded, and explodes as the
number of posted prices increases over time. For this reason, we split our analysis in three
parts. In this section, we analyze a myopic problem that ignores the continuation value
of information, but provides a tight analytical characterization of the ﬁrst-order forces at
play. Then in Section 2.4 we provide analytical results for a tractable approximation to the
forward-looking problem, before numerically analyzing it extensively in Section 4.


                                                12
    Log quantity




                                                                                       Log quantity
                                         Log Price                                                                  Log Price


                      (a) One previously-observed price                                               (b) Two previously-observed prices

                                                     Figure 2. Worst-case Expected Demand


   A myopic ﬁrm chooses pt to maximize time-t’s worst-case expected proﬁt
                                              
                                          t−1
                   max min E υ(εt , ct )ε , ct = max (ept − ect ) ext−1 (pt ;m (p;pt ))+.5σt−1 (pt )+.5σz .
                                                                                 ∗             2            2

                    pt m(p)∈Υ0                      pt                                                   
                                                                                                             =ν ∗ (εt−1 ,ct ,pt )


    The optimal behavior crucially hinges on the history of observations εt−1 , which is an
endogenous object, as it depends on the past actions of the ﬁrm. In order to describe
analytically the key mechanics of the model, in this section we take εt−1 as given. We
expand the analysis to the case where εt−1 is endogenous in Section 4.
    We start with the simplest case for the ﬁrm’s information set and assume εt−1 contains
a single price p0 , observed for N0 number of times with an average quantity sold of ȳ0 . As
shown before, this results in a kink in the as-if expected demand, and in turn this provides
the ﬁrm with an incentive to keep its price rigid even when faced with variations in costs.
To show this insight analytically, in Proposition 1 we consider a log-linear approximation of
expected proﬁts around p0 , which reveals a ﬁrst-order loss of moving away from p0 .

Proposition 1. Deﬁne δ ∗ = δ sgn (pt − p0 ). For a given realization of ct , the diﬀerence in
worst-case expected proﬁts at pt and p0 , up to a ﬁrst-order approximation around p0 , is
                                                                                                              
                       ∗                                                             e p0
                   ln υ (ε   t−1
                                   , ct , pt ) −     ln υ0∗ (εt−1 , ct , p0 )   ≈ p0                         ∗
                                                                                           − (b + αt−1 (p0 )δ ) (pt − p0 ) .
                                                                                  e − e ct

Proof. The switch in sign of δ ∗ follows from the worst-case expected demand in (10). Also,
the marginal eﬀect ∂αt−1
                      ∂pt
                         (pt )
                               = 0 at pt = p0 . For details, see Online Appendix A.2.


                                                                                  13
   Proposition 1 shows the locally-evaluated tradeoﬀ of moving the price away from p0 . The
ﬁrst term in the squared brackets is the direct eﬀect of a change in price, holding demand
constant. The second term is the demand eﬀect of a price change, by moving along the
perceived demand elasticity. The fact that the elasticity switches by αt−1 (p0 )δ ∗ around p0 ,
as indicated by the signum function, is the key mechanism in our model.
    We now describe the main results that stem from this property.

 Result #1: There exists an inaction region around previously-posted prices

Given the ﬁrst-order loss arising from the switch in elasticity around p0 , a direct implication
(as derived explicitly in Corollary 1) is that there is a positive interval of ct realizations,
                      b 
around c∗0 ≡ p0 − ln b−1   , for which the ﬁrm keeps its current price ﬁxed at pt = p0 .

Corollary 1. Under the approximation in Proposition           ! 1, p0 is a local maximizer for any ct !∈
(ct−1,0 , ct−1,0 ), where ct−1,0 = c0 + ln b−1 b−αt−1 (p0 )δ and ct−1,0 = c∗0 + ln b−1
                                    ∗       b b−αt−1 (p0 )δ−1                         b b+αt−1 (p0 )δ−1
                                                                                          b+αt−1 (p0 )δ
                                                                                                        .
                                                   p0
Proof. For any ct ∈ (ct−1,0 , ct−1,0 ) we have ep0e−e ct ∈ (b − αt−1 (p0 )δ, b + αt−1 (p0 )δ) . Thus, the

derivative in Proposition 1 is negative for pt > p0 when δ ∗ = δ, and positive for pt < p0 when
δ ∗ = −δ. This gives the necessary and suﬃcient conditions for p0 to be a local maximizer.

     To gain intuition, consider an increase in cost to some ct > c∗0 . This lowers the markup
if the price remains at p0 , which gives the ﬁrm a reason to consider an increase in the price.
However, when the ﬁrm entertains a higher price pt > p0 , it perceives a discrete increase in
demand elasticity to b + αt−1 (p0 )δ, which lowers the optimal markup the ﬁrm targets. As
long as costs do not increase too much, so that ct ≤ c̄t−1,0 , the implied markup at p0 is in fact
still higher than the new target markup. Hence, the ﬁrm ﬁnds it optimal to keep its price
ﬁxed and let the markup decline. If the cost eventually moves higher than the threshold
c̄t−1,0 , the fall in markup would be too big, inducing the ﬁrm to change its price.
     The logic is similar for a decrease in cost below c∗0 . As the ﬁrm entertains lowering its
price from p0 , it perceives the discretely-ﬂatter elasticity b − αt−1 (p0 )δ. Facing this decrease
in elasticity, the ﬁrm ﬁnds it optimal to keep its price ﬁxed and let the markup increase
until ct falls to the lower bound ct−1,0 . Only for a cost realization below this threshold is the
implied increase in markup big enough to incentivize the ﬁrm to lower its price and move
along the ﬂatter demand curve it perceives below p0 .
     Proposition 1 implies that rigidity arises if and only if there is ambiguity about the
demand shape. If that is not the case, i.e. δ = 0, the interval of costs for which p0 is the
local optimizer is the singleton set {c∗0 }, and thus the probability that p0 is a local maximizer
becomes zero. With ambiguity, this probability becomes strictly positive.


                                                   14
   Unlike a ﬁxed cost of changing the price, the as-if ﬁrst-order perceived cost that emerges
in our model is history dependent. There are two fundamental dimensions along which past
information matters for this perception, which we now turn our attention to.

Result #2: The inaction region widens as a price gets observed more often

The ﬁrst dimension is that the perceived demand loss of changing the price increases with
the signal-to-noise ratio αt−1 (p0 ) (see Proposition 1). Intuitively, increasing the precision
of the information available at p0 makes the ﬁrm more conﬁdent in its estimate of x(p0 ),
eﬀectively amplifying the perceived increase in uncertainty when moving away from p0 . This
translates in a larger diﬀerence between the worst-case demand elasticities on either side of
p0 , which in turn raises the ﬁrst-order loss of changing prices. Since αt−1 (p0 ) increases with
N0 , (by equation (7)), it follows that holding everything else constant, having seen the price
p0 more often in the past leads to a larger inaction region, as summarized in Corollary 2.

Corollary 2. The interval, deﬁned in Corollary 1, of cost shock realizations ct for which p0
is a local maximizer widens with N0 :

                                                  ∂ct−1,0      ∂ct−1,0
                                                          < 0;         >0
                                                   ∂N0          ∂N0
                                                                ∂αt−1 (pt )
Proof. Follows from Corollary 1 and from                          ∂N0
                                                                              > 0 in equation (7).

Result #3: Prices display memory

Another crucial property of history dependence is that when past information εt−1 contains
more than one unique price point, the general updating formulas discussed in Section 2.2
imply that there exist kinks in the as-if expected demand around each previously observed
price level pi ∈ εt−1 . These kinks lead to qualitatively similar ﬁrst-order losses in the expected
proﬁt around all such prices. This result is formalized in Proposition 2.

Proposition 2. Let δi∗ ≡ δ sgn (pt − pi ) for all pi ∈ εt−1 . For a given realization of ct , up to
a ﬁrst-order approximation around each such pi ∈ εt−1 :
                                                                                                  
        ∗                                                         e pi
    ln υ (ε t−1
                  , ct , pt ) −   ln υ0∗ (εt−1 , ct , pi )   ≈ pi                           ∗
                                                                        − (b + αt−1,i (pi )δ + Ai ) (pt − pi ) .
                                                               e − e ct

Proof. The switch in δ ∗ follows directly from the worst-case expected demand detailed in
Online Appendix A.1. There we also deﬁne the term αt−1,i (p) which denotes the weight put
on the past demand realization at pi in the conditional expectation, i.e. its eﬀective signal-


                                                                   15
to-noise ratio when updating with multiple signals. Lastly, Ai collects additional derivative
terms that do not depend on the sign of (pt − pi ), for details see Online Appendix A.2.
                         b 
   Letting c∗i = pi − ln b−1  for all pi ∈ εt−1 , a direct counterpart to Corollary 1 follows.

Corollary 3. Under the ﬁrst-order approximation in Proposition 2, for each !pi ∈ εt−1 there
exists the interval (ct−1,i , ct−1,i ), where ct−1,i = c∗i + ln b−1      b b−αt−1,i (pi )δ+α̂−1
                                                                                                 and ct−1,i =
                                 !                                            b−αt−1,i (pi )δ+α̂

c∗i + ln b−1
          b b+αt−1,i (pi )δ+α̂−1
             b+αt−1,i (pi )δ+α̂
                                   , such that for all ct ∈ (ct−1,i , ct−1,i ) pi is a local maximizer.

Proof. For any ct in this interval, the ﬁrst order derivative of the change in proﬁts in
Proposition 2 is negative for pt > pi and positive for pt < pi , for all pi ∈ εt−1 .

    Thus, Proposition 2 and Corollary 3 imply that the ﬁrm is not only reluctant to change
its current price, but is in general inclined to repeat prices posted in the past, since there
are kinks in the proﬁt function there as well. This generates ‘memory’ in the price series.

Result #4: Good demand signals make a price change less likely

Lastly, the analysis so far has focused on the ﬁrst-order eﬀect of price deviations around any
of the pi ∈ εt−1 , showing that keeping the price ﬁxed at previous levels is a local optimum.
Next, we show that there is an additional interaction between the level of the past quantity
sold ȳi and the change in the perceived demand slope around the price pi at which that
signal was observed. This interaction is of second-order, thus washes away in the local
analysis above, but can matter for ﬁnding the global optimum, as we do in Section 4.
    This interaction arises from the fact that the signal-to-noise ratio αt−1,i (p) declines
with the distance between p and pi . Intuitively, because the levels of demand at diﬀerent
prices are imperfectly correlated, the information about demand at some price pi is most
useful for updating beliefs at prices in its neighborhood. This naturally arises from the
fact that demand does not come from a particular parametric family – when learning non-
parametrically, information is inherently local, as it does not update beliefs about parameters
that control the underlying function globally. The non-linearity of αt−1,i (p) is of second-order
locally, but matters when thinking about the global maximum.
    The second cross-derivative of the worst-case expected demand, with respect to price and
the perceived innovation at pi , denoted by zi ≡ ȳi − (−γ − bpi ), is given by

                              ∗t−1 (pt ; m∗ (p; pt ))
                           ∂ 2x
                                                       = −2ψαt−1,i (pt )(pt − pi ).
                                    ∂pt ∂ zi

   Note that the derivative of the worst-case expected demand to the right (left) of pi
becomes more negative (positive) as the perceived innovation zi increases. Hence, a higher

                                                     16
signal innovation zi ampliﬁes the eﬀects of the endogenous switch in the worst-case demand
elasticity. Intuitively, positive demand news shift up the conditional belief about demand
at all prices, but the weight put on the signal decreases with |pt − pi |, so that beliefs about
demand shift up the most locally. In Section 4 we investigate this interaction empirically and
quantify how much a ﬁrm that observes a particularly good (bad) demand realization is more
likely to keep (change) its posted price. This asymmetry in the eﬀect of demand news on
the probability of changing a price stands in contrast to most state-dependent mechanisms,
such as a standard menu-cost model, where both positive and negative shocks make the ﬁrm
more likely to reprice as they raise the gap between the current and optimal prices.


2.4     Incorporating forward-looking behavior
Next, we consider how forward-looking behavior aﬀects optimal pricing, and stickiness in
particular. The current price choice pt and demand realization yt become state variables in
next period’s problem, as they are incorporated in the future information set εt . This gives
rise to a new incentive: posting a price for the sake of obtaining new information.10
    To characterize this exploration motive, we need to analyze the continuation value in (5).
This presents a technical problem – the relevant state εt−1 is the whole history of prices and
demand realizations, which is inﬁnitely long, thus making the general form of the dynamic
problem intractable. To get around this, we assume the ﬁrm understands that its action
today (time t) will change its information set in the future, but thinks that none of its future
pricing decisions (t + k) will aﬀect its information set again – that is, εt+k = εt , ∀k ≥ 1. We
denote the resulting continuation value of the recursive problem from t + 1 onward, when the
ﬁrm does not face any more changes in the endogenous state εt but still faces the ﬂuctuations
in exogenous cost process ct+k , as Ṽ .11 Plugging it into (5), the ﬁrm solves
                                                           "                                         
                                                                                                  t−1
          V (ε   t−1
                       , ct ) = max min E ν(εt , ct ) + β       Ṽ (ε , ct+1 )g(ct+1 |ct )dct+1 ε
                                                                     t
                               pt   m(p)∈Υ0


   This approximation makes the dynamic problem tractable, while featuring two important
conceptual advantages. First, the ﬁrm is forward-looking into the discounted inﬁnite future
  10
     Conceptually, our environment is related to the multi-arm bandit literature. Here the payoﬀs of the
arms (i.e. price choices) are correlated since ψ > 0, and evaluated under multiple priors. See Bergemann
and Valimaki (2008) for a survey of related applications of bandit problems studied under expected utility.
  11
     Ṽ (.) is the solution to the following recursive problem, with details presented in Online Appendix A.3
                                                               "                                     
                                                                                                     
                 Ṽ (εt , ct+1 ) = max min E ν(εt+1 , ct+1 ) + β Ṽ (εt , ct+2 )g(ct+2 |ct+1 )dct+2 εt
                              pt+1 m(p)∈Υ0




                                                     17
in terms of the cost process ct+k , hence does not only consider the likely cost next period as
it would in a simple two-period model. Second, the approximation leaves the history εt−1
completely unrestricted. Thus, it avoids any ad hoc assumptions limiting the ﬁrms’ memory,
which could lead to built-in conclusions on how ﬁrms learn and the resulting pricing decisions.
Instead, leaving it unrestricted allows us to evaluate in Section 4 the long-run properties of
the model at its stochastic steady state, where that history is fully endogenous and long.
In this section, however, we will focus on analyzing the qualitative features of the economic
forces shaping the exploration motive, and to this end we treat the history εt−1 as given.
    The experimentation motive is driven by a desire for information that is both new and
relevant. On the one hand, the ﬁrm would like to obtain information on new parts of the
demand curve where its ex-ante uncertainty is high. On the other hand, the ﬁrm values
relevant information, i.e. signals that would aﬀect beliefs about demand near prices that are
likely to be posted in the future. The balance of these two forces determines whether the
exploration incentives lead to the selection of a brand new price pt or revisiting one of the
previously observed prices. Which one dominates depends crucially on the information the
ﬁrm enters the period with – εt−1 .
    To gain analytical insight into this trade-oﬀ, we consider the special case where i) ψ = ∞,
so that beliefs about demand at diﬀerent prices are uncorrelated; and ii) there is perfect
foresight that future costs are constant at some arbitrary level c > 0, i.e. ct+k = c for all k ≥
1. Under these assumptions,         we can characterize analytically the expected continuation value
                                      
                            
E Ṽ ({εt−1 , pt , yt }, c)εt−1 , pt as a function of pt (the expectation is over the realizations of
the new signal yt ), and prove two results that illustrate how the exploration incentive could
be maximized either away from or exactly at one of the previously observed prices.
     The composition of the history of observations εt−1 is key to determining whether the
optimal exploration strategy is to stay put or try something new. To illustrate, we consider
two cases that would also help understand the numerical results in Section 4 where εt−1 is
endogenous. First, let εt−1 = ε0 contain demand realizations at only one distinct price level
p0 . To make the point starker, we assume that the realization of the observed signal ȳ0 is
                                              2
good enough (i.e. ȳ0 > −γ − bp0 + σ2x ), so that when the cost equals c∗0 = p0 − ln( b−1     b
                                                                                                ), p0 is
not just locally optimal, but is in fact the global static proﬁt-maximizer conditional on ε0 .
     In Proposition 3, we characterize the current price pt that maximizes the expected
continuation value when c = c0 .
                                                                                      
                                                                                  
                                                                                ∗  0
Proposition 3. The expected continuation value E Ṽ ({ε , pt , yt }, c0 )ε , pt achieves its
                                                                       0


maximum at
                                 p∗t = arg min(p − p0 )2 s.t. p = p0 .
                                            p


                                                  18
Proof. We provide intuition in the text below, see Online Appendix A.3 for details.

    Intuitively, choosing p∗t today ensures that the new signal yt will be informative about a
price as close as possible to the ex-ante expected optimal p0 – this makes the new information
highly relevant. As a result, if the realization zt at the new signal is above a threshold z̄t (p∗t ),
characterized in the proof, then the ﬁrm will stick with this price in the future, set pt+k = p∗t ,
and take advantage of the unexpectedly high demand at that price while remaining near its
ex-ante optimal markup level. On the other hand, if the signal realization happens to be bad,
the ﬁrm can safely switch back to the ex-ante optimal p0 , where the belief about demand is
not aﬀected by zt , and still oﬀers lower uncertainty and the preferred markup.
      The reason for not picking pt = p0 is that a bad realization of the new signal erodes the
ex-ante best pricing option, p0 , while the ﬁrm does not have a good fall-back alternative, as
it has no observations of demand at other prices. Because of this, it is best to experiment
with a brand new price, though the desire for relevant information keeps the ﬁrm near p0 .
      Proposition 3 describes a case where the value of new information is maximized away
from p0 . However, next we show that this is not a general result, but depends on whether
the ﬁrm has seen one or more distinct prices in the past. In particular, let εt−1 = ε1 contain
demand realizations at two distinct prior prices, p0 and p1 . Also, to simplify the exposition
we assume that the information received at these prices is of the same quality – demand at
each price has been observed the same number of times (N1 = N0 ), and the observed signals,
ȳ0 and ȳ1 , imply equally-good news, i.e. the same perceived innovation: z0 = z1 = z.
      Proposition 4 shows that when the previously observed demand at p0 and p1 has been
good enough, the continuation value is maximized at p0 for a range of cost shocks around
c∗0 . Thus, forward-looking behavior reinforces the static stickiness result (Corollary 1).

Proposition 4. There is a non-singleton interval of costs (c, c̄) around c∗0 , and a threshold
χ > 0, such that if z > χ, then for any c ∈ (c, c̄):
                                                                    
                                                                    
                              p0 = arg max E Ṽ ({ε , pt , yt }, c)ε1 .
                                                        1
                                        pt

Moreover, the threshold χ is decreasing in |p1 − p0 |.

Proof. We provide intuition in the text below, see Online Appendix A.3 for details.

    The reason for this result is two-fold. First, information about demand at p0 is the most
relevant since that is the price expected to be optimal in the future. Second, even if the ﬁrm
receives a ‘disappointing’ new signal yt at p0 , it has a good fall-back option as it has also
accumulated information (and thus reduced uncertainty) at the price level p1 . Thus, the ﬁrm
can set pt = p0 and further reduce uncertainty about demand at the most likely future price,

                                                   19
safe with the knowledge that it has a good alternative in case the new information is bad.
The value of the fall-back option is important – in particular, the perceived innovation in
the average past demand realization at p1 must exceed a threshold χ (which we characterize
in the proof). This threshold is lower when p0 and p1 are closer to each other, because then
their implied markups are more similar, making the two price choices closer substitutes, and
thus p1 a more attractive fall-back option.
    Our analytical results show that forward-looking behavior can both counteract and
reinforce the previous stickiness result derived from static maximization. The resulting
overall eﬀect depends crucially on the structure of the prior history εt−1 , which highlights
the importance of taking into account the endogeneity of that history. To that end, Section
4 numerically analyzes the stochastic steady state of a general version of our forward-looking
model, with ψ < ∞ and stochastic cost shocks. We ﬁnd that experimentation is not only
consistent with signiﬁcant price stickiness, but also helps generate an empirically relevant
(i) life-cycle proﬁle of pricing behavior and (ii) size distribution of price changes.


3     Quantitative Model and Nominal Rigidity
In this section, we embed our mechanism in a macroeconomic model with monopolistic
competition. The key elements are that ﬁrms are uncertain about both (i) their demand curve
and (ii) the competitors’ price index. We ﬁrst show analytically that this two-dimensional
uncertainty gives rise to as-if kinks in demand in terms of nominal prices. Then, in the
next section, we quantify the ability of our mechanism to match micro-level moments and
generate monetary non-neutrality. In what follows, all lower case variables are in logs.


3.1    Structure of competition
The ﬁrst primitive of the economic framework is the ﬁrm’s set of direct competitors. We
assume that ﬁrm i sells to a single industry j and in doing so, competes against a continuum
of other monopolistically competitive ﬁrms who do the same. Each industry j has a
representative ﬁnal-good ﬁrm that aggregates the varieties i. Its cost-minimization problem
implies a demand schedule xj (.) for the good of ﬁrm i in industry j

                                yi,t = xj (pi,t − pj,t , yj,t , zi,t ) ,                 (11)




                                                  20
where pi,t is the log price set by ﬁrm i, and the log industry price index pj,t is such that
             #
epj,t +yj,t = epi,t +yi,t di.12 The zi,t term is an idiosyncratic demand shock for good i which
is unobserved by ﬁrm i but known to be distributed as N (0, σz2 ). The demand curve in
equation (11) is a generalization of the typical CES structure, with the familiar result that
the demand for a given intermediate good i is a function of the ﬁrm’s price relative to the
industry average, pi,t − pj,t ; overall industry output yj,t ; and demand shocks zi,t .
   At the aggregate level, a representative household consumes a ﬁnal good produced by a
competitive ﬁrm that buys from the continuum of industries j. The household’s consumption
basket and$the associated
                        % aggregate price  index are given by the standard CES structures
      b
            #      b−1
                                   1
                                        #             
yt = b−1 ln   eyj,t b dj and pt = 1−b ln epj,t (1−b) dj . Cost minimization by the ﬁnal good
producer implies a standard demand curve for the industry j composite good

                                           yj,t = yt + b(pt − pj,t ).                                       (12)

   We denote the relative prices that enter as arguments in the demand curves for ﬁrm i in
equation (11) and for industry j in equation (12), respectively, as

                                    ri,t ≡ pi,t − pj,t ;        rj,t ≡ pt − pj,t .                          (13)


3.2     Information about competition
We model a ﬁrm that has Knightian uncertainty over the joint assessment of (i) its demand
curve xj as a function of its own relative price pi,t − pj,t , and (ii) the price index of its direct
competitors pj,t . Each ﬁrm i observes the full history of its own prices and quantities, pi,t and
yi,t , as well as the aggregate output and price levels, yt and pt . Intuitively, our framework is
meant to capture the idea that since ﬁrms do not know the exact structure of the demand
they face, they also do not know how to precisely aggregate over the prices of their direct
competitors to build the relevant price index they compete against. Thus, uncertainty about
the competitive environment manifests itself in uncertainty over the shape of the demand
curve, but also the relevant price index that determines a speciﬁc ﬁrm’s relative price.
                                                                 #                         
  12
    In the background, the technology is modeled as eyj,t = fj−1    fj (eyi,t )gj (ezi,t )di , where each industry
j has potentially diﬀerent production functions fj$ and gj . Solving%!the cost-minimization problem of the
                                                                    f  (eyj,t )
ﬁnal good ﬁrm in industry j yields yi,t = ln fj−1 epi,t −pj,t gjj (ezi,t ) . In equation (11) we summarize the
eﬀective demand curve as xj and note that it is a transformation of the functions fj and gj .




                                                           21
Ambiguity about the demand curve

   For tractability, we assume the ﬁrm understands that the industry demand yj,t and the
demand shocks zi,t enter multiplicatively in the unknown function xj in equation (11). Since
ﬁrm i also knows the structure of the aggregate consumption basket, it can substitute out
industry output yj,t from equation (12) to obtain the demand schedule

                                     yi,t = xj (ri,t ) + brj,t + yt + zi,t ,                               (14)

where the relative prices ri,t and rj,t are deﬁned in (13).
    Ambiguity about the demand curve xj is modeled as in equations (3) and (4): there is a
set of multiple priors, each of which is a GP distribution with mean function m(ri ) so that

                      m(ri ) ∈ [−γ − bri , γ − bri ];       m (ri ) ∈ [−b − δ, −b + δ].                   (15)

Ambiguity about the relative price

   In our model, the ﬁrm does not directly observe its direct competitors’ price index pj,t . It
does, however, have two relevant sources of information. These sources diﬀer in the perceived
ambiguity about their informational content. In particular, the ﬁrm is conﬁdent, i.e perceives
no ambiguity, about the ﬁrst source, which consists of marketing reviews that perfectly reveal
the value of pj,t . We model reviews as occurring with some exogenous probability λT . Here
we implicitly assume that there are some technological constraints on the ability to perform
frequent reviews (e.g. the necessary data may not be observed every period); or simply that
reviews are costly, leading the ﬁrm to perform them infrequently.13
    In addition, the ﬁrm observes the aggregate price level pt at all time. However, unlike
in a rational expectations (RE) framework, we assume the ﬁrm is not conﬁdent about how
pt relates to the unknown pj,t , and perceives their relationship as ambiguous. In particular,
we assume that while the ﬁrm is certain that aggregate and industry prices are cointegrated
and thus must keep pace with each other in the long-run, the ﬁrm is uncertain in the short-
run structural relationship between the two. Putting together the ﬁrm’s two sources of
information, it perceives the evolution of pjt as

                                         pj,t = p&j,t + φ(pt − p&j,t ),                                    (16)
  13
    As long as reviews do not happen every period, using deterministic or state-dependent review lags would
not change our analysis signiﬁcantly. The modeling advantage over a deterministic timing is computational:
we ﬁnd that stochastic review times achieve faster convergence towards the stationary distribution. The
advantage over a state-dependent setup is tractability, as it avoids modeling a cost-beneﬁt analysis of reviews.




                                                       22
where p&j,t is the most recent review signal as of time t, and the function φ summarizes the
unknown and ambiguous structural relationship between pt and pj,t . Indeed, our assumption
that ﬁrms do not know the exact industrial structure (i.e. the function xj ) implies that they
also do not know the exact equilibrium relationship between pt and pj,t – diﬀerent industry
production functions imply diﬀerent such structural relationships.
   Ambiguity about φ is modeled with the same tools as the uncertainty about the demand
function xj . Speciﬁcally, we assume that the priors on φ are GP distributions, with mean
functions that lie in a set Ωφ around the true DGP φ(pt − p&j,t ) = pt − p&j,t . For tractability,
we focus on the limiting case in which the variance function of the GP distributions over φ
goes to zero almost everywhere. Given the resulting Dirac priors, we can simplify notation
and specify the set of priors directly as a set of possible φ’s the ﬁrm entertains.
   In particular, we specify that for small inﬂationary pressure, i.e. when |pt − p&j,t | is less
than some threshold Γ, the relationship is uncertain and the function φ lies in the interval

                                φ(pt − p&j,t ) ∈ [−γp , γp ], for |pt − p&j,t | ≤ Γ.                            (17)

This captures the idea that observing a small change in the aggregate price pt does not
convince the ﬁrm that the unobserved industry price has also changed. Online Appendix
A.7, shows that such uncertainty about the local relationship between aggregate and industry
inﬂation is well supported by the data. Lastly, to ensure that under all admissible priors
pt − pj,t is stationary, we make the set of potential φ grow with pt − pj,t as inﬂation rises:

φ(pt − p&j,t ) ∈ [−γp + pt − p&j,t − Γ sgn(pt − p&j,t ), γp + pt − p&j,t − Γ sgn(pt − p&j,t )], for |pt − p&j,t | ≥ Γ.

Unambiguous estimates of relevant relative prices and demand

    The review signal p&j,t is the only unambiguous estimate of pj,t . The ﬁrm can use this
signal to construct unambiguous estimates of the relative prices of interest, ri,t and rj,t , as

                                      r&i,t ≡ pi,t − p&j,t ;    r&j,t ≡ pt − p&j,t .                            (18)

Here, r&i,t represents the ﬁrm’s estimate of the relevant relative price driving its own demand
curve, constructed using the ﬁrm’s observed nominal price pi,t and the review signal p&j,t . In
turn, r&j,t is the estimate of the relative price that enters the industry j demand curve.
   Using these expressions, we can decompose the relative prices ri,t and rj,t into a compo-
nent over which the ﬁrm is conﬁdent and one that is perceived as ambiguous. Speciﬁcally,
given the law of motion of pj,t in equation (16), the unknown relative prices ri,t and rj,t


                                                           23
deﬁned in (13), and their unambiguous estimates in (18), the decomposition is given by

                            ri,t = r&i,t − φ (&
                                              rj,t ) ;        rj,t = r&j,t − φ (&
                                                                                rj,t ) .         (19)

   Substituting the decompositions of the unobserved ri,t and rj,t in (19) into the demand
equation (14) leads to

                                   ri,t − φ(&
                        yi,t = xj (&        rj,t )) − bφ(&
                                                         rj,t ) +b&
                                                                  rj,t + yt + zi,t ,             (20)
                                                          
                                ambiguous components of demand


which isolates the unambiguous and ambiguous components of demand. The former are
given by the observed aggregate output yt , the risky demand shock zi,t and the unambiguous
estimates of the relative prices (&      ri,t , r&j,t ). The ambiguous components are due to ambiguity
over (i) the demand curve xj itself, with the set of priors given in equation (15); and over
(ii) the relative prices (ri,t , rj,t ), arising from the set of priors for φ in (17).


3.3     Optimization problem
Having described the competitive and information structures, we now turn our attention
to the proﬁt maximization problem. We assume that the production function of the
intermediate-good ﬁrm i is given by yi,t = ωi,t + at + li,t , where ωi,t and at are an idiosyncratic
and aggregate productivity shock respectively; and li,t represents the (log) hours supplied by
the household to ﬁrm i. The processes for these shocks are known:

                             ωi,t = ρω ωi,t−1 + εωi,t ;         at = ρa at−1 + εat ,

where εωi,t is iid N (0, σω2 ) and εat is iid N (0, σa2 ). Because we are ultimately interested in how
nominal shocks aﬀect the ﬁrm’s pricing decisions, nominal spending is the other aggregate
shock in this economy: the log nominal aggregate spending st = pt + yt is assumed to follow
a random walk with drift, st = μ + st−1 + st , where st is iid N (0, σs2 ).
    The aggregate side of the model is standard. We assume linear labor disutility for the
representative household, which then equalizes the wage to consumption, which in turn is
simply equal to aggregate output by market clearing (as detailed in the Online Appendix
A.4). Given the log-demand in equation (20), the real ﬂow proﬁt of ﬁrm i becomes
                                                               
                                    υi,t = epi,t −pt − eyt −ωi,t eyi,t .                         (21)

   The ﬁrm’s problem can be summarized as follows: The ﬁrm enters period t with


                                                         24
knowledge of the history of all its previous quantities sold, the corresponding nominal prices
at which those quantities were observed and its history of industry price review signals. In
addition, the ﬁrm sees the history of aggregate prices and output. At the start of time t,
the idiosyncratic productivity ωi,t and aggregates (pt , yt ) are observed. If a new review is
conducted, p&j,t equals pj,t and equals p&j,t−1 otherwise. Given the history of observables and
current states, the ﬁrm optimizes over its action, pi,t , taking into account the ambiguity over
its demand in equation (20). At the end of period t, the demand shock zi,t is realized and
the ﬁrm updates its information set with the observed quantity sold yi,t at price pi,t .
    Finally, the ﬁrm needs to conjecture a law of motion of pt to forecast future proﬁts. We
close the model by assuming that the ambiguity-averse ﬁrms are measure zero, while the rest
of the economy is populated by rational-expectations ﬁrms. This makes aggregate determi-
nation simple, as the equilibrium pt is given by pRE
                                                  t . The implication of this assumption is
that by ignoring strategic complementaries in price setting, the quantitative benchmark of
Section 4 can be seen as a lower bound on the degree of monetary non-neutrality.
    For a transparent comparison between our model and the RE benchmark, we assume a
simple DGP where each variety i faces the same demand function coming from industry j in
(14), given by xj (ri,t ) = −bri,t . Using this knowledge of the demand function in equation (20),
it follows that a RE ﬁrm has full knowledge that its demand is yi,t   RE
                                                                         = −b(pi,t − pt ) + yt + zi,t .
                                                                         RE
The resulting optimal RE nominal price takes the familiar form pi,t = log b−1       b
                                                                                        + pt − ωi,t ,
where the aggregate price (up to a constant) is pRE    t  = st − at .

Aggregate price level and proﬁts

    Note that the aggregate price pt aﬀects real proﬁts in equation (21) through three possible
channels. The ﬁrst is the standard eﬀect of deﬂating nominal proﬁts by pt . The other two
eﬀects show up in the demand equation (20). On the one hand, when observing a higher pt ,
holding p&j,t constant, the ﬁrm estimates that the industry j’s composite good is relatively
cheaper. As a result, the ﬁrm expects higher demand for industry j’s composite good, which
in turn, holding everything else constant, translates into a higher demand for ﬁrm i. This
demand shifter is given by b&   rj,t in equation (20). On the other hand, the same observation of
a higher pt may change the ﬁrm’s perception of the unobserved pj,t , through their structural
relationship φ(&rj,t ). In particular, holding constant p&j,t , a larger pt indicates to the ﬁrm that
the aggregate price index is higher than the ﬁrm’s unambiguous estimate of pj,t . While in a
RE model this observation would fully convince the ﬁrm that pj,t must have also risen, our
ambiguity-averse ﬁrm lacks such conﬁdence, as summarized in the set of beliefs in (17).




                                                  25
3.4     Joint worst-case beliefs
To illustrate the key intuition analytically, for the rest of this section we zero-in on the special
case of a myopic ﬁrm born at time t = 0 that is in its second period of life (i.e. t = 1).
Hence, its information set contains just one previous price point, pi,0 , and the quantity sold
at that price, yi,0 .14 In addition, the ﬁrm observes the history of aggregates, {y0 , y1 , p0 , p1 },
and signals on the industry price level, {& pj,0 , p&j,1 }. These observables are used by the ﬁrm
to form the unambiguous estimates of the relative prices, {&      ri,0 , r&j,0 , r&j,1 }, as deﬁned in (18).
    Abstracting from the unambiguous terms, expected demand is given by

                 ri,1 − φ(&
               m(&        rj,1 )) − bφ(&
                                       rj,1 ) + α{yi,0 − [m(&
                                                            ri,0 − φ(&
                                                                     rj,0 )) − bφ(&
                                                                                  rj,0 )]},                (22)

                 2
where α = σ2σ+σ
              x
                2.
                   15
                      The expectation is simply a combination of a prior belief about demand
            x   z
                                           ri,1 − φ(&
at the current relative price ri,1 (i.e. m(&        rj,1 )) − bφ(&
                                                                 rj,1 )) and an update given the
realized quantity yi,0 at the previous price ri,0 . Since the industry prices pj,0 and pj,1 are
uncertain, expected demand depends on the priors for both the demand curve, m(.), and
the structural relationship between industry and aggregate prices, φ(.).
     The analysis of the worst-case priors is similar to the one in the real model in that it
can be decomposed in jointly considering the worst-case priors for (i) the level of demand at
the current relative price ri,1 and (ii) the change in demand between ri,1 , and the previous
ri,0 (where the quantity sold yi,0 was observed). However, the ﬁrm now needs to account for
the joint ambiguity over both the demand shape, i.e. m, and the industry-aggregate price
relationship φ, since the latter aﬀects perceptions about the unknown pj,0 (the industry price
when yi,0 was realized) and pj,1 (the industry price that determines the current relative price).
     The worst-case prior for the level of demand at the current price ri,1 is straightforward –
it is equal to the lower bound of (15), given by −γ − b (& ri,1 − φ(&
                                                                    rj,1 )). Under this prior, the
ﬁrst two components of expected demand in (22) simplify to −γ − b&      ri,1 , as the bφ(&
                                                                                         rj,1 ) terms
cancel out. This reﬂects our assumption that while the ﬁrm faces ambiguity about the local
elasticity of its demand schedule, its beliefs are centered around the true xj (ri,t ) = −bri,t .
     Still, the ambiguity about the shape of demand impacts the ﬁrm’s evaluation of the
change in demand from ri,1 to ri,0 , and thus its update based on the realization of yi,0 . In
  14
     In Online Appendix B.2 (on the authors’ website) we show how the conceptual analysis is extended to
having multiple past prices, and Section 4 shows numerical results for the general case of forward-looking
ﬁrms with unrestricted history.
  15
     To simplify notation and the analysis, for the rest of this section we suppress the local information eﬀects
by working with ψ = 0. We relax this assumption in Section 4.




                                                       26
fact, there are two sources of ambiguity aﬀecting this update, since the surprise in yi,0 is

     yi,0 − [m(&
               ri,0 − φ(&
                        rj,0 )) − m (&
                                     ri,1 − φ(&
                                              rj,1 ))] +                             rj,0 ) − φ(&
                                                                                b [φ(&          rj,1 )]               (23)
                                                                                               
             Ambiguous change along ﬁrm’s demand curve                Ambiguous change in industry’s relative price


The ﬁrst source of ambiguity in the update is the ﬁrm’s uncertainty over the shape of its
demand curve between ri,0 and ri,1 , governed by the set of priors m. The second source
of ambiguity is due to the unobserved change in the industry price level from pj,0 to pj,1 ,
and is governed by the set of priors on the industry-aggregate price structural relationship
φ. Moreover, the unknown industry inﬂation impacts the ﬁrm’s update in two places: (i) it
aﬀects the actual change in the relative price ri,t and enters the argument of the prior on the
demand function m, and (ii) introduces a shift in the ﬁrm’s demand schedule, as movements
in pj,t against the aggregate price pt change the economy’s demand for the composite good
of industry j, shifting demand for all ﬁrms in that industry (the second term in (23)).
   Once the relevant constraints on the admissible functions m and φ are taken into account,
determining the joint worst case for the ambiguous update in (22) reduces to

                       min             min             −δ  {&
                                                             ri,1 − r&i,0 − [φ(&
                                                                               rj,1 ) − φ(&
                                                                                          rj,0 )]} .                  (24)
                     δ  ∈[−δ,δ] φ(
                                   rj,t )∈[−γp ,γp ]


    The joint worst-case prior beliefs depend on whether the ﬁrm considers a price that raises
or lowers r&i,1 relative to r&i,0 . When it entertains an action that increases r&i,t , it sets in motion
a concern that its eﬀective demand is sensitive to this action. This concern manifests itself
in a joint worst-case belief that both (i) the unknown demand curve m, is steep, i.e. δ ∗ = δ,
and that (ii) there was a decline in the unknown price index of its direct competition within
industry j. Hence, if r&i,1 ≥ r&i,0 , the minimizing priors are

                                δ ∗ = δ;        φ∗ (&
                                                    rj,1 ) = −γp ;         φ∗ (&
                                                                               rj,0 ) = γp .                          (25)

     In contrast, when the ﬁrm entertains decreasing its estimated relative price r&i,1 , it worries
about the opposite situation: that (i) its unknown demand curve is ﬂat (i.e. δ ∗ = −δ), and
(ii) it is facing an increase in the unknown price index of the competition. Hence, if r&i,1 ≤ r&i,0 ,

                              δ ∗ = −δ;           φ∗ (&
                                                      rj,1 ) = γp ;      φ∗ (&
                                                                             rj,0 ) = −γp .                           (26)

     It is worth pointing out that the worst-case belief about the change in pj,t is not always
that the ﬁrm’s competition has lowered prices. The reason is that the industry price aﬀects
the ﬁrm’s demand in two ways: (i) it determines the relevant relative price (the argument of
xj ), and (ii) acts as a demand shifter since lower overall prices in industry j boost demand

                                                               27
for all ﬁrms inside the industry. These two eﬀects go in opposite directions, and which one
dominates depends on the perceived elasticity of the demand function xj . When xj takes on
the average elasticity b, these two eﬀects cancel out. However, when the ﬁrm is contemplating
a price increase or decrease, the worst-case local elasticity of xj changes away from b. As a
result, the worst-case belief about φ endogenously depends on the ﬁrm’s action r&i,1 .
    The key implication of equations (25) and (26) is that the joint worst-case beliefs over
the demand curve and the industry-aggregate price relationship endogenously induce a kink
in the worst-case conditional demand schedule around r&i,0 , – notice they give rise to an
absolute value term −αδ|&   ri,1 − r&i,0 | in (24). The reason behind the emergence of the kink
is similar to the real model, and in particular equation (10). The diﬀerence is that while
in the real model the relevant relative price was uniquely determined by the ﬁrm’s action,
here this is not the case. Intuitively, the ﬁrm is facing an identiﬁcation problem, as it is
uncertain about both the argument and the shape of the demand function. Faced with this
joint ambiguity, it turns out that the robust solution is to estimate the demand curve in
terms of the unambiguous estimate of the relative price r&i,t . Due to the uncertainty about
the local shape of the demand function, a kink at the previously observed r&i,0 emerges.


3.5     Learning and nominal rigidity
The kink in the worst-case expected demand leads to a ﬁrst-order expected loss of having
an estimated relative price r&i,1 diﬀerent from r&i,0 . The ﬁrm can avoid this loss by posting a
nominal price pi,1 such that r&i,1 = r&i,0 , or

                                      pi,1 − p&j,1 = pi,0 − p&j,0 .                              (27)

    Naturally, rigidity in r&i,t has implications for the optimal nominal price.
    First, consider the case in which a new review of the industry price does not occur at
time t = 1, so that p&j,1 = p&j,0 . In that case, if the ﬁrm ﬁnds it optimal to take advantage of
the kink in estimated relative prices, equation (27) shows that the ﬁrm will do so by keeping
its nominal price ﬁxed and set pi,1 = pi,0 . This makes the nominal price rigid.
    Of particular importance is the result that the optimal nominal price p∗i,1 may stay ﬁxed
at its previous value pi,0 even as the aggregate price changes. The current aggregate price
p1 is one of the state variables that aﬀects proﬁts, as shown in equation (21) and discussed
in Section 3.3, and thus aﬀects pricing decisions. However, due to the kink in the worst-case
expected demand, captured by the −αδ|&       ri,1 − r&i,0 | term discussed above, we show (see details
in Proposition A1 in Online Appendix A.5) that there is a range of values of aggregate
inﬂation for which it is optimal for the ﬁrm to keep pi,1 = pi,0 . A similar argument leads to

                                                  28
nominal rigidity conditional on changes in the other state variables as well.
    Alternatively, consider periods when the ﬁrm observes the industry price through a review
signal, i.e. p&j,1 = pj,1 . To take advantage of the kink at r&i,0 , the ﬁrm changes its nominal price
away from pi,0 in response to the information that is revealed by the diﬀerence pj,1 − p&j,0 .
Unless by chance pj,1 = p&j,0 , rigidity in the estimated relative price leads to a nominal
adjustment.

Indexation is suboptimal

    Our model makes indexation to the aggregate price level suboptimal, even in the absence
of external costs of changing prices. Intuitively, this is because the unambiguous estimate of
the relevant relative price, pi,t − p&j,t , is conceptually diﬀerent from the real price, pi,t −pt . The
ﬁrm optimally seeks to minimize exposure to ambiguity about its demand. Since demand is
a function of the relative price pi,t − pj,t , the ﬁrm optimally keeps constant the unambiguous
estimate of this relative price, not the real price as measured against the aggregate price.
The two concepts of relative prices are materially diﬀerent in our model because the observed
aggregate price pt is neither (i) the direct competitors’ price index, nor (ii) an unambiguous
estimate of it.
    To see this, note that the observed aggregate price can be used to deﬂate all nominal
prices to obtain real prices. We denote the resulting real versions of the price of the ﬁrm,
the current industry j price, and the industry price observed at the last marketing review as

                       i,t ≡ pi,t − pt ;
                      preal                 j,t ≡ pj,t − pt ;
                                           preal                p&real
                                                                  j,t ≡ p
                                                                        &j,t − pt .                (28)

The key point is that as long as the competitive and information structure deﬁned in Sections
3.1 and 3.2 are maintained, such re-normalization of prices based on variables in the ﬁrm’s
information set leads to the same optimal solution as derived above. Therefore, the nominal
rigidity is not an artifact of a lack of properly deﬂating nominal prices or nominal illusion.
    We can rewrite all of the basic relationships of our model using the deﬂated prices in
(28). For example, the demand curve faced by the individual ﬁrm can be written as
                                                   real           
                         i,t − p
              yi,t = xj preal  &real
                                 j,t − φ(−&j,t ) − b p
                                          preal      &j,t + φ(−&
                                                               preal
                                                                j,t ) + yt + zi,t ,                (29)

where the set of beliefs over the functions xj (.) and φ(.) is the same as in (15) and (17).
                                                           j,t ) ∈ [−γp , γp ]. In our two-period
                                                          preal
Indeed, in the short run the ﬁrm still entertains that φ(−&
case, equation (29) leads to a kink in the worst-case expected demand around the estimated




                                                  29
                     i,0 − p
relative real price preal  &real
                             j,0 . The local proﬁt maximizer around that kink is to set



                                         i,1 − pi,0 = p
                                        preal         &real
                                                        j,1 − p
                                                              &real
                                                real
                                                                j,0 .                                      (30)

But since aggregate inﬂation p1 − p0 cancels out on both sides of this equation, we obtain
back the optimal nominal price solution given by equation (27).
   Intuitively, when there is no review, the RHS of equation (30) implies that the observed
aggregate inﬂation rate reduces the unambiguous estimate of the industry j real price one-
to-one. To keep demand at the same estimated real price relative to the industry average,
the ﬁrm ﬁnds it optimal to keep its nominal price unchanged, i.e. pi,1 = pi,0 , and thus let its
real price also decrease one-to-one, as implied by the LHS of equation (30).
    Suppose on the contrary that the ﬁrm were to index its nominal price using aggregate
inﬂation and follow a pricing policy that sets preal    real
                                                 i,1 = pi,0 , and keeps its real price constant.
Positive aggregate inﬂation implies a lower estimate of the real industry price p&real
                                                                                  j,1 , compared
to the last period. Keeping its own real price constant while that estimate has decreased is
equivalent to an increase in the ﬁrm’s real relative price vis-a-vis its direct within industry
                    i,1 − p
competitors, i.e. preal   &real
                            j,1 goes up. This is precisely what the ﬁrm wishes to avoid, as
movements in this relative price expose it to ﬁrst-order losses arising from the ambiguity
about the demand shape, as discussed above.16 Thus, such indexation is suboptimal.

Stickiness and memory in nominal prices

    The result of equation (27) extends in a straightforward fashion once we move beyond
the example of a ﬁrm in its second period of life. The unrestricted history of estimated
relative prices r&it−1 and realized quantities forms the information set used to update beliefs
about demand. Given past history r&it−1 , the worst-case beliefs feature kinks at all previously
observed r&i ∈ r&it−1 . When a review does not occur this period so that p&j,t = p&j,t−1 , the kinks
in expected demand occur at the same set of nominal prices as last period.
    These kinks make stickiness in nominal prices akin to “price plans”, where posted prices
tend to bounce around a few “reference prices”. However, unlike other frameworks such as
Eichenbaum et al. (2011), price plans adjust gradually over time: as shocks push the ﬁrm to
visit a price it has not posted previously, it is added to its “price plan”. Importantly, in the
future the ﬁrm is still likely to revisit the older prices, as the signals it has accumulated there
  16
    Formally, these ﬁrst-order losses dominate the standard markup and aggregate-demand eﬀects of a
change in pt , as shown in Propositions A1 and A2, Online Appendix A.5. Naturally, we can modify either
one of our two key primitives that (i) the economy is sub-divided in industries so that the set of ﬁrm’s direct
competitors is diﬀerent from the set of all ﬁrms in the economy, and thus pj,t = pt , or that (ii) the ﬁrms are
not conﬁdent that movements in pt translate one-to-one in movements in pj,t , in ways that would recover full
nominal ﬂexibility. Online Appendix B.3 (on the authors’ website) has details on such alternative economies.


                                                      30
remain in its information set. As we discuss in Section 4.3, this feature has implications for
the persistence of the real eﬀects of monetary shocks.


4      Quantitative evaluation
Next, we evaluate quantitatively the empirical relevance of the model described in the
previous section by testing its implications against a rich set of conditional and unconditional
moments. This requires solving numerically the general inﬁnite horizon decision problem of
the ambiguity-averse ﬁrms. As discussed earlier, the dimensionality of the space grows with
the length of the history εt−1 , and to handle this problem we use the same Ṽ approximation as
outlined in Section 2.4. The advantage of this approach is that we can leave εt−1 completely
unrestricted, hence do not need to impose any ad-hoc assumptions limiting the memory of
the ﬁrms. This way, we can evaluate the performance of our mechanism in the long-run,
at the stochastic steady state of the model, where the history of observations εt−1 is both
endogenous, reﬂecting past optimal choices, and long.


4.1     Calibration
The model period is a week. We calibrate β = 0.97(1/52) to match an annual interest
rate of 3%. The mean growth rate of nominal spending μ = 0.00046 is set to match
an annual inﬂation of 2.4%, and we pick the standard deviation σs = 0.0015 to generate
an annual standard deviation of nominal GDP growth of 1.1%. Following the calibration
in Vavra (2014) we set the persistence and standard deviation of aggregate productivity
ρa = 0.91(1/13) = 0.9928 and σa = 0.0017 to match the quarterly persistence and standard
deviation of average labor productivity, as measured by non-farm business output per hour.
We choose an elasticity of substitution of b = 6, implying a (ﬂexible price) markup of 20%.
    We choose the remaining parameters by targeting micro-level pricing moments from the
IRI Academic Dataset. The dataset consists of scanner data for the 2001 to 2011 period
collected from over 2,000 grocery stores and drugstores in 50 U.S. markets. The products
cover a range of almost thirty categories, mainly food and personal care products. For our
purposes, we focus on nine markets and six product categories.17 Because our model does
not feature a rationale for sales, all reported moments are based on “regular price” series in
  17
    The markets are Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Dallas, Houston, Los Angeles, New York City, Philadelphia
and San Francisco. The categories are beer, cold cereal, frozen dinner entrees, frozen pizza, salted snacks
and yogurt. A more complete description of the dataset is available in Bronnenberg et al. (2008).




                                                    31
which temporary sales are ﬁltered out.18

Learning parameters and stochastic shocks

Our mechanism emphasizes non-parametric learning under ambiguity, which creates a rich
learning environment characterized by six parameters {δ, γp , γ, σx2 , ψ, λT }. With a focus on
limiting the associated degrees of freedom, we set two of the learning parameters to values
corresponding to natural limiting cases, and freely estimate the remaining four parameters.
   First, regarding ambiguity over the demand function, we assume that the ﬁrm is conﬁdent
that the mean demand function cannot be locally upward sloping, hence δ ≤ b. To minimize
degrees of freedom, we thus simply ﬁx δ = b. Second, in terms of ambiguity over the
unobserved industry price index, the parameter γp controls the size of the entertained set
of cointegration relationships in equation (17). As detailed in Section 3, a positive γp is the
reason why the joint worst-case beliefs about the demand function and the relative price lead
to nominal rigidity in the short run. However, once the worst-case is determined and the
ﬁrm engages in learning through the perceived relative price r&i , the value of γp only enters
as a price-independent demand shifter in the worst-case expectation. Its quantitative role is
therefore limited and thus we study the limit of γp → 0. This leaves four learning parameters
{γ, σx2 , ψ, λT } that we estimate by targeting micro-level moments, as detailed below.
    The only modeling diﬀerence relative to the environment described in Section 3 is the
assumption that with probability λφ , ﬁrm i exits and a newly-born ﬁrm takes its place
in industry j. New ﬁrms have no information on the demand function beyond the time-
zero prior, thus exit resets the information capital of ﬁrms.19 This assumption serves two
purposes. First, with an inﬁnitely growing history of signals, conditional beliefs are non-
stationary, making it diﬃcult to evaluate behavior at the stochastic steady state. Second, it
allows us to study pricing behavior over the ﬁrm’s life-cycle, which serves as an additional
set of untargeted moment restrictions on our learning mechanism. Here, we set the exit
probability λφ = 0.0075, following Argente and Yeh (2017), who provide a detailed analysis
of the duration of a UPC-store pair in the same IRI dataset that we use.
    The ﬁrm’s quantity sold is subject to demand shocks, with a standard deviation of σz .
We calibrate this parameter by using empirical evidence on the accuracy of predicting one-
  18
     We use the methodology of Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) which aims to eliminate V-shaped sales.
Also, as is usual with scanner datasets, we obtain the unit price by dividing weekly revenue by quantity
sold. In order to minimize the probability that we identify spurious price changes due to middle-of-the-
week repricing, the use of coupons, loyalty cards, etc., we take the conservative approach of eliminating any
observations that feature a price with fractional cents.
  19
     As such, we interpret reseting the informational capital as a broad concept, which includes any shock
that makes the ﬁrm unsure that past observations are still informative, including major changes in the
competitive landscape, the introduction of rival substitutes or technological change.


                                                     32
period-ahead quantity. This involves estimating the demand regression:

   qijt = β0 + β1 qi,j,t−1 + β2 pijt + β3 p2ijt + β4 cpit + weekt θ1 + storej θ2 + itemi θ3 + zijt   (31)

where qijt and pijt are quantities and prices in logs for item i in store j at time t; cpit is the
(log) consumer price index for food and beverages; while weekt , storej and itemi are vectors
of week, store and item dummies respectively.20 We then compute the empirical standard
deviation of the residuals zijt leading us to set σz = 0.613.21
    The ﬁrms also face idiosyncratic productivity shocks, whose persistence and volatility
(respectively ρw and σw ) we estimate via moment matching.

Simulated method of moments

We estimate the six free parameters, {ρw , σw , σx , ψ, λT , γ}, via simulated method of moments,
by targeting the six pricing moments listed in Table II. For the most part, these are basic
pricing moments widely used in the literature to discipline price-setting models. Throughout,
we deﬁne the ‘reference price’ as the modal price within a 13-week window period, as in
Gagnon et al. (2012). The last moment, the mean duration of a pricing regime, appeals
to the fact that in our model, the kinks in expected demand turn basic stickiness into
price plans. In both actual and simulated data, we identify these price plans using the
method in Stevens (2014).22 Table I presents all parameters values, while Table II shows
the outcomes for moments targeted in the estimation.23 The model matches the targeted
moments very well and, naturally, it does so through a positive ambiguity parameter γ,
which is the necessary source for any price stickiness in the model.24


4.2     Testable implications
Next, we analyze the ability of the model to match various features of the data that were not
directly targeted in the estimation, yet speak to the mechanisms at the heart of our model.
  20
     Given the high (weekly) frequency of our data and the fact that we do not ﬁnd evidence of middle-of-
the-week price changes, endogeneity is unlikely to be a signiﬁcant issue here.
  21
     The regression is run and the volatility measure is computed ﬁrst for each of the 54 category/market
pairs, before being aggregated using revenue weights.
  22
     The methodology modiﬁes the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test to identify shifts in the distribution of price
changes over time. In order to have enough observations from which to identify regimes when applying to
the data, we ignore quote-lines that have missing price data or less than 104 weekly observations (2 years).
We use Stevens (2014)’ standard critical value of 0.61 throughout our regime identiﬁcation exercises, for
both actual and simulated data. Also, in both cases, we eliminate regular price changes of less than 1%.
  23
     The estimation is based on a simulated panel of 5000 time periods with 1000 active ﬁrms in each period.
  24
     Online Appendix A.6 shows that the estimated γ implies an empirically plausible amount of ambiguity,
as it generates dispersion in prior demand forecasts that matches the evidence in Gaur et al. (2007).


                                                     33
                                 Table I. Parameter Values

             Calibrated Parameters                          Estimated Parameters
β      μs      σs     ρa    σa     σz    λφ           ρw    σw    σx    ψ     λT    γ
0.9994 0.00046 0.0015 0.993 0.0017 0.613 0.0075       0.998 0.008 0.691 4.609 0.018 0.614


All model moments are computed at the stochastic steady state. An important characteristic
of the steady state is that the typical information set of a ﬁrm turns out to feature demand
observations at a relatively small number of distinct price points. Because of this endogenous
sparsity of the information set, the typical ﬁrm has several price points associated with low
uncertainty that are both sticky and likely to be revisited, but also still faces substantial
residual demand uncertainty away from those price points. Online Appendix A.8 provides a
detailed discussion of the typical information set at the stochastic steady state.
   We start by covering moments that have previously been analyzed in the literature, before
turning to more novel features. The results are presented in Table III. All empirical moments
are obtained by weighing results across markets and categories.

                        Table II. Targeted moments - Data vs model

                                                                      Data       Model
   Frequency of regular price changes                                 0.107      0.105
   Median size of absolute regular price changes                      0.149      0.154
   75th pctile of the distribution of non-zero absolute price changes 0.274      0.277
   Fraction of non-zero price changes that are increases              0.535      0.533
   Frequency of modal price changes (13-week window)                  0.027      0.026
   Mean duration of pricing regimes                                   29.90      30.54


                      Table III. Untargeted moments - Data vs model

                                                                        Data     Model
  Panel A Prob. modal P is max P                                        0.819    0.740
          Fraction of weeks at modal P (13-week window)                 0.829    0.880
          Prob. price moves to modal P                                  0.592    0.646
  Panel B Prob. revisiting old price (26-week window)                   0.478    0.493
          uni (26-week window)                                          0.774    0.822
  Panel C Avg hazard slope                                              -0.011   -0.015
  Panel D Kurtosis( ΔP distribution)                                    3.00     2.16
          Prob. modal P revisits old modal P (52-week window)           0.085    0.112
          Prob. revisiting price from before last modal P change        0.269    0.253
          Prob. revisiting price from before brand new price            0.327    0.387



                                              34
4.2.1   Reference prices, memory and size distribution

We ﬁrst show that our model matches well a number of moments analyzed in the literature.

Reference prices. Panel A of Table III shows that the model correctly predicts that the
typical modal price is generally also the highest price in a given 13-week window – the
probability of that occurring in the data is 82% vs. 74% in the model. Second, within
each 13-week window, we also compute the average fraction of weeks that the regular price
spends at the reference (modal) price: while in the data the regular price spends 83% of the
time at the modal price, in the model this fraction equals 88%. We conﬁrm that this is not
simply a by-product of pervasive price stickiness: the probability that a non-modal regular
price change ends at the modal price, and not at some other regular price, is 65% in the
simulations compared to 59% in the data.

Discreteness and memory. In our model, the ﬁrst-order perceived cost of moving away
from any of the previously-observed prices implies that prices display memory (see Corollary
3). Panel B of Table III reports the probability that, conditional on a price change, the ﬁrm
posts a regular price that it has already visited within the last six months (26 weeks): this
probability is 49% in our model, and 48% in the data. Note that a standard menu cost or
Calvo model would feature no such price memory and the probability would be 0%.
    A related empirical observation is that ﬁrms tend to cycle through a relatively limited,
discrete set of prices as opposed to posting a lot of new unique prices. To test this property,
we produce a novel statistic that takes into account price stickiness: for each product i (a
given UPC) sold in a speciﬁc store j, we compute the number of unique prices and price
changes observed within the 26-week window centered around week t, and denote them by
uijt and cijt respectively. We then deﬁne the ratio uniijt ≡ uijt /(cijt + 1).25 Note that if all
price changes end up at a price that had not been visited before within a speciﬁc window,
the ratio uniijt is equal to 1. Yet, in the data we see that the average value of this moment
is 0.774, as reported in Table III. This is very close to the simulated moment of 0.822.

Size distribution of price changes In our model, the perceived cost of changing prices
is history dependent and a function of the absolute size of the price change. As a result, our
model allows for the co-existence of large and small price changes. This property is evident
from Figure 3, which plots the distribution of the size of price changes in the model (left
  25
     In both the data and the model, we drop from the computation any window that features no price
change. We thank an anonymous referee for suggesting this moment to us.




                                                35
panel) and the data (right panel). While parameter heterogeneity across ﬁrms would allow
for a smoother distribution, our model clearly can generate price changes of various sizes.

                                       Model                                                           Data
          6




                                                                           6
             4




                                                                              4
       Density




                                                                        Density
          2




                                                                           2
          0




                                                                           0
                  -.4   -.3   -.2   -.1    0   .1   .2   .3   .4                  -.4   -.3   -.2   -.1    0   .1   .2   .3   .4
                                    Price change                                                    Price change

         Figure 3. Distribution of the absolute size of price changes. Data vs. simulations.



4.2.2            Hazard function of price changes

An important force in our setup is that, all else equal, a ﬁrm is less willing to move away
from a price that it has stayed at for longer and thus acquired more information about. This
naturally gives rise to a declining hazard function of price changes: the probability of a price
change conditional on the price having survived τ periods is decreasing in τ .
   The shape of the hazard function has been heavily discussed in the price-setting literature.
Nakamura and Steinsson (2008), for example, estimate a downward-sloping hazard using U.S.
CPI data, a characteristic that they consider represents a challenge to many popular price-
setting mechanisms. Some, however, have argued that this ﬁnding could be a by-product
of heterogeneity: as noted by Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008), “[t]he declining pooled hazards
could simply reﬂect a mix of heterogeneous ﬂat hazards, that is, survivor bias.”
    In light of this word of caution, our approach is to employ a linear probability model
(LPM) with a rich set of ﬁxed eﬀects to control for heterogeneity in unconditional price
change frequencies that may mechanically generate downward-sloping hazard functions. The
linear regression circumvents the incidental parameters problem that arises with the use of
ﬁxed eﬀects in non-linear models, such as a proportional hazard framework or a probit. 26
    For each category/market, we run a separate regression of the type:

                                    1(pi,j,t = pi,j,t−1 ) = α + βτi,j,t + γi + γj + γt + ui,j,t                              (32)
  26
    In Online Appendix B.4 (on the authors’ website), we apply our econometric approach to panels of
simulated data and show that it allows us to recover the true value of the slope of the hazard function, even
in the presence of pervasive heterogeneity.


                                                                   36
where the symbol 1(.) denotes the indicator function. Since τi,j,t is the length of the price
spell (i.e. the number of weeks since the price has last been changed), the coeﬃcient β
therefore represents the estimate of the slope of the hazard function. Finally, γi , γj and
γt are product, store and week ﬁxed eﬀects respectively. These shifters control for any
systematic heterogeneity that would bias downwards the slope of the hazard. We run the
regression on spells of 26 weeks or less, where the vast majority of observations lie.
   Panel C of Table III shows that we obtain a slope estimate β of -0.011, once averaged
across the 54 category/market pairs. This value implies that each additional week that a
spell survives lowers the probability of observing a price change by about 1.1 percentage
point. The estimated slope coeﬃcients are negative and statistically signiﬁcant at the 1%
level in all category/market pairs, whether we use unweighted or weighted observations.27
    To evaluate the model’s ability to match the empirical hazard, we estimate the same
LPM regression on the data simulated by the model. At -0.015, the slope of the simulated
hazard is steeper, yet compares well with its empirical counterpart.
    In Online Appendix A.9 we apply the alternative approach of Campbell and Eden (2014)
and reach the same conclusion: the hazard of regular price changes is downward sloping and
of similar magnitude in both model and data.

4.2.3    Pricing behavior over the product life-cycle

Using the same dataset as ours, Argente and Yeh (2017) ﬁnd that both the frequency and size
of price changes decline signiﬁcantly with the age of the typical the product. In our model,
the price behavior over the life-cycle of the product/ﬁrm is shaped by the history dependence
of the optimal pricing decision through the interaction of two forces. First, at the beginning
of its life, the ﬁrm does not have much information about the demand curve of the product
it sells and has therefore not yet established any deep perceived kink in expected demand.
Second, the fact that the ﬁrm has very little information about demand increases the relative
value of experimentation, as discussed in Section 2.4. Both of these forces imply that price
ﬂexibility decreases with age: newly-born ﬁrms tend to change prices more frequently than
ﬁrms that have been in existence for a while and have accumulated signiﬁcant information
capital at past prices. Similarly, the experimentation motive implies that the average size
of price changes for young ﬁrms is larger than that of older ﬁrms.
    We quantify the life-cycle properties of the frequency and size of price changes in our
  27
     We cluster standard errors at the store level, the cluster which yields the highest standard errors. Also,
in line with the literature, we drop all left-censored spells from the sample. Lastly, in Figure B.1 of the
Online Appendix B.5 (on the authors’ website), we plot the distribution of coeﬃcient estimates β across the
54 category/market pairs.



                                                      37
model by running the following two regressions on the simulated data:

                         1(pi,t = pi,t−1 ) = β0f req + β1f req 1(agei,t ≤ 26) + εi,t

                              |Δpit | = β0size + β1size 1(agei,t ≤ 26) + εi,t ,

where the coeﬃcients of interest are β1f req and β1size , which capture respectively the frequency
and size of price changes in the ﬁrst 6 months of a ﬁrm’s life relative to the next half a year.28
      In both cases, we ﬁnd positive and statistically-signiﬁcant coeﬃcients: β1
                                                                                   f req
                                                                                         = 0.23 and
β1
    size
         = 0.09. In other words, our model predicts that both the frequency and size of price
changes fall as a new product ages, in line with the evidence from Argente and Yeh (2017).

4.2.4    Past demand realizations and price-setting decisions

The focus so far has been on price-related moments, as is common in the literature. Yet,
our model also has stark and unique implications about the relationship between quantities
and prices. In particular, the perceived cost of changing the last posted price increases
with the realized value of the demand shock at that price (see Result 4): a ﬁrm that
observes a particularly good demand realization is more likely to stay put, while bad demand
realizations raise the likelihood of a price reset.
    To test this prediction, we ﬁrst extract demand innovations in the data by using regression
(31), which was described earlier. The object of interest is the residual zijt , the unexplained
or “surprise” demand component for item i in store j at time t. We then construct two
indices that capture how attractive a given price may be from the perspective of the ﬁrm.
We deﬁne the z-score of price pijt as:
                                              26
                                                    [validij,t−τ × zij,t−τ ]
                               zscoreijt =          26
                                                 τ =0
                                                                             .
                                                      τ =0 validij,t−τ


The indicator validij,t−τ = 1 if pijt = pij,t−τ , that is, if the price at time t − τ is the same
as the one we compute the z-score for. Conceptually, the z-score of price pijt corresponds to
the average of the demand innovations at that price.29 It is also useful to deﬁne a version
of the zscore that only incorporates demand innovations up to t − 1, and which therefore
  28
      Focusing on ﬁrst 12 months of life helps isolate the life-cycle eﬀects. The estimates are even more
pronounced if we do not censor on the right. As is typical with any moments on the size of price changes,
the second regression only considers time periods with a non-zero price change.
   29
      We truncate the window to 26 weeks to capture the idea that demand realizations very far back are
likely to be of little value to the ﬁrm. We also tried to geometrically discount past observations; this has
little impact on the results.




                                                        38
informs the price choice at t:
                                               26
                                                     [validij,t−τ × zij,t−τ ]
                               zscorelag
                                     ijt   =    τ =1
                                                     26                      .
                                                       τ =1 validij,t−τ


Finally, we deﬁne wscoreijt , which captures how often a price has been posted in the past:

                                                       '
                                                       26
                                      wscoreijt =             validij,t−τ .
                                                       τ =0


       In order to test whether the ﬁrm is less (more) likely to move away from a price that
experienced an unexpectedly good (bad) demand realization, we run the following regression:

   1(pi,j,t = pi,j,t−1 ) = β0 + β1 (zscoreij,t−1 − zscorelag
                                                          ij,t−1 ) + β2 wscoreij,t−1 + fij + εijt .   (33)

The LHS equals 1 when the price at t is diﬀerent than at t−1, and 0 otherwise. The regressor
of interest, zscoreij,t−1 − zscorelag
                                   ij,t−1 , corresponds to the change in the z-score of the price
posted at t − 1: a positive value indicates that all else equal, the ﬁrm was hit by a relatively
good demand realization at time t − 1.30 We also control for the w-score, which is the proper
way of controlling for the declining hazard under the null hypothesis of our mechanism. When
run on the actual data, the panel regression includes either category/market or product/store
ﬁxed eﬀects fij in order to control for the heterogeneity in price change frequency.
   For both the model and the data, we run two main regressions. The ﬁrst one imposes
no additional restrictions. The second uses only observations for which wscoreij,t−1 ≤ 12,
so that the price the ﬁrm is considering leaving has been posted for at most half of the
periods within the backward-looking 26-week window. This distinction is driven by our
model prediction that new demand realizations are less likely to inﬂuence the decision to
change a price that has been observed more often in the past (high w-score).
   Table IV presents the results of running the regression in equation (33) on both the
actual and simulated data. To ease the interpretation, the coeﬃcients are reported as
marginal eﬀects: the impact of a one-standard-deviation deviation in the z- or w-score on
the likelihood of a price change. All coeﬃcients are statistically signiﬁcant at the 1% level.
Three observations on the z-score eﬀect are worth highlighting.
   First, the eﬀect is negative in all regressions: a good (bad) demand realization at the
posted price that lifts (lowers) the z-score decreases (increases) the chance of moving away
from that price. This is in contrast to most state-dependent mechanisms, such as a standard
  30
    To minimize the risk that changes in the z-score are driven by some complex non-linearity in the demand
function, we focus on observations for which there was no price change at t − 1, i.e. pi,j,t−1 = pi,j,t−2 .


                                                       39
menu-cost model: in these environments, both positive and negative shocks make the ﬁrm
more likely to reprice as they raise the gap between the current and optimal prices.
  Second, the eﬀect is indeed larger for more “recent” prices (low w-score): while a one-
standard-deviation change in the z-score decreases the probability of a price change by
between 80 to 90 basis points when we condition on wscoreij,t−1 ≤ 12, the eﬀect is only
around 55 basis points with wscoreij,t−1 ≤ 25. The eﬀects are also economically meaningful,
as a 80bp increase in the probability of a price change is about 10% of the unconditional
probability of a price change in the data.
   Third, the z-score eﬀects in the data and the model are similar: for younger prices, the
absolute impact on the price change frequency is 83bp, almost perfectly in line with the 86-
87bp eﬀect in the data. They also compare favorably when conditioning on wscoreij,t−1 ≤ 25
(65bp vs. 57-58bp in the data).

                           Table IV. Results from the z-score regressions


                                                        Data                           Model
   wscoreij,t−1 ≤ x                        x = 12                  x = 25        x = 12     x = 25
   zscoreij,t−1 − zscorelag
                        ij,t−1 -0.0087 -0.0086 -0.0058 -0.0057 -0.0083 -0.0065

   wscoreij,t−1                     -0.0373 -0.0290 -0.0466 -0.0264 -0.0253 -0.0195
   Category/market FE                  X                       X
   Product/store FE                                 X                       X

Note: The dependent variable equals 1 when pi,j,t = pi,j,t−1 , 0 otherwise. The empirical regressions include
either both category and market ﬁxed eﬀects, or item/store ﬁxed eﬀects. We report marginal eﬀects: the
impact of a one-standard-deviation in the independent variable on the likelihood of a price change. Standard
errors are clustered at the category-market level. All coeﬃcients are statistically signiﬁcant at 1% level.




4.3     Monetary non-neutrality
In this section, we argue that our theory is relevant not only due to its successful micro-level
predictions, but also because the model alters the standard relationships highlighted in the
literature between micro-level moments and the propagation of nominal shocks.
    We quantify the degree of monetary non-neutrality by computing the impulse response of
total output produced by the measure-zero set of ambiguity-averse ﬁrms to an innovation in
aggregate nominal spending. Note that because all other ﬁrms have rational expectations,
our exercise arguably represents a lower bound on the size and persistence of monetary
non-neutrality since it ignores any strategic complementaries in price setting.

                                                        40
                             1                                                                                                     1
                                                                              Ambiguity Aversion                                                                              Ambiguity Aversion
                                                                              Calvo                                                                                           Menu Cost
                                                                              Menu Cost                                                                                       Kimball
                            0.8                                               Kimball                                             0.8
Fraction of nominal shock




                                                                                                      Fraction of nominal shock
                            0.6                                                                                                   0.6




                            0.4                                                                                                   0.4




                            0.2                                                                                                   0.2




                             0                                                                                                     0



                                     5      10   15   20   25      30   35     40      45     50                                         5   10   15   20   25      30   35    40     45      50
                                                           Weeks                                                                                            Weeks

                                         (a) Matching regular price change frequency                                                    (b) Matching reference price change frequency

                                                                Figure 4. Nominal spending eﬀects on real output.


                                         We estimate the impulse responses via Jordá (2005) projections, an approach well suited
                                  to the high degree of non-linearity in our model. In the expression below, we regress the
                                  t + k output of ambiguity-averse ﬁrms on the nominal shock st
                                                                                   "
                                                                             ln(       Yi,t+k di) = αk + βk st + uj,t+k .

                                     The coeﬃcients βk represent the impulse response of output to the nominal shock, plotted
                                  by the solid line in Figure 4, panel (a). The response is shown as a fraction of the shock.
                                  We ﬁnd that, for a 1% shock, real output increases by 0.38% on impact, and this increase is
                                  persistent, with full a cumulative output eﬀect of 7.2% after 52 weeks.

                                  Alternative models

                                  To provide context for our results, we contrast our mechanism with three simple and widely
                                  used alternative mechanisms of nominal rigidity.31 The ﬁrst is a Calvo model, where the
                                  ﬁrm can change its price with an exogenous probability. The second is a menu cost version,
                                  where the ﬁrm can change its price at any time by paying a ﬁxed cost. The third model uses
                                  Kimball (1995) preferences which create a smoothed version of a kink in demand - a form of
                                  real rigidity. To generate nominal rigidity in that model, we follow the literature and assume
                                    31
                                      Online Appendix B.7 (on the authors’ website) details instead comparative statics within our model,
                                  focusing on the resulting nuanced link between price ﬂexibility, memory, and non-neutrality.




                                                                                                   41
that the ﬁrm must pay a small menu cost.32 Besides these diﬀerences, all speciﬁcations share
the same economic framework: we study a similar measure-zero sector and assume the same
cost processes as in our benchmark setup.
       The Kimball model represents a particularly useful comparison because even if it shares a
similar kinked-demand ﬂavor, the underlying mechanism is very diﬀerent from ours. For one,
our framework generates stickiness without additional ﬁxed costs since it features kinks that
are not smoothed-out. Second, our model generates perceived kinks in demand; in a Kimball
world, an econometrician would be expected to ﬁnd evidence of actual kinks in demand
schedules. This property is not innocuous as it has proven diﬃcult to ﬁnd evidence for the
large super-elasticity values that are needed to jointly generate a signiﬁcant persistence of
monetary shocks and plausible micro price facts (see the evidence in Dossche et al. (2010)
and the analysis in Klenow and Willis (2016)).
   Our model of rigidity is also consistent with a range of facts, such as experimentation and
eﬀects of the level of past demand realizations on price setting, that are driven by our learning
forces which are absent in the three considered alternative models. A crucial property here is
that in the alternative models, conditional on a price change the gap towards the new optimal
frictionless price is perfectly closed and the probability that the ﬁrm visits an old price is
zero. Instead, in our framework, the ﬁrm does not typically eliminate this gap, preferring to
return to a previously visited “safe” price due to ambiguity aversion. As we discuss below,
this type of price memory has important implications for monetary non-neutrality.
    Our ﬁrst set of comparisons are based on calibrating the respective free parameter of each
of the alternative models (Calvo probability or menu cost) to the same 10.5% frequency of
regular price changes as in our ambiguity model. The impulse responses corresponding to
these models are marked by the non-solid lines in Figure 4, panel (a). Overall, the cumulative
real eﬀect in our model is similar to that of the Calvo model (7.58%), and signiﬁcantly larger
than in the menu cost and Kimball models (1.12% and 1.81% respectively).

Impulse responses

The most striking diﬀerence is in the degree of persistence. In our model, the real eﬀect
only dies out after 48 weeks and has a half-life of 18 weeks. In contrast, in the menu cost
and Kimball models the real eﬀects have half-lives of less than 3 weeks, and disappears
within 10 weeks, while in Calvo it has a half-life of 8 weeks and dies out 32 weeks in. The
diﬀerent persistence across these standard models is due to the Golosov and Lucas (2007)
selection eﬀect - the adjusting ﬁrms in the Calvo framework are chosen randomly, but are
  32
    See for example Klenow and Willis (2016), whom we follow to use a value of 10 for the demand super-
elasticity (elasticity of the demand’s price elasticity) in the Kimball aggregator.


                                                  42
self-selected in the two other versions and hence adjust by a lot on average, leading to a
quick transmission of the shock.
   The fundamental reason for the signiﬁcantly larger persistence in our model is that,
consistent with the data, it features memory in nominal prices: a substantial proportion of
price movements occurs between perceived demand kinks that have formed prior to the shock.
As the ﬁrm revisits old price points, aggregate adjustment is slowed down, even though prices
look very ﬂexible at the micro level. Indeed, our environment features something akin to a
“price plan” – a collection of low-uncertainty prices that the ﬁrm has visited in the past and
switches between relatively ﬂexibly.
   This ﬂexibility when switching between low-uncertainty, previously-visited prices ac-
counts for the muted real eﬀect on impact of the nominal spending shock. Intuitively,
as noted by Alvarez and Lippi (2019), in models that have price plan-like behavior (like
ours) ﬁrms actively use their free but imperfect margin of adjustment, leading to signiﬁcant
ﬂexibility on impact. Yet, in our model, the blunted real eﬀect on impact is more than made
up for by the high persistence, leading to a large cumulative real eﬀect, as well as to impulse
response dynamics that are not well approximated by any of the three alternative models.

Frequency and kurtosis of regular price changes

Alvarez et al. (2016) show that the cumulative degree of nominal non-neutrality in a wide
range of models, including the three alternative frameworks we study, is proportional to
the kurtosis of the regular price change distribution. Intuitively, this proportionality arises
because in this class of models the derivative of the density of price gaps at the adjustment
thresholds, and implicitly the Golosov and Lucas (2007) selection eﬀect, becomes small only
for suﬃciently leptokurtic distributions of price changes.
    In contrast, as noted by Alvarez and Lippi (2019), frameworks that feature price plans,
like ours, do not ﬁt the class of models analyzed in Alvarez et al. (2016). Indeed, we ﬁnd
that our mechanism does not abide by this suﬃcient statistic relationship, in a manner that
is quantitatively important. As we report in Panel D of Table III, the distribution of the
regular price changes has a kurtosis of 3 in the data, while our model generates a kurtosis of
2.16. The standard analysis would predict that such a model-implied kurtosis, if anything an
underprediction of its empirical value, would be associated with weak real eﬀects of nominal
shocks. However, even though the kurtosis in our model is signiﬁcantly lower than in the
Calvo version, (2.16 versus 5.7), the cumulative real eﬀects are very similar (7.2% versus
7.6%). In fact, our kurtosis is much closer to that of the menu cost and Kimball models, at
1.23 and 1.79 respectively, yet our model implies a cumulative real eﬀect that is six times
larger than in the menu cost model.

                                              43
   The broad observation that price-plan-like behavior is important for mapping moments of
regular price changes to the propagation of nominal shocks is not unique to our model – see
previous discussion in Eichenbaum et al. (2011) (EJR) and Kehoe and Midrigan (2015). Yet,
we argue next that the nature of price memory in our model is fundamentally diﬀerent than
in existing frameworks, in a way that has important implications for aggregate dynamics.

Gradual adjustments in price plans

If our mechanism was simply an endogenous version of the EJR “price plan”, then the
persistence of the real output eﬀect to a money shock would be governed by the frequency
of changes in reference prices. In particular, Alvarez and Lippi (2019) show that a simple
menu cost model calibrated to the frequency of reference price changes provides a useful
upper bound on the eﬀect of such a “price plan” model. But that is not true for our model
– panel (b) of Figure 4 shows that our model’s real eﬀects are signiﬁcantly more persistent
and as a result cumulatively larger (7.2% versus 5.5% and 6%, respectively) than those from
a menu cost or Kimball model matched to the same frequency of reference price changes.
   The reason is that the price plans in our model adjust gradually. In a standard price-plan
model like EJR, once a ﬁrm decides to update its plan, it resets all prices within the plan.
In our model, instead, the price plans evolve slowly, with new prices being added to the
eﬀective plan as the ﬁrm experiments with and learns about demand at new price points.
The reason is that when shocks drive a ﬁrm to post a price outside of the set it has been
visiting in the past, this does not destroy the information capital it has built up at its old
price points. Hence, when idiosyncratic shocks mean-revert, the ﬁrm is likely to revisit those
old price points. This is important: the fact that the ﬁrm returns to known prices, even after
sampling a new portion of the price space, is what slows down the evolution of the aggregate
price level beyond what is captured by the frequency of reference price changes.
    We quantify the importance of these gradual price-plan adjustments in both the model
and the data in three ways, which we report in Panel D of Table III. First, we consider
memory in reference, as opposed to regular, prices: we compute the probability that a
change in the reference price (i.e. the modal price in a 13-week window) revisits one of
the old reference prices set in the past 52 weeks. The previous literature has not studied
potential memory in reference prices; under the implicit assumption that reference price
changes capture price plan resets, such as in EJR, such memory should be zero. Instead, we
ﬁnd that these probabilities are 8.5% and 11.2% in the data and model respectively, pointing
at signiﬁcant memory in reference prices.
    Next, we try to identify gradual price plan changes. Consider that a reference price
change occurs at time t. We compute the probability that the ﬁrst price reset following the

                                             44
reference price change leads to a price that had already been posted before period t. In
standard memory models such as EJR, this probability would be 0%, as ﬁrms reset their
whole price plan at once. Yet, we ﬁnd this probability to be 27% in the data, compared
to 26% time in the model. We also consider an alternative approach to capturing partial
price plan changes. We ﬁrst identify occurrences of “brand new prices”, which are deﬁned as
prices that have not been posted in the previous 52 weeks. We then compute the probability
that the ﬁrst price change that follows a time-t brand new price revisits a price that was
posted before t (ostensibly from before the shift in the “price plan”). This probability is
equal to 33% in the data, and 39% in the model.

Summary

Overall, our theory oﬀers a micro-foundation for price memory that delivers novel im-
plications at both the micro and macro levels. First, we show that our uniﬁed theory
of rigidity and memory jointly matches a host of over-identifying restrictions on micro-
level pricing behavior. These additional moments not only provide external validity of
the underlying theory, but also imply a more nuanced picture of how the observed micro-
level price ﬂexibility maps into the aggregate propagation of nominal shocks. Second, our
framework endogenously generates slow and gradually adjusting price plans. This feature
implies much more persistent real eﬀects from monetary shocks than in a benchmark menu
cost model calibrated instead to the frequency of reference price changes. As a result,
we believe that our mechanism may be better suited at capturing the high persistence of
monetary policy eﬀects estimated in the data (Christiano et al. (2005)).


5    Conclusion
In this paper we show how ﬁrms’ speciﬁcation doubts about their perceived model of demand
leads to a novel theory of price stickiness. We ﬁnd strong empirical support for our theory
by subjecting the mechanism to a rich set of micro-level implications. The parsimony
and quantitative relevance of the mechanism make it a promising step towards building
macroeconomic models that can be used for counterfactual analysis. Importantly, the theory
has novel predictions about the way in which nominal shocks aﬀect the aggregate economy.


References
Alvarez, F., H. Le Bihan, and F. Lippi (2016): “The real eﬀects of monetary shocks
 in sticky price models: a suﬃcient statistic approach,” American Economic Review, 106,


                                            45
  2817–51.

Alvarez, F. and F. Lippi (2019): “Temporary Price Changes, Inﬂation Regimes and
 the Propagation of Monetary Shocks,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
 forthcoming.

Argente, D. and C. Yeh (2017): “Product’s Life Cycle, Learning, and Nominal Shocks,”
 Manuscript, Minneapolis Fed.

Bachmann, R. and G. Moscarini (2011): “Business cycles and endogenous uncertainty,”
 Manuscript, Yale University.

Baley, I. and J. A. Blanco (2018): “Firm uncertainty cycles and the propagation of
 nominal shocks,” AEJ: Macroeconomics, forthcoming.

Ball, L. and D. Romer (1990): “Real rigidities and the non-neutrality of money,” The
 Review of Economic Studies, 57, 183–203.

Bergemann, D. and K. Schlag (2011):             “Robust monopoly pricing,” Journal of
 Economic Theory, 146, 2527–2543.

Bergemann, D. and J. Valimaki (2008): “Bandit problems,” The New Palgrave
 Dictionary of Economics, 2nd ed. Macmillan Press.

Bils, M. and P. Klenow (2004): “Some evidence on the importance of sticky prices,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 112, 947–985.

Bonomo, M. and C. Carvalho (2004): “Endogenous time-dependent rules and inﬂation
 inertia,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 1015–1041.

Bronnenberg, B., M. Kruger, and C. Mela (2008): “Database paper: The IRI
 Marketing Data Set,” Marketing Science, 27, 745–748.

Campbell, J. R. and B. Eden (2014): “Rigid prices: Evidence from US scanner data,”
 International Economic Review, 55, 423–442.

Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum, and C. Evans (2005): “Nominal Rigidities and the
 Dynamic Eﬀects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 113.

Dossche, M., F. Heylen, and D. Van den Poel (2010): “The kinked demand curve
 and price rigidity: Evidence from scanner data,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 112,
 723–752.

Dow, J. and S. Werlang (1992): “Uncertainty Aversion, Risk Aversion, and the Optimal
 Choice of Portfolio,” Econometrica, 60, 197–204.

Dupraz, S. (2016): “A Kinked-Demand Theory of Price Rigidity,” Mimeo, Banque de
 France.



                                           46
Eichenbaum, M., N. Jaimovich, and S. Rebelo (2011): “Reference Prices, Costs, and
  Nominal Rigidities,” American Economic Review, 101, 234–62.

Einhorn, H. J. and R. M. Hogarth (1986): “Decision making under ambiguity,” Journal
  of Business, S225–S250.

Ellsberg, D. (1961): “Risk, Ambiguity, and the Savage Axioms,” The Quarterly Journal
 of Economics, 643–669.

Epstein, L. G. and M. Schneider (2003): “Recursive Multiple-Priors,” Journal of
 Economic Theory, 113, 1–31.

Gagnon, E., D. López-Salido, and N. Vincent (2012): “Individual Price Adjustment
 along the Extensive Margin,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 27, 235–281.

Gaur, V., S. Kesavan, A. Raman, and M. L. Fisher (2007): “Estimating
 demand uncertainty using judgmental forecasts,” Manufacturing & Service Operations
 Management, 9, 480–491.

Gilboa, I. and D. Schmeidler (1989): “Maxmin Expected Utility with Non-unique
 Prior,” Journal of Mathematical Economics, 18, 141–153.

Golosov, M. and R. E. Lucas (2007): “Menu costs and phillips curves,” Journal of
 Political Economy, 115, 171–199.

Handel, B. R. and K. Misra (2015): “Robust new product pricing,” Marketing Science,
 34, 864–881.

Jordá, O. (2005): “Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections,”
  American Economic Review, 95, 161–182.

Kehoe, P. and V. Midrigan (2015): “Prices are sticky after all,” Journal of Monetary
 Economics, 75, 35–53.

Kimball, M. S. (1995): “The Quantitative Analytics of the Basic Neomonetarist Model,”
 Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 27.

Klenow, P. J. and O. Kryvtsov (2008): “State-Dependent or Time-Dependent Pricing:
 Does It Matter for Recent US Inﬂation?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 863–904.

Klenow, P. J. and B. A. Malin (2010): “Microeconomic Evidence on Price-Setting,”
 Handbook of Monetary Economics, 3, 231–284.

Klenow, P. J. and J. L. Willis (2016): “Real rigidities and nominal price changes,”
 Economica, 83, 443–472.

Knotek, I. and S. Edward (2010): “A Tale of Two Rigidities: Sticky Prices in a Sticky-
 Information Environment,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 42, 1543–1564.



                                          47
Kunreuther, H., R. Hogarth, and J. Meszaros (1993): “Insurer ambiguity and
 market failure,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 7, 71–87.

Machina, M. J. and M. Siniscalchi (2014): “Ambiguity and ambiguity aversion,” in
 Handbook of the Economics of Risk and Uncertainty, Elsevier, vol. 1, 729–807.

Mackowiak, B. and M. Wiederholt (2009): “Optimal Sticky Prices under Rational
 Inattention,” American Economic Review, 99, 769–803.

Maffioletti, A. and M. Santoni (2005): “Do trade union leaders violate subjective
 expected utility? Some insights from experimental data,” Theory and Decision, 59, 207–
 253.

Mankiw, N. G. and R. Reis (2002): “Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices: A Proposal
 to Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117,
 1295–1328.

March, J. G. and Z. Shapira (1987): “Managerial perspectives on risk and risk taking,”
 Management science, 33, 1404–1418.

Matějka, F. (2015): “Rationally inattentive seller: Sales and discrete pricing,” The Review
 of Economic Studies, 83, 1125–1155.

Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2008): “Five facts about prices: A reevaluation of
 menu cost models,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123, 1415–1464.

Raman, A., M. Fisher, and A. McClelland (2001): Supply chain management at
 World Co., Ltd, Harvard Business School Boston, MA.

Rasmussen, C. E. and C. K. Williams (2006): Gaussian processes for machine learning,
 vol. 1, MIT press Cambridge.

Reis, R. (2006): “Inattentive producers,” The Review of Economic Studies, 73, 793–821.

Rothschild, M. (1974): “A two-armed bandit theory of market pricing,” Journal of
 Economic Theory, 9, 185–202.

Sims, C. A. (2003): “Implications of rational inattention,” Journal of monetary Economics,
  50, 665–690.

Stevens, L. (2014): “Coarse Pricing Policies,” Manuscript, Univ. of Maryland.

Stigler, G. J. (1947): “The kinky oligopoly demand curve and rigid prices,” The Journal
  of Political Economy, 432–449.

Stiglitz, J. E. (1979): “Equilibrium in product markets with imperfect information,” The
  American Economic Review, 339–345.

Vavra, J. (2014): “Inﬂation Dynamics and Time-Varying Volatility: New Evidence and an
  Ss Interpretation,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129, 215–258.

                                            48
Woodford, M. (2003): “Imperfect Common Knowledge and the Eﬀects of Monetary
 Policy,” Knowledge, Information, and Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honor
 of Edmund S. Phelps, 25.

——— (2009): “Information-constrained state-dependent pricing,” Journal of Monetary
 Economics, 56, S100–S124.




                                         49
A      Online Appendix A
A.1     Updating with more observed prices
We can readily expand the updating formulas that we have developed in Section 2.2 for one
observed price to the case of multiple observed past price points. Let the ﬁrm’s information set
εt−1 contain T unique price points collected in the vector pT = [p1 , . . . , pT ] , where T > 0 is
arbitrarily large but ﬁnite. We label the average realized quantity sold at each of these unique
price points ȳi , and similarly collect them in the vector yT = [y1 , . . . , yT ] . Lastly, let Ni be the
number of times the ﬁrm has seen price point pi in the past, and thus this is the number of signals
at pi the ﬁrm has. The vector NT = [N1 , . . . , NT ] collects these values.
    The joint distribution between demand at any price p and the vector of signals y is similarly
joint Normal:                                                 
                                x(p)           m(p)
                                       ∼N              , Σ(p, pT )
                                 yT           m(pT )
    where the variance-covariance matrix is given by
                                                                                  
                                            σx2             K(p, pT )
                       Σ(p, pT ) =
                                         K(pT , p) K(pT , pT ) + diag(NT )−1 σz2

    The conditional expectation of x(p) given a prior mean function m(p) and the vector of signals
yT , follows from applying the standard formula for conditional Gaussian expectations:

      E(x(p)|yT , m(p)) = m(p) + K(p, pT )(K(pT , pT ) + diag(NT )−1 σz2 )−1 (yT − m(pT ))             (34)

    Expanding the above expression, we can show that the conditional expectation is again linear
in the prior and a weighted sum of the demeaned signals, leading to

             E(x(p)|yT , m(p)) = m(p) + α1 (p)(y1 − m(p1 )) + · · · + αT (p)(yT − m(pT ))

    where αi ∈ (0, 1) is the i-th element of the 1xT vector K(p, pT )(K(pT , pT ) + diag(NT )−1 σz2 )−1 .
    Without loss of generality, assume the prices in p are sorted in ascending order, with the
last element being the largest price value. In building the worst case expectation, one can work
from back to front and ﬁrst characterize the worst case prior m∗ (p; pt ) for entertained price values
pt > pT . The ﬁrm wants the prior level of demand at the entertained price pt , m∗ (pt ; pt ), to be
the lowest possible so it sets it equal to the lower bound of Υ0 so that

                                           m∗ (pt ; pt ) = −γ − bpt

    Again similar to the case of only one previously observed price, the ﬁrm is worried that demand

                                                      1
decreases a lot as it increases its price away from its previous observations. Now, however, this
worry does not apply only to the closest signal at the price value of pT , but to all previous signals.
Since all previous signals were observed at prices below pt , the worst case m∗ (p; pt ) for any p < pt
is given by:
                        m∗ (p; pt ) = min [γ − bp, −γ − bpt + (b + δ)(pt − p)]

    Next consider, pt ∈ (pT −1 , pT ]. The worst case m∗ (pt ; pt ) is again at the lower bound of the
admissible set Υ0 . And the basic intuition for the rest of the worst-case prior is similar to before
– the ﬁrm worries that setting the price pt away from its previous observations pT makes demand
change for the worse. Thus, the ﬁrm is worried that m∗ (pT ; pt ) is the highest possible level, given
constraints on the admissible set Υ0 and the fact that m∗ (pt ; pt ) = −γ − bpt . This concern yields
                                     
                                            min [γ − bp, −γ − bpt + (b + δ)(pt − p)] for p < pt
                   m∗ (p; pt ) =
                                            min [γ − bp, −γ − bpt + (b − δ)(pt − p)] for p ≥ pt
    Hence for all price points below the currently entertained price pt , the worst-case prior is
restricted by the maximum admissible derivative b + δ, while for prices above pt it is restricted by
the lowest admissible derivative b − δ.
   Substituting this worst case prior in (34), it is easy to evaluate the worst-case expectation
 (pt |yT , m∗ (p; pt )). Given the piecewise nature of m∗ (p; pt ), it follows that there is a kink in the
x∗

worst-case expected demand x      ∗ (pt |yT , m∗ (p; pt )) around any p ∈ pT .


A.2      Proofs for Section 2
Proposition 1. Deﬁne δ ∗ = δ sgn (pt − p0 ). For a given realization of ct , the diﬀerence in worst-
case expected proﬁts at pt and p0 , up to a ﬁrst-order approximation around p0 , is
                                                                                                   
               ∗                                                          e p0
           ln υ (ε  t−1
                          , ct , pt ) −   ln υ0∗ (εt−1 , ct , p0 )   ≈ p0                         ∗
                                                                                − (b + αt−1 (p0 )δ ) (pt − p0 ) .
                                                                       e − e ct

Proof. Consider ln υ ∗ (εt−1 , ct , pt ) at some pt ∈ [p0 −                 2γ
                                                                             δ
                                                                               , p0   +   2γ
                                                                                           δ
                                                                                             ].   When pt > p0 , we have
                         (                                                                       )
         ln(ept − ect ) + −γ − bpt + αt−1 (pt )
                                               z0 − αt−1 (pt )δ (pt − p0 ) + .5 2
                                                                               σt−1 (pt ) + .5σz2 ,

while at pt < p0 , this equals
                         (                                                                       )
         ln(ept − ect ) + −γ − bpt + αt−1 (pt )
                                               z0 + αt−1 (pt )δ (pt − p0 ) + .5 2
                                                                               σt−1 (pt ) + .5σz2 .

where for convenience we have deﬁned z0 ≡ −γ − bp0 . In turn, ln υ ∗ (εt−1 , ct , p0 ) equals
                                      (                                              )
                      ln(ept − ect ) + −γ − bp0 + αt−1 (pt )
                                                            z0 + .5 2
                                                                   σt−1 (p0 ) + .5σz2 .


                                                                       2
   Fix some ct and take a ﬁrst-order approximation of ln υ ∗ (εt−1 , ct , pt ) with respect to pt ,
evaluated at p0 . Since this function is not diﬀerentiable at p0 , we analyze its right and left derivative
separately. The former derivative equals
                                                                                                 2
                       e p0                           ∂αt−1 (pt )                             ∂
                                                                                               σt−1 (pt )
                                − b − α t−1 (p 0 )δ +             [
                                                                   z 0 − δ (p t − p 0 )] + .5
                  e −e
                   p 0      c t                         ∂pt                                      ∂pt

                                                                   ∂ 2 (p )
                                                                    σt−1
                                               ∂αt−1 (pt )                 t
where the partial derivatives                     ∂pt
                                                             and       ∂pt
                                                                                are evaluated locally at p0 . In particular, given
that
                                               σx2                 2
                        αt−1 (pt ) =        2     2
                                                       e−ψ(pt −p0 ) ; σ
                                                                      t−1
                                                                        2
                                                                           (pt ) = σx2 (1 − αt−1 (pt )),
                                           σx + σz /N0
then these two functions are diﬀerentiable p0 , with marginal eﬀects equal to zero at p0 . Therefore,
the local approximation to the right of p0 simpliﬁes to

                                                            ep 0
                                                                    − [b + αt−1 (p0 )δ] .
                                                       e p 0 − e ct

   The ﬁrst term in the brackets reﬂects the eﬀect of changing the price on proﬁts, while the
second captures the movement of demand along a curve with elasticity −b. The third term arises
from the eﬀect of demand of moving along a steeper demand curve, which is a characteristic of
the worst-case belief about the demand elasticity.
   Therefore, we obtain the local approximation to the right of p0
                                                                                                       
                 ∗                                                             e p0
           ln υ (ε      t−1
                              , ct , p t ) −   ln υ0∗ (εt−1 , ct , p0 )   ≈ p0       − (b + αt−1 (p0 )δ) (pt − p0 )          (35)
                                                                            e − e ct

   A similar derivation follows for the derivative to the left of p0 , where we obtain

                                                             e p0
                                                                     − [b − αt−1 (p0 )δ]
                                                        e p 0 − e ct

and therefore the local approximation to the left of p0 is simply
                                                                                                       
                 ∗                                                             e p0
           ln υ (ε      t−1
                              , ct , pt ) −    ln υ0∗ (εt−1 , ct , p0 )   ≈ p0       − (b − αt−1 (p0 )δ) (pt − p0 )          (36)
                                                                            e − e ct

   We obtain the result in Proposition 1 by putting together equations (35) and (36) and using
the signum function to deﬁne δ ∗ = δ sgn (pt − p0 ).

Proposition 2. Let δi∗ ≡ δ sgn (pt − pi ) for all pi ∈ εt−1 . For a given realization of ct , up to a
ﬁrst-order approximation around each such pi ∈ εt−1 :
                                                                                                        
           ∗                                                            e pi
       ln υ (ε   t−1
                       , ct , pt ) −   ln υ0∗ (εt−1 , ct , pi )    ≈ pi                           ∗
                                                                              − (b + αt−1,i (pi )δ + Ai ) (pt − pi ) .
                                                                     e − e ct


                                                                           3
Proof. The structure of the proof is very similar to the previous one. Consider ln υ ∗ (εt−1 , ct , pt ) at
some pt ∈ [pi − 2γ
                 δ
                   , pi + 2γ
                           δ
                             ]. Using δi∗ ≡ δ sgn (pt − pi ) we can write ln υ ∗ (εt−1 , ct , pt ) as
                   ⎧                                                                                                                         ⎫
                   ⎨                         '                        $                                         %                            ⎬
ln(ept −ect )+ −γ − bpt +                             αt−1,k (pt ) zk − δk∗ (pt − pk ) 1(pt ∈ (pk , pk )) + .5 2
                                                                                                               σt−1 (pt ) + .5σz2                ,
              ⎩                                                                                                                              ⎭
                                           pk ∈εt−1


    Fixing some ct , take a ﬁrst-order approximation of ln υ ∗ (εt−1 , ct , pt ) with respect to pt , evaluated
at pi . Since this function is not diﬀerentiable at p0 , we analyze its right and left derivative separately
as before, Using the notation δi∗ ≡ δ sgn (pt − pi ), we can express both the right and left derivatives
around one of the pi ∈ εt−1 as
                                                                 2 (p )
     epi                           ∗   ∂αt−1,i (pi )          ∂
                                                               σt−1   i
             − b − α t−1,i (p i )δ i +               
                                                     zi +  .5
e p i − e ct                               ∂p                     ∂p
                       '         ∂αt−1,k (pi ) $                                        %                  '                      $                        %
                 +                               zk − δk∗ (pi − pk ) 1(pi ∈ (pk , pk )) −                            αt−1,k (pi ) −δk∗ 1(pi ∈ (pk , pk ))
                                       ∂p
                     pk ∈ε
                       t−1      /pi                                                                    pk ∈εt−1 /pi


 The partial derivatives of the signal-to-noise ratios and the posterior variance are no longer zero,
however they are not a function of the sign of (pt −pi ) hence when considering a local approximation
around pi all of the additional terms (as compared to Proposition 1) can be treated as a constant.
We call that constant Ai :


     ∂αt−1,i (pi )          σ 2 (pi )
                           ∂
Ai =               zi + .5 t−1
         ∂p                    ∂p
       '       ∂αt−1,k (pi )   $                                        %                  '                       $                        %
   +                             zk − δk∗ (pi − pk ) 1(pi ∈ (pk , pk )) −                             αt−1,k (pi ) −δk∗ 1(pi ∈ (pk , pk ))
                       ∂p
       pk ∈ε
        t−1    /pi                                                                      pk ∈εt−1 /pi



    Using the fact that the Ai term is not a function of pt , it just updates the coeﬃcients in the
ﬁrst-order approximation of ln υ ∗ (εt−1 , ct , pt ), but does not change the basic observation that there
is a kink in the proﬁt function at pi , so that:

                                                                                                           
               ∗                                                           e pi
          ln υ (ε    t−1
                           , ct , pt ) −   ln υ0∗ (εt−1 , ct , pi )   ≈ pi                           ∗
                                                                                 − (b + αt−1,i (pi )δ + Ai ) (pt − pi ) .
                                                                        e − e ct




A.3        Forward looking behavior
We solve the recursive optimization problem in two steps. First, we compute the value function
at time t + 1. The key insight is that from this point onward the ﬁrm solves a series of static
maximization problems because the endogenous state variable, the information set εt , remains the

                                                                              4
same from period to period. Still, the ﬁrm faces a dynamic, recursive problem because of the law
of motion of the exogenous state variable, the cost shock ct , which evolves according to its law
of motion g(ct+1 |ct ). Hence, the value function at t + 1, which we label with Ṽ (.) to diﬀerentiate
from the time-t value function V (.), is given by
                                                                       "                                         
                                                                                                                 
              t
          Ṽ (ε , ct+1 ) = max min E ν(εt+1 , ct+1 ) + β                      Ṽ (ε , ct+2 )g(ct+2 |ct+1 )dct+2 εt
                                                                                    t
                             pt+1 m(p)∈Υ0


   Since the information set is not growing over time, the state space for this problem is ﬁnite
and tractable. As a result, we can solve for Ṽ (εt , ct+1 ) through standard techniques and use it as
the continuation value perceived by the ﬁrm at time t:
                                                                   "                                        
                                                                                                         t−1
            V (ε  t−1
                        , ct ) = max min E ν(εt , ct ) + β                      t                       
                                                                        Ṽ (ε , ct+1 )g(ct+1 |ct )dct+1 ε
                                pt   m(p)∈Υ0


s.t.
                                                    εt = {εt−1 , pt , yt }.

Thus, at time t the ﬁrm fully takes into account that pt , and the resulting new demand signal
yt , will serve as informative signals for future proﬁt-maximization decisions. Importantly, this
information is useful not only in the very next period, but propagates through the inﬁnite future
according to the law of motion of ct .
     For the following analytical results we work with the case where ψ = ∞ and the ﬁrm has
perfect foresight on future costs, s.t. ct+k = c for all k ≥ 1, for some constant c. In this case, the
time t + 1 value function is just the present discounted value of worst-case expected proﬁts when
the cost shock equals c:
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                maxp minm(p)∈Υ0 E ν(εt+1 , c)εt
                                Ṽ (εt , c) =
                                                                  1−β
     Hence, the only remaining uncertainty in Ṽ (.) from the perspective of time t is the uncertainty
about the realization of the time t signal yt . Next, we turn to characterizing the expectation of
Ṽ , given the time t information set εt−1 .
     For all analytical results below, we assume that (i) ψ → ∞ and (ii) there is perfect foresight
on future costs so that ct+k = c for some c.
 Exploration makes prices more ﬂexible when εt−1 contains demand observations at
only one previous price p0
   We start with the case where the time t information set, εt−1 , contains only one price point, p0 ,
observed N0 times with an average signal y0 . To be speciﬁc, call that information set ε0 . We will
assume that the realization of the signal y0 is good enough, so that when c = c∗0 = p0 − ln( b−1 b
                                                                                                   ),


                                                              5
p0 is not just locally optimal (recall Corollary 1), but that it is the global maximizer conditional
on εt−1 . The relevant condition is

                                                              σx2
                                      z0 = y0 − (−γ − bp0 ) > ,
                                                              2

   in which case                                                                        
                                                                           
                            p0 = arg max min E                ν(εt+1 , c∗0 )ε0 , m(p)
                                        p   m(p)∈Υ0

    Hence in the absence of any new information, in future periods the ﬁrm will optimally set p0 ,
since it essentially faces a static problem with marginal cost equal to c∗0 . The signal pair {pt , yt }
provides such new information and could lead to a diﬀerent optimal action pt+k .
    Our ﬁrst result is a characterization of the current price pt that maximizes the expected
continuation value when c = c∗0 . It turns out that when the ﬁrm has collected prior information
about demand only at p0 , then even even at that value of the cost the optimal exploration strategy
is to deviate from p0 .
                                                                              
                                                                         
                                                                       ∗  0
Proposition 3. The expected continuation value E Ṽ ({ε , pt , yt }, c0 )ε , pt achieves its maxi-
                                                             0


mum at
                                  p∗t = arg min(p − p0 )2 s.t. p = p0 .
                                               p

Proof. In order to simplify notation, throughout the proofs we will use the standard expectation
notation E(.) to deﬁne the worst-case expectation of the ﬁrm.
    The limiting case ψ → ∞ simpliﬁes the construction of the worst-case expected demand
because corr(x(p), x(p )) = 0 for all p = p . Thus, when updating beliefs about demand at any
price p, only past signals observed at that particular price p matter. For future reference, it will be
convenient to deﬁne the following notation for signal-to-noise ratios that will show up repeatedly

                                                                     σx2
                                   α0 ≡ αt−1 (p0 ; p0 ) =
                                                                σx2 + σz2 /N0

                                                                          σx2
                             αt|0 ≡ αt (p0 ; p0 |pt = p0 ) =
                                                                  σx2 (N0 + 1) + σz2
                                                                   σx2
                                 αt ≡ αt−1 (pt ; pt |pt =
                                                         p0 ) = 2
                                                                σx + σz2
where the ﬁrst is the signal-to-noise ratio of the signal y0 conditional on ε0 information, αt|0 and αt
are the (recursive) signal-to-noise ratios applicable to the new signal yt given the signal y0 , in the
two cases where pt = p0 and pt = p0 respectively. Since p0 = ln( b−1b
                                                                       ) + c∗0 , it is the optimal myopic
price for ct+k = c∗0 , which is the relevant case in the future. Thus, if its information set does not
change, the ﬁrm will price pt+k = p0 in the future. The information set changes, of course, as a
function of the current period pricing choice pt and the resulting new signal yt . For convenience,

                                                      6
deﬁne the perceived innovations in the existing signal y0 and the new signal yt as

                                          z0 ≡ y0 − (−γ − bp0 )

                                           zt ≡ yt − (−γ − bpt )

and the variance adjusted innovation of y0 as

                                                          1
                                               z&0 ≡ z0 − σx2 .
                                                          2

Observe that since ct+k = c∗0 with probability one, the only uncertainty over future proﬁts is in
the innovation of the new signal zt . Hence, the expected continuation value is simply the expected
                                                                           ∗
discounted value of a stream of worst-case static proﬁts at ct+k      = c0 , after taking the expectation
                                                                                                      
                                                         !                                       0
                                                 ∗                           ∗     ∗            
over the unknown zt : E Ṽ ({ε , pt , yt }, c0 )|ε , pt = 1−β E E(ν(pt+k , c0 )|{ε , pt , yt })ε , pt =
                                     0               0          β                       0

                             
                        
                      ∗  0
  β
1−β
    E νt+k (pt+k , c0 )ε , pt , where p∗t+k is the resulting static optimal price, given the updated
          ∗     ∗


information set {ε0 , pt , yt }.
    If pt = p0 , this optimal price is still p0 unless the information in the new signal yt is particularly
bad and suﬃciently erodes the ﬁrm’s beliefs about proﬁts at p0 , in which case the ﬁrm switches
to the interior optimal price pintt+k – the ex-ante second best option. To ﬁnd this interior optimum,
note that for all prices pt+k = p0 the worst-case demand is simply

                                     ∗t (pt+k ; m∗ (p; pt+k )) = −γ − bp
                                     x

hence the interior optimal price is

                                       t+k = min{p|(p − p0 ) > 0},
                                      pint                  2



                                                                        b
which gets you as close as possible the to optimal markup b−1               while still staying on the smooth
portion of the ﬁrm’s demand curve (recall: there is a kink in the worst-case belief at p0 , but is
smooth everywhere else). Thus, if pt = p0 , optimal p∗t+k is equal to p0 unless zt < z0 , where z0 is
such that:
                                   ∗
                            Et−1 (νt+k (p0 , c∗0 )|ε0 , pt = p0 , zt = z0 )
                                       ∗
                                                                               =1
                          limp→p0 E(νt+k   (p, c∗0 )|ε0 , pt = p0 , zt = z0 )
Substituting in the relevant expressions and simplifying, we can derive

                                              σx2             α(p0 )
                                       z0 =       (1 − α0 ) −        z&0 .
                                              2                αt|0

Hence if pt = p0 , the optimal p∗t+k is equal to p0 as long as the innovation in the new signal is good
enough – namely zt ≥ z0 .

                                                       7
     If pt = p0 , p0 remains the optimal price at t + k unless the new signal yt is good enough to
convince the ﬁrm to deviate from its ex-ante optimum p0 and move to the newly observed pt itself.
In the limiting case ψ → ∞ we know that the only potential alternative is pt , because yt does
not update beliefs anywhere else, and hence p0 dominates all other prices. In particular, for every
possible pt there is an upper threshold for the innovation in yt , such that p∗t+k = pt if and only if
zt > z̄(pt ). This threshold z̄(pt ) satisﬁes

                                            ∗
                                         E(νt+k (pt , c∗0 )|ε0 , pt = p0 , zt = z̄(pt ))
                                            ∗
                                                                                           =1
                                         E(νt+k (p0 , c∗0 )|ε0 , pt = p0 , zt = z̄(pt ))

Substituting in the respective expressions, and simplifying we can derive:
                                                 0                      1               
                                α0     σx2   1      exp(pt ) − exp(c∗0 )
                       z̄(pt ) = z&0 +     −     ln                        + b(p0 − pt )
                                αt     2     αt     exp(p0 ) − exp(c∗0 )

With the two thresholds thusly characterized, we can conclude that the optimal pricing policy at
time t + k is given by:
                              ⎧
                              ⎪
                              ⎪ p            if pt = p0 and zt ≥ z 0 or pt = p0 and z(pt ) ≤ z̄(pt )
                              ⎪
                              ⎨ 0
                    p∗t+k =     pt           if pt = p0 and zt > z̄(pt )
                              ⎪
                              ⎪
                              ⎪
                              ⎩pint
                                   t+k       if pt = p0 and zt < z 0
                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                               
We can then evaluate the expected continuation value E Ṽ ({ε                             0
                                                                                              , pt , yt }, c∗0 )ε0 , pt       – we do so
separately for the cases pt = p0 and pt = p0 , since the expected continuation value (which we will
denote by the short-hand Et−1 (Ṽ ) to save space) is potentially discontinuous at pt = p0 , so that
Et−1 (Ṽ |pt = p0 ) =
            z0                                                1
= Φ( 3                  )(exp(p0 ) − exp(c∗0 )) exp(−γ − bp0 + (σx2 + σz2 ))
       2              2
      σx (1 − α0 ) + σz                                       2
                                                                                                                                 2      2
                                                                                                                α (σ (1−α0 )+σz )−z0
                                                                                                              Φ( t|0√x 2                 )
                     z0                                                               1                                σx (1−α0 )+σz2
+ (1 − Φ( 3                     ))(exp(p0 ) − exp(c∗0 )) exp(−γ − bp0 + α0 z0 + (σx2 (1 − α0 ) + σz2 ))                       z
            σx2 (1 − α0 ) + σz2                                                       2                        1 − Φ( √ 2 0
                                                                                                                          σx (1−α0 )+σz2
                                                                                                                                       
                    ∗                  1 2       2         αt|0 (σx2 (1 − α0 ) + σz2 ) − z0                               z0
= (exp(p0 ) − exp(c0 )) exp(−γ − bp0 (σx + σz )) Φ(             3                           ) exp(α0 z&0 ) + Φ( 3                     )
                                       2                           σx2 (1 − α0 ) + σz2                            σx2 (1 − α0 ) + σz2




                                                                  8
while Et−1 (Ṽ |pt = p0 ) =

                                                                        1
          zt < z̄(pt ))(exp(p0 ) − exp(c∗0 )) exp(−γ − bp0 + α0 z0 + (σx2 (1 − α0 ) + σz2 ))
     = P (
                                                                        2
                                         ∗                    1 2
          zt ≥ z̄(pt ))(exp(pt ) − exp(c0 )) exp(−γ − bpt + (σx (1 − αt ) + σz2 ))E(exp(αt zt )|
     + P (                                                                                       zt > z̄(pt ))
                                                              2
              z̄(pt )                                                     1
     = Φ( 3               )(exp(p0 ) − exp(c∗0 )) exp(−γ − bp0 + α0 z0 + (σx2 (1 − α0 ) + σz2 ))
             (σx2 + σz2 )                                                 2
            αt (σx2 + σz2 ) − z̄(pt )                                       1
     + Φ(        3                    )(exp(pt ) − exp(c∗0 )) exp(−γ − bpt + (σx2 + σz2 )))
                    (σx2 + σz2 )                                            2

where we use the fact that the ﬁrm perceives zt ∼ N (0, σ̂t−1
                                                           2
                                                               (pt ) + σz2 ), and Φ(.) denotes the CDF
of the standard normal distribution.
    The ﬁrst question of interest is if and when the expected continuation value is discontinuous
at pt = p0 . To answer this question, we evaluate the ratio lim Et−1E(Ṽ |p1(=p  0)
                                                                             Ṽ |p =p )
                                                                                         . It is useful to ﬁrst
                                                                                                   p1 →p0           t−1       1   0

evaluate the denominator and collect terms, concluding that limpt →p0 Et−1 (Ṽ |pt = p0 ) =
                                                                                                                            
                                              1 2                z̄(pt )                         αt (σx2 + σz2 ) − z̄(pt )
   = (exp(p0 ) −   exp(c∗0 )) exp(−γ                  2
                                       − bp0 + (σx + σz )) Φ( 3              ) exp(α0 z&0 ) + Φ(      3                    )
                                              2                 (σx2 + σz2 )                             (σx2 + σz2 )

                                              Et−1 (Ṽ |pt =p0 )
It then follows that the ratio           limpt →p0 Et−1 (Ṽ |pt =p0 )
                                                                                =

                                       σx2           α                                                        σx2    α
                                        2
                                           (1−α0 )+ α 0 z0                                      (1−α0 )       2
                                                                                                                  − α 0 z0
                                  Φ( √               t|0
                                                                   ) exp(α0 z&0 ) + Φ( √                             t|0
                                                                                                                              )
                                           σx2 (1−α0 )+σz2                                            σx2 (1−α0 )+σz2
                              =                 α0           σx2                                  2
                                                                                                 σx       α
                                                     z0 +                                            − α0 z0
                                           Φ( √
                                              αt              2
                                                                   ) exp(α0 z&0 ) + Φ( √2                     t
                                                                                                                    )
                                                  (σx2 +σz2 )                                      (σx2 +σz2 )




 where we have substituted in the respective values of the thresholds z0 and z̄(pt ). The ratio limits
to 1 as z&0 → ∞, and it is below 1 at z&0 = 0, as in this case

                                                                                              σx2

                                                                                    Φ( √       2
                                                                                                  (1−α0 )
                                                                                                                    )
                                   Et−1 (Ṽ |pt = p0 )                                       σx (1−α0 )+σz2
                                                                                              2
                                                              =                                       2                 <1
                               limpt →p0 Et−1 (Ṽ |pt = p0 )                           Φ( √ σ2x              2
                                                                                                                )
                                                                                             2    σx +σz


Next, we show that the derivative of the ratio in respect to z&0 is positive for the relevant values
z&0 ≥ 0, which is enough to conclude that lim Et−1E(Ṽ |pt(=p 0)
                                                                       converges to 1 from below and hence
                                              pt →p0 t−1 Ṽ |pt =p0 )
is less than one for all ﬁnite z&0 ≥ 0. The needed derivative,

                                                        ∂ limEt−1 (ṼE(|pṼt =p 0)
                                                                             |p =p
                                                                   pt →p0           t   0)
                                                                                             ,
                                                                       ∂&
                                                                        z0




                                                                            9
      it is proportional to
⎛                                                                                                                                                               ⎞
       2                                                             2                                                                  2
⎜   σx
       (1 − α0 ) + αα0 z0
                                                         σ
                                                (1 − α0 ) 2x − αα0 z0
                                                                                                      σx
                                                                                                         (1 − α0 ) + αα0 z0                    ⎟
⎜    2                                                                             α0                  2                                        ⎟
⎜(φ(                t|0
                           ) exp(α   
                                     z   ) − φ(  
                                                                 t|0
                                                                       ))                       + Φ(  
                                                                                                                       t|0
                                                                                                                             ) exp(α   
                                                                                                                                       z   )α   ⎟∗
⎜        2               2
                                   0   0
                                                     2               2          2              2           2               2
                                                                                                                                     0   0    0 ⎟
⎝      σx (1 − α0 ) + σz                           σx (1 − α0 ) + σz      αt|0 σx (1 − α0 ) + σz         σx (1 − α0 ) + σz                      ⎠
  
                                      =0
              ⎛                                                                  ⎞         ⎛    2                                                                ⎞
                                 2                              2                             σx                                                   σ2
                  α0
                     z    +
                               σx                             σx    α0
                                                                    −  z                         (1 − α0 ) + αα0 z0                    (1 − α0 ) 2x − αα0 z0
                  αt 0
              ⎝Φ(              2                              2    αt 0 ⎠                 ⎜   2                 t|0                                       t|0   ⎟
                                     ) exp(α0 z0 )   +   Φ(               )            − ⎝Φ(                       ) exp(α0 z0 ) + Φ(                      )⎠ ∗
                    (σx2   +   σz2 )                           (σx2 + σz2 )                       σx2 (1 − α0 ) + σz2                       σx2 (1 − α0 ) + σz2
              ⎛                                                                                                                                  ⎞
                     2                                        2                                                  2
              ⎜     σx                                       σx                                                ⎟σx
              ⎜    2
                      +α  0
                            z
                         αt 0                      2
                                                      −α  0
                                                            z
                                                         αt 0        α0           2
                                                                                     +α  0
                                                                                           z
                                                                                        α1 0                   ⎟
              ⎜(φ(            ) exp(α0 z0 ) − φ(            ))            +Φ(            ) exp(α0 z0 )α0 ⎟
              ⎜        2 + σ2                          2 + σ2          2 + σ2         2 + σ2                   ⎟
              ⎝      σ x     z                       σ x     z   α 1 σ x    z       σ x     z                  ⎠
                
                                                      =0
                                  ⎡       2                                      2                            2                                  2
                                                                                                                                                          ⎤
                                        σx                     α0                                           σx                   α0
                                            (1   − α0 ) +         z
                                                              αt|0 0
                                                                               σx   α0
                                                                                     − z                       (1   − α0 ) −       z
                                                                                                                                αt|0 0
                                                                                                                                               σx   α0
                                                                                                                                                     + z
                                ⎢        2                                      2   αt 0                     2                                  2   αt 0 ⎥
              = α0 exp(α0 z0 ) ⎣Φ(                                     )Φ(             )          − Φ(                               )Φ(             )⎦
                                            σx2 (1 − α0 ) + σz2                  σx + σz2
                                                                                  2                              σx2 (1 − α0 ) + σz2             σx + σz2
                                                                                                                                                  2




       Thus, the derivative is positive if and only if

                                                                           2                               σx2           α
                                                                         σx    α
                                                                             − α0 z0                       2
                                                                                                               (1−α0 )− α 0 z0
                                                                    Φ( √  2      t
                                                                                           )         Φ( √                t|0
                                                                                                                                   )
                                                                              σx2 +σz2                          σx2 (1−α0 )+σz2
                                                                          2
                                                                         σx      α
                                                                                                >          σx2           α
                                                                              + α0 z0                         (1−α0 )+ α 0 z0
                                                                    Φ( √
                                                                       2             t
                                                                                           )         Φ( √
                                                                                                            2            t|0
                                                                                                                                   )
                                                                              σx2 +σz2                          σx2 (1−α0 )+σz2


      This inequality holds since

                                                            2                             σx2    α                        σx2           α
                                                          σx    α
                                                              − α0 z0                     2
                                                                                              − α 0 z0                    2
                                                                                                                              (1−α0 )− α 0 z0
                                                 Φ( √      2      t
                                                                         )       Φ( √            t|0
                                                                                                            )        Φ( √               t|0
                                                                                                                                                     )
                                                             σx2 +σz2                           σx2 +σz2                       σx2 (1−α0 )+σz2
                                                          σx2   α
                                                                             >            σx2    α
                                                                                                                >         σx2           α
                                                              + α0 z0                        + α 0 z0                       (1−α0 )+ α 0 z0
                                                 Φ( √      2      t
                                                                         )       Φ( √
                                                                                           2     t|0
                                                                                                            )        Φ( √
                                                                                                                           2            t|0
                                                                                                                                                     )
                                                             σx2 +σz2                           σx2 +σz2                       σx2 (1−α0 )+σz2


      where the ﬁrst inequality follows from αt|0 < αt , and the second from the fact that

                                                                    σx2            α                            σx2            α
                                                                     2
                                                                        (1−α̃0 )− α 0 z0                        2
                                                                                                                    (1−α̃0 )+ α 0 z0
                                                                  ∂ √              t|0
                                                                                                            ∂ √                t|0
                                                                         σx2 (1−α̃0 )+σz2                            σx2 (1−α̃0 )+σz2
                                                                                                      <
                                                                              ∂ α̃0                                    ∂ α̃0

      and the fact that the term                                                 ⎛               2                       ⎞
                                                                                               σx            α0
                                                                                                2 (1−α̃0 )− αt|0 z
                                                                                                                 0

                                                                               ⎜ Φ( √σx2 (1−α̃0 )+σz2 ) ⎟
                                                                              ∂⎜
                                                                               ⎝ σ2x2 (1−α̃0 )+ αα0 z0 ⎠
                                                                                                         ⎟
                                                                                 Φ( √
                                                                                                 t|0
                                                                                                       )
                                                                                        2            2
                                                                                                    σx (1−α̃0 )+σz

                                                                                                    ∂ α̃0




                                                                                                     10
equals
                                                                    2
                                                                   σx                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                                   σx
                                                                                   α                                                                                               α
    2                              2                                2
                                                                        (1−α̃0 )− α 0 z
                                                                                      0            2                              2                                2
                                                                                                                                                                        (1−α̃0 )+ α 0 z
                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                   t|0                                                                                               t|0
  σx
   2
      (1   − α0 ) −    α0
                          z
                      αt|0 0
                                 σx
                                  2
                                     (1   − α0 ) +    α0
                                                         z
                                                     αt|0 0
                                                                  ∂ √    2 (1−α̃ )+σ 2
                                                                                                  σx
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                      (1   − α0 ) −    α0
                                                                                                                          z
                                                                                                                      αt|0 0
                                                                                                                                 σx
                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                     (1   − α0 ) +    α0
                                                                                                                                                         z
                                                                                                                                                     αt|0 0
                                                                                                                                                                  ∂ √      2 (1−α̃ )+σ 2
                                                                        σx      0   z                                                                                     σx      0   z
φ(                            )Φ(                           )                            − Φ(                               )φ(                           )
       σx2 (1 − α0 ) + σz2             σx2 (1 − α0 ) + σz2                 ∂ α̃0                     σx2 (1 − α0 ) + σz2               σx2 (1 − α0 ) + σz2                   ∂ α̃0
<0



Thus, we can conclude that
                                                                 Et−1 (Ṽ |pt = p0 )
                                                                                            <1
                                                             limpt →p0 Et−1 (Ṽ |pt = p0 )
for all z&0 ≥ 0 meaning that there is discontinuous jump down in the continuation value at pt = p0 .
    Lastly, consider what value of pt optimizes the expected continuation value. Since the
discontinuity at p0 (the only potential corner solution) is a jump down, the maximizing pt must
                                                                          Ṽ |pt =p0 )
be the interior maximum, which satisﬁes the FOC condition that ∂Et−1 (∂p     t
                                                                                        = 0. Taking the
                  ∂Et−1 (Ṽ |pt =p0 )
derivative,             ∂pt
                                          =

                                                                                                                                 ∂ z̄(pt )
                 z̄(pt )                     c∗0                     1                          ∂p
     = φ( 3          )(e          p0
                                        − e ) exp(−γ − bp0 + α0 z0 + (σx2 (1 − α0 ) + σz2 )) 3 t
           σx2 + σz2                                                 2                         σx2 + σz2
                                                                                                                                                              ∂ z̄(pt )
         αt (σx2 + σz2 ) − z̄(pt ) pt       ∗                  1                                             ∂p
     − φ(     3                    )(e − ec0 ) exp(−γ − bpt + (σx2 (1 − αt ) + σz2 + αt2 (σx2 + σz2 ))) 3 t
                    2      2
                  (σx + σz )                                   2                                           σx2 + σz2
          αt (σx2 + σz2 ) − z̄(pt )                 1                                                           ∗
     + Φ(      3                    ) exp(−γ − bpt + (σx2 (1 − αt ) + σz2 + αt2 (σx2 + σz2 )))(ept − b(ept − ec0 ))
                    2      2
                  (σx + σz )                        2



 The above expression limits to zero as pt → p0 . To see that, note that limpt →p0 ∂ z̄(p
                                                                                     ∂pt
                                                                                          t)
                                                                                             = 0, thus
                                                                                              b
the ﬁrst 2 terms of the FOC expression above fall out. For the last term, using p0 = ln( b−1    ) + c0
it follows that
                                           ∗       b c∗0    b c∗0
                          (ep0 − b(ep0 − ec0 )) =     e −       e =0
                                                  b−1     b−1
                                                                           ∂Et−1 (Ṽ |pt =p0 )
Therefore, we can conclude that limpt →p0                                        ∂pt
                                                                                                  = 0, and thus the interior maximum of the
expected continuation value is pt → p0 .

     Intuitively, p∗t = arg minp (p−p0 )2 s.t. p = p0 , ensures that the new signal yt will be informative
about a price as close as possible to the ex-ante expected optimal p0 , and thus achieves almost the
same markup – this makes the new information highly relevant. As a result, if the realization of
zt happens to be good enough, i.e. zt is above a threshold z̄t (p∗t ) that is characterized in the proof
above, then the ﬁrm will stick with this price in the future, set pt+k = p∗t , and take advantage of the
unexpectedly high demand at that price. On the other hand, if the signal realization happens to
be bad, the ﬁrm can safely switch back to the ex-ante optimal p0 , where the belief about demand
is not aﬀected by zt , and still oﬀers lower uncertainty and a good perceived markup.


                                                                                     11
   The reason for not picking pt = p0 is that a bad signal realization at p0 erodes the ex-ante
best available pricing option, p0 , and at the same time the ﬁrm does not have a good fall-back
alternative, as it has no observations of demand at other prices. If in that case the realization of
zt falls below the threshold z 0 , the news about x(p0 ) is bad enough to incentivize the ﬁrm to set
pt+k to a previously unvisited price. Due to this downside risk at p0 , there is a ﬁrst-order gain
of obtaining information at a new price, which manifests in the discontinuous jump down in the
expected continuation value at p0 .
    As shown in Proposition 3, the best forward-looking strategy is therefore to experiment by
posting a new price. This exploration incentive could potentially overturn the rigidity result
implied by the static maximization pricing choice analyzed earlier, but as we show next it turns
out that this results is speciﬁc to the ﬁrm having seen only one price in the past. In more general
situations, when the ﬁrm has seen more than one distinct price point in the past, forward-looking
behavior can in fact reinforce the static rigidity incentives.
Exploration makes prices stickier, when εt contains observations at multiple prices

Proposition 4. There is a non-singleton interval of costs (c, c̄) around c∗0 , and a threshold χ > 0,
such that if z > χ, then for any c ∈ (c, c̄):
                                                                        
                                                                    1
                                                                   
                              p0 = arg max E Ṽ ({ε , pt , yt }, c)ε , pt .
                                                         1
                                        pt

Moreover, the threshold χ is decreasing in |p1 − p0 |.

Proof. The proof follows a similar logic as the previous one. First, we characterize the optimal
pt+k for c = c∗0 , but now conditional on ε1 , and then use it to compute the expected continuation
value and show that it is maximized at pt = p0 . Lastly, we appeal to continuity to conclude that
pt = p0 is optimal for an interval of cost values around c∗0 . In addition to the signal-to-noise ratio
notation α0 , αt|0 , αt deﬁned in the previous proof, we deﬁne

                                                                  σx2
                                   α1 ≡ αt−1 (p1 ; p1 ) =
                                                             σx2 + σz2 /N1

                                                                      σx2
                            αt|1 ≡ αt (p1 ; p1 |pt = p1 ) =
                                                              σx2 (N1 + 1) + σz2
Similarly, we deﬁne the (variance corrected) innovation in the signal at p1 as

                                         1                        1
                              z&1 ≡ z1 − σx2 = y1 − (−γ − bp1 ) − σx2
                                         2                        2

The optimal policy at t + k follows a similar structure to the one described in the previous proof.
Conditional on just ε1 the optimal pt+k is equal to p0 , and the way the new information contained
in yt aﬀects the optimal pt+k depends on the position of pt . If pt = p0 , then the ﬁrm stays at p0

                                                    12
unless the new signal is too bad (   zt < z0 ). If pt = p1 , then the ﬁrm moves to p1 if the signal is
good enough (  zt > z̄1 ) otherwise stays at p0 . And if pt ∈/ {p0 , p1 }, then the ﬁrm again stays at p0
unless the signal is too good, but compared to a diﬀerent threshold: zt > z̄(pt ). The key diﬀerence
from the previous proof is what happens if pt = p0 and the signal is suﬃciently bad to prompt a
move ( zt < z0 ). There exists a χ1 > 0 such that if z1 > χ1 , then the ﬁrm does not move to the
interior optimum pint , but rather to p1 , which as another relatively good price at which the ﬁrm
has built some information capital is a better option than the brand new pint where the ﬁrm has
not accumulated any information. To see this, note that
            ∗
        E(νt+k (p1 , c∗0 )|ε1 , pt = p0 )
                 ∗
                                              = (b exp(p1 − p0 ) − b + 1) exp(−b(p1 − p0 ) + α1 z&1 ) > 1
     limp→p0 E(νt+k  (p, c∗0 )|ε1 , pt = p0 )

Note that the RHS is increasing in z&1 , and thus in z1 and limits to inﬁnity as z1 → ∞, hence
there exists a constant χ1 > 0 such that the above ratio is strictly greater than one when z > χ1 .
For the rest of the proof we assume that z1 > χ1 so that the above inequality holds. The relevant
thresholds z0 , z̄1 , z̄(pt ) can be computed as before, by ﬁnding the value of the signal at which the
ﬁrm is indiﬀerent between p0 and the respective alternative option:

                                σx2              1
                        z0 =        (1 − α0 ) −      (b(p1 − p0 ) − ln(be(p1 −p0 ) − b + 1))
                                2               αt|0

                              σx2               1
                        z̄1 =     (1 − α1 ) +       (b(p1 − p0 ) − ln(be(p1 −p0 ) − b + 1))
                               2              αt|1
                                                  0                         1                
                              α0       σx2    1         exp(pt ) − exp(c∗0 )
                     z̄(pt ) = z&0 +       −       ln                           + b(p0 − pt )
                              αt       2      αt        exp(p0 ) − exp(c∗0 )
So the t + k optimal pricing policy is:
              ⎧
              ⎪
              ⎪ p    if pt = p0 and zt ≥ z 0 , or pt = p1 and zt ≤ z̄1 or pt ∈
                                                                               / {p0 , p1 } and zt ≤ z̄(pt )
              ⎪
              ⎨ 0
    p∗t+1 =     p1   if pt = p1 and zt > z̄1 or pt = p0 and zt < z0
              ⎪
              ⎪
              ⎪
              ⎩p
                 t   if pt ∈
                           / {p0 , p1 } and zt > z̄(pt )

We can now use this result to characterize the expected continuation        value
                                                                                  and ﬁnd its maximizer.
                                                                                
Note that the value of pt that maximizes E( Ṽ ({ε1 , pt , yt }, c∗0 )ε1 , pt  ) is either one of the two
corner solutions p0 and p1 , or the interior maximum. Moreover, we can appeal to the proof of
Proposition 3 for the result that the expected continuation value achieves its interior maximum
at the limit of pt → p0 . This follows because under ψ → ∞ the additional signal y1 only matters
when updating beliefs at p1 itself, hence at p = p1 the expected continuation value is equivalent to
the one conditional on ε0 , that we analyzed above. We proceed in two steps. First we show that
the two corner solutions are in fact equivalent to each other, and then we conclude by showing that


                                                            13
                                                                                                             !
p0 also dominates the interior solution pint . The expected value E( Ṽ ({ε1 , pt , yt }, c∗0 |ε1 , pt = p0 ) )
is slightly diﬀerent than before, because the fall back option (in case of a bad new signal yt ) is
now p1 . Now, Et−1 (Ṽ |pt = p0 ) =

                  z0                                                                       1 2
= Φ(                              )(exp(p1 ) − exp(c∗0 )) exp(−γ − bp1 + α1 z1 +          (σ (1 − α1 ) + σz2 ))
         σx2 (1   − α0 ) +   σz2                                                           2 x
                                                                                                                                          2          2
                                                                                                                                   αt|0 (σx (1−α0 )+σz )−z0
                                                                                                                              Φ(       √    2 (1−α )+σ 2
                                                                                                                                                              )
                       z0                                                       1                                                          σx
                                ))(exp(p0 ) − exp(c∗0 )) exp(−γ − bp0 + α0 z0 + (σx2 (1 − α0 ) + σz2 ))
                                                                                                                                                  0   z
+ (1 − Φ(                                                                                                                                        z0
            σx2 (1 − α0 ) + σz2                                                 2                                                  1 − Φ( √    2 (1−α )+σ 2
                                                                                                                                              σx     0   z
                                                                                                                                                                              
     1                              1                              αt|0 (σx2 (1   − α0 ) +   σz2 )   − z0                     z0
=       exp(c∗0 − γ − bp0 + α0 z0 + (σx2 + σz2 ))            Φ(                                           ) + Φ(                          )(bep1 −p0 − b + 1)e−b(p1 −p0 )
    b−1                             2                                       σx2 (1 − α0 ) + σz2                        σx2 (1 − α0 ) + σz2

                                                      !
Similarly, E( Ṽ ({ε1 , pt , yt }, c∗0 |ε1 , pt = p1 ) ) can be computed as Et−1 (Ṽ |pt = p1 ) =

                                                               1 2
     zt ≤ z̄1 )(exp(p0 ) − exp(c∗0 )) exp(−γ − bp0 + α0 z0 +
= P (                                                            (σ (1 − α0 ) + σz2 ))
                                                               2 x
                                                               1
     zt > z̄1 )(exp(p1 ) − exp(c∗0 )) exp(−γ − bp1 + α1 z1 + (σx2 (1 − α1 )(1 − αt|1 ) + σz2 ))E(exp(αt|1 zt )|
+ P (                                                                                                               zt > z̄1 )
                                                               2
                                                                                                                                                           
     1                                   1                          z̄1                   αt|1 (σx2 (1 − α1 ) + σz2 ) − z̄1
=        exp(c∗0 − γ − bp0 + α0 z0 + (σx2 + σz2 )) Φ(                            ) + Φ(                                  )(bep1 −p0 − b + 1)e−b(p1 −p0 )
  b−1                                    2                  (σx2 (1 − α1 ) + σz2 )               (σx2 (1 − α1 ) + σz2 )


Substituting in the expressions for z0 and z̄1 we obtain

                                                      Et−1 (Ṽ |pt = p0 ) = Et−1 (Ṽ |pt = p1 )
                                                                              !
Lastly, note that for pt ∈
                         / {p0 , p1 }, E( Ṽ (c0 , {εt−1 , pt , yt }|ε1 , pt ) ) is the same as computed in the
proof of Proposition 3 above. As a result, the interior maximum is achieved at lim pt → p0 , hence to
conclude our argument we need to compare Et−1 (Ṽ |pt = p0 ) against limpt →p0 Et−1 (Ṽ |pt ∈       / {p0 , p1 }),
which in turn equals
                                                                                                                                      
                                                        1 2                z̄(pt )                         αt (σx2 + σz2 ) − z̄(pt )
      (exp(p0 ) −      exp(c∗0 )) exp(−γ                        2
                                                 − bp0 + (σx + σz )) Φ( 3              ) exp(α0 z&0 ) + Φ(      3                    )
                                                        2                 (σx2 + σz2 )                             (σx2 + σz2 )

Let θ̂ = (b(p1 − p0 ) − ln(be(p1 −p0 ) − b + 1)) > 0, then after substituting the expressions for z0 and
z̄(pt ) and simplifying, the ratio of the two expected continuation values simpliﬁes to:

                                                                     σx2                                    σx2
                                                                      2
                                                                         (1−α0 )+ α θ̂                       2
                                                                                                                (1−α0 )− α θ̂
                                                                Φ( √               t|0
                                                                                             ) + Φ( √                     t|0
                                                                                                                                   ) exp(−θ̂)
              Et−1 (Ṽ |pt = p0 )                                       σx2 (1−α0 )+σz2                       σx2 (1−α0 )+σz2
                                           =                                     σ2                       2                                                          (37)
      limpt →p0 Et−1 (Ṽ |pt ∈
                             / {p0 , p1 })                                α0
                                                                             z + 2x
                                                                          αt 0
                                                                                                        σx    α
                                                                                                            − α0 z0
                                                                    Φ( √                   ) + Φ( √      2      t
                                                                                                                          ) exp(−α0 z&0 )
                                                                             (σx2 +σz2 )                    (σx2 +σz2 )


The denominator is decreasing in z&0 and thus also in z0 , hence for every θ̂ there is a z0 big enough
such that the above ratio is strictly greater than 0. As a result, there exists a ﬁnite constant
χ0 > 0 such that when z0 > χ0 it follows that pt = p0 maximizes the expected continuation value.



                                                                                    14
Finally, let χ = max{χ0 , χ1 }, then if z1 = z0 > χ,
                                                                                                     !
                                           p0 = arg max E Ṽ ({ε1 , pt , yt }, c∗0 )|ε1 , pt
                                                       pt


Since Ṽ is continuous in the cost shock c, it follows that there exists a non-singleton interval (c, c̄)
around c∗0 , such that if c ∈ (c, c̄), then
                                                                                                     !
                                           p0 = arg max E Ṽ ({ε1 , pt , yt }, c)|ε1 , pt
                                                        pt


Lastly, we want to show that ∂|p∂χ
                                0 −p1 |
                                        < 0. This follows directly form the facts that (i) the numerator
of (37) is decreasing in θ̂, and that (ii) θ̂ is increasing in (p1 − p0 ). Hence, as we decrease the
distance between p0 and p1 , we increase the RHS of (37), and thus we require a smaller z = z0 = z
to make the ratio bigger than 1.


A.4      Household problem
The representative household consumes and works according to

                                                     '
                                                     ∞       0                      "               1
                                            max            Et β   t+k
                                                                            ct+k −       Li,t+k di
                                      ct+k ,Li,t+k
                                                     k=0


where ct denotes log consumption of the aggregate good, subject to the budget constraint
                      "                                                                  "                "
                              pj,t +cj,t                                        pt +wt
                          e                dj + Et Qt+1 Dt+1 = Dt + e                        Li,t di +        υi,t di,

where Qt+1 is the stochastic discount factor, Dt are state contingent claims on the aggregate
shocks, υi,t is the proﬁt from the monopolistic intermediaries and wt is the log real wage. The
optimal labor supply condition is simply wt = ct , while the market clearing states that ct = yt .
Substituting the wage into the ﬁrm’s proﬁt we obtain equation (21).


A.5      Proofs on learning and nominal rigidity
Proposition A1. The nominal price pi,1 = p&j,1 +&ri,0 is a local maximizer of the worst-case expected
                                             b b−αδ−1             b b+αδ−1 
proﬁts for any aggregate price p1 ∈ (p1 + ln b−1 b−αδ , p1 + ln b−1     b+αδ
                                                                                ).

Proof. Let υ ∗ (ε0 , s1 , pi,1 ) denote the worst-case expected proﬁt, conditional on the history ε0 and
the current state s1 = {ωi,1 , p1 , y1 , p&j,1 } , evaluated at some nominal price pi,1 . Conditional on pi,1 −
p&j,1 , the worst-case beliefs are given by equations (25) and (26). Take a ﬁrst-order approximation
of the change in proﬁts, υ ∗ (ε0 , s1 , pi,1 ) − υ ∗ (ε0 , s1 , p&j,1 + r&i,0 ), evaluated around pi,1 = p&j,1 + r&i,0 .



                                                                    15
This equals                                                              
                                         epj,1 +ri,0 −p1              ∗
                                                               − (b + αδ ) (pi,1 − p&j,1 − r&i,0 ) ,
                                 epj,1 +ri,0 −p1 − ey1 −ωi,1
where δ ∗ = δ sgn (pi,1 − p&j,1 − r&i,0 ) .
   It then follows that for any p1 ∈ (p, p), where we deﬁne
                                      0                            1                   0                    1
                                             b b − αδ − 1                                    b b + αδ − 1
                   p = p1 + ln                                         ; p = p1 + ln                            ,
                                           b − 1 b − αδ                                    b − 1 b + αδ

we have
                                      epj,1 +ri,0 −p1
                                                            ∈ (b − αδ, b + αδ),
                              epj,1 +ri,0 −p1 − ey1 −ωi,1
which makes the ﬁrst-order derivative of the change in proﬁts negative to the right of p&j,1 + r&i,0
and positive to its left. This gives the necessary and suﬃcient conditions for p&j,1 + r&i,0 to be a
local maximizer.
Proposition A2. Let δ index = δ sgn (p1 − p&j,1 ). Up to a ﬁrst-order approximation around p1 = p&j,1 ,
the diﬀerence ln υ ∗ (ε0 , s1 , r&i,0 + p1 ) − ln υ ∗ (ε0 , s1 , r&i,0 + p&j,1 ) equals
                                                                            
                                                  eri,0
                                                              − b − αδ index
                                                                               (p1 − p&j,1 ) < 0.
                                         eri,0   − ey1 −ωi,1

Proof. First, analyze the worst-case expected proﬁt under a policy rule that implements indexa-
tion, i.e. pindex
            i,1   = r&i,0 + p1 , given by
                                                                             ∗ index
                                 υ ∗ (ε0 , s1 , pindex
                                                 i,1   ) = eri,0 − ey1 −ωi,1 ex0 (pi,1 ,y1 ,p1 ,pj,1 )

      ∗0 (pindex
where x     i,1   , y1 , p1 , p&j,1 ) equals .5 (
                                                 σ02 + σz2 ) + ct − b&
                                                                     ri,0 − γ + α [y0 − (−γ − b&
                                                                                               ri,0 )] plus

                  min               min               −αδ  (p1 − p&j,1 ) + αδ  [φ(p1 − p&j,1 ) − φ(p0 − p&j,0 )]
                δ  ∈[−δ,δ] φ(pt −
                                  pj,t )∈[−γp ,γp ]


The joint worst-case demand shape and co-integrating relationship are given by

        δ index = δ sgn (p1 − p&j,1 ) ; φindex (p1 − p&j,1 ) − φindex (p0 − p&j,0 ) = −2γp sgn (p1 − p&j,1 ) .

Given the presence of the kink we compute a log-linear approximation of υ ∗ (ε0 , s1 , pindex
                                                                                        i,1   ) around
p1 = p&j,1 . At its right we have
                                  d ln υ ∗ (ε0 , s1 , pindex
                                                       i,1   )
                                                               = −αδ
                                             dp1
while at its left, the derivative is

                                                       d ln υ ∗ (ε0 , s1 , pindex
                                                                            i,1   )
                                                                                    = αδ
                                                                  dp1

                                                                       16
The constant term in the approximation is given by evaluating ln υ ∗ (ε0 , s1 , pindex
                                                                                 i,1   ) at p1 = p&j,1 :
                       ∗                
                    ln eri,1 − ey1 −ωi,1 + ct − b&
                                                  ri,0 − γ + α [y0 − (−γ − b&
                                                                            ri,0 )] − 2αδγp .

Second, let us analyze the worst-case expected proﬁt under the original policy, p∗i,1 = r&i,0 + p&j,1 ,
which targets the same r&i,0 but by adjusting the nominal price to the review signal p&j,1 . We have
                                                                                  ∗ ∗
                            υ ∗ (ε0 , s1 , p∗i,1 ) = eri,0 +pj,1 −p1 − ey1 −ωi,1 ex0 (pi,1 ,y1 ,p1 ,pj,1 )

      ∗0 (p∗i,1 , y1 , p1 , p&j,1 ) equals .5 (
where x                                         σ02 + σz2 ) + ct − b (&
                                                                      ri,0 + p&j,1 − p1 ) − γ + α [y0 − (−γ − b&
                                                                                                               ri,0 )] plus

                       min               min               αδ  [φ(p1 − p&j,1 ) − φ(p0 − p&j,0 )] = −2αδγp
                     δ  ∈[−δ,δ] φ(pt −
                                       pj,t )∈[−γp ,γp ]


Note that υ ∗ (ε0 , s1 , p∗i,1 ) does not have a kink in the p1 space. Approximate around p1 = p&j,1 to
obtain a derivative is:
                                      d ln υ ∗ (ε0 , s1 , p∗i,1 )           eri,0
                                                                  = − ri,0        +b
                                                dp1                  e − emy1
The constant term is given by evaluating ln υ ∗ (ε0 , s1 , p∗i,1 ) at p1 = p&j,1 , as:
                                        
                    ln eri,0 − ey1 −ωi,1 + ct − b&
                                                  ri,0 − γ + α [y0 − (−γ − b&
                                                                            ri,0 )] − 2αδγp .

We now compute the diﬀerence ln υ ∗ (ε0 , s1 , pindex
                                                i,1   ) − ln υ ∗ (ε0 , s1 , p∗i,1 ), up to their ﬁrst-order ap-
proximation:          0                                      1
                               eri,0
                                           − b − αδ    index
                                                               (p1 − p&j,1 ) < 0
                        eri,0 − ey1 −ωi,1
using the worst-case demand shape δ index = δ sgn (p1 − p&j,1 ) and Proposition A2. The latter shows
that the condition for having the optimal price r&i,1 be at the kink r&i,0 is that the derivatives at the
right, based on demand elasticity −b − δ, and at the left, using the elasticity −b + δ, are negative
and, respectively, positive.


A.6       Dispersion of forecasts
Here we detail how we use empirical evidence from Gaur et al. (2007) on survey data to evaluate
the size of our calibrated ambiguity parameter γ. Gaur et al. (2007) use item-level forecasts of
demand data from a skiwear manufacturer, called the Sport Obermeyer dataset. The dataset
contains style-color level forecasts for 248 short lifecycle items for a selling season of about
three months. The forecasts are done by members of a committee speciﬁcally constituted to
forecast demand, consisting of: the president, a vice president, two designers, and the managers
of marketing, production, and customer service. Raman et al. (2001) provides details on the
forecasting procedures and on the dataset.

                                                                    17
   Our model connects to the data in Gaur et al. (2007) as follows. They observe forecasts
made prior to the product being introduced. Their statistic for the dispersion of these forecasts is
reported as a coeﬃcient of variation. Our model relates to this measure through the set of multiple
priors. Indeed, in our model, prior to observing any realized demand signals, the ﬁrm entertains
a set of forecasts about quantity sold. We connect this set to the dispersion of forecasts made
by the committee described above. In particular, in our model the ﬁrm entertains the following
time-zero set of forecasts on the level of demand

                           [exp(−γ − bp + 0.5σz2 ), exp(γ − bp + 0.5σz2 )]

While in the data the set consists of only seven forecasters, we have a continuum. But we can
compute the coeﬃcient of variation (CV) of these forecasts and compare it against the reported
statistic. In particular, using a uniform distribution over the forecasts in the set above, the CV,
normalized by the average forecast, equals

                                             1 eγ − e−γ
                                       CV = √
                                              3 (eγ + e−γ )

    Gaur et al. (2007) report in their Table 4 that the average level of coeﬃcient of variation,
scaled by the average forecast, across the products in the dataset equals 37.6%. Plugging in the
calibrated value of our ambiguity parameter γ = 0.614, we obtain a CV equal to 31.58%.


A.7     Empirical link between aggregate and industry prices
In this section, we use US CPI data to show that the relationship between aggregate and industry
prices is time-varying and unstable over short-horizons. In particular, an econometrician would
generally have very little conﬁdence that short-run aggregate inﬂation is related to industry-level
inﬂation, even though he can be conﬁdent that the two are cointegrated in the long-run. Thus, our
assumption on the uncertainty over φ(.) puts the ﬁrm on an equal footing with an econometrician
outside of the model.
    Our analysis uses the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ most disaggregated 130 CPI indices as well
as aggregate CPI inﬂation. The empirical exercise consists of the following regression method. For
a speciﬁc industry j, we deﬁne its inﬂation rate between t − k and t as πj,t,k and similarly πt,k
                                                                                              a
                                                                                                  for
aggregate CPI inﬂation. For each industry j, we run the rolling regressions:

                                                        a
                                       πj,t,k = βj,k,t πt,k + ut

over three-year windows starting in 1995 and ending in 2010, and note that results are very similar
if we use windows of 2 or 5 years instead. We repeat this exercise for k equal to 1, 3, 6, 12 and 24
months. Finally, for each of these horizons we compute the fraction of regression coeﬃcients βj,k,t

                                                  18
(across industries and 3-year regression windows) that are statistically diﬀerent from zero at the
95% level.
   We ﬁnd that for 1-month inﬂation rates, only 11.4% of the relationships between sectoral and
aggregate inﬂation are statistically signiﬁcant. For longer horizons k, these fractions generally
remain weak but do rise over time: 26.4%, 40.6%, 58.5% and 69.1% for the 3-, 6-, 12- and 24-
month horizons respectively. This supports our assumption that while disaggregate and aggregate
price indices might be cointegrated in the long run, their short-run relationship is weak.
   In fact, not only is the relationship statistically weak in general, but it is highly unstable. This
can be seen in Figure A.1, which shows the evolution of the coeﬃcient βj,k,t for k = 3 for 3-year-
window regressions starting in each month between 1995 and 2010, for four industries. Not only
are there large ﬂuctuations in the value of this coeﬃcient over our sample, but sign reversals are
common. In general, at any given date, there is little conﬁdence that the near-future short-horizon
industry-level inﬂation would be highly correlated with aggregate inﬂation, even though the data
is quite clear that the two are tightly linked over the long-run.

                                     Carbonated drinks                                        Beer
                   4




                                                                   1 1.5 2
                   2




                                                                   .5
                   0




                                                                   -.5 0
                   -2




                              1995    2000          2005   2010              1995      2000          2005    2010
                                             date                                             date


                                        Televisions                            Fees for lessons and instruction
                                                                   2
                   2




                                                                   1
                   1
                   0




                                                                   0
                   -3 -2 -1




                                                                   -1
                                                                   -2




                              1995    2000          2005   2010              1995      2000          2005    2010
                                             date                                             date




Figure A.1. 3-year rolling regressions of 3-month industry inﬂation on 3-month aggregate inﬂation
for four categories. The solid line plots the point estimate of regression coeﬃcient on aggregate
inﬂation. The dotted lines plot the 95% conﬁdence intervals.



A.8     The typical information set at the stochastic steady state
In this section we analyze in more depth the typical information set at the stochastic steady
state. In the model, the price histories and demand realizations diﬀer across ﬁrms. One reason
is the idiosyncratic noise in demand realizations, but more importantly, the position of the
demand signals is endogenous, because it depends on the past pricing decisions of the ﬁrm. With

                                                              19
idiosyncratic productivity shocks, ﬁrms take diﬀerent pricing decisions, and thus their information
sets evolve diﬀerently. Let
                                                                   
                                        Iit = r̃uniq
                                                it   , N it , ŷ it


be the 3-column matrix that characterizes the information set of ﬁrm i at time t, where r̃uniq  it  is
the vector of unique unambiguously estimated relative price points in the history of past price
decisions, r̃it , of ﬁrm i; Nit is the associated vector of the number of times each of those unique
price points has been chosen in the past; and ŷit is the average, demeaned demand realization
that the ﬁrm has seen at those unique price points. So each row of r̃uniq
                                                                       it   is one of the unique price
levels the ﬁrm has posted in the past, the corresponding row of Nit is the number of times this
price has been seen in the past, and the corresponding row of ŷit is the average demeaned demand
realizations the ﬁrm has experienced when choosing that price. The matrix Iit fully described
the information set of the ﬁrm, and is the suﬃcient statistic needed to compute the worst-case
expected demand x̂it (r̃).
   The most striking characteristic of Iit is that the average cardinality of r̃uniq
                                                                                it   is just six. Thus
even though the average life span of ﬁrms in our model is 133 periods, the histories contain only 6
unique estimated relative prices on average. Another interesting characteristic, is that the average
ﬁrm has not seen each of those six price points equally often, but in fact the most often posted
price accounts for 74% of all observations, on average. Moreover, the second most often chosen
price accounts for another 19% of all observations.
    These features of the typical information set can be helpful in understanding the pricing
moments the model generates. First, the sparse nature of the information set implies that the
typical ﬁrm faces substantial amount of residual demand uncertainty even in the long run. The
reason behind this substantial residual demand uncertainty is that the history of observations is
endogenously sparse. In particular, the optimal policy leads the ﬁrm to often repeat estimated
relative prices, resulting in a history of observations that provides a lot of information about the
average level of demand at those select prices, but leaves the ﬁrm uncertain about the shape of its
demand in between the observed price points. Hence our mechanism, which operates speciﬁcally
through the uncertainty about the local shape of demand, has a strong bite even at the steady
state of the model, when ﬁrms have seen long histories of demand observations. In fact, because
of the local nature of learning and the endogenous location of demand signals, learning proceeds
so slowly that the mechanism survives even if ﬁrms live for thousands of periods. We explore this
implication further in Online Appendix B.6 (on the authors’ website) by setting λφ = 0. In the
same appendix we also show that the accumulation of new information could in fact change the
optimal position of some of the reference prices.
    Second, the typical information set still contains multiple distinct price points at which the
ﬁrm has reduced demand uncertainty. Thus, the optimal pricing action does not only lead to price
stickiness (i.e. reluctance to leave one of the price points with low residual demand uncertainty),


                                                    20
but also to signiﬁcant memory in prices since conditional on a move, the ﬁrm is likely to move to
one of the other price points it has learned about in the past, rather than to a brand new price.
   Lastly, the typical information set also tends to feature one “dominant” price at which the ﬁrm
has accumulated most of its past signals. This gives rise to pricing patterns where the ﬁrm has a
clear “modal” or “reference” price point that it tends to stay at for prolonged periods of time and
return to often.


A.9     Cell-based evidence on hazard functions

                                    Data                                           Simulations
                                    Γ = 4 weeks                                           Γ = 4 weeks




                                                                     6
                5
             2 3 4
             Density




                                                                   Density
                                                                  2     4
                1
                0




                                                                     0
                        -.4   -.2                   0   .2                   -.4    -.2                   0   .2
                                     Hazard slope                                          Hazard slope


                                    Γ = 5 weeks                                           Γ = 5 weeks
                6




                                                                     6
              Density




                                                                   Density
                   4




                                                                        4
             2




                                                                  2
                0




                                                                     0




                        -.4   -.2                   0   .2                   -.4    -.2                   0   .2
                                     Hazard slope                                          Hazard slope


                                    Γ = 6 weeks                                           Γ = 6 weeks
                6




                                                                     6
              Density




                                                                   Density
                   4




                                                                        4
             2




                                                                  2
                0




                                                                     0




                        -.4   -.2                   0   .2                   -.4    -.2                   0   .2
                                     Hazard slope                                          Hazard slope




Figure A.2. Distributions of the cell-based hazard slopes. A slope is deﬁned as the diﬀerence
between the price change frequencies of old (τ ≥ Γ) and young (τ < Γ) prices. Empirical (left)
and simulated (right) distributions.


    In Figure A.2, we plot the distributions of cell-based slopes obtained using the approach of
Campbell and Eden (2014). A cell is a speciﬁc product sold in a given store, while the slope
is computed as the diﬀerence between the price change frequencies of older and younger prices.
An “old” price is one that has survived at least Γ weeks. In order to obtain a more complete
comparison between the data and the model simulations than just the average slope, we plot both
the empirical (left column) and simulated (right) distributions of the cell-based hazard slopes, for
Γ = 4, 5, 6.




                                                             21
