NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY
Emily Breza
Supreet Kaur
Yogita Shamdasani
Working Paper 22491
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22491

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016

We thank James Andreoni, Dan Benjamin, Stefano DellaVigna, Pascaline Dupas, Edward
Glaeser, Robert Gibbons, Uri Gneezy, Seema Jayachandran, Lawrence Katz, Peter Kuhn, David
Laibson, Ulrike Malmendier, Bentley MacLeod, Sendhil Mullainathan, Mark Rosenzweig,
Bernard Salanie, and Eric Verhoogen for their helpful comments. Arnesh Chowdhury, Mohar
Dey, Piyush Tank, and Deepak Saraswat provided outstanding research assistance. We gratefully
acknowledge operational support from JPAL South Asia and financial support from the National
Science Foundation, the IZA Growth and Labor Markets in Low Income Countries (GLM-LIC)
program, and the Private Enterprise Development for Low Income Countries (PEDL) initiative.
The project was registered in the AEA RCT Registry, ID 0000569. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Emily Breza, Supreet Kaur, and Yogita Shamdasani. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Morale Effects of Pay Inequality
Emily Breza, Supreet Kaur, and Yogita Shamdasani
NBER Working Paper No. 22491
August 2016
JEL No. D03,E24,J3,O15
ABSTRACT
The idea that worker utility is affected by co-worker wages has potentially broad labor market
implications. In a month-long experiment with Indian manufacturing workers, we randomize
whether co-workers within production units receive the same flat daily wage or different wages
(according to baseline productivity rank). For a given absolute wage, pay inequality reduces
output and attendance by 0.24 standard deviations and 12%, respectively. These effects
strengthen in later weeks. Pay disparity also lowers co-workers’ ability to cooperate in their selfinterest. However, when workers can clearly observe productivity differences, pay inequality has
no discernible effect on output, attendance, or group cohesion.
Emily Breza
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 821
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
ebreza@gsb.columbia.edu

Yogita Shamdasani
Department of Economics
Columbia University
1022 International Affairs Building
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
yjs2112@columbia.edu

Supreet Kaur
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
Evans Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
supreet@berkeley.edu

A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/569/history/

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

1

1. Introduction
In traditional agency models, workers care about only their own wage levels when making
labor supply decisions. However, a long tradition in economic thought—as well as in psychology, sociology, and organizational behavior—has advanced the notion that individuals
also care about their pay relative to that of their co-workers.1 This paper tests the empirical validity of this view. In addition, it examines workers’ underlying notion of equity:
specifically, whether perceived justifications for pay differences mediate fairness concerns.2
Relative pay comparisons between workers have the potential to influence various labor
market features. For example, they could help explain why wage compression—when wages
vary less than the marginal product of labor—appears prevalent in both poor and rich
countries (Frank 1984, Dreze and Mukherjee 1989, Lazear 1989, Fang and Moscarini 2005,
Charness and Kuhn 2007). They have also been proposed as a micro-foundation for wage
rigidity (Akerlof and Yellen 1990). In addition, relative pay concerns could affect how
workers sort into firms—for example, leading some firms to specialize by worker ability,
or mediating how productivity dispersion maps to earnings inequality (Frank 1984, Song
et al. 2015, Card et al. 2013). Relatedly, they could influence the decision to contract labor
within or across firm boundaries (e.g., Nickerson and Zenger 2008).3
The existing behavioral economics literature has focused on the idea that agents’ own
internal preferences over relative pay can affect their utility. This idea has two related
implications for worker behavior. First, relative pay can act as a compensating differential—affecting the willingness to accept employment at a given absolute wage. Second,
such utility effects could impact effort, for example, in the presence of reciprocity.4 Work
in social psychology and sociology suggests that this exclusive focus on internal preferences
may provide an incomplete view. These literatures emphasize that pay disparity can foster
“resentment, lack of cooperation, sabotage, and lack of team potency” (Shaw 2015). These
forces have the potential to create social conflict, amplifying effects on labor supply and
output across all workers. For example, even if higher-paid workers individually derive positive utility from being paid more than others, their outcomes could be worsened due to
discontent or hostility from their co-workers—who, mechanically, must be paid relatively
less (Schmitt and Marwell 1972, Deutsch 1986, Lazear 1989, Levine 1991, Duffy et al. 2012).
1

In economics, see, e.g., Marshall (1890), Veblen and Almy (1899), Keynes (1936), Duesenberry (1949),
Hicks (1963), Easterlin (1974), Hamermesh (1975). In psychology, seminal work by Adams (1963) develops
a theory of pay inequity, building on Festinger (1954)’s cognitive dissonance theory. See Cook and Hegtvedt
(1983) and Shaw (2014) for reviews of work in social psychology, sociology, and organizational behavior.
2
A long standing debate in this literature is on conceptualizing equity—whether individuals compare pay in
levels, or ratios of pay to productivity (e.g., Adams 1963, Thibaut and Kelley 1959, Baron and Kreps 2013).
3
See Fehr et al. (2009) for a general discussion of how fairness considerations may affect the labor market.
4
Behavioral agency theory predicts that workers may reduce effort in response to fairness violations, especially under incomplete contracting (Kőszegi 2014). Fehr et al. (2009) argue that because most jobs contain
some incomplete contracting, maintaining morale is essential for effort provision. This view is espoused by
Bewley (1999), who documents managers’ perceptions that relative pay is important for worker motivation.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

2

Figure 1 documents perceptions among Indian workers that pay inequality creates such
morale effects. Respondents predict that, for a given absolute wage level, a worker who is
paid less than his peers would be less likely to accept employment (Question 1) and would
reduce effort (Question 2). In addition, 94% of respondents state that pay disparity will
lead to conflict among co-workers (Question 3). While only suggestive, these perceptions
match those of respondents in other contexts such as the U.S. (e.g., Bewley 1999).
In this paper, we use a field experiment to test whether workers care about relative pay.
We construct a design that enables comparisons of workers who earn the same absolute
wage, but differ in their co-workers’ wages. In addition, we incorporate variation in the
perceived justification for pay differences. We examine the effects of relative pay on labor
supply: the extensive margin decision to accept work (attendance) and effort provision
(output). We also explicitly test for impacts on group cohesion among co-workers.5
In the experiment, 378 workers in Odisha, India are employed full-time for one month in
seasonal manufacturing jobs—a prominent source of local employment. They work in small
factories, which are organized into distinct production units, with 3 workers per unit. All
unit members produce the same exact product (e.g. rope), while every unit within a factory
produces a different product (e.g. rope, brooms, incense sticks). Each unit sits together in a
separate physical space in the factory, both during work and lunch breaks. Thus, the other
workers in one’s unit constitute a natural and salient reference group for pay comparisons.
Note that production is an individual activity, with no joint production of any kind.
All workers are paid a flat daily wage for attendance, in accordance with the typical pay
structure in the area. The decision to come to work is therefore incentivized: being absent
results in a loss of earnings. However, there is incomplete contracting on effort: workers
have some latitude to select effort levels, which are reflected in output. To obtain measures
of worker output, we bear substantial overhead costs—in the form of extra staff and record
keeping—to quantify each worker’s daily individual production.
We induce exogenous variation in co-worker pay by randomly assigning units to one of
four different pay structures. In the Pay disparity condition, each unit member is paid a
different wage—wHigh , wM ed , or wLow —in accordance with his respective productivity rank
within the unit (determined by baseline productivity levels). These pay differences are fairly
modest: the difference between each wage level is less than 5%. In the three Compressed
pay conditions, all three unit members are paid the exact same wage, which we randomly
assign to be wHigh , wM ed , or wLow .6 This allows us to compare, for example, workers with
5

From the firm’s perspective, there are of course potential benefits of differential pay, such as incentive
effects. Optimal pay policies would balance such benefits against potential morale costs. Our goal in this
paper is not to evaluate this tradeoff. Rather, our design focuses on isolating the more basic question of
whether workers care about relative pay.
6At the beginning of the baseline (i.e. “training”) period, workers are told that they will receive a wage
increase on a pre-specified date, and that the size of this increase may depend on their baseline productivity.
Once they are randomized into their wage treatment on this date, no additional future wage changes are
possible. This shuts down dynamic incentive effects; see below for a discussion of this.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

3

the same average baseline productivity level who both earn an absolute wage of wLow , but
differ in whether they are paid less than their peers (under the Pay disparity treatment) or
the same as their peers (under the Compressed Low wage treatment). Note that managers
maintain pay secrecy; any learning about peer wages is through self-disclosure.
To test whether perceived justifications mediate morale effects, we incorporate two additional sources of variation into our design. First, while wage levels are fixed, underlying
baseline productivity is continuous. This induces variation in the extent to which pay differences among co-workers overstate productivity differences.7 Second, co-worker output is
far more observable for some tasks relative to others. By randomizing units to production
tasks, we generate variation in the observability of co-worker productivity.8
Even though managers maintain pay secrecy, workers learn about co-worker wages. At
the end of the month, 86.6% of workers can accurately report the wages of both co-workers
in their product units. In contrast, they know the wages of those in other product units only
7.2% of the time. This is consistent with the presumption that workers primarily compare
their pay with that of co-workers in their own unit.
For a given absolute pay level, output declines by 0.33 standard deviations (22%) on
average when a worker is paid less than both his co-workers.9 This is accompanied by a
12 percentage point decrease in attendance. In addition, holding fixed the level of absolute
pay, we find little evidence that performance improves if a worker is paid more than his
peers. In fact, in units where there is Pay disparity, the highest and median wage workers
also have substantively lower attendance than their counterparts on Compressed units (10
and 13 percentage points, respectively). We also see no evidence of positive impacts on
output for these workers. Overall, we estimate that workers give up 9.3% of their earnings
to avoid a workplace where they are paid differently than their peers. The negative effects
of Pay disparity on labor supply persist over the duration of the employment period and
appear to strengthen in later weeks.
Perceived justifications play an important role in mitigating these morale effects. Each
of our two sources of variation in perceived justifications yields the same pattern of effects.
First, when co-workers’ baseline productivity levels are farther apart—so that differences
in productivity swamp differences in wages—workers in Pay disparity units have the same
attendance and output as their counterparts on Compressed units. Second, in production
7Workers are randomly assigned to units upon recruitment, making this a random source of variation.
8We quantified the observability of each of the ten tasks ex ante in a pilot. A different sample of workers—all

of whom were in product units with Compressed wages—were asked after three weeks of work to rank their
output relative to that of their unit-mates. We use the mean accuracy of these responses for a given task as
the observability value for that task. This observability value is uncorrelated with other differences across
tasks, such as output dispersion or growth. In the experiment, we stratify wage treatments by production
task, ensuring variation in task observability within each treatment cell.
9This estimate compares low-rank workers in Pay disparity (wage w
Low ) with low-rank workers in Compressed units where everyone is paid wLow . In general, all relative pay effects are identified off pairwise
comparisons of workers in Pay disparity with workers in Compressed units who have the same absolute wage
level and same baseline productivity rank.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

4

tasks where workers can easily see that their higher paid peers are more productive than
themselves, we also find no negative effect of pay disparity. These findings indicate that fairness violations from Pay disparity are only triggered when the rationale for pay differences
is not extremely clear to workers.
If relative pay effects operate through emotions such as resentment or envy of co-workers,
this could generate hostility and reduce social cohesion among unit members. This could
help explain, for example, why workers in Pay disparity give up substantial earnings to avoid
coming to work—even those who are paid relatively more than their peers. We designed
two cooperative endline games, conducted on the last day of work, to investigate effects
on group cohesion. The games have no benefit for the firm, ruling out motives such as
reciprocity or beliefs about the firm. In both games, workers are paid group piece rates for
performance. This enables us to test whether Pay disparity induces a group dynamic that
subsequently affects co-workers’ ability to cooperate in their own self-interest.
In the first game, workers are organized into their product units, and build towers out
of raw materials. Each unit is paid a piece rate based on the height of its tower. Pay
disparity units build towers that are 17% shorter on average than those with Compressed
wages. However, in units where pay differences are justified—based on baseline productivity
differences or task observability—Pay disparity units perform as well as Compressed units.
In the second set of activities, workers play cooperative puzzle games in pairs. Workers
are randomly paired with someone from either their own product unit or from another
unit. Compressed unit workers perform better on these games when paired with someone
from their own product unit than when paired with a “stranger” (someone from another
unit). In stark contrast, Pay disparity workers perform 28% worse when they are paired with
someone from their own unit than with a stranger. In addition, when in mixed pairs, there is
no evidence that Pay disparity workers perform worse than Compressed pay workers—their
decrease in performance arises only when paired with someone from their own unit. Finally,
when pay disparity is clearly justified, we cannot reject that Pay disparity workers perform
similarly to Compressed workers—regardless of with whom they are paired.
Data from an endline survey also suggests a decrease in social cohesion. Specifically, after
over a month of working together, Pay disparity workers report fewer social network connections—defined as a willingness to borrow or lend, seek or give advice, or visit one-another’s
homes—than Compressed workers. Survey responses also provide suggestive evidence about
fairness perceptions. Relatively lower paid workers in Pay disparity units are more likely to
state that their wages were set unfairly in relation to their unit-mates than low rank workers
in Compressed units. In contrast, Pay disparity workers with relatively higher wages do
not believe their wages are unfair; however, they are substantially less likely to report being
happy at endline. While only suggestive, this is consistent with a decrease in attendance
for higher-paid workers being driven by resentment or hostility in the work environment.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

5

This study builds on the literature on relative pay comparisons in the workplace. Two
recent field experiments have examined relative pay concerns. First, Card et al. (2012) document that University of California employees report higher job dissatisfaction on surveys
when they find out they are paid less than their co-workers. Second, Cohn et al. (2012)
show that random relative pay cuts matter more than absolute pay cuts for effort; these
effects persist strongly over a six-hour period. Our results are consistent with those of both
studies.10 In addition, our work relates to the broader literature on fairness preferences and
effort provision, such as gift-exchange (Akerlof 1982).11
Our study advances this literature. We find substantial impacts of relative pay comparisons on output and labor supply, with workers giving up earnings to avoid a workplace
with pay disparity. We also document deleterious impacts of pay inequality on group cohesion and cooperation. This dimension has been emphasized in social psychology and
sociology—albeit with limited identified evidence—but largely ignored in the empirical behavioral economics literature to date. In addition, in our experiment, relative wages are
not arbitrary, but rather reflect productivity differences; this is important if justifications
can undo fairness violations (Falk et al. 2008, Bracha et al. 2015) and matches why pay
disparity may arise in the labor market. We provide the first piece of field evidence that
perceived justifications play an essential role in mediating morale effects.12 This has bearing
on understanding, for example, why wage compression may arise in some settings or occupations and not in others. Finally, workers make decisions for a job from which they derive
their primary source of income over the one-month study period. Given low baseline levels
of income and employment, the decision to give up earnings is therefore meaningful. The
time horizon also indicates that impacts do not disappear once the novelty of wage changes
wears off (Gneezy and List 2006, Levitt and List 2007).
10

In addition, Cullen and Pakzad-Hurson (2015) use a field experiment with TaskRabbit workers to show
that relatively lower pay lowers productivity. Two recent studies also examine relative pay using natural
experiments: Rege and Solli (2013) find an increase in job separations after pay disclosures in Norway,
and Dube et al. (2015) document an increase in worker quits following differential pay increases in the US.
In earlier work, laboratory studies have used gift exchange games to explore effects of different pay levels
(Charness and Kuhn 2007, Gatcher and Thoni 2010, Bartling and von Siemens 2011, Bracha et al. 2015)
and ranks (Brown et al. 2008, Clark et al. 2010, Kuziemko et al. 2014), with mixed results. Finally, a
number of other papers are also consistent with a relationship between relative pay and worker satisfaction
or behavior (Levine 1993, Pfeffer and Langton 1993, Clark and Oswald 1996, Hamermesh 2001). A set of
related studies examines the effects of revealing performance ranks to piece rate workers, indicating that
social comparisons may matter for effort even in the absence of incomplete contracting (Blanes i Vidal and
Nossol 2011, Bandiera et al. 2013, Barankay 2016).
11
In contrast to our focus on relative pay, gift exchange posits reference dependence in a worker’s own
absolute wage (past or expected). A large body of work finds gift exchange in the lab (e.g., Fehr et al.
1993). Field experiments have found little evidence for sustained positive reciprocity and mixed evidence for
negative reciprocity over one-day periods (Gneezy and List 2006, Kube et al. 2013, Esteves-Sorenson and
Macera 2015, DellaVigna et al. 2016). List (2009) and Charness and Kuhn (2011) present literature reviews.
12
Consistent with this, Pfeffer and Langton (1993) document that wage dispersion within academic departments is negatively correlated with faculty satisfaction and co-authorships. They argue this correlation is
weaker in fields with more developed scientific paradigms and productivity- or experience-based pay.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

6

While we find that pay disparity alters labor supply and group cohesion in our setting,
one cannot draw conclusions about optimal pay structure. One potential benefit to firms
of differential pay is dynamic incentives: workers know that if they work hard now, it could
lead to higher pay in the future. Our design intentionally shuts down this channel because
after the baseline period, there is no further chance of wage changes (or even of future
employment). This is important for our goal: cleanly isolating whether workers care about
relative pay. It is also a realistic feature of seasonal and other contract jobs—a common
form of employment among the workers in our study. However, in choosing the optimal pay
structure, a firm would weigh any potential costs of differential pay (e.g. morale effects)
against the potential benefits (e.g. dynamic incentive or selection effects). Our findings
indicate that workers’ relative pay concerns could affect this calculus.
Section 2 below presents a brief framework. We lay out the experiment design in Section
3. Section 4 outlines the empirical strategy and Section 5 presents the results. In Section
6, we discuss potential alternate explanations and threats to validity. Section 7 concludes.
2. Framework
We adapt the framework of DellaVigna et al. (2016), in which workers’ social preferences
affect effort provision. We modify their approach to allow peer wages to affect morale.
We assume that a worker i receives a wage offer wi from the firm and makes two decisions:
a) whether to work, si ∈ {0, 1}; and b) if si = 1, how much effort ei ≥ 0 to exert. Effort
is not contractible by the firm. If the worker chooses not to work (i.e., si = 0), then he
receives a stochastic outside option, Ri = R + εi . His payoff from working is:
V (wi , wR , ei ; θi ) = wi − c (ei ; θi ) + M (wi , wR ) ei ,
where c (ei ; θi ) is a convex effort cost, θi is a worker-specific productivity parameter, and
M (·) is a morale effect term that depends on the worker’s own wage and a reference value,
wR . The worker chooses to supply his labor if the value from working is greater than his
outside option, that is: si = 1 (arg maxe V (wi , wR , ei ; θi ) ≥ Ri ) . Note that this formulation
leads to potential effects on both effort ei and attendance si . A decrease in M(·) leads to
lower benefits from exerting effort and will decrease ei . Given the restriction ei ≥ 0, if M (·)
falls far enough, the participation constraint will no longer be satisfied, leading to si = 0.13
We conceptualize relative pay concerns as reference-dependence in utility, where the
worker’s reference value is a function of co-worker pay (and productivity):
wR = r (w−i , θi , θ−i ) .
We incorporate this into the worker’s morale effect term:
M (wi , wR ) = αf (wi − wR |wi < wR ) + βf (wi − wR |wi > wR ) + g (wi ) .
13An alternate way to generate effects on s would be to separately allow relative pay differences to shift
i

V (·) in a way that is independent of ei .

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

7

This formulation captures the idea that morale is at least partially determined by relative
wage differences. The function f (·) is monotonically increasing in the gap between the
worker’s wage and his reference value, and f (0) = 0. We allow for asymmetric effects of
differences between own and reference wages. Specifically, if the worker is paid less than the
reference wage, wi < wR , the morale component of his utility increases by αf 0 (wi − wR ) per
unit of effort, relative to the case where wi = wR . Consequently, the direction of the effect
on both ei and si is pinned down by the sign of α. Similarly, if wi > wR , the direction of
the effect on ei and si (relative to when wi = wR ) is pinned down by the sign of β. Finally,
g (wi ) captures peer-independent contributors toward morale, such as gift exchange.14
Note that this is a reduced form specification of worker utility. The parameters α and
β capture both innate preferences and social dynamics in the work place. Prior work conceptualizing relative pay comparisons predicts that α < 0, that is, individuals dislike being
paid less than their peers (i.e., Adams 1963, Akerlof and Yellen 1990). The prediction on
the sign and relative magnitude of β, however, varies. Preferences for status or advantageous inequality generate β > 0. However, if workers have inequity aversion (e.g., Fehr and
Schmidt 1999), or if pay disparity generates strife or a breakdown in social relations in the
workplace, then this could generate β < 0 (e.g., Shaw 2014).
In this simple framework, changes in 1 (wi < wr ) and 1 (wi > wr ), holding fixed wi , will
affect both the probability of accepting work and effort if α and β are non-zero. In the experiment, we generate variation in w−i (i.e. co-worker wages). This enables us to construct
test cases where the value of 1 (wi < wr ) or 1 (wi > wr ) is clear. For example, we posit that
wi < wr if a worker is paid strictly less than his co-workers, but not when he is paid the
same as all his co-workers. We infer the sign of α and β by examining the impact on labor
supply of changes in 1 (wi < wr ) and 1 (wi > wr ), respectively.
In addition, we use experimental manipulations to test whether workers care only about
wage differences in levels (i.e. wR = r (w−i )), or whether relative productivity also enters
into workers’ assessments of pay equity (wR = r (w−i , θi , θ−i )). To accomplish this, we vary
the composition of co-workers, in terms of their productivity. Conceptually, this enables us
to change θ−i , holding fixed θi , generating orthogonal variation with respect to wi and w−i .
The impact of this on behavior provides insight into workers’ underlying notions of equity.

3. Experimental Design and Protocols
3.1. Experimental Design. We explore relative pay concerns using a field experiment
with manufacturing workers. In our setting, workers are paid a flat daily wage for attendance. Consequently, as in the framework above, extensive margin changes in labor supply
(i.e. attendance) affect earnings, whereas there is incomplete contracting on effort.
14Alternately, g (w ) could capture other drivers of effort including monitoring norms for effort provision.
i

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

8

3.1.1. Reference group. We must first be able to isolate, for each worker, a clear reference
group of peers for pay comparisons. In the factories, we organize workers into production
units of 3 workers each. All workers within a unit produce the same exact product, while
every unit in a factory produces a different product. Production is strictly an individual
activity. Because each worker’s two unit members are the only other people at the factory making the same product, they constitute the most salient reference group for wage
comparisons. We empirically validate this intuition in Section 5.1.15
3.1.2. Wage treatments. We construct wage treatments to generate variation in co-worker
pay, holding own absolute pay fixed. Using baseline productivity data (see below), we rank
each worker as the lowest, medium, or highest productivity worker within his respective
unit. Each unit is then randomized into one of four wage structures, as shown in Table 1:
• Pay disparity: Each worker is paid according to his baseline productivity rank within
the unit. In each unit, the lowest rank worker receives wL , the middle rank receives
wM , and the highest rank worker receives wH . Thus, all three co-workers in the
unit always have a different wage from each other.
• Compressed Low: All unit members are paid the same daily wage of wL .
• Compressed Medium: All unit members are paid the same daily wage of wM .
• Compressed High: All unit members are paid the same daily wage of wH .
The difference between each of the three wage levels is fairly modest: less than 5%.
This design enables us to compare workers who have the same expected productivity and
are paid the same absolute wage, but differ in their wage relative to their co-workers. For
example, low rank workers in Compressed Low are paid wL —the same wage as the other
workers in their unit. The low rank workers in Pay disparity also receive an absolute wage
of wL , but earn strictly less than their co-workers. If being on a unit where one is paid less
than one’s peers reduces morale, low rank workers in Pay disparity units will have worse
performance than their counterparts in Compressed Low units. The design generates three
such pair-wise comparisons, illustrated in each respective row of Table 1.
3.1.3. Perceived justifications. We incorporate two sources of variation in the perceived
justification for pay differences. First, while wage differences are fixed at discrete intervals,
underlying baseline productivity differences among co-workers are continuous.This generates
variation in the ratio of {wage difference}/{productivity difference} within and across wage
treatments. Because workers are randomly organized into their product units, these baseline
productivity differences are exogenously determined.
Second, we exploit the extent to which workers can observe co-worker productivity. Ten
different products are manufactured in the factories. These products differ substantively
in how easy it is to observe the output of one’s unit-mates—for example, whether piles of
15This view is consistent with Card et al. (2012), who find that University of California workers are most

likely to compare pay with those in the same department.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

9

output build up quickly, clearly highlighting production differences across co-workers. To ex
ante quantify the observability of each production task, we used a pilot that was conducted
with a different sample of workers before the experiment began. These pilot participants
were paid equal wages and asked to rank their productivity relative to their co-workers at
the end of three weeks. We use the accuracy of responses to this exercise as a proxy for
output observability for each product. We stratify wage treatments by production task,
enabling us to test for the effects of observability within and across wage treatments.
We examine whether variation in perceived justifications mediates the effects of Pay
disparity. This provides insight into workers’ notions of what constitutes fairness in wages
(e.g. Adams 1963). Figure 2 summarizes the sources of variation in the experiment design.
3.2. Context, Protocols, and Social Cohesion Tests.
3.2.1. Context. The experiment takes place across three factory sites in India, located in
semi-rural areas surrounding the city of Bhubaneswar, Odisha. Workers are employed in
low skill manufacturing of local products such as rope, brooms, incense sticks, candle wicks,
disposable plates, and floor mats. Using a partnership with local contractors—who provide
expertise in production, set quality and training standards, and sell all output in the local
wholesale market—we manage the operational implementation of the experiment.
In this area, laborers work in agriculture during peak planting and harvesting, which
comprise about four months of the year. In the remaining lean agricultural months, they
typically seek short-term contract employment in non-agricultural jobs, such as manufacturing and construction. In our experiment, workers are employed in such seasonal contract
jobs full-time for one month. During the period of employment, the job constitutes the
primary source of household earnings. These earnings are particularly valuable because of
high unemployment in the agricultural lean season. For example, before recruitment, the
average worker reports involuntarily unemployment 15 of the past 30 days (Table 2).
In accordance with the typical pay structure in the area, workers are paid a flat daily wage
for each day they come to work.16 There are no strict production minimums, but workers
can be fired for excessive absences (more than three days in a row) or disruptive behavior.
All workers have experience with flat daily wage pay. In addition, they are familiar with
the concept of performance pay—for example, because piece rates are often used during
harvesting—and about 45% have worked under piece rates themselves.17 All workers in the
sample are adult males; see Table 2 for demographic descriptives.
16In general, firms in the area pay both flat daily wages and piece rates for low skill manufacturing. This

often corresponds to differences in quality grades, because quality for these tasks is difficult to quantify and
costly to monitor. Flat wages are more common across firms as a whole.
17In addition, factories will sometimes pay workers differential flat wages based on experience. In construction, workers of different skill grades will usually receive differential flat wages.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

10

3.2.2. Timeline & Protocols. The experiment was run in 14 one-month rounds across three
factory sites. Figure 3 details the within-round timeline. For each round, workers are
recruited from a different local labor market (set of villages) within a 15 km radius of the
factory. The position is advertised as a one-time contract job. Each round requires hiring 30
workers; if more than 30 workers apply for the job, we randomly select among applicants.18
On the first day of work, workers are randomly assigned into one of the ten product
units, with three workers per unit.19 Each worker’s unit (and therefore production task)
remains the same throughout their employment. The workers within a unit sit together in
a designated area—they work together and also eat lunch together in their production area.
Each unit is physically separated from other units—often in separate rooms—due to space
requirements for each production activity and for storing inputs nearby.
Production is strictly an individual activity—all workers produce their product from
beginning to end on their own, with no joint production within units. We hire numerous
additional staff, who sit in the factories and count each worker’s individual production of
goods of salable quality (e.g. number of individual incense sticks or paper bags) in a separate
back storage room. This enables us to obtain daily measures of worker output.
Workers initially undergo a “training period” on how to produce their assigned product.
Typically after day four, output has reached a level of quality that can be sold in the
market. However, we elongate the training period to two weeks to obtain stable baseline
productivity measures for each worker once experience trends begin to flatten out. During
training, all workers are paid a daily wage that corresponds to the prevailing daily wage
in the area (e.g. Rs. 250/day or ~$4/day). On the first day of work, they are told that
their post-training wage may depend on their productivity during the training period. In
addition, on Day 10, each worker is given private feedback on his own productivity rank
within his unit (as part of a routine check-in with the manager).20
On Day 14, each product unit is randomized into one of the four wage treatments in
Table 1.21 For the wage assignments, each worker’s productivity rank within his unit
is defined based on performance in the final three days of the training period (Days 1113).22 All workers get a pay raise relative to the training wage—with wL , wM , and wH

18Four of the rounds involved fewer than 30 workers; the remaining rounds had 30 workers exactly.
19On the first day of work, we also conduct a very short baseline survey to capture demographic character-

istics including age, literacy, and basic employment history.
20This helps underscore to workers that we are paying attention to productivity. It also helps ensure our
subsequent wage treatment effects are not confounded by information revelation about relative ranks.
21An implication of our design is that within a factory, different units have differing pay structures and
average pay levels. This is not odd since every unit within a factory produces a unique product and is
associated with a distinct contractor.
22The three days before the wage change captures production levels after experience trends have flattened
out. Results are robust to dropping the small number of units where ranks are different within this window
relative to the full training period.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

11

corresponding to a roughly 4%, 8%, and 12% pay increase, respectively.23 Consequently,
even wL constitutes a wage premium above workers’ outside option. On Day 14, each
worker is told his own post-training wage privately by his manager. Managers maintain pay
secrecy, so that workers are not informed of their co-workers’ wages. Consequently, to the
extent workers learn about relative wages, it is through self-disclosure among co-workers.24
After wage treatments are implemented, workers continue to work in their assigned units
for an additional 20 days—allowing us to observe subsequent output and attendance. On
the final day (Day 35), we conduct tests for social cohesion and administer an endline survey.
To ensure understanding of the timeline, each worker is given an individualized calendar
on Day 1. The calendar highlights the date that training will end (and wages will increase)
as well as the last day of the work contract. On Day 1, the training wage amount (Rs. 250)
is filled in on the calendar for each of the training days, with the remainder of the days left
blank. On Day 14, the worker’s post-training wage is written on the calendar for each of
the remaining days until the end of employment. Each worker sees his individual calendar
each day upon arrival to work. This makes it clear to workers that: there will be a wage
increase on Day 14 (which may depend on baseline productivity); the post-training wage is
fixed, with no further wage changes; and the employment period ends on a pre-set date.
3.2.3. Endline Tests for Social Cohesion. As discussed above, the impact of pay disparity
can operate through both individual preferences over relative pay as well as group-level
dynamics such as social cohesion and conflict. To the extent that pay disparity generates
feelings such as envy or resentment, these two channels are inherently related.
To explicitly test for effects on social cohesion, we design a set of cooperative games on the
last day of employment, as part of a “fun farewell”. In these games, workers are paid piece
rates for group-level performance. There is no benefit to the firm from the games—ruling
out motives such as retaliation against the firm in driving behavior.
We implement two types of activities, which we describe in detail in Section 5.5. In the
first activity, workers play in their assigned product units, enabling us to examine general
effects on team cooperation. In the second activity, we induce variation in whether workers
are paired with someone from their own product unit versus a “stranger” (someone from
another unit). This enables us to distinguish general changes in worker disgruntlement from
dynamics that are specific to working with one’s co-unit members. These activities allow us
to test whether Pay disparity affects workers’ ability to cooperate in their own self-interest.
Finally, we use an endline survey to obtain additional suggestive evidence on mechanisms.
We ask workers about social ties at endline—for example, whether, after working together
23For example, if the training wage (corresponding to the prevailing wage in the area) was Rs. 250/day,

then wL , wM , and wH would be Rs. 260, Rs. 270, and Rs. 280, respectively.
24It would be odd for an employer to publicly list wages. We verify in Section 5.1 that workers shared wage
information. To the extent that sharing was imperfect, this will dampen our observed treatment effects.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

12

for over a month, they would visit the home of or borrow money from their co-workers. We
also collect self-reports on the perceived fairness of wages and worker happiness.
4. Empirical Strategy
4.1. Outcomes. Attendance is a binary variable capturing whether worker i is present on
day t. We also record the continuous, total output of salable products by each worker i on
each day t.25 We code raw production as zero when a worker is absent. We standardize
output within each task—using the mean and standard deviation for that task in the final
three days of the training period.26 This enables us to pool across tasks and measure output
using consistent units: standard deviations from the mean.
Table 2 presents baseline values of attendance and standardized production in the full
training period. Attendance is approximately 95%. Both baseline attendance and productivity are balanced across the Compressed and Pay disparity units. Appendix Figure A5
documents, within Compressed units, both the stability of relative productivity ranks over
time as well as the stability of output levels even in the post period.
4.2. Empirical Specification. To test our key predictions, we compare outcomes between
individuals in the Pay disparity and Compressed units, holding fixed a worker’s production
rank and wage. Recall from Table 1 that the most direct comparisons are between the Low
rank Pay disparity worker with the Low rank Compressed Low worker, the Medium rank
Pay disparity worker with the Medium rank Compressed Medium worker, and the High
rank Pay disparity worker with the High rank Compressed High worker. We refer to this
set of six rank-treatment cells, which are circled in Table 1, as the “relevant group”. To
use all of the variation in our experimental data, we use a differences-in-differences strategy
that incorporates the pre-period production information.
The most basic differences-in-differences approach restricts the sample to the “relevant”
group of six rank-treatment cells:
yit = α1 [P ostt × P ayDispi × Lowi ] + α2 [P ostt × P ayDispi × M edi ]
(4.1)
+ α3 [P ostt × P ayDispi × Highi ] + α4 [P ostt × Lowi ] + α5 [P ostt × M edi ]
+ α6 [P ostt × Highi ] + λi + τt + η1 xkt + η2 x2kt + εit .
In all specifications, i indexes the worker, k indexes the task, and t indexes the dayround.P ostt is a binary indicator that equals 1 on the days after the wage treatment takes
effect within the round. P ayDispi is an indicator for being a member of a Pay Disparity
unit. The variables Lowi , M edi and Highi are binary indicators for productivity rank, as
defined in Section 3.2.2. Any time-invariant unit or worker characteristics are absorbed by
25During training, workers learn how to create output so that it meets the quality standards required for it

to be salable. In Appendix Table A2 we explore treatment effects on production quality.
26Recall this corresponds to the days used to compute productivity ranks. Standardized output over the

full training period is 0.2 standard deviations lower on average than during these final three days (Table 2).

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

13

the worker fixed effects, λi , while any time trends are captured by the day-by-round fixed
effects, τt . Finally, xkt and x2kt allow for task-specific quadratic experience trends.
The key treatment effects of interest are captured by α1 , α2 , and α3 . The coefficient
α1 measures the average change in outcomes in the post period (relative to the training
period) for Low rank workers in Pay disparity units relative to those in Compressed L
units. Similarly, α2 captures the average treatment effect for Medium rank workers in Pay
disparity vs. Compressed M units. α3 captures the average treatment effect for High rank
workers in Pay disparity vs. Compressed H units.
Note that by restricting the sample to the “relevant” workers, the above specification
ignores observations from the “irrelevant” workers (the complement of the “relevant” group).
These additional observations can be used to help estimate the controls: round-by-day fixed
effects and experience trends. To improve precision, we augment Equation (4.1):
(4.2)
yit = α1 [P ostt × P ayDispi × Lowi ] + α2 [P ostt × P ayDispi × M edi ]
+ α3 [P ostt × P ayDispi × Highi ] + α4 [P ostt × Lowi ] + α5 [P ostt × M edi ]
¯ 0 θ + N eigh
¯ 0 γ + λi + τt + η1 xkt + η2 x2 + εit .
+ α6 [P ostt × Highi ] + Irrel
it
it
kt
We define Irreli as an indicator for whether a worker is in the “irrelevant” group (not
¯ 0 is a vector
among the six “relevant” rank-treatment cells). In Specification (4.2), Irrel
it
of interactions of Irreli with P ostt and each rank: ]. These interactions fully absorb the
change in outcomes for “irrelevant” workers in the post period; the main coefficients of
interest—α1 , α2 , and α3 —are therefore still estimated off of only the “relevant” group.
Consequently, this improves statistical power without affecting identification.
In addition, we define N eighi as an indicator for whether a unit is located in the same
physical room or production space as another unit, facilitating conversation across units.27
¯ it 0 contains interactions of N eighi with P ostt , the
In Equation (4.2), the vector N eigh
treatment and rank of worker i, and the treatment of N eighi .28 Thus, the coefficients α1 ,
α2 , and α3 are identified off units with no neighbors. In neighborless units, it is extremely
clear that one’s two product unit co-workers comprise the relevant reference group.29
To maximize statistical power, we use Equation (4.2) as our main specification. Our
¯ 0 controls. Appendix
results are similar if we exclude “irrelevant” workers or omit the N eigh
it
Table A1 documents robustness to these and other changes to our estimating equation.
We also examine the pooled effect of Pay disparity across Low, Medium, and High ranks:
¯ 0 γ + λi + τt + η1 xkt + η2 x2 + εit . (4.3)
¯ 0 θ + N eigh
yit = α [P ostt × P ayDispi ] + Irrel
it
it
kt

27Usually, units were in separate physical rooms so this wasn’t possible. Seating charts available on request.
28Due to random assignment, N eigh is exogenous to both treatment status and worker characteristics.
i
29Our experiment isn’t powered to investigate whether workers respond to the wage levels of neighboring

units; such a question would require sufficient variation in the number of instances of neighboring units and
in their wages. We leave this for future work.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

14

The main coefficient of interest, α, is still identified off of comparisons within the “relevant” cells. It therefore captures the average treatment effect of Pay disparity compared to
Compressed pay (holding fixed absolute pay) across all worker ranks.30
Finally, we test whether perceived justifications mediate the effects of pay inequality. As
described in Section 3.1, we built two sources of heterogeneity in perceived justifications
into the design: productivity differentials and output observability. To examine their role,
we fully interact the variables encoding treatment status, rank, and P ostt in Equations
(4.2) and (4.3) with each of the justification measures.
5. Results
5.1. Knowledge of Co-worker Wages. Given that managers maintain pay secrecy throughout the experiment, a necessary condition for the wage treatments to affect productivity
is that workers actually learn co-workers’ wages. We verify this using the endline survey.
Panel A of Table 3 reports that among Compressed unit workers, 95.8% correctly report the
wage of at least one co-worker, and 90.9% correctly report the wages of both co-workers.
Workers from Pay disparity units are less accurate—with 87.1% and 74.2% of respondents
reporting the correct wage of at least one or both co-workers, respectively.31 These findings
indicate that overall, there is substantial learning within production units, but Compressed
unit workers have statistically significantly more accurate beliefs. This suggests that it may
be awkward for co-workers to discuss pay under pay dispersion.
For the treatments to have power, it is also important that workers consider their product
unit as their reference group.32 In the endline survey, each worker was also asked to list
the wages of each member of the incense stick, candle wick, floor mat, and paper bag
production units—each of which could be assigned to either Pay disparity or Compressed
pay, depending on the round.33 In Panel B of Table 3, we examine how well individuals learn
about the wages of other units. Strikingly, the majority of workers have no opinion about
the wages of any of the workers on these other units. Approximately 87% of respondents
are not willing to wager a guess about the wages on Compressed units, and only 8.6% of
respondents can accurately list all of the wages. It appears even harder to learn about
the wages on Pay disparity units, with only 1.9% of respondents able to accurately list the
wages of all workers on such units. These findings support our assumption that workers
primarily compared their wages with their two other unit-mates.
5.2. Effects of Pay Disparity. Figure 4 provides an overview of the patterns in the
underlying production data. It plots average standardized production on each day for each
30All variables are defined exactly as in Equation 4.2. Again, P ost is absorbed by the time fixed effects, τ .
t
t
31The accuracy of beliefs is similar across Low, Medium, and High rank workers. It is also worth mentioning

that only four workers on Pay disparity units believe that both their co-workers earned the same wage.
32If workers instead compared themselves to those in other units, this should decrease the potency of our
treatments and make it harder to find treatment effects.
33For this exercise, we exclude observations where individuals were asked about their own units.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

15

of the 3 sets of “relevant” pairwise comparisons. Among Low rank workers in the baseline
period, production in the Compressed Low and Pay disparity units shows a common trend as
workers gain experience. The treatment (“post”) period begins on day 0, when each worker
is told his post-training wage. Within about 5 days (i.e. by the first payday following the
wage change), differences in output start to emerge, with workers on Pay disparity units
(who are paid less than their peers) reducing output relative to the Compressed L units.
This delay in the onset of treatment effects is consistent with non-immediate diffusion of
pay information among unit members. In addition, there is no evidence of positive effects
of being paid relatively more than one’s peers: High rank workers in Pay disparity units
appear to perform worse than those in Compressed H units. This pattern also generally
holds for Medium rank workers in Pay disparity versus Compressed M units.
Panel B of Table 4 presents regression estimates of treatment effects separately for each
rank. Low wage workers in Pay disparity units reduce output by 0.385 standard deviations
relative to those in Compressed Low units (significant at the 1% level). This effect is robust
to the inclusion of individual fixed effects (Col. 2, our preferred specification corresponding
to Equation (4.2)), indicating that α1 < 0. The 0.332 standard deviation decrease in Col. 2
is equivalent to a 22% reduction in output relative to the Compressed Low (control) treatment mean. In addition, we find little evidence that performance improves when workers are
paid more than their peers. In fact, there are large, but statistically insignificant decreases
in production for High rank workers in Pay disparity units relative to their counterparts
on Compressed High units. We find similar results for the Medium rank workers on the
Pay disparity units relative to those in Compressed Medium units. In contrast, we see little
evidence for changes in quality (Appendix Table A2).34
In addition, Pay disparity reduces attendance for all ranks. Treatment effects for Low,
Medium, and High wage earners are -12, -12.9, and -10.4 percentage points, respectively
(all significant at 5% level, Col. 4), off a base of 94% attendance among Compressed units.
Because we code a worker’s raw production as zero when he is absent, treatment effects on
standardized production combine the extensive margin attendance effects with any intensive
margin effort effects. We attempt to decompose these effects in two different ways. First,
we regress output conditional on positive attendance in Col. 5. Conditional on coming to
work, Low rank workers in Pay disparity units produce 0.2 standard deviations less than
those in Compressed Low units (p-value 0.077). Because this is a selected sample, this
result must be interpreted with caution. However, if the most aggrieved workers are those
who decide to skip work, this coefficient is likely to underestimate the true intensive margin
effect. Second, we use a back-of-the-envelope calculation. Mean output conditional on
attendance for Low rank workers in Compressed Low units is 1.64. The attendance effect of
34It is difficult to quantify quality in our setting—one of the reasons for the prevalence of flat daily pay. For

a subset of rounds, tasks and days, we had management rate the quality of each worker’s output for that
day on a scale of 1-5. We do not see evidence for a change in these subjective quality ratings. It is possible,
however, that this subjective measure is too crude and noisy to enable us to examine such effects.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

16

Pay disparity for the Low rank is -12 percentage points. If the full effect on production were
coming through attendance, we would predict an output decrease of −0.12 × 1.64 = −0.197
standard deviations. This corresponds to about half (59%) of the total effect on output.
While both these decomposition approaches have their limitations, they suggest that in our
setting, being paid less than one’s peers likely negatively affects effort as well as attendance.
In contrast, the effects for the Medium and High wage earners appear to operate primarily
through attendance. For these workers, there is little evidence of conditional intensive margin effort effects in Col. 5. Furthermore, the back-of-the-envelope decomposition suggests
that the attendance effects can fully account for the (statistically insignificant) coefficients
on standardized output. This suggests that Medium and High wage earners are less likely
to show up to work, but there is no evidence that they reduce effort while at the workplace.
While we did not have strong ex ante predictions for these workers, these effects may indicate a reduced desire to work alongside disgruntled co-workers—consistent with resentment
or hostility at work. We further explore this idea below.
Given that the treatment effects of Pay disparity are negative in sign for all three ranks,
the pooled specification of Equation 4.3 may provide improved statistical power. These
results are presented in Panel A. Overall, individuals in Pay disparity units decrease production by 0.311 standard deviations and reduce attendance by 11.5 percentage points
relative to individuals of the same rank and absolute wage level in Compressed units. We
also report pooled regression results for all of the analyses that follow.
Finally, in Appendix Table A1, we show that the results in Table 4 are robust to a number
of alternative specifications, including dropping “irrelevant” workers, omitting controls for
the presence of other units in close proximity, and estimating treatment effects using only
post-treatment observations. We also provide suggestive evidence in Appendix Figure A2
that attendance effects are driven both by increases in the number of days missed by the
chronically absent and in the likelihood of workers missing only a few days of work.

Earnings Consequences of Attendance Effects. Because employees are not compensated
when absent, the attendance effects indicate that workers are willing to give up full-time
earnings to avoid a workplace where they are paid differently than their peers. However,
the foregone factory earnings may overstate this value if workers can find outside casual
employment when absent. To bound this value, we use survey data from individuals who
applied for the factory jobs, but were not hired in the randomization protocol. These respondents report finding paid work on only 23.7% of days. Their average total cash plus
in-kind wage, conditional on working, is Rs. 271. Thus, in the experiment, workers are paid
an average daily wage premium of Rs. 39.
If absentee workers find outside jobs at similar rates as the non-selected workers, then
the attendance treatment effect of Pay disparity causes workers to forego an average of

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

17

Rs. 403 in earnings.35 This corresponds to 9.3% of potential earnings in the factory in the
post period. Furthermore, under the extremely conservative assumption that absentees find
work at the prevailing wage every day they are absent, they are still giving up the average
wage premium of Rs. 39 each day. These foregone earnings amount to 7.1% of wages earned
over the same period by individuals who were not selected for the factory jobs.36
Effects Across Time. Table 5 examines the evolution of treatment effects over time. We separately estimate Equation 4.2 over three parts of the post period—the days before the first
payday, between the first and second payday, and the days after the second payday—after
wage treatments took effect.37 Focusing on the pooled regressions in Panel A, the effects of
Pay disparity are only evident after the first pay day, post wage change. This is consistent
with non-immediate diffusion of wage information. It also matches supervisors’ informal
observations that workers were more likely to discuss wages on paydays, which occurred
each Friday. Furthermore, we find little evidence that the effects wane over time.
5.3. Perceived Justifications. We use the two (pre-registered) sources of heterogeneity
built into our design to investigate if perceived justifications mediate morale effects.
5.3.1. Baseline Productivity Differences. We first examine treatment effects when workers’
higher-ranked peers are substantially more productive than themselves. For each worker,
we compute average baseline output conditional on attendance; this corresponds to what
is observed by workers before wages change.38 We then compare this baseline productivity
average with that of the worker’s next-higher ranked co-worker (i.e. for each low rank
worker, the difference with his medium-ranked co-worker; for each medium rank worker,
the difference with his high-ranked co-worker). Note that this variable is not defined for
high rank workers. Recall that because workers are randomly assigned to units, baseline
productivity differentials are exogenously determined.39
We define the productivity difference between a worker and his higher-ranked peer to
be “large” when it is above 0.37 standard deviations, the mean difference among the “relevant” Compressed workers. In Columns 1-2 of Table 6, we interact this binary variable
35The wage premium is calculated using the average factory cash wage plus an in-kind wage of Rs. 40 (the

monetary value of lunch), which is similar to the in-kind wage paid in the market. We assume a wage of 0 on
days that workers cannot find work; on days they can find paid work, they only forego the wage premium.
We use the pooled treatment effect on attendance of 11.7 percentage points and calculate that Pay disparity
causes workers to miss 1.64 extra days of work (based on the modal number of workdays in the post period).
36Non-selected workers earn an average of Rs. 899 over this period.
37The full pre-treatment period is included in all regressions.
38Specifically, we use the final six days of training—which are used to convey ranks to workers and compute
ranks for wage treatments. Results are robust to using only the final three days for this calculation.
39Baseline output differences among co-workers could also reflect team dynamics or culture. Note this does
not affect identification, because baseline characteristics are orthogonal to the wage treatments. However,
this potentially broadens the interpretation of the heterogeneous treatment effects presented here. The fact
that baseline productivity ranks have stable predictive power in other domains, such as the group cohesion
games in Section 5.5, suggests that these ranks do capture some inherent differences among co-workers.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

18

with treatment status. Panel A displays pooled treatment effects for Low and Medium
ranks combined, while Panel B decomposes the effects by rank. There are large negative
impacts of Pay disparity when productivity differences are small: Low and Medium rank
workers decrease output by 0.358 standard deviations and attendance by 16.7 percentage
points (both significant at 1% level). However, large baseline productivity differences almost
fully mitigate these negative effects. When a worker is substantially less productive than
his higher-paid peer, the total treatment effect of Pay disparity is indistinguishable from
zero. Note that the P ost × P erceived justif ication term in Panel A reveals no detectable
changes in the behavior of Compressed units when productivity differences are large. These
heterogeneous effects appear (though under-powered) for each rank separately in Panel B.
In Appendix Table A3, we show that the results are robust to alternate specifications, including adding interactions of the worker’s own baseline productivity level with an indicator
for post treatment.40 Appendix Table A4 explores a range of productivity thresholds, defined as the percent difference in baseline output between a worker and his next higher-rank
co-worker.41 Productivity differences need to be quite large (on the order of 20%) for us to
detect a significant offsetting response to Pay disparity. While this is substantially larger
than the underlying difference in wages, it may simply reflect observability: it is difficult
for workers to recognize that their peers are more productive unless differences are big.42
5.3.2. Output Observability. We next check for mediating effects of whether co-worker output is observable. We quantify observability using data from 3-week pilot rounds with a
different sample of workers (conducted before the start of this experiment). These workers
were all paid Compressed wages, and were never told their relative productivity ranks. On
the last day of the pilots, we asked workers to rank their co-workers by productivity.43 We
use the mean accuracy of these responses for a given task as a proxy for output observability. There is substantial variation across tasks in accuracy rates—from essentially 0 to
0.88 (Figure 5). We define tasks with accuracy rates above the sample median of 0.5 as
“observable.”
Columns 3-4 of Table 6 present heterogeneous treatment effects by task observability. The
results mirror those in Columns 1-2. Panel A shows pooled effects across all three ranks.
40One potential concern is that when a Low rank worker has a large baseline difference with his Medium

rank peer, this may mean his absolute productivity level is extremely low—leaving him little room to fall
in response to Pay disparity, or indicating something else about his “type”. In Cols. 3-4 of Appendix Table
A3, we show robustness to adding controls so that the bottom decile of Low rank workers are not used
to estimate effects. Cols. 5-6 add full interactions with own baseline productivity; here, the heterogenous
effects are estimated off differences with one’s higher-rank peer, holding fixed own productivity. While this
demands a lot of statistical power, the results are robust to the inclusion of even these controls.
41Note that this scaling of productivity differentials is highly correlated with that used in the main analysis.
42Alternately, this finding matches the predictions of Fang and Moscarini (2005), in which self-serving bias
leads workers to assume they are not less productive than peers unless this difference is extremely apparent.
43Two production tasks were added after piloting was completed; we followed a similar procedure with a
separate sample of workers to quantify observability for these two additional tasks.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

19

When co-worker output is difficult to observe, Pay disparity sharply lowers production and
attendance. In contrast, there are no detectable total effects when co-worker output is easy
to observe; the triple interactions are large and statistically significant. We also find no
evidence that task observability differentially affects the performance of Compressed units
post wage change. The same patterns emerge in Panel B, when we estimate heterogeneous
effects separately by rank. We show in Appendix Table A5 that the results are robust to
sequentially dropping each of the ten tasks.
As with any heterogeneous treatment effects analysis, one might be concerned that observability is correlated with other task characteristics. Appendix Figure A3 plots the
distribution of output for each production task separately and shows that there is no discernible correlation between, for example, a task’s observability value and output dispersion.
More generally, for other correlated task characteristics to pose a problem, they would need
generate our pattern of results through a different mechanism. One possible trait might be
the amount of social cohesion naturally developed during the training period. In Appendix
Table A6, however, we find that observability is not correlated with turnover or attendance
in the training period. Further, the fact that the pattern of results for task observability
matches that in the productivity differences regressions bolsters our interpretation.
Note that observability and productivity differences derive from independent sources
of variation – productivity differences from the randomization of individuals to units and
observability differences from the randomization of units to tasks. Unsurprisingly, Appendix
Table A7 verifies that there is substantial non-overlap among these two measures. Finally,
we find no evidence to suggest that observable tasks simply have more natural productivity
dispersion, making it easier to learn about productivity differences. In Col. (4) of Appendix
Table A6, we show that observability is uncorrelated with the steepness of the learning curve.
5.3.3. Aggregate Perceived Justifications. Finally, for parismony and power, we define an
aggregate perceived justifications indicator. This binary indicator equals 1 if any justification is present—i.e., if an individual has a large productivity difference with his next-higher
ranked peer, or he is on an observable production task.44 Not surprisingly, heterogeneous
treatment effects using this indicator are similar to those above (Table 6, Columns 5-6).45
5.4. Effects of Pay Disparity at the Production Unit-Level. Our key empirical tests
are based on comparing workers who earn the same absolute wage, but differ in co-worker
wages. However, our design also enables us to examine the effects of Pay disparity at the
production unit level. Note that this exercise uses a different source of variation than the
analyses presented above; all workers in each production unit are used for identification.
Table 7 presents the results.46 Panel A reports comparisons between Pay disparity units and
44For high rank workers, this indicator always takes the value of task observability.
45Appendix Table A7 verifies that the productivity difference results and observability results are identified

off of different sources of variation. There is substantial non-overlap among these two measures in the sample.
46This table uses the same specification as Equation 4.3, but eliminates all controls for “irrelevant” workers.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

20

all Compressed units combined. Panel B compares Pay disparity units with only Compressed
Low units. This latter test is strong given that all workers on Pay disparity units are paid
weakly more than those on Compressed Low units. Columns 1-2 present average treatment
effects, while Columns 3-8 present heterogeneous treatment effects.47
On average, Pay disparity units have lower rates of attendance relative to all Compressed
units pooled and to Compressed Low units. The average effects on production are also
negative, but not statistically different from zero. When output differences are not large
or co-worker output is not observable, compared to Compressed Low units, Pay disparity
units have 0.306 standard deviations lower output and 8 percentage points lower attendance
on average (Panel B, Cols. 7-8). However, when pay differences are clearly justified, no
negative treatment effects are detectable. We again show that Compressed units behave
no differently in the post period when there are large differences in productivity or when
output is easily observable. These results suggest that in our setting, Pay disparity is indeed
detrimental to unit-level outcomes—even compared to Compressed Low units which have
weakly lower absolute wages for all workers—when perceived justifications are not present.48
5.5. Effects on Group Cohesion and Dynamics. The above results confirm our initial
hypothesis that workers dislike disadvantageous inequality in pay: workers who are paid less
than their peers reduce output and attendance. Further, we find striking evidence that even
workers in a position of advantageous inequality forego wages to avoid the workplace. Recall
that workers spend the entire day with their unit co-workers—sitting in close proximity and
also eating lunch together at their stations. If Pay disparity fosters resentment between
workers, then it might create a negative or even hostile work environment that workers
would pay to avoid. Emotions such as acrimony or envy may also erode the ability of peers
to cooperate even when it is in their own self-interest. Such forces are of course impossible
to examine with just the output and attendance data alone. Consequently, we designed
tests to enable us to directly examine social cohesion and cooperation.
5.5.1. Teamwork Games. We developed two sets of collaborative games that require teamwork. Workers played these games at endline on the last day of work, as part of a “fun
47Note that observability is already defined at the production unit level.

We define large productivity
differentials at the unit level as an indicator for whether both the Low and Medium rank workers have large
productivity differentials with the worker of next higher rank.
48While not our primary goal, we can use wage variation across Compressed units to explore whether absolute
pay affects performance. We examine this using differences-in-differences regressions in Appendix Table A8.
If units reciprocate higher wages with higher productivity, then we should expect output to be increasing in
pay. Further, any positive peer effects from harder working co-workers should amplify such effects. However,
consistent with previous literature, we find no evidence of positive gift exchange on productivity at any time
horizon—in the days immediately following wage changes or in the longer-run. Relative to Compressed Low
units, Compressed Medium and Compressed High units do increase attendance in the short run—consistent
with a simple substitution effect on labor supply. However, even these effects disappear in the full sample
period. Note that ours is not an ideal test for gift exchangebecause workers were all expecting some wage
increase, and thus we are not able to identify the worker’s ex ante reference wage.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

21

farewell” day. Workers were paid their full wage plus piece rates based on performance in
these games.49 Importantly, there was clearly no benefit to the firm from worker effort on
the games—ruling out reciprocity as a motive for performance.
In the first game, workers were asked to build a tower with the other members of their
assigned product units. Each unit was given the same set of raw materials (e.g., cardboard,
pens, rubber bands, playing cards) and was asked to build as tall a tower as possible within
a 25 minute time limit. The payment schedule was a linear piece rate for the tower’s height
(in cm), paid equally to each unit-member.
Pay disparity units build towers that are 9.376 cm (17.5%) shorter than those of Compressed units on average (Table 8, Col. 1). However, as before, these negative effects are
concentrated in cases where Pay disparity is not clearly justified (Cols. 2-4). When it is,
we detect no difference between the performance of Pay disparity and Compressed units.
Do these results indicate general disgruntlement among Pay disparity workers, or are they
driven by a breakdown in within-unit cooperation? To understand this, we constructed a
second set of games in which workers solved two types of cooperative puzzles in pairs of two.
In the “Spot the Difference” game, each person in the pair received a printed sheet with
nearly-identical pictures on each sheet. The workers had to compare and circle any difference
in the pictures on the two sheets (Appendix Figure A4, Panel A). In the “Symbol Matching”
game, each pair member was given a sheet with a grid of symbols. Workers had to match
symbols—circling all instances where the same symbol appeared in the same grid position
in both of their respective sheets (Appendix Figure A4, Panel B).50 In both games, both
members of the pair received the same payment, a piece rate for every correct answer that
was circled on both workers’ respective sheets. For these partnered games, we constructed
pairs by reshuffling workers across product units. Each worker played four iterations each
of Spot the Difference and Symbol Matching. We randomized pair construction so that
in 50% of cases, a worker played with someone from his own product unit, and 50% with
someone from another product unit for each of the games.
Table 9 presents effects on the cooperative pairwise puzzles. If both members of a pair
are from the same unit, they score 1.105 points (27%) lower if that unit had Pay disparity
versus Compressed pay (Col. 1). The F-test p-value of 0.0536 in Column 1 suggests that Pay
disparity workers actually perform better playing with a stranger (i.e. someone from another
product unit) than playing with a unit co-worker. In addition, note that Pay disparity
workers do not perform worse than Compressed workers in general—the point estimate for
at least one Pay disparity worker in pair is actually positive (though insignificant). Rather,

49At the end of the day, we randomly selected one of the games for each worker, and the worker received his

piece rate earnings for that game only. Workers were told we would randomly select one game for payment
in advance. Note that these endline games were only played in the final 8 rounds of the experiment (80
product units only).
50We thank Heather Schofield for providing us with the Symbol Matching game grids (see Schofield 2014.)

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

22

these workers only perform worse when they are paired with a unit co-worker. 51Finally,
Columns 3-4 provide evidence that treatment effects are larger in the absence of perceived
justifications, and perceived justifications mitigate the negative treatment effect. However,
the mitigating effects of justifications are not statistically distinguishable from zero.
It is worth noting that the worker productivity rankings in the main experiment have
predictive power in these endline games. On average, a pair with a Low or Medium rank
worker scores 15.8% and 13.8% less, respectively, than a pair with a High rank worker (Col.
2). This suggests that the baseline rankings capture, in part, some stable differences in
ability or effort across workers.
Overall, these findings indicate a decrease in Pay disparity workers’ ability to cooperate
in their own self-interest. This does not appear to result from general disgruntlement: low
performance only arises when they must work with the other people in their own product
units. While in our study, workers engage in individual production, the results suggest that
the effects of pay inequality may be exacerbated in settings with team production.
5.5.2. Network Formation. Tension within Pay disparity groups might impede the formation of relationships outside of work, and could represent an additional manifestation of a
lack of group cohesion. In the endline survey, we asked each employee whether he would
engage in the following with each co-worker in his unit: seek or dispense advice; socialize;
and borrow or lend .52We code a worker as having a network link with a co-worker if he
states that he and his co-worker would engage in any of these activities.
In Table 10, the outcome variable in Columns 1-2 measures the number of co-workers
with whom the worker reports a link, with possible values of 0, 1, or 2. The outcome
in Columns 3-4 indicates whether the worker has a link with both of his unit co-workers.
Consistent with the results of the team cohesion games, workers in Pay disparity units
appear substantially less likely to interact with one another outside of work. On average,
Pay disparity workers report .23 fewer friends from the production unit (a 30% decrease,
Col. 1) and are 12.7 percentage points less likely to be friends with both co-workers (a 48%
decrease, Col. 3). These effects are larger and statistically significant in magnitude when no
51Because the endline games were conducted on the last day of work—when all workers received their final

pay for the contract job, attendance was high. In the tower game, units just played with whichever workers
were present. In the cooperative puzzles, if a worker was absent, then the person who had been paired
with that worker for a pair-game sat out during that round and their score for that pair-game is coded as
0. Appendix Table A9 verifies that the endline game results are not driven by differential absence across
units. First, as expected on the last day, treatment status did not affect worker attendance (Cols. 1-2).
Cols. 3-4 replicate results for the tower game restricting the sample tounits where all three workers. Cols.
5-6 replicate results for only those pair-games where both members of a pair were present. The results are
similar to those in Tables 8 and 9.
52This method is based on four of the network elicitation questions used in Banerjee et al. (2013). We also
asked about familial relationships. Given that family relationships cannot change over time, we control for
whether a worker is related to any co-workers in his unit in the regressions.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

23

justification is present; as before, there are no detectable treatment effects when disparity
is clearly justified Cols. 2 and 4).
5.5.3. Fairness and Happiness. In the endline survey, we asked workers to assess how fair
their wages were in relation to those of their peers. Panel A of Table 11 presents the results.
Overall, Pay disparity units are no more likely to believe that their wages were set unfairly
in relation to their unit co-workers than the Compressed units. However, this pooled result
hides substantial heterogeneity. Compared to their Compressed unit counterparts, Pay
disparity Low rank workers are significantly more likely to state that their wages were
set unfairly in relation to their co-workers (Col. 4). Moreover, Pay disparity High wage
workers are significantly less likely to state that their wages were set unfairly (Col. 2). Taken
seriously, the survey responses of the High rank workers suggest that inequity aversion does
not play a very meaningful role in explaining the main attendance results, as no fairness
violation appears to be triggered by the higher levels of pay.
In addition, we also asked respondents to report their happiness on a ten-step ladder.53
Panel B of 11 presents the results on this proxy of subjective well-being. Overall, Pay
disparity units report being less happy than their Compressed unit counterparts (Col. 1).
Despite believing that their wages are fair, High workers on Pay disparity units report the
largest reductions in happiness (Col. 2).
5.6. Discussion. We find that Pay disparity causes all workers in our setting to decrease
attendance and forego earnings, regardless of whether they are paid more or less than their
co-workers. Moreover, the results paint a consistent picture of a drop in social cohesion
within the production unit. Pay disparity undermines cooperation between workers on the
same unit, causes a decrease in social ties outside of work, and leads to reports of more
unhappiness at endline. These findings are consistent with the view in the social psychology
and sociology literature that inequality in the workplace can lead to a break-down in social
cohesion and an increase in social conflict.
This evidence also helps to shed light on why Pay disparity workers decrease attendance
even when they are paid more than their co-workers. Our endline results suggest that while
high rank workers consider their wages fair, the condition of Pay disparity, nonetheless,
makes them less happy. This could reflect the fact that working in close proximity to
aggrieved workers (i.e., those earning less than their unit-mates) could be unpleasant due
to hostility, resentment, or social awkwardness. Our finding that co-workers in Pay disparity
units are less likely to discuss their wages (Table 3) suggests that Pay disparity may also
give rise to awkwardness that all workers in a unit might seek to avoid.
53The survey question was taken directly from the World Values Survey (WVS). See Frey and Stutzer (2002),

Luttmer (2005), and Benjamin et al. (2012) for previous work exploring the links between relative income
and social status with happiness.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

24

6. Threats to Validity
6.1. Internal validity concerns. We now consider whether an explanation other than
relative pay concerns could produce our findings.
Peer effects in attendance. Recall that in the endline games, Pay disparity workers
perform worse with their own co-workers than with someone from another unit, with whom
they have not worked at all. This implies that the decreased performance of Pay disparity
units in the endline games does not arise from the fact that they have had less time to work
together (due to lower attendance) than the Compressed units. However, could the main
attendance results still be partly driven by traditional peer effects in attendance, leading us
to overstate the treatment effect of relative pay? We explore this in Appendix Table A11,
taking advantage of the randomization of workers to units. Because some villages have
much higher attendance rates than others, the villages of one’s co-workers strongly predicts
co-worker attendance (Col. 1).54 If there were a causal attendance peer effect, then the
villages of one’s co-workers should also predict one’s own attendance. However, this is not
the case. Co-worker attendance—identified using the random composition of co-workers’
villages—does not predict one’s own attendance (Cols. 2-3).55
Career concerns. We stress to workers that this is a one-time contract job—a common
form of employment in this setting. Despite this, when a worker in Pay disparity observes
he is paid less than his co-workers, he may believe the firm is less likely to re-hire him
and therefore may decrease effort. However, such beliefs should be more likely when it is
clear that the worker is much less productive than his peers. In contrast, we find decreased
performance when workers perceive that they are close in productivity to their higher-paid
peers. In addition, a basic career concerns story would not predict that workers would
give up earnings while they have the job, or that higher-paid workers would also reduce
attendance. It also cannot explain the social cohesion results.
Learning about one’s outside option. It is also unlikely that Pay disparity causes workers
to infer that they could find higher wages at another firm. Even the lowest post-treatment
wage, wL , is above workers’ outside options. For example, Appendix Figure A1 documents
that only 1.7% of workers state the prevailing wage in their local labor market to be above
our training wage of Rs. 250. In addition, given that employment rates are low in the lean
season (Table 2), it would be surprising for workers to be absent to search for alternate
work, rather than waiting for the current contract to end. Finally, this hypothesis cannot
explain why the higher-paid workers also attend less or why Pay disparity units do not
cooperate well in the social cohesion games.

54This is due to factors including distance to the factory, local social events, and local labor demand shocks.
55In addition, while one’s own education predicts output levels, co-workers’ education does not predict own

output in the post period. This indicates limited peer effects in output within the context of our experiment
(e.g., Mas and Moretti 2009,Bandiera et al. 2010,Guiteras and Jack 2014).

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

25

Discouragement effects / self-signaling. Our results are not consistent with discouragement effects from the Pay disparity wages revealing a worker’s type (i.e., productivity).
Similar arguments to those above make this explanation difficult to reconcile with our results. Namely, we find no effects of Pay disparity in the cases with perceived justifications,
when it’s easiest for a worker to learn about his low productivity. In addition, we disclose
information about relative productivity ranks to workers on Day 10—before treatment. We
find little evidence that this disclosure has a differential impact on those who learn they are
relatively less productive than their coworkers (Appendix Table A10).
Belief formation about employer. Finally, it is unlikely that Pay disparity affected performance because workers found differential pay unusual. In our setting, all workers are
aware of performance pay regimes such as piece rates for harvesting, and about half of
workers have worked under piece rates themselves. Indeed, there are no differential effects
of Pay disparity for workers who have worked on piece rates versus those who have not. In
addition, among local employers that pay flat daily wages, we observe differential pay based
on experience or worker skill-levels.56 Finally, such an explanation could not explain the
impact of Pay disparity on workers’ ability to cooperate in the endline games, which had
nothing to do with the employer.
6.2. External validity concerns. Pay structure. Because output in our production tasks
is in principle measurable, firms could consider paying performance incentives like piece
rates. However, doing so depends on the cost of monitoring. In the experiment, we bear
considerable expense to hire extra staff to measure each worker’s output daily (e.g. count
every single incense stick). Indeed, different local firms produce the same retail good under
piece rates or under flat wages—with implications for the quality grade sold by the firm.57
Dynamic incentives and pay policy. One potential benefit to firms of differential pay
is dynamic incentives: workers know that if they work hard now, it could lead to higher
pay in the future. Our study design explicitly shuts down this channel because after the
training period, there is no possibility of a wage change.58 The objective of our study is
not to identify the optimal pay policy for firms, but rather, to isolate whether workers care
56It is not surprising that pay differentials are often based on clear rules or formulas based on experience,

skill level, or piece rates—our findings indicate the importance of such clear justifications.
57For example, the contractors with whom we worked sold the output produced as part of the experiment
at a relatively high quality grade (and therefore price premium). As another example, some employers
pay piece rates while others in the same village pay fixed daily wages to harvest a given crop—again, with
implications for quality. There is a large literature on such multitasking problems.
58Note that fixed wage setting based on prior (or expected) productivity is not uncommon in many settings.
As discussed above, workers in our study are routinely employed in one-time seasonal contract jobs, where
the pay is fixed for the duration of the contract. In other contexts, firms often set the pay of short-term
consultants based on expected productivity. Even for salaried workers, pay is usually based on ex-ante
expectations, with stickiness throughout a worker’s tenure at the firm (e.g. Fehr et al. 2009)—this is not
adjusted with new information on ex-post performance, but rather re-negotiated at infrequent intervals.
More generally, explicit incentives like piece rates based on ex-post output are not very common in our
setting (e.g. Dreze and Mukherjee 1989, Kaur 2015) or in the US (MacLeod and Parent 1999).

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

26

about relative pay. Optimal pay policy would depend on weighing the potential costs of
differential pay (e.g. morale reductions) against the potential benefits (e.g. selection or
increased effort). Our findings indicate that relative pay concerns could affect this calculus.
Magnitude of effects and context. Of course, as with any empirical study, the effect sizes
we document are specific to our setting. While we cannot predict the magnitude of effects
in other populations, a growing body of work in economics lends credence to the view that
concerns about relative pay matter in a range of field settings including the US and Europe
(Card et al. 2012, Cohn et al. 2012, Rege and Solli 2013, Dube et al. 2015).
7. Conclusion
The pattern of our findings broadly supports the view of pay disparity articulated in the
psychology, sociology, and organizational economics literatures. These literatures posit that
the workplace is a social organism, where the relational aspects of pay cannot be divorced
from its economic value. They predict that being paid less than one’s peers is a disamenity;
this accords with our finding that relatively lower paid workers substantially reduce output
and attendance. These literatures also predict that discontent among some workers can
break down social cohesion and cooperation, fostering social conflict and altering the dynamics of the group more broadly. This is consistent with our findings that Pay disparity
workers are unable to cooperate at endline—doing worse when they work with co-workers
from their own unit than with strangers.59 The fact that even relatively higher-paid workers
decrease attendance—coupled with their happiness responses on the endline survey—also
provides some suggestive evidence in support of this view. If lower-paid workers were discontent or resentful, then working and eating lunch alongside them may have been socially
awkward or unpleasant for their relatively higher paid peers, dampening their desire to go to
work. Such externalities are in accordance with Frank (1984)’s observation that “Status is,
like Coase’s social costs, a reciprocal phenomenon...[O]ne person’s gain in status can occur
only at the expense of a loss in status for others.” This underscores the reason why our empirical results do not allow us to isolate workers’ individual internal preferences for relative
pay. The effects we document are a reduced form combination of internal preferences and
group-level dynamics.
An important theme throughout our results is that negative morale effects disappear
when the reason for differential pay is extremely transparent. This could help advance
our understanding of when pay compression is more likely to arise in the labor market.
Specifically, in settings where it is difficult to quantify individual productivity, it will be
challenging for an employer to justify pay differences. For example, in our experiment,
managers informed each worker of his relative rank during the training period. Despite
this, workers did not find pay differences acceptable unless, for example, output differences
59This finding also has bearing on the more general idea that inequality may generate discord in society.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

27

greatly overstated pay differences (Appendix Table A4).60 This may help explain why, in
the labor market, pay compression appears to be especially common among flat (e.g. hourly
or daily) wage workers, but not among performance pay workers. Performance pay, such
as piece rates or commissions, is possible only when it is feasible to quantify important
dimensions of output. In such settings, the pay structure embeds a clear and justifiable
mapping between output and pay; consequently, pay differentials across workers are less
likely to violate fairness norms. In contrast, flat wages tend to arise in those settings where
important dimensions of output are hard to quantify. Thus, even though managers may have
a sense of which workers are more productive than others on average, setting pay according
to expected output can be difficult to justify from the worker’s perspective. This suggests
pay compression may be optimal in flat wage occupations, even when signals of differential
productivity are available to employers—such as tollbooth attendants, supermarket cashiers,
or agricultural day laborers (Frank 1984, Dreze and Mukherjee 1989). Furthermore, to the
extent that wage compression plays a role in generating wage rigidity (e.g., Akerlof and
Yellen 1990), our findings may have some relevance for understanding why wages appear
to be more rigid among flat hourly workers relative to salaried workers with bonuses (e.g.,
Kahn 1997). More generally, while such implications are only suggestive, our perceived
justifications results have potential relevance for understanding when relative pay concerns
may affect wage structure and labor market outcomes.
In addition, our findings suggests that firms may have several potential tools at their
disposal to manage morale in the presence of pay dispersion. For example, increased transparency in output could more easily allow firms to motivate workers through disparate
wages—generating aggregate output benefits not just through a reduction in moral hazard,
but also through improved morale. Firms could also potentially alter the organizational
structure of the workplace itself—through job titles, physical co-location of similar workers,
or the construction of teams or “units” (as we did in the experiment)—to affect who a
worker views as being in her reference group.
While speculative, the above discussion suggests a variety of ways through which relative pay concerns could influence labor market phenomena—such as the returns to human
capital investment, wage compression, wage rigidity, firm boundaries, and unemployment.
Theoretical and empirical explorations of such relationships could enrich our view of agency
theory and the functioning of the labor market.

References
Adams, J. S.: 1963, Towards an understanding of inequity., The Journal of Abnormal and
Social Psychology 67(5), 422.
60This matches the predictions of Fang and Moscarini (2005), who argue that self-serving bias will lead

workers to feel aggrieved unless it’s clear that their peers are more deserving than themselves.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

28

Akerlof, G.: 1982, Labor contracts as partial gift exchange, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 97(4), 543–569.
Akerlof, G. A. and Yellen, J. L.: 1990, The fair wage-effort hypothesis and unemployment,
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 105(2), 255–283.
Bandiera, O., Barankay, I. and Rasul, I.: 2010, Social incentives in the workplace, The
Review of Economic Studies 77(2), 417–458.
Bandiera, O., Barankay, I. and Rasul, I.: 2013, Team incentives: evidence from a firm level
experiment, Journal of the European Economic Association 11(5), 1079–1114.
Banerjee, A., Chandrasekhar, A. G., Duflo, E. and Jackson, M. O.: 2013, The diffusion of
microfinance, Science 341(6144), 1236498.
Barankay, I.: 2016, Rank incentives: Evidence from a randomized workplace experiment,
Working Paper .
Baron, J. N. and Kreps, D. M.: 2013, Employment as an economic and a social relationship,
in R. Gibbons and J. Roberts (eds), Handbook of Organizational Economics, Princeton
University Press, pp. 315–341.
Bartling, B. and von Siemens, F. A.: 2011, Wage inequality and team production: An
experimental analysis, Journal of Economic Psychology 32(1), 1–16.
Benjamin, D. J., Heffetz, O., Kimball, M. S. and Rees-Jones, A.: 2012, What do you think
would make you happier? what do you think you would choose?, American Economic
Review 102(5), 2083–2110.
Bewley, T. F.: 1999, Why wages don’t fall during a recession, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Blanes i Vidal, J. and Nossol, M.: 2011, Tournaments without prizes: Evidence from personnel records, Management Science 57(10), 1721–1736.
Bracha, A., Gneezy, U. and Loewenstein, G.: 2015, Relative pay and labor supply, Journal
of Labor Economics 33(2), 297–315.
Brown, G. D., Gardner, J., Oswald, A. J. and Qian, J.: 2008, Does wage rank affect employees? well-being?, Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society 47(3), 355–389.
Card, D., Heining, J. and Kline, P.: 2013, Workplace heterogeneity and the rise of west
german wage inequality, The Quarterly journal of economics 128(3), 967–1015.
Card, D., Mas, A., Moretti, E. and Saez, E.: 2012, Inequality at work: The effect of peer
salaries on job satisfaction, American Economic Review 102(6), 2981–3003.
Charness, G. and Kuhn, P.: 2007, Does pay inequality affect worker effort? experimental
evidence, Journal of Labor Economics 25(4), 693–723.
Charness, G. and Kuhn, P.: 2011, Lab labor: What can labor economists learn from the
lab?, Handbook of Labor Economics 4, 229–330.
Clark, A. E. and Oswald, A. J.: 1996, Satisfaction and comparison income, Journal of
Public Economics 61(3), 359–381.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

29

Clark, A., Masclet, D. and Villeval, M.-C.: 2010, Effort and comparison income: Experimental and survey evidence, Industrial and Labor Relations Review 63(3), 407–426.
Cohn, A., Fehr, E., Herrmann, B. and Schneider, F.: 2012, Social comparison in the workplace: Evidence from a field experiment, IZA Discussion Paper No. 5550 .
Cook, K. S. and Hegtvedt, K. A.: 1983, Distributive justice, equity, and equality, Annual
review of sociology 9(1), 217–241.
Cullen, Z. and Pakzad-Hurson, B.: 2015, Equal pay for equal work? evidence from the
renegotiation of short-term contracts online, Working Paper, Stanford University .
DellaVigna, S., List, J., Malmendier, U. and Rao, G.: 2016, Estimating social preferences
and gift exchange at work, NBER Working Paper No. 22043 .
Deutsch, M.: 1986, Cooperation, conflict, and justice, Justice in social relations, Springer,
pp. 3–18.
Dreze, J. and Mukherjee, A.: 1989, Rural labor markets in india, The Balance Between
Industry and Agriculture in Economic Development: Manpower and Transfers, Vol. 3,
London: Macmillan Press, pp. 223–265.
Dube, A., Giuliano, L. M. and Leonard, J. S.: 2015, Fairness and frictions: The impact of
unequal raises on quit behavior, Working Paper .
Duesenberry, J. S.: 1949, Income, saving, and the theory of consumer behavior, Vol. 87,
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Duffy, M. K., Scott, K. L., Shaw, J. D., Tepper, B. J. and Aquino, K.: 2012, A social context
model of envy and social undermining, Academy of Management Journal 55(3), 643–666.
Easterlin, R. A.: 1974, Does economic growth improve the human lot? some empirical
evidence, in P. A. David and M. W. Reder (eds), Nations and Households in Economic
Growth: Essays in Honor of Moses Abramovitz, Elsevier.
Esteves-Sorenson, C. and Macera, R.: 2015, Gift exchange in the workplace: Addressing
the conflicting evidence with a careful test, Working Paper .
Falk, A., Fehr, E. and Fischbacher, U.: 2008, Testing theories of fairness?intentions matter,
Games and Economic Behavior 62(1), 287–303.
Fang, H. and Moscarini, G.: 2005, Morale hazard, Journal of Monetary Economics
52(4), 749–777.
Fehr, E., Goette, L. and Zehnder, C.: 2009, A behavioral account of the labor market: The
role of fairness concerns, Annual Review of Economics 1(1), 355–384.
Fehr, E., Kirchsteiger, G. and Riedl, A.: 1993, Does fairness prevent market clearing? an
experimental investigation, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 108(2), 437–459.
Fehr, E. and Schmidt, K. M.: 1999, A theory of fairness, competition, and cooperation,
Quarterly journal of Economics 114(3), 817–868.
Festinger, L.: 1954, A theory of social comparison processes, Human relations 7(2), 117–140.
Frank, R.: 1984, Are workers paid their marginal products?, American Economic Review
74(4), 549–571.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

30

Frey, B. S. and Stutzer, A.: 2002, What can economists learn from happiness research?,
Journal of Economic Literature 40(2), 402–435.
Gatcher, S. and Thoni, C.: 2010, Social comparison and performance: Experimental evidence on the fair wage–effort hypothesis, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization
76(3), 531–543.
Gneezy, U. and List, J. A.: 2006, Putting behavioral economics to work: Testing for gift
exchange in labor markets using field experiments, Econometrica 74(5), 1365–1384.
Guiteras, R. P. and Jack, B. K.: 2014, Incentives, selection and productivity in labor
markets: Evidence from rural malawi, NBER Working Paper No. 19825 .
Hamermesh, D.: 2001, The changing distribution of job satisfaction, Journal of Human
Resources 36(1), 1–30.
Hamermesh, D. S.: 1975, Interdependence in the labour market, Economica 42(168), 420–
429.
Hicks, J.: 1963, The Theory of wages, London: Macmillan.
Kahn, S.: 1997, Evidence of nominal wage stickiness from microdata, The American Economic Review 87(5), 993–1008.
Kaur, S.: 2015, Nominal wage rigidity in village labor markets, NBER Working Paper No.
20770 .
Keynes, J. M.: 1936, The general theory of interest, employment and money, London:
Macmillan.
Kőszegi, B.: 2014, Behavioral contract theory, Journal of Economic Literature 52(4), 1075–
1118.
Kube, S., Maréchal, M. A. and Puppe, C.: 2013, Do wage cuts damage work morale?
evidence from a natural field experiment, Journal of the European Economic Association
11(4), 853–870.
Kuziemko, I., Buell, R., Reich, T. and Norton, M.: 2014, Last-place aversion: Evidence and
redistributive implications", Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(1), 105–149.
Lazear, E. P.: 1989, Pay equality and industrial politics, Journal of Political Economy
97(3), 561–580.
Levine, D. I.: 1991, Cohesiveness, productivity, and wage dispersion, Journal of Economic
Behavior & Organization 15(2), 237–255.
Levine, D. I.: 1993, What do wages buy?, Administrative Science Quarterly 38(3), 462–483.
Levitt, S. D. and List, J. A.: 2007, What do laboratory experiments measuring social preferences reveal about the real world?, The Journal of Economic Perspectives 21(2), 153–174.
List, J. A.: 2009, Social preferences: Some thoughts from the field, Annu. Rev. Econ.
1(1), 563–579.
Luttmer, E. F.: 2005, Neighbors as negatives: Relative earnings and well-being, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(3), 963–1002.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

31

MacLeod, W. B. and Parent, D.: 1999, Job characteristics, wages and the employment
contract, Federal Reserve Bank of Saint Louis Review 81(3), 13–27.
Marshall, A.: 1890, Principles of Economics, London, Macmillan.
Mas, A. and Moretti, E.: 2009, Peers at work, The American Economic Review 99(1), 112–
145.
Nickerson, J. A. and Zenger, T. R.: 2008, Envy, comparison costs, and the economic theory
of the firm, Strategic Management Journal 29(13), 1429–1449.
Pfeffer, J. and Langton, N.: 1993, The effect of wage dispersion on satisfaction, productivity,
and working collaboratively: Evidence from college and university faculty, Administrative
Science Quarterly 38(3), 382–407.
Rege, M. and Solli, I.: 2013, Lagging behind the joneses: The impact of relative earnings
on job separation, Working Paper .
Schmitt, D. R. and Marwell, G.: 1972, Withdrawal and reward reallocation as responses to
inequity, Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 8(3), 207–221.
Schofield, H.: 2014, The economic costs of low caloric intake: Evidence from india, Working
Paper .
Shaw, J. D.: 2014, Pay dispersion, Annu. Rev. Organ. Psychol. Organ. Behav. 1(1), 521–
544.
Shaw, J. D.: 2015, Pay dispersion, sorting, and organizational performance, Academy of
Management Discoveries 1(2), 165–179.
Song, J., Price, D. J., Guvenen, F., Bloom, N. and von Wachter, T.: 2015, Firming up
inequality, NBER Working Paper No. 21199 .
Thibaut, J. W. and Kelley, H. H.: 1959, The social psychology of groups., New York, John
Wiley.
Veblen, T. and Almy, C.: 1899, The Theory of the Leisure Class: An Economic Study in
the Evolution of Institutions, Macmillan & Company, Limited.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

32

Figures

Figure 1. Perceived Impact of Pay Disparity on Labor Supply and Cohesion
1) A laborer accepts a job from an external contractor at
Rs. 240/day. The work begins the next day. At night,
he learns that 2 other workers in the village have been
offered the same job at:

A) Rs. 240/day.
B) Rs. 270/day.
Do you think the worker would show up to work the
next day?

Definitely

A) Equal pay

Probably

B) Pay disparity

Probably Not
Definitely Not

0
2) There is a local soda factory that hires workers to load
bottles onto trucks. Sunil accepts a contract to work at
the factory for Rs. 240/day. The next morning, he
arrives at work. He learns that other workers in his
neighborhood have been hired for the same job at:

A) Rs. 240/day.
B) Rs. 260/day.
How carefully will Sunil do the work relative to his
usual level of effort?
3) 3 people from a village get hired to work on a
construction site together. The prevailing wage is
Rs. 250. The contractor pays them:
A) Rs. 250/day.

B) Different wages based on their quality: Rs.
250/day, Rs. 270/day, and Rs. 290/day.
How well will they work together?

50

100

More carefully
Than Usual

A) Equal pay
B) Pay disparity

As carefully
As Usual
Less carefully
Than Usual

0

50

100

A) Equal pay

Very Well

B) Pay disparity
As Well
As Usual
There Will
Be Conflict

0

50

100

Notes: Surveys conducted with 200 laborers drawn from the same population as the experiment participants. Each respondent was asked 1 question out of
each pair above. The x-axis in each chart shows the percentage of respondents choosing a given answer.

SummaryFigure
of Randomization
2. Randomization Design
Randomize
workers into
units of 3

Workers of
heterogeneous
ability

Randomize
units into tasks

Variation in
relative productivity
within units

Randomize into
wage treatments
(stratify by task)

Variation in
observability of
co-worker output

Notes: Three steps of randomization design. All unit, task and treatment assignments are made on day
one of the experiment by the researchers. Factory management not informed of treatment status until the
day of the wage change.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

33

Timeline for
Each Round
Figure 3. Time Line
Recruitment

1

“Training” period
(baseline output)

Treatment period

10

4

35

14

Job Output is Feedback Units randomized into
wage treatments
begins salable on rank
(Managers maintain
pay secrecy)
Notes: This figure shows the timeline of activities in each of the 14 production rounds.

Day

Group cohesion
tasks & endline
survey

Figure 4. Effects of Pay Disparity on Worker Output
Low Rank Workers

-1.5

-1

Standardized production residual
-.5
0

Standardized production residual
-1
-.5
0

.5

Medium Rank Workers

-10

0

10

20

-20

-10

0

Day

10
Day

Compressed_Low Pay

Pay Disparity

Compressed_Low Pay

Pay Disparity

Standardized production residual
-.5
0
.5

High Rank Workers

-1

-20

-20

-10

0

10

20

Day
Compressed_High Pay

Pay Disparity

Notes: Y-axis shows residuals of standardized output after removing individual fixed effects in the
pre-period and dummies for festivals. Each plot compares workers of same rank who earn the same wage,
but are in Compressed vs. Pay disparity units. Day=0 is when wage treatments took effect.

20

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

34

Figure 5. Task Observability: Actual vs. Survey Correlations

Correlation Actual vs. Survey

Productivity Correlations by Task

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

1

2

3

4

5
6
Task ID

7

8

9

10

Notes: Figure plots the correlation between actual productivity rankings and perceived rankings by the
workers (reported after 3 weeks of work). Note that this data come from four pilot rounds, using a
separate sample of workers, where all workers were paid the same wage and were not informed about their
production rankings. In our analysis, we split the tasks at the median level of observability (0.5
correlation).

0

.2

Proportion
.4

.6

Figure 6. Daily wage distribution in rural Orissa

-100

-50
0
50
Daily Wage Earned - Modal Village Wage (Rs.)

100

Notes: Wage data from 10-day recall surveys of 1207 workers conducted in 63 villages. Villages were
randomly chosen from the same sample frame as those from which workers were recruited for the main
experiment. The figure plots the distribution of reported daily wages minus the modal wage in the village.

Wage Treatments
THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

35

Tables
Table 1. Wage Treatments and Relevant Comparisons
Worker Rank

Pay Disparity

Compressed Low

Compressed Medium

Compressed High

wLow

wLow

wMedium

wHigh

wMedium

wLow

wMedium

wHigh

wHigh

wLow

wMedium

wHigh

Low productivity
Medium productivity
High productivity

Notes: Table presents randomization design. The key comparison groups in each row are highlighted.
These six cells combined form the “relevant” group of workers.

Table 2. Summary Statistics

Married
Number of Children
Hindu
Owns land
Sharecrops land
Has missed at least one meal in last 30 days
Number of days can't find work in last 30 days
Number of days worked in past 10 days
Number of days worked inside village in past 10 days
Total wage earnings over past 10 days
Typical wage in village during work period
Has experience working with piece rates
Baseline production (full training period)
Bseline attendance (full training period)

Compressed
(1)

Pay Disparity
(2)

0.738
(0.440)
1.531
(1.490)
0.996
(0.062)
0.522
(0.500)
0.565
(0.497)
0.112
(0.315)
14.612
(6.838)
2.707
(2.736)
1.938
(2.436)
543.768
(708.571)
216.464
(33.190)
0.413
(0.493)
-0.218
(0.688)
0.950
(0.082)

0.800
(0.402)
1.698
(1.502)
1.000
(0.000)
0.461
(0.501)
0.490
(0.502)
0.105
(0.309)
15.260
(6.972)
2.441
(2.585)
1.843
(2.512)
438.559
(587.394)
211.505
(35.138)
0.473
(0.502)
-0.199
(0.635)
0.960
(0.074)

P-value of
Difference
(3)
0.341
0.418
0.319
0.381
0.270
0.881
0.474
0.461
0.757
0.164
0.383
0.391
0.870
0.319

Notes: Responses taken from baseline surveys conducted on first day of work. Means and standard deviations are
shown in cols (1) and (2) for Compressed and Pay Disparity units, respectively. Col (3) displays the p-values of the
comparisons of means across Compressed and Pay Disparity production units obtained from a simple univariate
regression, where standard errors are clustered by production unit. N=378.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

36

Table 3. Knowledge of Co-worker Wages
P-value of
Difference
(3)

Compressed
(1)

Pay Disparity
(2)

0.909
(0.288)
0.958
(0.200)
0.921
(0.271)
0.966
(0.181)

0.742
(0.440)
0.871
(0.337)
0.871
(0.337)
0.923
(0.265)

0.003***

0.086
(0.280)
0.117
(0.321)
0.134
(0.341)

0.019
(0.138)
0.143
(0.351)
0.174
(0.380)

0.000***

Panel A — Own Unit

Indicator for knows correct wage of both co-workers
Indicator for knows correct wage of at least one co-worker
Indicator for has an opinion of wage of both co-workers
Indicator for has an opinion of wages of at least one co-worker

0.031**
0.203
0.206

Panel B — Other Units

Indicator for knows correct wage of all unit members
Indicator for has an opinion of wages of all unit members
Indicator for has an opinion of wages of some unit members

0.237
0.070*

Notes: Responses taken from endline surveys in which workers were asked to list the wages of the members of their own
production units and also the members of a set of four fixed product units. Means and standard deviations are shown in cols
(1) and (2) for Compressed and Pay Disparity units, respectively. Col (3) displays the p-values of the comparisons of means
across Compressed and Pay Disparity units obtained from a simple univariate regression, where standard errors are clustered
by production unit. Panel A describes beliefs about a worker's own production unit. Panel B summarizes beliefs about the
wages of individuals on other units: Compressed units in col (1) and Pay Disparity units in col (2). Observations in Panel B
only include individuals who are evaluating the wages of units other than their own. N=358.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

37

Table 4. Effects of Pay Disparity
Output
(std dev.)

Output
(std dev.)

(1)

(2)

Attendance Attendance

Output |
Attendance

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.115***
(0.026)

-0.117***
(0.025)

-0.0893
(0.094)

Panel A — Pooled Treatment Effects

Post x Pay disparity

-0.311***
(0.110)

-0.242**
(0.097)

Panel B — Treatment Effects Separately by Rank

Post x Pay disparity x Low wage

-0.385***
(0.134)

-0.332**
(0.128)

-0.113**
(0.055)

-0.120**
(0.053)

-0.204*
(0.114)

Post x Pay disparity x Med wage

-0.262
(0.201)

-0.226
(0.187)

-0.126**
(0.056)

-0.129**
(0.060)

-0.0608
(0.138)

Post x Pay disparity x High wage

-0.288
(0.199)

-0.172
(0.181)

-0.106**
(0.053)

-0.104**
(0.052)

-0.00901
(0.152)

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

-0.099
8375

-0.099
8375

0.939
8375

0.939
8375

0.015
7678

Individual fixed effects?
Post-treatment Compressed mean
N

Notes : Difference in differences regressions. Panel A pools the treatment effects across the low, medium, and high rank
workers, while Panel B shows the treatment effects separately by rank. Post is an indicator that equals 1 if the day is after
workers have been randomized into wage treatments, and 0 during the baseline training period. Col (5) limits to observations
where the worker was present. Regressions include day*round fixed effects, task-specific quadratic experience trends, and
controls for neighboring production units. All coefficients are identified off comparisons of workers who earn the same absolute
wage and have the same productivity rank within their production unit (see regression specification in text). Standard errors
clustered by production unit.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

38

Table 5. Effects Over Time
Output (std dev.)

Attendance

After
Before first Between first and
second
payday in second paydays payday in
post period
in post period
post period

After
Before first Between first and
second
payday in second paydays payday in
post period
in post period
post period

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.0260
(0.037)

-0.133***
(0.029)

-0.149***
(0.042)

Panel A — Pooled Treatment Effects

Post x Pay disparity

-0.0530
(0.123)

-0.309***
(0.114)

-0.294**
(0.133)

Post x Pay disparity x Low wage

-0.0607
(0.187)

-0.325**
(0.151)

-0.461***
(0.174)

0.0493
(0.087)

-0.103*
(0.062)

-0.224***
(0.079)

Post x Pay disparity x Med wage

0.0541
(0.169)

-0.343*
(0.195)

-0.231
(0.283)

-0.0400
(0.049)

-0.153**
(0.063)

-0.126
(0.089)

Post x Pay disparity x High wage

-0.144
(0.235)

-0.259
(0.248)

-0.199
(0.203)

-0.0753
(0.069)

-0.144**
(0.066)

-0.101
(0.069)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.081
4565

-0.028
4670

-0.264
5654

0.973
4565

0.945
4670

0.916
5654

Panel B — Treatment Effects Separately by Rank

Individual fixed effects?
Post-treatment Compressed Mean
N

Notes : Difference in differences regressions. Post is an indicator that equals 1 if the day is after workers have been randomized into wage treatments, and
0 during the baseline training period. All specifications include all of the pre-wage change observations. Col (1) and (4) only include post observations
before the first payday. Col (2) and (5) only include post observations after the first but before the second payday. Col (3) and (6) only include post
observations after the second payday. Regressions include individual fixed effects, day*round fixed effects, task-specific quadratic experience trends, and
controls for neighboring production units. All coefficients are identified off comparisons of workers who earn the same absolute wage and have the same
productivity rank within their production unit (see regression specification in text). Standard errors clustered by production unit.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

39

Table 6. Mediating Effects of Perceived Justifications
Definition of Perceived Justification Indicator
Baseline output difference
Baseline differences are
between a worker and his
Co-worker output is
large or co-worker output is
higher ranked peer is large
highly observable
highly observable
Output
Attendance
Output
Attendance
Output
Attendance
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

Dependent variable

Panel A — Pooled Treatment Effects

Post x Pay disparity

-0.358***
(0.133)

-0.167***
(0.039)

-0.384***
(0.131)

-0.153***
(0.031)

-0.445***
(0.147)

-0.181***
(0.037)

Post x Pay disparity x Perceived justification

0.292*
(0.173)

0.159**
(0.061)

0.395**
(0.161)

0.0996**
(0.046)

0.429***
(0.154)

0.134***
(0.045)

Post x Perceived justification

0.0483
(0.107)

-0.0500
(0.032)

-0.0518
(0.103)

0.0332
(0.028)

-0.0342
(0.094)

0.0160
(0.025)

Panel B — Treatment Effects Separately by Rank

Post x Pay disparity x Low wage

-0.448***
(0.147)

-0.168***
(0.061)

-0.513***
(0.160)

-0.158**
(0.071)

-0.718***
(0.191)

-0.239***
(0.091)

Post x Pay disparity x Low wage x Perceived justification

0.467**
(0.231)

0.181**
(0.087)

0.512**
(0.220)

0.121
(0.077)

0.712***
(0.230)

0.225**
(0.096)

Post x Pay disparity x Med wage

-0.270
(0.224)

-0.170**
(0.075)

-0.248
(0.227)

-0.157**
(0.068)

-0.283
(0.280)

-0.187**
(0.088)

Post x Pay disparity x Med wage x Perceived justification

0.127
(0.267)

0.150
(0.094)

0.0890
(0.293)

0.0876
(0.118)

0.0829
(0.311)

0.104
(0.115)

Post x Pay disparity x High wage

-0.386
(0.242)

-0.139*
(0.071)

-0.372
(0.242)

-0.137*
(0.072)

Post x Pay disparity x High wage x Perceived justification

0.582**
(0.269)

0.0884
(0.078)

0.564**
(0.269)

0.0845
(0.082)

0.436
8375

0.172
8375

0.437
8375

0.173
8375

R-squared
Number of observations (worker-days)

0.436
8375

0.171
8375

Notes: Panels A and B show comparisons of each worker in Pay disparity production units with the relevant worker (who has the same rank and absolute earnings
level) in the Compressed production units. In Cols. (1)-(2), the Perceived justification indicator equals 1 if the baseline productivity difference between a worker and
his higher-ranked co-worker (for low and medium rank workers) is above the Compressed group mean. In Cols. (3)-(4), this indicator equals 1 if the observability
correlation for the worker's production task (computed using a separate baseline sample) is above the mean. In Cols. (5)-(6), this indicator equals 1 if the baseline
productivity difference between a worker and his higher-ranked co-worker (for low and medium rank workers) is above the Compressed group mean or if the
observability correlation for the worker's production task is above the mean. Regressions include individual fixed effects, day*round fixed effects, task-specific
quadratic experience trends, and controls for neighboring production units. Standard errors clustered by production unit.

Table 7. Effects of Pay Disparity: Unit Level Variation
Definition of Perceived Justification Indicator

Dependent variable

Output
(1)

Post x Pay disparity

-0.134
(0.092)

Attendance
(2)

Co-worker output is
highly observable
Output
Attendance
(3)
(4)

Large baseline output
difference between
co-workers
Output
Attendance
(5)
(6)

Co-worker output is highly
observable or baseline
differences are large
Output
Attendance
(7)
(8)

Panel A — Comparison with all Compressed Units

-0.273**
(0.122)

-0.116***
(0.032)

-0.125
(0.120)

-0.0797***
(0.027)

-0.273**
(0.125)

-0.111***
(0.033)

Post x Pay disparity x Perceived justification

0.383**
(0.159)

0.119**
(0.047)

0.241
(0.177)

0.0961*
(0.051)

0.379**
(0.160)

0.111**
(0.047)

Post x Perceived justification

-0.0375
(0.100)

0.0140
(0.028)

0.0345
(0.100)

0.0413
(0.030)

-0.0241
(0.085)

0.0289
(0.024)

Panel B — Comparison with Compressed_Low Units Only

Post x Pay disparity

-0.148
(0.108)

-0.0597*
(0.035)

Post x Pay disparity x Perceived justification

Post x Perceived justification

R-squared
Number of observations (worker-days)

0.432
8375

0.165
8375

-0.317**
(0.139)

-0.0845**
(0.042)

-0.136
(0.122)

-0.0605
(0.039)

-0.306**
(0.144)

-0.0800*
(0.045)

0.465***
(0.163)

0.0892*
(0.051)

0.127
(0.219)

0.106
(0.070)

0.432**
(0.169)

0.0848
(0.053)

-0.122
(0.125)

0.0465
(0.035)

0.147
(0.157)

0.0371
(0.052)

-0.0784
(0.124)

0.0577
(0.035)

0.433
8375

0.167
8375

0.432
8375

0.166
8375

0.433
8375

0.167
8375

40

Notes: Differences in differences regressions examining unit-level performance across wage treatments. Specifications are similar to the pooled individual regressions, but use variation
from all workers, not only the "relevant" ones. Panel A examines the average performance of all workers on Pay disparity units relative to all workers in Compressed units. In Panel B,
Pay disparity units are compared to the Compressed Low units only; these regressions include a dummy for being on a Compressed Medium or Compressed High unit, and an interaction
of the dummy with the Perceived justification indicator (so the omitted category is Compressed Low). In Cols. (3)-(8), the Pereceived justification indicator takes the same value for all
workers in a unit. In Cols. (2)-(3), the Perceived justification indicator equals 1 if the worker was assigned to a production task where co-worker output is highly observable. In Cols. (5)(6), this indicator equals 1 if the baseline productivity difference between each worker and his higher-ranked co-worker (for both the low and medium rank workers) is above the
Compressed group mean. In Cols. (5)-(6), this indicator equals 1 if either the observability or large baseline productivity difference equals 1. All regressions include individual fixed
effects, day*round fixed effects, task-specific quadratic experience trends, and controls for neighboring production units. Standard errors clustered by production unit.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

-0.0735***
(0.026)

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

41

Table 8. Effects on Group Cohesion: Endline Games 1
Dependent variable: Tower height
(1)
(2)
-9.376***
-18.89**
(3.487)
(8.068)

Pay disparity

(3)
-20.49***
(5.532)

17.81*
(9.472)

Pay disparity x Observable task
Pay disparity x Large productivity difference

17.11**
(6.815)

Pay disparity x Perceived justification (aggregate)
Dependent variable mean
R-squared

(4)
-25.72***
(6.923)

19.66***
(7.445)
53.97
0.291

53.97
0.397

53.97
0.397

53.97
0.410

Notes: Observable task equals 1 if the observability correlation for the unit's production task (computed using a separate
baseline sample) is above the mean. Large productivity difference equals 1 if the difference between a worker and his higher
paid peer is above average (>0.375 standard deviations) for at least one member of the unit. Perceived justification
(aggregate) is a boolean that equals 1 if either of the perceived justification measure dummies -- Observable task or Large
productivity difference -- equals 1. All regressions include round fixed effects. N=80 production units. Games were only run
in later rounds of the experiment. Robust standard errors.

Table 9. Effects on Group Cohesion: Endline Games 2
Dependent variable: Number correct
(1)
-1.105**
(0.498)

(2)
-1.082**
(0.499)

(3)
-1.480**
(0.617)

(4)
-1.467**
(0.616)

Both workers from same unit

0.350
(0.295)

0.498
(0.300)

0.502*
(0.300)

0.502
(0.319)

At least one worker on Pay disparity unit

0.234
(0.413)

0.222
(0.406)

0.203
(0.504)

0.185
(0.504)

Both workers from same unit x Pay disparity x Perceived justification

0.598
(0.558)

0.613
(0.561)

At least one worker on Pay disparity unit x Perceived justification

0.0305
(0.489)

0.0221
(0.484)

Both workers from same unit x Pay disparity

At least one low rank worker in pair

-0.645**
(0.261)

-0.659**
(0.260)

At least one medium rank worker in pair

-0.564*
(0.286)

-0.587**
(0.286)

0.135
No
4.085
0.129

0.0593
No
4.085
0.130

F-test p-value: Sum of first two coefficients
Fixed effects for all rank combinations?
Dependent variable mean
R-squared

0.0536
No
4.085
0.123

0.0639
Yes
4.085
0.132

Notes: Dependent variable is the number of correct matches made by the pair. Perceived justification equals 1 if a worker on a pay disparity
unit was assigned to an observable production task, or was substantially less productive than his higher paid peer, and equals 0 otherwise. This
variable always equals 0 for workers in Compressed units. Regressions include fixed effects for the order in which a game was played during
the day and the game station (location in worksite), as well as education controls (a dummy for whether both workers in the pair completed
primary school, and a dummy for whether both can write a sentence in the local language). N=1904 pair-game observations. Games were only
run in later rounds of the experiment. Standard errors are clustered by production unit.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

42

Table 10. Social Cohesion Outside Work: Network Formation

Dependent variable
Pay disparity

Number of
within-unit
network links
(1)

Number of
within-unit
network links
(2)

-0.236*
(0.124)

-0.349**
(0.169)

Pay disparity x Perceived justification
Compressed mean

Indicator for
Indicator for
network link
network link
with both cowith both coworkers in unit workers in unit
(3)
(4)
-0.127*
(0.070)

0.208
(0.245)
0.779

0.779

-0.173**
(0.085)
0.0845
(0.137)

0.265

0.265

Notes: Network links are measured from endline surveys. We define a link if the worker reports that he would go to the co-worker
or the co-worker would come to him for: advice, borrowing money, or visiting one another's houses. In cols. (2) and (4), the
perceived justification indicator equals 1 if the observability correlation for the worker's production task is above the mean or if any
worker in the unit has a large productvity difference with his higher-ranked co-worker. Regressions include an indicator for haveing
unit co-workers who are relatives. Standard errors clustered by production unit. N=358.

Table 11. Endline Survey: Fairness and Happiness
Sample restriction

All
workers

High
rank only

Medium
rank only

Low
rank only

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Panel A — Believes wage set fairly relative to co-workers

Pay disparity

-0.0143
(0.091)

0.363***
(0.120)

-0.163
(0.170)

-0.587***
(0.186)

Pay disparity x Perceived justification

0.0154
(0.118)

-0.108
(0.190)

0.111
(0.228)

0.470*
(0.252)

R-squared

0.0840

0.244

0.203

0.239

Panel B — Above-median happiness (World Values Survey)

Pay disparity

Pay disparity x Perceived justification
R-squared
N

-0.292***
(0.111)

-0.448***
(0.163)

-0.241
(0.172)

-0.146
(0.168)

0.298**
(0.133)

0.349
(0.225)

0.307
(0.220)

0.241
(0.205)

0.190
358

0.315
121

0.292
119

0.278
118

Notes : OLS regressions using endline survey responses. Panel A dependent variable is whether the worker viewed his wages as “fair” or “very
fair” (relative to a 5 point scale). Panel B dependent variable is an indicator for above-median happiness (World Values Survey). Perceived
justification indicator equals 1 if the observability correlation for the worker's production task is above the mean or if the baseline productivity
difference between a worker and his higher-ranked co-worker (for low and medium rank workers) is above the Compressed group mean. All
specifications include task and round fixed effects. Col (1) includes all observations. Cols (2) - (4) restrict the samples to the high, medium, and
low rank workers. Standard errors clustered by production unit in Col (1). Robust standard errors are used in the single-rank specifications.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

43

Appendix A. Supplemental Figures and Tables

0

.1

.2

Fraction

.3

.4

.5

Figure A1. Distribution of Village Prevailing Wages: Endline Survey Responses

-150

-100

-50
Village wage - Training wage

0

50

Notes: Histogram plots distribution of the prevailing wage, as reported by workers.. Responses from
endline survey responses of 356 individuals from 39 villages. Note only 1.7% of workers indicate a prevailing
wage above Rs. 250, which is the training wage in all rounds. The modal village wage is always ≤ Rs.250.

0

2

Density
4

6

8

Figure A2. Total Attendance on Pay Disparity and Compressed Units

.6

.7
.8
.9
Fraction of days present in post-wage change period
Pay Disparity

1

Compressed

Notes: Kernel density plots of worker attendance rates during the post-wage change period among
“relevant” workers, separately for Pay disparity and Compressed production units. Attendance rate is
measured as the fraction of days worker was present in the post-wage change period.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

Figure A3. Density of Raw Production by Task, Scaled by Mean

(a) Correlation = 0

(b) Correlation = 0.15

(c) Correlation = 0.39

(d) Correlation = 0.41

(e) Correlation = 0.42

(f) Correlation = 0.50

(g) Correlation = 0.52

(h) Correlation = 0.62

(i) Correlation = 0.75
(j) Correlation = 0.88
Notes: Density plots of raw production, scaled by mean. Subfigures ordered by task observability.

44

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

45

Figure A4. Cooperative Puzzle Games - Examples

Panel A: Spot the Difference - Example

Panel B: Symbol Matching - Example

Notes: Examples of the cooperative pair games. Each worker in a pair would receive one of the sheets.
Workers had to compare their respective sheets, and circle items that were different (Spot the Difference)
or matched (Symbol Matching) on both their sheets.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

46

-1

Standardized production residual
-.5
0
.5

1

Figure A5. Stability of Relative Productivity Ranks Across Time

-20

-10

0

10

20

Day
High rank workers
Low rank workers

Medium rank workers

Notes: The y-axis shows the residual of standardized output after removing individual fixed effects in the
pre-period (before day 0) and dummies for festival days. The figures plot, for each day of the experiment,
the average of the residuals for each group of workers restricting to members of the Compressed production
units. Day=0 is the day wage treatments took effect (i.e. when workers were told their post-training
wage).

Table A1. Effects of Pay Disparity: Robustness to Alternate Specifications
Output
(std dev.) Attendance

Output
(std dev.) Attendance

(1)

(2)

(3)

Post x Pay disparity

-0.222***
(0.070)

-0.0961***
(0.019)

Post x Pay disparity x Low wage

-0.279**
(0.110)

-0.100**
(0.043)

-0.400***
(0.120)

Post x Pay disparity x Med wage

-0.180
(0.127)

-0.0995**
(0.045)

Post x Pay disparity x High wage

-0.205
(0.140)

Sample
Include Pre-treatment observations?
Include "Irrelevant" workers?
Neighbor Controls?
Individual fixed effects?

(4)

Output
(std dev.) Attendance

Output
(std dev.) Attendance

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

-0.242**
(0.097)

-0.117***
(0.025)

-0.272**
(0.111)

-0.115***
(0.028)

-0.115**
(0.049)

-0.332**
(0.128)

-0.120**
(0.053)

-0.292**
(0.134)

-0.0987*
(0.054)

-0.278
(0.194)

-0.148**
(0.065)

-0.226
(0.187)

-0.129**
(0.060)

-0.291
(0.198)

-0.146**
(0.062)

-0.0882**
(0.037)

-0.145
(0.174)

-0.111**
(0.052)

-0.172
(0.181)

-0.104**
(0.052)

-0.238
(0.202)

-0.103**
(0.052)

Relevant
Yes
No
No
Yes

Relevant
Yes
No
No
Yes

Relevant
Yes
No
Yes
Yes

Relevant
Yes
No
Yes
Yes

Full
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Full
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Full
No
Yes
Yes
No

Full
No
Yes
Yes
No

-0.099
4307

0.939
4307

-0.099
4307

0.939
4307

-0.099
8375

0.939
8375

-0.099
5283

0.939
5283

Panel A — Pooled Treatment Effects

-0.272***
(0.086)

-0.124***
(0.022)

Post-treatment Compressed Mean
N

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

Panel B — Treatment Effects Separately by Rank

Notes : Difference in differences regressions are presented in Cols (1)-(6). Cols (7)-(8) only include post-training, post-treatment observations. Panel A pools the treatment
effects across the low, medium, and high rank workers, while Panel B shows the treatment effects separately by rank. Post is an indicator that equals 1 if the day is after
workers have been randomized into wage treatments, and 0 during the baseline training period. Regressions include day*round fixed effects, and task-specific quadratic
experience trends,. Cols (3)-(8) include controls for neighboring production units. All coefficients are identified off comparisons of workers who earn the same absolute
wage and have the same productivity rank within their production unit (see regression specification in text), i.e., from the so-call "relevant" workers. Standard errors
clustered by production unit.
47

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

48

Table A2. Effects on Output Quality

Quality rating
(1)
Post x Pay disparity

Panel A — Pooled
-0.0128
(0.026)

Panel B — Separately by Rank
Post x Pay disparity x Low wage
0.00705
(0.050)

High quality
rating
(2)

Proportion
rejected
(3)

-0.0907
(0.092)

-0.0123
(0.017)

-0.0471
(0.173)

0.0187
(0.021)

Post x Pay disparity x Med wage

-0.0361
(0.046)

-0.183
(0.164)

-0.0396
(0.039)

Post x Pay disparity x High wage

-0.0182
(0.026)

-0.109
(0.110)

-0.00563
(0.018)

0.823
3868

0.842
3868

0.012
1669

Post-treatment Compressed mean
N

Notes : Difference in differences regressions. The sample is restricted to days when a worker was
present. Cols. (1)-(2) show effects on supervisors' subjective daily assessment of the quality of each
worker's output (collected in only a subset of days and rounds). Quality rating is a proportion: the
rating score divided by the maximum possible rating (either 3 or 5). High quality rating is a boolean for
whether the worker's quality rating on that day was above 0.8. The dependent variable in Col. (3) is the
proportion of output that was rejected due to substandard quality; this is only measured for the two
production tasks where quality standards were quantifiable (candle wicks and incense sticks). Panel A
pools effects across the low, medium, and high rank workers, while Panel B shows effects separately
by rank. Post is an indicator that equals 1 if the day is after workers have been randomized into wage
treatments, and 0 during the baseline training period. Regressions include individual fixed effects,
day*round fixed effects, task-specific quadratic experience trends, and controls for neighboring units.
Note that caution must be used when interpreting these coefficients, since the sample conditions on
attendance. Standard errors clustered by production unit.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

49

Table A3. Perceived Justifications: Robustness of Relative Productivity Results

Dependent variable
Post x Pay disparity

Post x Pay disparity x Perceived justification
R-squared
Number of observations (worker-days)

Controls for own
baseline productivity
x post x rank
Output Attendance
(1)
(2)

Controls for baseline
productivity lowest 10%
x post x treatment
Output
Attendance
(3)
(4)

Controls for own baseline
productivity
x post x treatment x rank
Output
Attendance
(5)
(6)

-0.353**
(0.137)

-0.158***
(0.042)

-0.413***
(0.134)

-0.179***
(0.042)

-0.456***
(0.144)

-0.178***
(0.042)

0.299*
(0.177)

0.152**
(0.063)

0.292*
(0.171)

0.162***
(0.061)

0.221
(0.178)

0.129*
(0.068)

0.436
8375

0.173
8375

0.438
8375

0.172
8375

0.439
8375

0.175
8375

Notes: Table shows comparisons of each worker in Pay disparity teams with the relevant worker (who has the same rank and absolute earnings
level) in the Compressed teams. The Perceived justification indicator equals 1 if the baseline productivity difference between a worker and his
higher-ranke co-worker (for low and medium rank workers) is above the Compressed group mean. Cols. (1)-(2) include time- and rank- varying
controls for baseline productivity. Cols. (3)-(4) include time- and treatment- varying controls for whether the worker's baseline productivity was
in the lowest 10% of the distribution (for Low workers). Cols. (5)-(6) add time-, treatment-, and rank- varying controls for the worker's baseline
productivity. Regressions include individual fixed effects, day*round fixed effects, task-specific quadratic experience trends, and controls for
neighboring production units. Standard errors clustered by production unit.

Table A4. Perceived Justifications: Robustness to Alternative Cutoffs for Relative Productivity Thresholds

Dependent variable

Definition of Threshold for Relative Productivity Fraction
>10% difference
>15% difference
>20% difference
>25% difference
Output Attendance
Output Attendance
Output Attendance
Output Attendance
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(5)
(6)
-0.270
(0.170)

-0.122**
(0.052)

-0.321**
(0.145)

-0.156***
(0.040)

Post x Pay disparity x Perceived justification

0.00679
(0.187)

-0.00936
(0.076)

0.151
(0.164)

0.0790
(0.064)

0.332**
(0.166)

0.434
8375

0.170
8375

0.435
8375

0.170
8375

0.436
8375

R-squared
Number of observations (worker-days)

-0.355*** -0.177***
(0.135)
(0.037)

-0.351**
(0.138)

-0.173***
(0.039)

0.178***
(0.060)

0.313*
(0.175)

0.171**
(0.067)

0.172
8375

0.436
8375

0.172
8375

Notes: Regressions show comparisons of each worker in Pay disparity teams with the relevant worker (who has the same rank and absolute earnings level) in the
Compressed production units, heterogeneously by Perceived justifications. Results are pooled across the Low and Medium rank workers. Perceived justifications
indicator equals 1 if the difference between a worker and his higher-ranked peer (for low and medium rank workers) is greater than X%, where X is stated at the top of
each column. Regressions include individual fixed effects, day*round fixed effects, task-specific quadratic experience trends, and controls for neighboring production
units. Standard errors clustered by production unit.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

Post x Pay disparity

50

Table A5. Perceived Justifications: Task Observability Robustness
Sample restriction: drop tasks

Task 1

Task 2

Task 3

Task 4

Task 5

Task 6

Task 7

Task 8

Task 9

Task 10

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Panel A — Output (std. dev)

Pay disparity

0.393**
(0.180)

0.386**
(0.164)

0.453***
(0.171)

0.373**
(0.167)

0.430**
(0.183)

-0.115
(0.121)
0.177
(0.156)

-0.399*** -0.533*** -0.516***
(0.129)
(0.145)
(0.149)
0.313*
(0.160)

0.563***
(0.166)

0.513***
(0.177)

-0.378**
(0.151)
0.351*
(0.184)

Panel B — Attendance

Pay disparity

-0.143*** -0.152*** -0.151*** -0.152*** -0.153*** -0.144*** -0.156*** -0.205*** -0.139*** -0.125***
(0.032)
(0.034)
(0.035)
(0.032)
(0.034)
(0.036)
(0.033)
(0.029)
(0.041)
(0.029)

Pay disparity x Perceived justification

0.141***
(0.049)

0.101**
(0.049)

0.0901*
(0.049)

0.103**
(0.047)

0.105*
(0.056)

0.0871*
(0.047)

0.0672
(0.055)

0.155***
(0.046)

0.0885*
(0.053)

0.0719
(0.047)

7459

7638

7453

7638

7511

7500

7482

7573

7565

7556

N

Notes: Table shows specification for main observability regressions, but sequentially drops each production task from the regression. Comparisons are between each worker in Pay
disparity production units with the relevant worker (who has the same rank and absolute earnings level) in the Compressed production units. Treatment effects are pooled across the
Low, Medium and high Rank workers. The Perceived justification indicator equals 1 if the observability correlation for the worker's production task (computed using a separate
baseline sample) is above the mean. Regressions include individual fixed effects, day*round fixed effects, task-specific quadratic experience trends, and controls for neighboring
production units. Standard errors clustered by production unit.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

Pay disparity x Perceived justification

-0.359*** -0.381*** -0.423*** -0.385*** -0.391***
(0.125)
(0.130)
(0.137)
(0.129)
(0.135)

51

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

52

Table A6. Absence of Correlation Between Task Observability Measure
and Training Outcomes

Observable task

Sample
Frequency of data
Pre-treatment Mean
N

Attendance

Attendance

Did not complete
training

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.0107
(0.011)

-0.0103
(0.008)

-0.00476
(0.011)

-0.0125
(0.151)

All hired workers Training completors
Daily
Daily
0.914
3557

Output growth
(std dev.)

All hired workers Training completors
Worker-level
Worker-level

0.954
3092

0.019
415

0.233
378

Notes : OLS regressions are presented in Cols (1)-(4) to measure pre-treatment correlates with observability. The
regressor in all specifications is an indicator for whether the production task has above-median observability. Cols (2) and
(4) restrict the analysis to only workers who completed the training period and were thus available to be randomized into
treatments. Cols (1)-(2) use daily attendance as the dependent variable. Col (3) captures whether a worker terminated his
employment before the end of the training period. Col (4) measures output growth in the training period by taking the
difference between standardized output on days 8 and 3. This captures the steepness of the learning curve for each
worker. Regressions include round fixed effects. Standard errors clustered by production unit.

Table A7. Sample Overlap Between Perceived Justification Measures
Below mean
observability
(Total 51.59%)

Above mean
observability
(Total 48.41%)

Below mean
production
difference
(Total 69.44%)

34.52%

34.92%

Above mean
production
difference
(Total 30.56%)

17.06%

13.49%

Notes: Tabulations of overlap between the two sources of
variation for perceived justifications: baseline
productivity differences between a worker and his higher
ranked peer, and the observability of co-worker output.
The binary splits for each meaure shown here are the
same as those used in the tables in the analysis. The table
shows the percentage of observations in each cell.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

53

Table A8. Effects of Higher Absolute Pay among Compressed Units
Output (std dev.)

Attendance

First two days
post wage
change

First week
post wage
change

Full
sample

First two days
post wage
change

First week
post wage
change

Full
sample

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Post x Compressed Medium

0.00218
(0.144)

0.0875
(0.129)

0.0184
(0.138)

0.0411
(0.044)

0.0570*
(0.033)

0.0225
(0.039)

Post x Compressed High

-0.00447
(0.109)

0.0274
(0.099)

-0.00973
(0.099)

0.0691*
(0.037)

0.0768**
(0.031)

0.0321
(0.034)

-0.212
2807

-0.237
3620

-0.292
6107

0.891
2807

0.894
3620

0.899
6107

Post-treatment Compressed Low Mean
N

Notes : Difference in differences regressions restricting the sample to only Compressed teams. Post is an indicator that equals 1 if the day is after
workers have been randomized into wage treatments, and 0 during the baseline training period. Regressions use unit-level variation, so all Compressed
wage unit workers are included. Omitted category is Compressed low wage units. All specifications include the full training period. Cols (1) and (4)
include only the first two post wage change days. Cols (2) and (5) include only the first work week post wage change. Col (3) and (6) include the full
sample. Regressions include individual fixed effects, day*round fixed effects, task-specific quadratic experience trends, and controls for neighboring
production units. Standard errors clustered by production unit.

Table A9. Robustness: Effects on Group Cohesion - Conditional on Attendance

Dependent variable
Pay disparity

Attendance
(1)
-0.0106
(0.031)

Attendance
(2)
-0.00889
(0.034)

Game:
Tower building in teams
Tower
Tower
height
height
(3)
(4)
-10.18**
-12.98**
(4.354)
(6.241)

0.0198
(0.044)

-7.400
(6.429)

Compressed_High pay

-0.0150
(0.053)

-0.936
(8.362)

Both workers from same unit x Pay disparity

-0.939**
(0.431)

Both workers from same unit

0.404*
(0.227)

At least one worker in pair was on Pay disparity unit

0.203
(0.325)

At least one low rank worker in pair

-0.604**
(0.236)

-0.714***
(0.252)

At least one medium rank worker in pair

-0.387*
(0.219)

-0.398*
(0.216)

4.695
1632
0.203

4.695
1632
0.105

Dependent variable mean
Observations
R-squared

0.921
240
0.170

0.921
240
0.172

54.17
65
0.318

54.17
65
0.338

54

Notes : This table replicates results for cooperative games, conditional on attendance. Cols 1-2 include the full sample of workers who participated in endline games
(run only in the later rounds of the experiment). Cols. 3-4 limit analysis to units where all 3 unit members were present on the day of endline games. Cols. 1-4
include round fixed effects. Cols. 5-6 limit analysis to pair-games where both workers in an assigned pair were present the day of endline games. Col. (5) includes
fixed effects for the order in which a game was played during the day and the game station (location in worksite) as well as education controls. Standard errors are
clustered by production unit.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

Compressed_Medium pay

Game:
Cooperative puzzles in pairs
Number
Number
correct
correct
(5)
(6)

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

55

Table A10. Response to Disclosure of Productivity Ranks in Training Period
Output
(std dev.)

Output
(std dev.)

Output
(std dev.)

Attendance

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Post rank disclosure x Low rank (pre disclosure)

0.00346
(0.089)

0.00801
(0.093)

-0.000635
(0.094)

0.00146
(0.024)

Post rank disclosure x Medium rank (pre disclosure)

0.00828
(0.058)

-0.00984
(0.059)

-0.00891
(0.060)

0.00303
(0.020)

No

Quadratic trends

Fixed effects

Fixed effects

-0.322
0.943
3060

-0.322
0.814
3060

-0.322
0.911
3060

0.969
0.935
3060

Experience x task controls?
Mean of dependent variable: 3 days prior to ranking treatment
F-test p-value: Post ranking x Low = Post ranking x Medium
N

Notes: Difference in differences regressions presented to test whether workers of different ranks respond differently to the information about their
relative productivity that was revealed four days (on average) before the end of the training period. Here, rank is calculated based on production
during the three days prior to the release of the ranking information. Regressions only contain data from the training period, and Post rank
disclosure is an indicator for the four days (on average) following disclosure before the end of the training period. All regressions include individual
fixed effects as well as worksite x day fixed effects. The coefficients are all relative to the output and attendance of the person with the highest
rank. Regressions include individual fixed effects and day*round fixed effects. The specifications that include experience x task fixed effects are
identified using variation in the lengths of the training periods across rounds. Standard errors clustered by production unit.

Table A11. Lack of Evidence of Attendance Peer Effects

Dependent variable

Predicted attendance of co-workers

First
Stage
Co-worker
attendance

Reduced
Form
Own
Attendance

IV
(2SLS)
Own
Attendance

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.600**
(0.278)

0.0035
(0.169)

Actual attendance of co-workers (instrumented)

F-stat: First stage excluded instrument
Number of observations (worker-days)

0.0063
(0.279)
4.65
6020

6020

6020

Notes: Table shows peer effects regressions instrumenting actual peer attendance with predicted peer
attendance. Predicted attendance is calculated using the average attendance of all workers from the same
village excluding the worker and others from his production unit (i.e., a jack-knife or leave-one-out
strategy). Observations limited to workers on Compressed pay units. Column 1 presents the first stage
regression of actual peer attendance on predicted peer attendance. Column 2 presents the reduced form
regression of own attendance on predicted peer attendence. Column 3 presents the IV estimation of the
effects of peer attendance on own attendance. All specifications include fixed effects for round, calendar
month, and day of round, and indicators for being assigned to a unit with one or more co-workers from the
same village. Standard errors clustered at the production unit level.

THE MORALE EFFECTS OF PAY INEQUALITY

56

Table A12. Supplemental Survey: Fairness of Different Wage Regimes

Outcome: Percentage of respondents saying the scenario is "Unfair" or "Very Unfair"
Pay type
A) flat daily wage B) piece rate
(1)
(2)
1 A brick factory in an area pays its workers a:
98%
0%
A) flat daily wage
B) piece-rate
for laying bricks. Balu and Mohit are both laborers who have
worked in the factory for 6 months. Balu earns Rs. 20 more per day.
2 A brick factory in an area pays its workers a:
A) flat daily wage
B) piece-rate
for laying bricks. Balu and Mohit are both laborers who have
worked in the factory for 6 months. Balu, who makes more bricks
than Mohit, earns Rs. 20 more per day.

16%

4%

Notes: Survey conducted with workers who were not a part of the experiment, but drawn from a similar population in
the area where the experiment was conducted. N=200 workers. Each worker was only asked one of the 4 questions
shown in the table. Respondents were given one of the 4 scenarios, and asked to rate them as "Completely fair",
"Acceptable", "Unfair", or "Very unfair".

