                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    DESIGNING NONLINEAR PRICE SCHEDULES FOR URBAN WATER UTILITIES
            TO BALANCE REVENUE AND CONSERVATION GOALS

                                        Frank A. Wolak

                                      Working Paper 22503
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22503


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2016




I would like to thank Michael Miller, Ivan Korolev, and Onder Polat for outstanding research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Frank A. Wolak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Designing Nonlinear Price Schedules for Urban Water Utilities to Balance Revenue and Conservation
Goals
Frank A. Wolak
NBER Working Paper No. 22503
August 2016
JEL No. L38,L5,L51,L95

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper formulates and estimates a household-level, billing-cycle water demand model under
increasing block prices that accounts for the impact of monthly weather variation, the amount of
vegetation on the household’s property, and customer-level heterogeneity in demand due to
household demographics. The model utilizes US Census data on the distribution of household
demographics in the utility’s service territory to recover the impact of these factors on water
demand. An index of the amount of vegetation on the household’s property is obtained from
NASA satellite data. The household-level demand models are used to compute the distribution of
utility-level water demand and revenues for any possible price schedule. Knowledge of the
structure of customer-level demand can be used by the utility to design nonlinear pricing plans
that achieve competing revenue or water conservation goals, which is crucial for water utilities to
manage increasingly uncertain water availability yet still remain financially viable. Knowledge of
how these demands differ across customers based on observable household characteristics can
allow the utility to reduce the utility-wide revenue or sales risk it faces for any pricing plan.
Knowledge of how the structure of demand varies across customers can be used to design
personalized (based on observable household demographic characteristics) increasing block price
schedules to further reduce the risk the utility faces on a system-wide basis. For the utilities
considered, knowledge of the customer-level demographics that predict demand differences
across households reduces the uncertainty in the utility’s system-wide revenues from 70 to 96
percent. Further reductions in the uncertainty in the utility’s system-wide revenues in the, range
of 5 to 15 percent, are possible by re-designing the utility’s nonlinear price schedules to minimize
the revenue risk it faces given the distribution of household-level demand in its service territory.


Frank A. Wolak
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
wolak@zia.stanford.edu
1. Introduction

        There is a growing need for urban water utilities to manage periods with limited water
supplies, particularly in arid parts of the United States. Because more that 85 percent of the total
cost of a typical urban water utility does not vary with the volume of water produced, this has led
to an increasing frequency of revenue shortfalls for these entities. According to the California
Public Utilities Commission (CPUC), over the past 10 years as high as 50 percent of the largest
water utilities it regulates have annual revenue shortfalls as large as 20 percent of their annual
revenue requirement. These revenue shortfalls have resulted in a far greater use of ex post revenue
adjustment mechanisms that increase water prices after periods with limited water availability to
recover these revenue shortfalls. This has led to an increasing temporal mismatch between the
retail price consumers are charged and their need to reduce to water consumption.1
        Despite rapidly growing populations in the western states over the past 30 years, there has
been no major water storage or delivery infrastructure investment west of the Continential Divide
since the early 1970s. For example, the population of California in 1970, around the time the State
Water Project was completed, was roughly half of the current value of 38.8 million. This hiatus
in water infrastructure investments is partially responsible for the increasing frequency of
shortfalls in water availability to urban water utilities in the West.
        This set of circumstances suggests two possible approaches to meet the West’s future water
demand: (1) manage existing water resources, primarily through pricing, or (2) build and pay for
additional water storage and/or transportation infrastructure.           Both approaches argue for a
significantly enhanced understanding of the customer-level demand for water. This argument is
strengthened by the fact that nonlinear pricing is the standard approach used by water utilities to
balance the competing goals of managing limited water resources and achieving sufficient
revenues to recover their costs. Customers typically face schedules where the price charged for
each additional unit, the marginal price, rises with the customer’s monthly consumption. The
marginal price is fixed for a block or range of values of monthly consumption, but it increases
across these blocks with increases in the value of monthly consumption. For this reason these
nonlinear price schedules are called increasing block price schedules.



1
 For example, the Water Revenue Adjustment Mechanism (WRAM) set by CPUC to recover past revenue shortfalls
has temporarily increased future monthly water bills for the same level of consumption by more than 40%.

                                                    1
       The form of the increasing block price schedule set by the utility impacts how much water
each customer purchases and the revenues the utility receives from that customer. The form of the
nonlinear price schedule also impacts the amount of uncertainty the utility faces in the quantity of
water it sells and the revenues it receives from each customer. This uncertainty in customer-level
water sales and revenues to the utility is aggregated across customers to create uncertainty in the
utility-level water sales and revenues. If a utility can accurately predict the customer-level demand
for water for any possible nonlinear price schedule it can then design increasing block price
schedules to achieve any conservation or revenue goal while also minimizing utility-level water
sales or revenue risk.    Increased information about the distribution of customer-level demand
directly translates into reduced water sales and revenue risk associated with any rate design goal.
       This paper formulates and estimates a household-level demand for water under increasing
block prices that accounts for the impact of weather variation within the household’s billing cycle
and customer-level heterogeneity in demand due to observable demographic characteristics and
other unobserved factors that differ across customers. This model can be used to construct an
estimate of the distribution of each customer’s monthly demand and total amount paid for water
for any arbitrary nonlinear price schedule. Combined with data on the distribution of observable
customer-level heterogeneity in the utility’s service territory, these household-level demand
models can be used to compute the distribution of aggregate water demand for any possible price
schedule.
       This process also yields an estimate of the distribution of total utility-level revenues for
any arbitrary nonlinear price schedule or set of nonlinear price schedules, which implies that the
modeling results can be used to measure both the household-level and aggregate willingness to
pay for a proposed water infrastructure investment. Specifically, it can be used to determine if
there exists a nonlinear price schedule consistent with the utility’s water pricing goals that recovers
sufficient revenues to recover the cost of a given water infrastructure investment. In general, the
estimated household-level water demand model can be used by the utility to design nonlinear
prices for water to achieve a wide range of systemwide policy goals.
       The model assumes that water demand depends on the price schedule faced by the
household the characteristics of household (such as household income, the size of the dwelling,
size of the property, number of adults living in dwelling), weather conditions (specifically, average
daily temperature and rainfall during the customer’s billing cycle), and a measure of the amount

                                                  2
of outdoor vegetation on the customer’s property.                 Information on the amount of outdoor
vegetation for each customer is obtained from satellite data compiled by the National Atmospheric
Information Administration (NASA) on a bi-monthly basis.
        The demand model is estimated for two water utilities charging increasing block price
schedules using monthly billing cycle data for a sample of customers from each utility combined
with data from the from United States (US) Bureau of Census Public Use Microdata Sample
(PUMS) of American Community Survey on the distribution of household demographic
characteristics in the United States Postal Service (USPS) Zip Code, the property-level vegetation
index, and data from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) on daily
weather conditions in that Zip Code during the billing cycle.
        Because there is some controversy about whether customers understand and are able to
respond to nonlinear prices, a non-nested hypothesis test is performed comparing this model of
household-level demand with nonlinear pricing to each of four competing models of household-
level demand that embody alternative price measures that that household responds to.2 For both
of the utilities considered, the non-nested hypothesis tests find that the model of demand with
nonlinear pricing provides a statistically superior description of the observed pattern of the
household-level demand relative to each of the four alternative models.
        Several summary statistics are compiled using the model to assess the impact of resolving
uncertainty about customer-level demand and the distribution of these demands throughout
utility’s service territory on the systemwide sales and revenue uncertainty faced by the utility. The
difference in the system-wide revenue risk between a scenario that assumes the utility only knows
the prior distribution of demographic characteristics in the household’s zip code and the scenario
that assumes the utility knows each customer’s demographic characteristics provides a metric for
assessing the revenues and sales risk reduction benefits to the utility from collecting demographic
information from each of its customers.
        Counterfactual nonlinear price schedules are computed that yield no more than the same
expected system-wide water sales and at least as much system-wide revenues as the utility’s
existing price schedules, but also minimize the uncertainty in the utility’s annual revenues from



2
 Ito (2014) and Borenstein (2009) argue that consumers respond to the average price they face rather than to the
nonlinear price schedule. Two of the alternative models of demand are based the assumption that the household’s
demand is a function of the average price.

                                                        3
water sales. Price schedules that reduce systemwide water consumption by 25 percent with a 95
percent probability while still obtaining at least a much expected sales, are also computed. These
counterfactual price schedules are constructed under the assumption that the utility knows the
posterior distribution of demographic characteristics for each household given its zip code and
observed vector of billing cycle-level water consumption.
        These experiments demonstrate several sources of economic benefits to the utility from
having a more detailed knowledge of individual customers. First, knowledge of the customer-
level demand can be used by the utility to design increasing block pricing plans that achieve any
revenue or sales goals with less revenue or sales risk. Second, knowledge of how these demands
different across customers based on observable characteristics of the customers can allow the
utility to significantly reduce the utility-wide revenue or sales risk it faces for any pricing plan.
Third, knowledge of how the structure of demand varies across customers can be used to design
personalized (based on observable household demographic characteristics) increasing block price
schedules to further reduce the risk the utility faces on a system-wide basis. Because it is relatively
straightforward for the utility to prevent resale of residential water service, utilities can set different
increasing block price schedules for each customer based on its observable demographic
characteristics. Finally, with detailed knowledge of how demands different across customers
based on observable demographic characteristics, the utility can more accurately assess the likely
water sales and revenue impacts of changes in the number and types of customers in their service
territory.
        For the two utilities considered, knowledge of the customer-level demographics that
predict demand differences across households reduced the uncertainty in the utility’s system-wide
revenues by 70 and 96 percent, respectively. Further reductions in the uncertainty in the utility’s
system-wide revenues in the range of 5 to 20 percent, are possible by re-designing the utility’s
nonlinear price schedules to minimize the revenue risk it faces given the distribution of household-
level demand in its service territory. This household-level demand information is also particularly
important for assessing the economic benefits of proposed water infrastructure projects and in
designing the price schedules necessary for raising the revenue needed to pay for them with the
least amount of water sales or revenue risk to the utility.
        The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section discusses the design of
nonlinear pricing plans. Section 3 describes the datasets used to estimate the demand model.

                                                    4
Section 4 presents the econometric model of demand, the specification tests performed, and
estimation results. Section 5 describes how the model can be used to estimate the distribution of
household-level and systemwide water sales and revenues. Section 6 presents the counterfactual
experiments performed using the model results. Section 7 concludes.
2. Rate Design with Nonlinear Pricing
       A major rationale for increasing block pricing by water utilities is that this form of
nonlinear pricing balances two competing public policy goals. The first is to provide the
“essential” amount of water a household needs for drinking, cooking, bathing, and other indoor
use at a price that is affordable for virtually all households in the utility’s service territory. The
second goal is to provide a financial incentive for households using more than the “essential”
amount to reduce their demand for water. By this logic, the higher-priced steps in the increasing
block price schedule beyond the initial baseline or essential consumption level are designed to
discourage less essential water consumption. For example, the second price step might be intended
for the demand to fill the household’s swimming pool. The third price step might be intended for
the demand for watering the household’s outdoor trees, bushes, and shrubs. The fourth price step
might be intended for the demand for watering the household’s lawn.
       Another argument in favor of increasing block pricing of water is that it recovers an
increasing amount of the utility’s revenue from high demand customers, which tend to also be the
high income customers. Because higher income consumers generally consume more water, the
highest marginal price they pay is typically greater than the highest marginal price low income
consumers pay. For this reason, increasing block pricing implies that high income consumers pay
a higher average price (total monthly payments divided by total monthly consumption) for their
water consumption than low income consumers.
       Increasing block pricing can also create revenue adequacy challenges for the water utility
if the utility makes the length of the baseline level of demand too large. High demand households
might consume along the baseline marginal price step as opposed to consuming at a higher
marginal price step. Figure 1(a) illustrates this case with DL(p), the demand curve for low-demand
consumers, and DH(p), the demand curve for high income consumers. Both curves intersect the
increasing block price schedule on the first price block, which raises significantly less revenue for
the utility than would be the case if DH(p) intersected the price schedule on the higher-priced block.
If the first block of the price schedule is too short, this can impose an excessive financial burden

                                                  5
on low-demand, low-income consumers by charging them the marginal price intended for high
demand consumers.        Figure 1(b) illustrates this case where both demand curves intersect the
increasing block price schedule on the higher-priced block.
       From the perspective of achieving enough revenues to recover the utility’s costs, while
selling no more than a certain amount of water to all customers, the design of a nonlinear pricing
schedule amounts to choosing a length for each step that separates customers into distinct groups
based on their willingness to pay for water. Moreover, if the utility has some uncertainty about
the location and shape of each customer’s demand, then reducing this uncertainty could help the
utility determine where to set the baseline demand level, qB, shown in Figure 1(c). This figure
shows the range of possible uncertainty (from the perspective of the utility) in DL(p) and DH(p).
This is indicated by the dotted lines to the left and right of each demand curve. Note that qB has
been chosen so that regardless of the realization of DL(p) and DH(p), each type of customer will
continue to consume along the same step of the increasing block price schedule. Choosing the
value of qB in this manner limits the amount of revenue variability that the utility faces due to its
uncertainty about the realized values of DL(p) and DH(p). The second part of the increasing block
pricing design process must choose the levels of the first marginal price and the second higher
marginal price to recover sufficient revenues to cover the utility’s costs, while still achieving the
goal of limiting the economic burden placed on low-income consumers in purchasing their
essential water needs.
       If the utility is able to sort households into different categories based on observable
demographic characteristics, then it is also possible to assign separate increasing block price
schedules to different households based on these characteristics. In this case, the utility would
like to achieve the outcome in Figure 1(c) for each set of observable demographic characteristics
that predict differences in the form of the demand.
       One possible set of counterfactual pricing experiments would use the estimated household-
level demand model to determine the extent to which it is possible for the utility to re-design its
increasing block price schedule to achieve at least as much expected revenue and expected water
sales no larger than it does under the current rate schedule while facing less risk to its total
revenues. A second set of counterfactual pricing experiments could set separate increasing block
prices schedules for households with different observable demographic characteristics to achieve
at least as much expected revenue and no larger expected water sales than with the current

                                                 6
increasing block price schedules used by the utility while facing the utility with less risk to its total
revenues. Both sets of counterfactual pricing experiments demonstrate that if a utility has more
information about the demand for water of individual customers, it can significantly reduce the
revenue or sales risk it faces in meeting a set of pricing goals.
3. Data Used in Analysis
        Four datasets are used to estimate the customer-level demand model for each utility service
territory. The first is billing cycle-level monthly water consumption data for a sample of
households for at least one year in duration. The second dataset is composed of daily weather
variables at the Zip Code level obtained from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) for the utility’s service territory. The third dataset is the distribution of
household-level demographic characteristics within each Zip Code in the utility’s service territory
obtained from the US Bureau of the Census. The fourth dataset is composed of the value of the
Normalized Vegetation Difference Index (NDVI) compiled by NASA for each household’s
property.
        Monthly household-level water consumption is available from two utilities at the billing
cycle-level, along with the customer’s zip code, form of nonlinear price schedule faced by
household, and other information necessary to compute customer’s monthly water bill. Although
utilities typically bill their customers on a monthly basis, customers receive their bills at different
times during the month. The time between consecutive billing dates is called the customer’s billing
cycle and it depends on when the meter reader shows up at the customer’s premises to read the
meter each month. For example, one customer might be billed on the third day of every month,
whereas another customer might be billed on the twentieth day of every month.
        Having data available on each customer’s billing cycle level is important for accurately
modeling the impact of weather conditions on a household’s demand for water. In terms of the
above example, it might be the case that the first two weeks of July are extremely hot so the water
demand is particularly high, whereas the last two weeks of July are mild and so water demand is
significantly lower. The customer with a billing cycle that starts on the third day of the month will
have much higher weather-related demand than customer whose billing cycle begins on the 20th
day of the month. Only by knowing the customer’s billing cycle is it possible to properly account
for differences across customers in their weather-related demand for water.



                                                   7
         The NOAA provides daily measures of rainfall and the maximum daily temperature at the
Zip Code level for each utility service territory.                The average value of the maximum daily
temperature is computed as the average of the daily maximum temperature across all days in the
billing cycle. The total amount of rainfall in that Zip Code during the billing cycle is also computed
from this data.      The inter-quartile range of the maximum daily temperatures and inter-quartile
range of daily rainfall in the zip code during the billing cycle are also compiled.3
         The distributions of household-level demographic variables for each Zip Code in each
utility’s service territory are obtained from the US Bureau of Census Public Use Microdata Sample
(PUMS) of American Community Survey. The demographic characteristics for each household
surveyed in each Public Use Microdata Area (PUMA) are compiled along with the sampling
weight for that household. These PUMAs can be matched to zip codes so that a distribution of
household-level demographic variables in the Zip Code is available for all Zip Codes in the service
territory
         The NDVI data is compiled by NASA from satellite data taken from the using NOAA’s
Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer (AVHRR).                             An algorithm is applied to the
wavelengths and intensity of visible and near-infrared light reflected by the land surface back up
into space to quantify the concentrations of green leaf vegetation for 30 meter by 30 meter
quadrants of the earth’s surface. The NDVI lies on the interval [-1,1], with higher values indicating
more green vegetation. Values close to -1 correspond to water, whereas values close to zero (-0.1
to 0.1) correspond to rock, sand, or snow. Small positive values, generally between 0.2 and 0.4,
represent shrub and grassland, and values close to 1 indicate temperate and tropical rainforests.
         Household-level, billing-cycle data is available from the Valley of the Moon (near
Sonoma), California and Cobb County, Georgia water utilities. Daily weather data has also been
compiled for the time period that the customer-level billing cycle data is available for each utility
service territory. The Zip Code-level distribution of household demographic data has also been
compiled for the time period that the customer-level billing cycle data is available for each utility
service territory. The NDVI data is available on a bi-monthly basis for each household in both
utility service territories. All nominal prices are converted to 2012 dollars using the Federal


3
  The inter-quartile range is the difference between the 75th percentile of the daily variables in the billing cycle and
25th percentile of this same distribution.


                                                           8
Reserve Economic Database Gross Domestic Product (GDP) deflator from St Louis Federal
Resource Bank.4
4. Econometric Model
          This section describes the specification of the econometric model of the billing cycle-level
and household-level water demand under increasing block prices that accounts for the weather
facing that household during its billing cycle, the differences in demographic characteristics across
households and the differences in the NDVI value for the property over time and across
households. This model is derived from the assumption that households choose their water
consumption to maximize a utility function that depends on their demographic characteristics and
NDVI value and unobserved heterogeneity.
          This econometric model is used to derive the joint density of all billing cycle-level
consumption choices for each household during the sample period conditional on the nonlinear
price schedule the household faces, its demographic characteristics, the value of NDVI on its
property, and the temperature and rainfall distributions it was exposed to each billing cycle during
the sample period. Because the demographic characteristics of each household are unobserved, in
order to arrive at the likelihood function used to estimate the parameters of the demand model, the
conditional distribution of the household’s monthly billing cycle-level consumption choices are
integrated with respect to the distribution of demographic characteristics in the Zip Code that
contains that household. This yields a likelihood function that depends on observable data—the
household’s vector of monthly water consumption choices, the values of the household’s property
vegetation index, the vector of the billing cycle-level monthly weather variables and the
distribution of demographic characteristics for that household’s Zip Code.
4.1. Water Demand Model
          Let U(xi,wi,Ai,Zi,Gi,εi,β) equal the utility function for household i over the N-dimensional
vector of goods, xi = (xi1,xi2,…,xiN), where xik is household i’s monthly consumption of good k,
and wi is the household i’s monthly consumption of water. The utility function also depends on
the household i’s demographic characteristics, Ai; the vector of weather variables faced by
household i, Zi; the value of the NDVI index for household i, Gi; a vector of unobserved
heterogeneity, εi. This utility function is parameterized by the vector β. Let pk equal the price of
the kth element of xi, xik. Let θi(w) equal the increasing block price function that the household i

4
    Data available from https://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/GDPDEF

                                                          9
faces for water. The value of this function at consumption level w is equal to, θi(w), the marginal
price. Figure 1(a) to 1(c) shows several increasing block price schedules with two price blocks.
        If household i purchases w+ units of water during the month then its total bill is equal to
R(θi(w+)) =                , which is equal to the area under the nonlinear price schedule up to the
observed consumption level, w+. A household that consumes w units of water and the vector of
other goods, x, has a monthly spending on water and the N other goods equal to ∑                       +
R(θi(w)). Under the assumption of utility-maximizing behavior, the household’s observed choices
of x and w are assumed to be the solution to the following optimization problem:
                     ,    U x, w| ,     ,   , , β subject to ∑             + R(θi(w)) = Ii,          (1)
where Ii is household i’s monthly income. Solving problem (1) yields the household’s utility-
maximizing choices for x and w as a function of the vector of prices, P = (p1,p2,…,pN) of the N
other goods; the nonlinear price function, θi(w); and total monthly income, Ii.
        Let w(P,θi,Mi, ,      ,   , ε , β equal the solution to this household-level optimization
problem. This function depends on the vector of prices of other goods, P; the nonlinear price
schedule for water faced by household i, θi(w); household i’s total monthly income, Ii; the vector
of observed characteristics of household i, Ai; the vector of unobserved characteristics of the
household, εi; the vector of weather variables faced by household i, Zi; the household’s vegetation
index, Gi; and the parameters of the household’s preference function, β.
        Assuming a parametric joint density for ε, f(ε|δ), (where δ if the vector of parameters of
this joint density) it is possible to derive the density of the household’s vector of billing-cycle level
observed water consumption, w, which I write g(w|P,θ, , ,          , β, δ . This density is also equal to
the conditional (on Ai) likelihood function for a single observation of monthly billing cycle-level
consumption for household i.
4.2. Log-Likelihood Function
        Let the subscript “t” denote the value of a variable for billing cycle t and T(i) equal the
number of monthly consumption observations for household i in the sample and N is the total
number of households in the sample. Let Wi = (wi1,wi2,…,wiT(i))’ equal the T(i) dimensional vector
of monthly water consumption observations for household i. Let W = (W1’,W2’,…,WN’)’ equal
the vector of the N vectors of monthly water consumption observations for all households in the
sample.    The first step in computing the likelihood function for the econometric model is to
compute the joint density of Wi for each household in the sample conditional on the household’s

                                                   10
demographic characteristics and the T(i) realizations of monthly weather conditions that they
faced. In terms of the above notation, this joint density takes the form:
                            ∏      g     |    ,θ ,        ,      ,       , β, δ                              (2)
The PUMS data from American Community Survey can be used to compute the probability density
functions for the vector of demographic characteristics for each Zip Code in the utility’s service
territory. This dataset provides the sampling weights for each household in the American
Consumer Survey and the vector of their demographic characteristics for each 5-digit Zip Code in
the utility’s service territory. Let (wt(i,n), An) for n=1,…,L(i) equal the values of these sampling
weights and associated vector of demographic characteristics for each sampled household in the
Zip Code that contains household i. In terms of this notation, the log-likelihood function for single
observation is equal to:
            L(Wi | β, δ) = ln[ ∑          ,   ∏          g           |   ,θ ,        ,   ,   , β, δ .        (3)
Summing over all N households in the sample yields log-likelihood function for the entire
sample:
            L(W|β, δ = ∑        ln ∑          ,      ∏          g         |       ,θ ,   ,   ,   , β, δ ],   (4)
Note that the joint distribution of (wi1,wi2,…,wiT(i))’ is integrated with respect to the density of the
vector of demographic characteristics, An, rather than the density of each wit individually, in order
to account for the persistence in household i’s billing cycle level demand over time. If the
consumption of household i is unexpectedly high in billing cycle t relative to what would be
predicted based on the observable characteristics of this household, then it is likely that its
consumption would be unexpectedly high in all other billing cycles. Integrating with respect to
the density of An as is done in equation (4) is consistent with that logic.
4.3. Functional Forms
       In order to implement the model empirically, it is necessary to choose functional forms for
the household’s utility function, U(xi,wi,Ai,Zi,Gi,εi,β), which yields the functional form for the
household’s demand function, w(P,θi,Mi, ,            ,        , ε , β . Because the distributions of monthly
water consumption across both across households for the same month and for the same household
over time are both positively skewed in the sense that many observations are just below the mean,
but a few observations are far above the mean, the appropriate variable to model is the logarithm
of the household’s monthly demand for water.


                                                     11
        This logic implies the following choice for the functional form for w*(θ,M, , , , ε, β , the
observable portion household’s billing cycle-level monthly demand for water conditional on
observing the household’s vector of demographic characteristics, A:
     ln(w*(pw,         , , ,β     = A’β1 + Z’β2 + G’β3 + α(A,G)ln(pw) + ρ(A,G)ln(V(A,G)),        (5)
where        ,         exp                and     ,        exp             . Define β = (β1’,β2’,β3,
β4’, β5, β6’ β7)’ as the vector of parameters of the demand function. This functional form implies
that the coefficient determining the price responsiveness of demand, α(A,G), is minus 1 times the
exponential function of a linear combination of some of the elements of the vector of the
household’s demographic variables and its vegetation index, and ρ(A,G) is an exponential function
of a linear combination of some of the elements of the vector of the household’s demographic
variables and its vegetation index. V(A) is the household’s monthly virtual income and it is written
as a function of this vector of demographic characteristics to denote the fact that the household’s
income is one the elements of the vector of household characteristics that we “integrate” out with
respect to in computing the likelihood function for household i in equation (4).
        This functional form allows for substantial differences in both the price responsiveness and
income responsiveness of water demand across households in each utility service territory. Both
the price and income coefficients depend on the value of the vegetation index for the household’s
property and a subset of the vector of demographic characteristics to allow for differences in both
the income and price elasticities across households and over time for the same household.
        There are two sources of unobservables for each month and household ε = ( , ), where
 ~      0,       and    ~    0,       are independent random variables distributed independently
across households and over time for the same household. This implies that              ,    ′ in the
notation of the likelihood function (2).          Constructing the conditional (on demographic
characteristics) likelihood function (2) for household i, requires computing the density of the
observed value of ln(wit), using the deterministic portion of the demand function and joint
distribution of ε.     The elements of ε = ( , )’ are called the unobserved household-level
heterogeneity, η, and the household-level optimization or technological uncertainty error, ν. The
former is assumed to be observed by the household, but the latter is assumed to be unobserved by
the household. Both elements of ε are unobserved by the econometrician.
        To understand the determination of the household’s virtual income, V(A), and the mapping
from ln(w*(pw,V(A), , , , β ) to the logarithm of observed consumption of the household,

                                                      12
consider a four-tier increasing block price schedule with a fixed charge. This implies p1 < p2 < p3
< p4. As shown in Figure 2(a), (0,w1*) is the range of consumption where marginal price is p1,
(w1*,w2*) is the range of consumption for the marginal price p2, (w2*,w3*) is the range of
consumption for the marginal price p3, (w3*,∞) is the range of consumption for the marginal price
p4, and FC equals the household’s fixed charge for the billing cycle. The increasing block price
schedule implies the piece-wise linear budget set composed of the segments, BS1, BS2, BS3, and
BS4 shown in Figure 2(a). For each segment of the increasing block price schedule, the segment
of the household’s budget set becomes increasingly steep because the slope of each segment is
equal to −pk/po, where pk is the marginal price for the kth price block and po is the price of all other
goods.
         Define dk as the difference between the cost of consumption level w (in the kth block of
the increasing block price schedule) when all units are purchased at price pk, the marginal price
for this block, and the actual cost purchasing w+ under the increasing block price schedule, so that
                                                            ∗
                R θ                    ∑                        . For example, if the household is
purchasing along the first price tier, then d1 = - FC and if the household is purchasing along the
second price tier, then d2 = - FC – (p1 – p2)w1*.       A household with a vector of demographic
characteristics, A, purchasing along the kth price tier has virtual income of Vk(A) = I(A) + dk, where
I(A) is the household’s income. Income is written as a function of the vector of demographic
characteristics to denote the fact that monthly income is one of the elements of A, the vector of
demographic characteristics obtained from PUMS data.
         Figure 2(a) shows a point of tangency between the household’s indifference curve and the
nonlinear budget constraint. If η was the only unobservable in the household’s demand function
then the following statements would hold. If there is a point of tangency between the household’s
indifference curve and one of the piecewise linear budget set segments, then there should be one
value of η that yields this observed value of water consumption. However, as Figure 2(b)
demonstrates, it is also possible that a point of tangency could occur at a kink point of the piecewise
linear budget set. In Figure 2(b), the kink point is at the consumption level w2*. In this case, there
would be a set of values of η such that the household consumes w2* because there are a number of
possible values of η that shift and rotate the household’s indifference curves which yield this point
as the household’s utility maximizing consumption choice.



                                                  13
        It is virtually impossible for a household to manage its water consumption with so much
precision as to end up exactly at a kink point on the piecewise linear budget set. Virtually all water
services demanded by the household involves uncertainty in the actual amount of water consumed
that is observed by the household. A household member demands water services such as taking a
bath or shower, filling their swimming pool, washing their car, or watering their plants or lawn.
Despite the individual’s best intentions to use only a certain amount of water, each water service
demand has technological uncertainty in the exact amount of water consumed. For example,
running water for a hot shower on a cold day takes longer than on a warm day and therefore uses
more water. For this reason, a second stochastic unobservable, ν, the so-called optimization error,
is introduced into the demand model to account for uncertainty in the actual amount of water
consumed by the household relative to their intended water service consumption level based on
only η.5
        The mapping from the realized values of the unobservables ( , ) to the observed value of
the logarithm of the household’s monthly billing cycle-level consumption, ln(w), for a K-step
increasing block price schedule takes the form
ln(w) = ln(w*(p1,V1(A), , , , β               +η+ν
                          ∗
        if η < ln(             - ln(w*(p1,V1(A), , , , β
                 ∗
ln(w) = ln(              +ν
                     ∗                                              ∗
        if ln(           - ln(w*(p1,V1(A), , , , β      < η < ln(       - ln(w*(p2,V2(A), , , , β
ln(w) = ln(w*(p2,V2(A), , , β              +η+ν
                     ∗                                              ∗
        if ln(           - ln(w*(p2,V2(A), , , , β      < η < ln(       - ln(w*(p2,V2(A), , , , β
                 ∗
ln(w) = ln(              +ν
                     ∗                                              ∗
        if ln(           - ln(w*(p2,V2(A), , , , β      < η < ln(       - ln(w*(p2,V2(A), , , , β
              …                                                                                            (6)
                 ∗
ln(w) = ln(               +ν
                     ∗                                                    ∗
        if ln(                - ln(w*(pK-1,VK-1(A), , , G, β < η < ln(         - ln(w*(pK,VK(A), , , , β
ln(w) = ln(w*(pK,VK(A), , , , β               +η+ν
                     ∗
        if ln(                - ln(w*(pK,VK(A), , , , β    <η
where Vk(A) = I(A) + dk for k=1,2,…,K is equal to:

5
 A similar error structure is employed by Hewitt and Hanemann (1995) and Olmstead, Hanemann, and Stavins
(2007) to derive the likelihood function for their demand models.

                                                          14
                         ∑               Φ          Φ            ∑             Φ          Φ               (7)


                     ∗
where tk = [ln(          - ln(w*(pk,Vk(A), , , , β        /ση,    rk = (tk – ρsk)/ 1            ,


sk = (ln(wit) – ln(w*(pk,Vk(A), , , , β /                        , nk = (mk-1 – ρsk)/ 1

               ∗                                                                   ∗
mk = (ln(          - ln(w*(pk+1,Vk+1(A), , , , β /ση, uk = (ln(wit) - ln(              / ση .
The multiplying this likelihood for billing cycle t for observation i by this same likelihood for all
T(i) months for household i yields the likelihood function for observation i given in equation (2).
           Maximizing this likelihood with respect to (β’,δ’)’ yields the maximum likelihood
estimates of this parameter vector. Two sets of standard errors for the parameter estimates are
computed. The first set uses the inverse of the matrix of the sum of the outer products of the
gradient of the log-likelihood for each household evaluated at the maximum likelihood parameter
estimates. The second set uses the White (1982) quasi-maximum likelihood estimate covariance
matrix which is equal to the inverse of the matrix of the second partial derivatives evaluated at the
maximum likelihood parameter estimates pre- and post-multiplied by the matrix of the sum of the
outer products of gradient of the log-likelihood function.
4.2. Estimation Results
           Table 1 contains the estimation results for Valley of the Moon (VoM). Table 2 contains the
estimates for Cobb County. The coefficient estimates and the two sets of standard errors described
in the previous section are reported for each region. The number of households in the sample is
also reported for each region. There are different numbers of months of data for each household
because of differences in billing cycles across households during the sample period for each utility.
           The following variables make up Zit, the vector of weather characteristics that customer i
was exposed to during billing cycle t.6
Average high temperature: The average of the daily maximum temperature values in household
i’s Zip Code during household i’s billing cycle.
Inter-quartile range of maximum daily temperatures: The 75th percentile of the daily maximum
temperature values in household i’s Zip Code during household i’s billing cycle minus the 25th



6
    All of the Zip Code-level weather data for each utility was obtained from the www.wunderground.com.

                                                         15
percentile of the daily maximum temperature values in household i’s Zip Code during household
i’s billing cycle
Total precipitation in billing cycle: Sum of daily precipitation in inches during the billing cycle
for the Zip Code containing household i.
Interquartile range of daily precipitation: The 75th percentile of the daily precipitation in
household i’s Zip Code during household i’s billing cycle minus the 25th percentile of the daily
precipitation in household i’s Zip Code during household i’s billing cycle
Vegetation—Value of NDVI for household i as of the start of billing cycle t.
        Figures 3(a) and 3(b) present the histogram of the NDVI index for households in VoM and
Cobb, respectively. Consistent with the hotter and wetter climate in Georgia versus Northern
California, the average value of the NDVI in Cobb is higher than in VoM, and the spread of the
distribution of the NDVI is significantly larger in Cobb relative to VoM.
        The household-level demographics variables, the vector A, all come from the PUMS data
set. A subset of the available demographic variables most likely to predict differences in water
demand across households are included in A.
Monthly income of household: Monthly household income in 2012 dollars. (Annual number
reported in PUMS data divided by 12)
Number of people over 18 years-old living in the household
Number of people under 18 years-old living in the household
House Size Indicators--House acreage between 1 and 10 acres. House acreage above 10 acres.
Number of bedrooms in the house
As discussed earlier, for each household sampled by the US Bureau Census in a given Zip Code,
this demographic information is reported along with a sampling weight indicating the number of
households in the Zip Code estimated to have the same demographic characteristics vector as the
sampled household. Dividing each sampling weight by the sum of the sampling weights for all
households sampled in that zip code yields the weight, wt(i,n), used in the construction of the
likelihood function.
        The price coefficient differs across households in the utility service territory because the
coefficient on the logarithm of price depends on Ain and Git. Nonlinear pricing of water and the
assumed stochastic structure described in the previous subsection that gives rise to the joint density
of Wi (the vector of billing cycle-level consumption values for household i) implies that the

                                                 16
coefficient on the logarithm of price for a given household cannot be interpreted as a price elasticity
of demand. The same logic applies to the coefficient on logarithm of household-level income.
Nevertheless, as shown in the following section, analogues to price and income elasticities can be
computed with respect to the expected water demand of the household.
        Parameter estimates of the model can be used to compute the posterior probability that
household s has the vector of demographics Asn given its vector of billing cycle-level consumption
W:
                                           ,   ∏            |       ,       ,       ,       ,       , ,
                            |                                                                                    .                   (9)
                                     ∑         ,   ∏            |       ,       ,       ,       ,         , ,

For each household in the sample, compute the L(s) values of                                         |          for s=1,2,…,L(s). The
value of Asn that has the highest posterior probability for that household is assigned that vector of
demographics for the purposes of computing the distrbution of systemwide sales and revenues
assuming that the utility knows each household’s demographic attributes.
4.3. Specification Tests for Non-Nonlinear Pricing Model
        This section presents the results of the specification tests of the model household-level
demand subject to nonlinear pricing. These tests uses four alternative models of the household-
level demand for water where households respond to different price and income measures and
compares the optimized value of the log-likelihood function from each of these models to the
optimized value of the log-likelihood function from the model of household-level demand subject
to nonlinear pricing. From the results of Vuong (1989), the appropriately normalized difference
between these optimized log-likelihood functions has an asymptotic N(0,1) distribution under the
null hypothesis that both models are equidistant (according to the Kullback-Leiber criteria) from
the true unknown data generation process. The direction of rejection of the two-sided test indicates
which of the two competing models provides a statistically superior description of the distribution
of the observed endogeneous variables given the observed conditioning variables.
        Four alternate “price” and “income” demand response models are considered for the same
functional form and distribution of unobservables. The functional form for each of the four
demand functions is:
     ln(w*(pw,     , , ,β       = A’β1 + Z’β2 + G’β3 + α(A,G)ln(price) + ρ(A,G)ln(income),                                         (10)
where      ,         exp                 and       ,            exp                                             . The four models differ
only in terms of what variables are substituted for “price” and “income” in equation (10). Given


                                                       17
the assumed distribution for ε = ( , )’, each of these models gives rise to a log-likelihood function
which is then optimized with respect to (β’,δ’)’. The four models considered are:
1) Actual price tier—“price” = tier price at actual consumption level and “income” = actual
income less the fixed connect charge (This model ignores utility-maximizing choice of the price
step.)

2) Average variable price—“price” = (Variable Cost of Bill)/(Actual Consumption) and
“income” = actual income less the fixed connect charge

3) Alternative actual price tier—“price” = tier price at their actual consumption and “income” =
actual income less the fixed connect charge plus additional income due to nonlinear price
 schedule (This model also ignores utility-maximizing choice of price step)

4) Total Average Price—“price” = (Total Bill)/(Actual Consumption) and “income” = actual
income

       Let ln(f(Y|X,θ)) denote the log-likelihood function for an observation from the demand
model with non-linear pricing and ln(g(Y|X,γ) the log-likelihood function for one of four
competing price response models. Vuong (1989) proposed the following non-nested test between
two competing parametric models for the conditional density of Y given X
           H: E(ln(f(Y|X,θ*)) = E(ln(g(Y|X,γ*) versus K: E(ln(f(Y|X,θ*)) > E(ln(g(Y|X,γ*) (11)
where E(.) is expectation with respect to true joint distribution of Y and X, θ* and γ* are plims of
ML estimates of θ and γ. The null hypothesis is that the expected value of the log-likelihood
functions for both models with respect to h(Y,X), the true joint density of Y and X, are equal versus
the alternative that the expected value for one model is greater than the other. Failure to reject the
null hypothesis implies that both models are equidistant from the true data generation process,
whereas a rejection implies that the model with the log-likelihood ln(f(Y|X,θ*) has a statistically
superior average log-likelihood function value.
       To implement the hypothesis test, estimate one of the four alternative models, g(Y|X,γ) and
compute Wi = ln(f(Yi|Xi, )) – ln(g(Yi|Xi, )), the difference between the maximized log-likelihood
function value for ith observation for each model where      is the maximum likelihood estimate of
θ* and is the maximum likelihood estimate of γ*. Vuong (1989) shows that under null hypothesis,
Z= √       / is asymptotically N(0,1) where N = number of customers                 ∑        and S =

   ∑                 .



                                                  18
       Table 3 shows the results of these hypothesis tests for VoM and Cobb for each of the four
alternate price response models. In all cases, the null hypothesis is overwhelmingly rejected
against the alternative that the nonlinear price model has the highest value average log-likelihood.
This is consistent with the conclusion that it provides a statistically superior description of the
conditional density of Y given X relative for the four alternative models considered.
5. Using Model to Reduce Revenue and Quantity Risk
       The estimates of the parameters of the household-level demand model given in Tables 1
and 2 make it possible to compute an estimate of the distribution of a household’s water
consumption and monthly bill for any nonlinear price schedule either conditional on the
household’s assigned demographic characteristics or without conditioning on the household’s
demographic characteristics.
       The expected value and variance of these magnitudes can be computed as follows. For a
given price schedule that could depend on the household’s demographic characteristics, θC(w,A*),
a household with demographics A* has expected consumption and the variance in this
consumption equal to:
                       E[w(P,θC,M,A*,Z,G,ε, β ] =                            P,      , M,      ∗
                                                                                                   , Z, G, s, β f ,             ,     (10)
       V[w*(P,θC,M,A*,Z, , ε, β ]
          =            ∗
                           P,   , M,   ∗
                                           , Z, G, s, β        E    ∗
                                                                        P,        , M,   ∗
                                                                                             , Z, G, ε, β           f ,               (11)
where β and δ in the above expression are evaluated at the maximum likelihood estimates given in
Tables 1 and 2. The expectations in the above expression are to be taken with respect to the
distribution of ε given A* assigned by the rule based on equation (9). A household with assigned
demographic characteristics A* has an expected monthly water bill and variance of its monthly
water bill equal to:
       E[R(θC(w*(P,θC,M,A*,Z,G,ε, β ,                     ∗
                                                              ]=                     ∗
                                                                                         P,         , M,    ∗
                                                                                                                , G, s, β   ∗
                                                                                                                                f ,   ,
                                                                                                                                      (12)
                                       V[R( (w*(P,θC,M,A*, , ε, β , ∗ ] =
              ∗
                  P,       , M, ∗ , Z, G, s, β , ∗ ER   w P, , M, ∗ , Z, G, ε, β ,                                      ∗
                                                                                                                                f ,    .
(13)
       For the case that the household i’s demographics are assumed to be unknown, the
household’s expected monthly water consumption and bill and the variance in its monthly water


                                                                   19
consumption and bill for the demographic characteristics-dependent increasing block price
schedule, θC(w,A*), are equal to:
   E[w*(P,θC,M,A*,Z,G,ε, β ] = ∑                     ,                 ∗
                                                                           P,       , M,         , Z, G, s, β f ,               ,       (14)
       V[w*(P,θC,M,A*,Z, , ε, β ]
           =∑            ∗
                             P,    , M,   ∗
                                              , Z, G, s, β         E       ∗
                                                                               P,     , M,       ∗
                                                                                                     , Z, G, ε, β         f ,          , (15)
and
                                  ER          w P,           , M, A, G, ε, β , A
                                                         ∗
                  ∑                 ,                        P,    , M,         , G, Z, s, β ,              f ,             ,           (16)

   V[R(    (w*(P,θC,M,A, , ε, β , A ]=∑                                ,                     ∗
                                                                                                 P,        , M,         , Z, G, s, β
                                  ER            w P,          , M, A, Z, G, ε, β , A                 f ,            .                  (17)
The expectations in (14) to (17) are taken with respect to the distribution of ε = ( , )’ and the
distribution of the demographic characteristics within the household’s Zip Code. The expectations
in (10) to (13) are taken with respect to the distribution of ε = ( , )’ for the value of the
household’s demographic characteristics assigned using the approach described above.
Consequently, comparing the variance of water consumption and total revenues, given the
assigned value of A and the variance with respect to the distributions of ε and A, provides a
measure of the value of demographic information to utility. It is also possible to substitute the
posterior probabilities computed from equation (9) into equations (14) to (17) and compute the
expected values and variances of sales and revenues based on these distributions of the
demographic characteristics for household i.
       These expressions in (10) and (14) can also be used to compute analogues to the price
elasticity and income elasticity of the demand for water. For the case of the price elasticity this
is computed as
{E[w(P,θ,M,A*,Z,G, ε, β ] - E[w(P,θ+,M,A*,Z,G,ε, β ]}/{0.05*E[w(P,θC,M,A*,Z, , ε, β ]} (18)
where θ is the actual nonlinear price schedule charged by the utility and θ+ is the actual nonlinear
price schedule with each price step multiplied by 1.05. This “price elasticity” is the percent change
in household i’s expected water consumption as a result of a 5 percent increase in all prices on the
nonlinear price function divided by 0.05. Computing an “income elasticity” as the percent change
in expected consumption from a 5 percent increase in household i’s income divided by 5 percent
yields the coefficient on logarithm of income. Consequently, the model of demand with nonlinear

                                                              20
pricing and demographic characteristics in the price coefficient implies a different “price
elasticity” for each household, but the same income elasticity for each household.                               However,
because demographic characteristics and the vegetation index are included in the income
coefficient, the income “elasticity” also differs across households.
       The “price elasticities” can be computed conditional on the vector of the household’s
demographic characteristics or unconditional on the household’s vector of demographic
characteristics. The only differences in the two “price elasticities” is whether the expectations in
(18) are taken with respect to the distribution of A or assume a fixed value of A. Figures 4(a) and
4(b) compute the joint distribution of income and price elasticities for VoM and Cobb,
respectively, using the posterior distribution of A, given in equation (9) for each observation in the
sample.   There is considerable heterogeneity in these elasticity estimates for both utilities.
However, the majority of the probability mass is concentrated on price and income elasticities that
are less than one in absolute value.
       It is also possible to compute the distribution of water consumption for all households in
the utility’s service territory and the analogous aggregate demand elasticity estimates. Suppose
there are J types of households, where households of type j have a vector of observed attributes,
Aj, and Hj is the number of type j customers in the utility’s service territory. This implies that the
expected sales of water by the utility (summed across all customers) associated with rate schedule
θC(w,A) is:
           Expected System-wide Water Sales = ∑          E    ∗
                                                                   P,       , M,        , G, ε, β                    (19)

           Variance in System-wide Water Sales = ∑           Var        ∗
                                                                            P,      , M,      , G, ε, β          .   (20)
Following the same procedure for system-wide revenues yields:
           Expected System-wide Revenues = ∑          ER                ∗
                                                                            P,      , M,     , G, ε, β , A           (21)

   Variance in System-wide Revenues = ∑          Var R            ∗
                                                                      P,         , M,    , G, ε, β , A       .       (22)
Given the estimated distribution of ε = ( , )’ and the distribution of demographic attributes in
each Zip Code within the utility’s service territory, other functions of the distribution of system-
wide sales and revenues can be computed. The water utility or its regulatory body might be
interested in the probability that system-wide sales or revenues exceed or fall below a pre-specified
value for a prospective rate schedule. The model estimates can be used to compute that probability.



                                                 21
       The aggregate or system-wide “price elasticity of demand” can be computed by finding the
percentage increase in expected system-wide demand as a result of a 5 percent increase in all price
steps faced by all customers divided by 5 percent. The aggregate “income” elasticity is the
percentage increase in expected system-wide demand as a result of a 5 percent increase in all
customer incomes divided by 5 percent.
6. Counterfactual Price Schedules
       This section first quantifies the revenue risk reduction that is possible for the utility simply
from gathering information on the demographic characteristics of its customers. It then reports
on the computation of counterfactual price schedules to achieve two policy goals to demonstrate
potential used of the model of demand.
       For VoM, I compute a counterfactual price schedule that is consistent with California’s
current water demand reduction goals and unlikely to run afoul of Proposition 218, which requires
that municipal water customers only pay for the cost of the water that they consume. Specifically,
I compute a price schedule which yields 25 percent less system-wide water sales than the existing
price schedule with 95 percent probability and achieves the same system-wide expected revenue
goals as the existing price schedule, while minimizing a measure of the financial burden of
achieving these water consumption reduction goals across all classes of customers. The price
schedule chosen minimizes the weighted sum of the squares of the difference between expected
payments by each household under the counterfactual schedule and the current price schedule
weighted by the inverse of that household’s expected payments under the current price schedule.
This objective function places the greatest burden to achieve water consumption reductions on
households that currently have the largest water bills. In solving this problem, the monthly fixed
charge, FC, was reduced to achieve the goal of maintaining system-wide expected revenues equal
to those under the current price schedule.
       For Cobb, I first compute a price schedule which yields the same or superior sales and
revenue outcomes for the utility but minimizes aggregate revenue risk. This price schedule
minimizes the standard deviation of utility-wide water revenues subject to the constraints that the
utility expects to sell no more water than it does under the current price schedule, and raises at
least as much total revenue for the utility as the existing rate. I then solve the same optimization
problem subject to the same constraints, but now allowing the utility to set two price schedules
that depend on value of the household’s NDVI. Specifically, the utility is allowed to set a schedule

                                                 22
for households with an NDVI value less than 0.35 and one for households for an NDVI value
greater than 0.35. For each of these counterfactual price schedules I impose two additional
constraints. First, the lowest marginal price in the counterfactual price schedule cannot be higher
than the lowest marginal price in the actual price schedule. Second, the highest marginal price in
the counterfactual price schedule cannot be higher than the highest marginal price in the actual
price schedule. Each counterfactual price schedule is allowed to have as many marginal price
steps as the actual price schedule subject to these two constraints. For Cobb, the counterfactual
price schedules did not change, FC, the monthly fixed charge that the household faces.
       Three main conclusions emerge from this counterfactual price schedule design exercise:

1) The model of the household-level demand for a water utility can be used to reduce the system-
wide revenue or sales risk associated with achieving any water pricing goal.

2) By compiling information on the demographic characteristics of their customers and building
this information into the utility’s model of household-level water demand, utilities can
significantly reduce (up to 96% for two utilities considered) both the water sales and revenue risk
associated with any expected water sales and revenue goals.

3) The customer-level model of demand incorporating demographic characteristics can be used
to design a menu of price schedules that can be offered to households (that allows them to select
which specific price schedule they would like to be on based on their NDVI index) to achieve a
given water pricing goal for the utility.

The price schedule optimization framework can readily incorporate constraints such as the
majority of customers having the same or lower monthly water bills under the optimal price
schedules compared to the current schedules.
       For both Cobb and VoM, the distribution of sales and revenues for each household is
computed under three different assumptions about the distribution of demographic characteristics
(in each zip code) in order to quantify the impact of compiling information on the demographic
characteristics of each household in the utility’s service territory. The first case assumes the
demographic characteristics of each household are unknown, but drawn from the prior distribution
for that zip code obtained from the PUMS data. The second case assumes the household’s
demographic characteristics are unknown, but drawn from the posterior distribution for that zip
code obtained from the model estimated and equation (9). The final set assumes the household’s
demographic characteristics are known and set equal to the value of An with the highest posterior
probability from equation (9).

                                                23
       Table 6(a) and 6(b) report the expected revenue and consumption per month per customer,
the standard deviation of systemwide revenues, and the standard deviation of systemwide
consumption per month for each of the three distributions of demographic characteristic for each
household. Two conclusions emerge from this table. First, for both VoM and Cobb, the standard
deviation in systemwide revenues for the case of known demographics is between 0.30 =
(1711/5555) and 0.04 = (2143/59091) of the value for case that the demographics are drawn from
the prior distribution of An. Second, using the posterior distribution instead of the prior distribution
of An yields an estimate of systemwide standard deviation of revenues that is slightly larger than
the value for the case where the vector of demographic characteristics is assumed to be known.
Taken together, these results emphasize that even imperfect knowledge of the value of An, which
is obtained from estimating the demand model and computing the posterior distribution of An, can
significantly reduce the sales and revenue risk faced by each utility. For this reason, all of our
counterfactual computations are based on this posterior distribution for each utility.
6.1. VoM—Demographics Drawn from Posterior Distribution
       This section considers a set of counterfactual price schedule choices that reflect policy
goals and constraints relevant to California during the summer of 2015, the fourth consecutive
summer of low water availability in the state. As a consequence, in the spring of 2015, Governor
Jerry Brown issued an executive order requesting a 25 percent reduction in state-wide urban water
consumption relative to 2013. A pre-existing legal constraint has further complicated the ability
of municipal utilities to achieve this goal.
       Proposition 218 (The Right to Vote on Taxes Initiative) requires that municipal utility
consumers only pay what it costs to provide them with the water that they consume. AB 2882
(Allocation-based conservation water pricing), signed into law in 2008, attempts to clarify how
nonlinear pricing of water can be implemented to avoid running afoul of Proposition 218.
However, a recent lawsuit filed by customers of the municipal utility in San Juan Capistrano and
the resulting decision which struck down the utility’s increasing block rate structure has led to
considerable uncertainty over the use of nonlinear pricing of water in California (Stephens, 2015).
       One possible solution to this problem is to determine a system-wide average cost of
delivering a thousand gallons of water for the utility and then setting a nonlinear price schedule so
that the revenues recovered from each type of household (as determined by their demographic
characteristics) equal this average cost times the amount of water they consume. Because this

                                                  24
average cost information is not available for VoM, an aggregate revenue constraint is imposed so
that households in the utility service territory do not pay more under the new schedule than they
were under the existing price schedule. (The constraint implicitly assumes that the utility was only
recovering the cost of the water supplied under the existing schedule.) The other constraint on the
counterfactual price schedule is that it reduces system-wide water consumption by 25 percent
relative to expected consumption under the existing schedule with at least a 95 percent probability.
       The objective function assumed for the optimal tariff design problem is to minimize the
weighted sum of squared differences between each household’s expected monthly bill under the
current price schedule and the household’s expected monthly bill under the counterfactual price
schedule (where the weight applied to each household-level squared difference is the inverse of
that household’s expected monthly bill under the current price schedule). This objective function
is designed to obtain the largest revenue increases from households with the largest current water
bills and the smallest revenue increases from households with the smallest current water bills.
Finding this price schedule requires solving the following optimization problem:
                  min θ(w) ∑                                        /                          (23)
                     subject to Prob( ∑                                  0.95
                               E( ∑                                  0
where θ(w) is the price schedule being solved for, θe(w) is the existing price schedule, Rh(
is the revenue received from household h under the price schedule θ(w), qh(θ(w)) is the quantity
demanded by household h under the price schedule θ(w), and E(.) is the expectation operator.
       While there are many other possible objective functions one can optimize to obtain
Governor Brown’s desired 25 percent reduction in system-wide water consumption with a high
probability, this one has the desirable property of putting less of the burden on households that
are presently spending less on water.
       Figure 8(a) plots the actual price schedule and price schedule that solves (23).        This
optimization problem also required reducing FC by 13 percent in order to achieve the expected
revenue constraint. Figure 8(b) plots the simulated distribution of household-level consumption
under the current price schedule set by VoM and simulated distribution of household-level
consumption under the counterfactual price schedule.




                                                25
6.2. Cobb—Demographics Drawn from Posterior Distribution
       Figure 6(a) plots actual price schedule faced by customers in Cobb County. This figure
also plots two optimal counterfactual NDVI-based price schedules. These price schedules are
computed by minimizing the standard deviation of systemwide revenues subject to the constraints
that expected revenues are at least as large as under the current price schedule and expected water
sales are no larger than under the current price schedule. Additionally, one price schedule will be
assigned to customers with a NDVI value of less than 0.35 and the other is assigned to customers
with a value less than 0.35. Recall that the constraint that the lowest step of each of these schedules
is constrained from below by the lowest price on the actual price schedule and the highest price
step is constrained from above by the highest price on the actual price schedule. This form of
NDVI-based pricing reduces the standard deviation of systemwide revenues relative to the actual
price schedule by 2 percent.
       Figure 6(b) plots the two optimal NDVI-based price schedules and the single price schedule
that minimizes the standard deviation of systemwide revenues subject to achieving at least as much
expected revenues and no larger expected water sales than the actual price schedule. This single
price schedule achieves slightly more than a 1 percent reduction in the standard deviation of
systemwide revenues relative to the actual price schedule.
       A number of other counterfactual price schedules can be computed that depend on
demographic characteristics, elements of Z, and combinations of these variables. Reductions in the
standard deviation of systemwide revenues of over 10 percent are possible with greater
differentiation of price schedules based on household characteristics.
6.3. Assessing the Relative Size of Optimization Error
       This section provides an ex post check on the reasonableness of the assumption of the
existence of optimization error or technological uncertainty associated with water use. As shown
in Section 5, the demand model can be used to compute the distribution of annual water
consumption for each household in the VoM sample. There are three sources of randomness in
annual water consumption (AWC).            First, is uncertainty in the vector of demographic
characteristics, A. The second is uncertainty in unobserved heterogeneity, η. The third is the
optimization error or technological uncertainty, ν. Let ν(annual) equal the vector of values of ν
for all billing cycles in the last year of the sample, and η(annual) equal the vector of values of η
for all billing cycles in the last year of the sample. For each household in the sample, compute the

                                                  26
variance in AWC integrating with respect to the distributions of ν(annual), η(annual) and prior
distribution of A. Conditional on the value of ν(annual) compute the variance of AWC for each
household. The ratio of Var(AWC|ν(annual)), the conditional variance of annual consumption
given ν(annual), to, Var(AWC), the unconditional variance of annual consumption, quantifies the
impact of optimization error or technological uncertainty on the variance of annual consumption.
       Figure 7 plots the histogram of values of Var(AWC|ν(annual))/Var(AWC) for each
household in the VoM sample. The average value of this ratio is 0.91, which implies less than 10
percent of the variance in annual consumption can be attributed to optimization error. This
histogram ranges from 0.85 to 0.95.        Values in this range are plausibly consistent with ν
representing optimization error or technological uncertainty in the household’s water demand.
7. Conclusions
       The model of demand can be used to simulate the distribution of the customer-level billing
cycle level household demand for water for any increasing block price schedule. This model can
then be used to simulate the distribution of the system-wide demand for water for any nonlinear
price schedule. The model can then be used to set price schedules that achieve a wide range of
water supply risk or revenue risk management goals in the utility’s rate design process.
       An important implication of this modeling and simulation exercise is to demonstrate the
tremendous reduction in revenue risk the utility faces if it is has the information data on the
demographic characteristics of its households. For the case of Cobb, the measure of the variance
of system-wide revenue conditional on the assumed knowledge of the vector of demographic
characteristics was roughly 4% of the measure of the variance in system-wide revenues, assuming
only the distribution of demographic in each Zip Code in the utility’s service area was known.
       The model was used to show that further revenue variance reductions could be achieved
by demographics-based price schedules. The household-level water demand model was used to
solve for the optimal (minimum system-wide revenues) demographic-based price schedules.
Again, significant variance reductions were possible without be used to compute the distribution
expected demand and variance in demand conditional on demographics. The model can even be
used to assist the utility in managing water shortfall and potential revenue shortfalls.
       The results presented here demonstrate that there is significant value to be had for the utility
from understanding the distribution of household level demand in designing price schedules to
achieve competing policy goals. In particular, by compiling demographic data on customers and

                                                 27
using such data in customer-level models of demand, utilities can significantly reduce the variance
in both the system-wide revenues and the amount of water sold in achieving any price schedule
design process. This results implies up to a roughly 96% reduction in the revenue risk that the
utility faces if demographic characteristics of its customers is known, suggesting significant
economic benefits to water utilities from collecting demographic data on its customers and
formulating household-level demand models for price schedule design.




                                                28
                                          References


Borenstein, Severin (2009) “To what electricity price do consumers respond? Residential demand
       elasticity under increasing-block pricing,” working paper available at
       http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.463.4825&rep=rep1&type=pdf

Hewitt, Julie A. and Hanemann, W. Michael, (1995) “A Discrete/Continuous Choice Approach to
       Residential Water Demand under Block Rate Pricing,” Land Economics, 75, 173-194.

Olmstead, Sheila M., Hanemann, W. Michael, and Stavins, Robert N. (2007) “Water Demand
      under Alternative Price Structures,” Journal of Environmental Economics and
      Management, 54, 181-198.

Ito, Koichiro (2014) “Do Consumers Respond to Marginal or Average Price? Evidence from
       Nonlinear Electricity Pricing,” American Economic Review, 104(2): 537–563

Sato, Kazuo (2015) “Additive Utility Functions with Double-Log Consumer Demand Functions,”
       Journal of Political Economy, 80(1), 102-124.

Stephens, Matt (2015) “In blow to water conservation, court rejects San Juan Capistrano's tiered
       rates,” Los Angeles Times, April 20, 2105, at http://www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-
       ln-water-rates-case-20150405-story.html.

Vuong, Quang (1989) “Likelihood Ratio Tests for Model Selection and Non-Nested Hypotheses,”
      Econometrica, 57(2), 307.333.

White, Halbert (1982) “Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Misspecified Models,” Econometrica,
       50(1), 1-25.




                                              29
 Table 1: Model Parameter Estimates and Standard Errors—Valley of The Moon, California
                                                                                     Standard
                                                                   Standard Error    Error (White
                                                                   (Outer Product of (1982)
 Parameter Name                                           Estimate Gradients)        Formula)
 Constant in the income elasticity formula                -0.31125 0.01867           0.09857
 Constant in the price elasticity formula                 -0.83170 0.10444           0.31342
 Std.dev. of household heterogeneity, η                   0.27898  0.01190           0.08486
 Std.dev. of optimization error, ν                        0.26800  0.01179           0.08305
 Constant                                                 -6.33831 0.38147           0.55999
 Average high temp in billing cycle                       0.00782  0.00169           0.00111
 75th - 25th percentile of temperature in billing cycle -0.01843 0.00203             0.00239
 Total precipitation in billing cycle                     0.00670  0.00459           0.00236
 75th - 25th percentile of precipitation in billing cycle -0.87861 0.37849           0.13993
 Number of people over 18 in house                        0.11379  0.02726           0.01570
 Number of people under 18 in house                       0.71123  0.02683           0.08927
 House acreage above 1 acre                               0.00088  0.03371           0.00106
 Number of bedrooms in house                              0.48981  0.07595           0.04090
 Price*temp                                               -0.03615 0.00169           0.00862
 Price*precip                                             0.00792  0.00222           0.00108
 Price* # of adults                                       0.04054  0.03586           0.01603
 Price* # of children                                     0.42252  0.02051           0.02822
 Price* # of bedrooms                                     0.25201  0.01033           0.02526
 Income* # of bedrooms                                    -0.02861 0.01493           0.00560
 Vegetation Index                                         -0.15522 0.40903           0.00989
 Income*Vegetation Index                                  0.02361  0.01166           0.00903
 Price*Vegetation Index                                   0.05847  0.02878           0.00668

Number of customers                                  2001




                                                30
 Table 2: Model Parameter Estimates and Standard Errors—Cobb County, Georgia
                                                                   Standard
                                                                   Error
                                                                   (Outer     Standard Error
                                                                   Product of (White (1982)
 Parameter Name                                           Estimate Gradients) Formula)
 Constant Term in income elasticity formula               -1.76995 0.06094    0.10967
 Constant Term in price elasticity formula                -0.21491 0.09163    0.17331
 Std.dev. of household heterogeneity, η                   0.03006  0.02165    0.01576
 Std.dev. of optimization error, ν                        0.35782  0.00149    0.00559
 Constant                                                 0.40180  0.08892    0.13906
 Average high temp in billing cycle                       -0.00574 0.00113    0.00123
 75th - 25th percentile of temperature in billing cycle   0.00318  0.00156    0.00137
 Total precipitation in billing cycle                     0.00448  0.00644    0.01009
 75th - 25th percentile of precipitation in billing cycle -0.40481 0.16279    0.16473
 Number of people over 18 in house                        0.54096  0.02075    0.05288
 Number of people under 18 in house                       -0.33908 0.01233    0.04119
 House acreage above 1 acre                               -0.11647 0.03392    0.04544
 Number of bedrooms in house                              0.28470  0.03759    0.08463
 Price*temp                                               -0.00569 0.00039    0.00081
 Price*precip                                             -0.00105 0.00140    0.00433
 Price* # of adults                                       0.08484  0.00425    0.00732
 Price* # of children                                     0.01378  0.00292    0.01437
 Price* # of bedrooms                                     0.50440  0.02261    0.02493
 Income* # of bedrooms                                    0.57176  0.02174    0.02191
 Vegetation Index                                         -0.02372 0.06132    0.08541
 Income*Vegetation Index                                  0.51465  0.07720    0.19072
 Price*Vegetation Index                                   0.41746  0.07557    0.21559

Number of customers                                              1034




        Table 3: Non-Nested Test of Nonlinear Pricing Model Versus Alternative Price Model
  Utility                                               Alternative Model
                        Actual Price Tier     Average Variable Alternative Actual Total Average
                                              Price                Price Tier          Price
  Valley of the         17.83                 16.56                16.78               11.66
  Moon
  Cobb County           15.24                 14.90                15.79               18.11
Note: Test statistic is asymptotically distributed as a N(0,1) random variable under null hypothesis. All
tests overwhelmingly reject null hypothesis in favor of nonlinear pricing model.




                                                   31
                 Table 4(a): Revenue Uncertainty and Demographic Information--VoM
                 E[Revenue     sd[System-     E[Consumption per month   sd[System-wide consumption]
                per month per wide revenue]           per bill]
                     bill]
 Demographics       $32.78       $5555              7.00 TGAL                   1422 TGAL
  drawn from
     prior
 Demographics      $34.93         $2025              7.67 TGAL                   485 TGAL
  drawn from
   posterior
 Demographics      $35.29         $1711              7.76 TGAL                   395 TGAL
   predicted




                Table 4(b): Revenue Uncertainty and Demographic Information—Cobb
                E[Revenue      sd[System-     E[Consumption per bill]  sd[System-wide consumption]
                 per bill]   wide revenue]
 Demographics     $73.86         $59091             6.82 TGAL                  4560 TGAL
  drawn from
     prior
 Demographics      $55.01         $3434              5.34 TGAL                   344 TGAL
  drawn from
   posterior
 Demographics      $55.20         $2143              5.36 TGAL                   213 TGAL
   predicted
Note: TGAL = Thousands of gallons




                                                32
Figure 1(a)




Figure 1(b)




Figure 1(c)




              33
Figure 2(a)




Figure 2(b)




              34
 Figure 3(a): Histogram of NDVI for Valley of the Moon




Figure 3(b): Histogram of NDVI for Cobb County, Georgia




                          35
Figure 4(a): Histogram of Price and Income Elasticities for VoM
          (Demographics Drawn from Posterior Distribution)




Figure 4(b): Histogram of Price and Income Elasticities for Cobb
          (Demographics Drawn from Posterior Distribution)




                                36
        Figure 5(a): Minimum Loss Conservation Price Schedules
                (Demographic Drawn from Posterior Distribution)




Figure 5(b): Histogram of Consumption Under Conservation Price Schedules
                (Demographics Drawn from Posterior Distribution)




                                      37
Figure 6(b): Vegetation Index-Based Price Schedules
    (Demographics Drawn from Posterior Distribution)




Figure 6(b): Vegetation Index-Based Price Schedules
    (Demographics Drawn from Posterior Distribution)




                          38
Figure 7: Decomposition of Variance of Annual Consumption—VoM
             (Demographics Drawn from Prior Distribution)




                                 39
