NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OPENING THE BLACK BOX OF THE MATCHING FUNCTION:
THE POWER OF WORDS
Ioana Marinescu
Ronald Wolthoff
Working Paper 22508
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22508

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016

This paper has benefited from feedback during presentations at CREST-Paris, the University of
Chicago, the Annual Meeting of the Society of Economic Dynamics, the University of Toronto,
the University of Wisconsin-Madison, UC Santa Barbara, the Tinbergen Institute, the University
of British Columbia, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the NBER Macro Perspectives Summer
Institute. We are grateful for comments from Briana Chang, Kerwin Charles, Francis Kramarz,
Peter Kuhn, Alan Manning, Craig Riddell, and Chris Taber. We thank Chaoran Chen and Sanggi
Kim for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w22508.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Ioana Marinescu and Ronald Wolthoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Opening the Black Box of the Matching Function: the Power of Words
Ioana Marinescu and Ronald Wolthoff
NBER Working Paper No. 22508
August 2016
JEL No. J31,J63,J64
ABSTRACT
How do employers attract the right workers? How important are posted wages vs. other job
characteristics?Using data from the leading job board CareerBuilder.com, we show that most
vacancies do not post wages, and, for those that do, job titles explain more than 90% of the wage
variance. Job titles also explain more than 80% of the across-vacancies variance in the education
and experience of applicants. Finally, failing to control for job titles leads to a spurious negative
elasticity of labor supply. Thus, our results uncover the previously undocumented power of words
in the job matching process.

Ioana Marinescu
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
ioanamarinescu@uchicago.edu
Ronald Wolthoff
University of Toronto
ronald.p.wolthoff@gmail.com

1

Introduction

A blossoming research agenda in macroeconomics analyzes business cycle fluctuations and
public policy through the lens of the matching function (Petrongolo & Pissarides, 2001), which
converts a given number of vacancies and unemployed workers into a resulting number of hires.
This approach has been fruitful for improving our understanding of macro issues (Yashiv, 2007).
Yet, there is limited empirical evidence on the micro foundations of the matching function, even
though theory shows that these foundations are important for aggregate outcomes including unemployment and efficiency (Rogerson et al., 2005). Outstanding questions include the source
of search frictions, the role of heterogeneity, and the strategies used by workers and firms during the matching process. Answering these questions requires opening the black box of the
matching function.
Early empirical work on the matching process, e.g. by Barron et al. (1985, 1987), focused
on its later stages, i.e. the screening and interviewing of applicants. This early work recognizes
that workers are heterogeneous and that different firms may employ different strategies to find
the best possible match. Of course, a firm’s pool of applicants is not exogenous and can be
influenced by the way in which the firm advertises its position, which raises the question of
how employers advertise the nature of their jobs, and how workers react to these signals. The
theoretical search and matching literature explores these questions extensively. In particular,
directed search models assign a key role to posted wages as an instrument for firms to attract
the right pool of applicants (see e.g. Moen, 1997; Shimer, 2005a; Eeckhout & Kircher, 2010).
Yet, empirical evidence about employers’ search strategies is limited. Holzer et al. (1991)
show that the wages that firms pay affect the number of applicants that they attract, but the
data in Holzer et al. (1991) does not capture whether firms communicated wages to potential
applicants. Recent evidence from employment websites indicates that, typically, only a small
fraction of job ads specifies a wage (see e.g. Kuhn & Shen, 2012; Brencic, 2012; Brown &
Matsa, 2014). This raises the question of what other strategies firms use to attract applicants
and how successful these strategies are.
In this paper, we answer this question by using a new data set from CareerBuilder.com,
a leading online job board. CareerBuilder.com contains about a third of all US vacancies.
Furthermore, the jobs and job seekers found on CareerBuilder.com are fairly representative of
the US labor market. We use a data set of all the vacancies posted in Chicago and Washington,
DC at the beginning of 2011. For each vacancy, we observe the information that firms provide
in their job ads. We also have information on the pool of applicants that each job ad attracts, in
particular the number of applicants and their education and work experience.

2

Using this data, we study how firms advertise their positions and how this affects the number and quality of applicants that they attract. We find that a job characteristic typically not
considered in the economics literature plays a critical role. This piece of information is the job
title of the vacant position as chosen by the employer, e.g. “senior accountant” or “network administrator”. We demonstrate that the words in the job title communicate important information
about a position, and that workers use them to direct their search. Even among the minority of
vacancies that post a wage, job titles play a far more important role than wages in explaining
the number and quality of applicants that a vacancy attracts. Thus, our results uncover the previously undocumented power of words in the search and matching process. We now describe
our results in more detail.
First, we analyze employers’ advertising behavior. We show that all job ads specify a job
title, which is prominently featured on CareerBuilder’s website, while only a subset of the
ads clearly specifies other characteristics a worker may care about, such as a wage (20%). A
natural interpretation of this fact is that listing these other characteristics would provide little
information in addition to the job title. To support this interpretation, we show that even when
firms post wages, job titles explain more than 90% of the wage variance. By contrast, six-digit
SOC codes, the most detailed occupational classification commonly used by economists, can
only explain a third of the wage variance. Thus, employers advertise their jobs using the power
of words embodied in the job title.
Second, we show that job titles play an important role in aiding workers’ search decisions.
Indeed, job titles explain more than 80% of the across-vacancies variation in the average education and experience of applicants. This shows that workers use job titles to direct their search. If
a job ad specifies a wage, workers use this information as well. Everything else equal, a higher
wage increases the number of applicants as well as their education and experience levels. Strikingly, when job titles are not controlled for, higher-wage vacancies attract significantly fewer
applicants. This negative relationship between wages and the number of applicants is counterintuitive because it implies a negative elasticity of labor supply. Yet, this negative relationship
holds even when controlling for detailed occupations (SOC). It is only when we control for job
titles that we find that a 10% increase in wages is associated with a 7% increase in the number
applicants. Job titles are thus crucial to explain the education and experience levels of applicants, and it is necessary to control for job titles to recover a positive elasticity of applications
with respect to the posted wage.
Third, we analyze the reasons why job titles explain posted wages so much better than
existing occupational classifications (SOC codes). One might think that the larger explanatory power of job titles is mechanical, because there are many more job titles than SOC codes

3

(several thousands vs. 840). However, job titles do contain important information that is not
captured by SOC. Indeed, the adjusted R-squared in regressions with job titles is almost as high
as the R-squared, showing that job titles have explanatory power above and beyond just adding
further degrees of freedom. We show that, relative to the detailed SOC occupations, job titles
better reflect the hierarchy, level of experience, and specialization of different jobs. For example, job titles separate accountants into "staff accountants," "senior accountants," and "directors
of accounting", with the last two earning more than the first. Likewise, job titles separate sales
representatives into lower-wage "inside sales" and higher-wage "outside sales," and information technology administrators are divided between lower-wage "network administrators" and
higher-wage "systems administrators." Thus, words in the job title are powerful predictors of
the posted wage.
Our overarching conclusion is that words in job titles play a fundamental role in the initial
stages of the search and matching process and are key to understanding labor market outcomes.
We make three main contributions to the literature. Our first contribution is to document the role
of job titles in employer search. Our second contribution is to verify many of the predictions
of directed search models, and to show how specifically workers direct their search. Finally,
our third contribution is to demonstrate the power of words in explaining the variance in posted
wages.
First, although job titles have been used to analyze career paths and promotions within firms
(see e.g. Lazear, 1992), we are – to the best of our knowledge – the first to analyze their role
in the search and matching process. By showing that firms advertise jobs primarily through
job titles rather than wages, we add to two areas of research: the employer search literature
analyzing firms’ strategies for finding the right match (Barron et al., 1985, 1987) as well as
the emerging empirical literature on online job search (see e.g. Kuhn & Shen, 2012; Brenc̆ic̆ &
Norris, 2012; Pallais, 2012; Faberman & Kudlyak, 2014; Marinescu, 2014; Gee, 2014).
Second, our finding that job titles and (if present) posted wages explain the number and
type of applicants that a firm attracts validates directed search models as realistic models of the
labor market. Indeed, in directed search models, employers compete for workers by posting job
characteristics, and workers direct their search to their preferred jobs. Thanks to the competition
among employers, directed search models typically lead to efficient outcomes (see Rogerson
et al. (2005) for a review of the literature). In the basic directed search model, a firm that
posts a higher wage attracts more applicants (see e.g. Moen, 1997), while in a setting with
heterogeneous workers, higher wages may also attract better applicants (see e.g. Shi, 2001).
Prior literature did not find strong evidence of this expected positive relationship between wages
and the number of applicants (Holzer et al., 1991; Faberman & Menzio, 2010; Bó et al., 2012).

4

In contrast, we find a positive relationship, but only within a job title. Therefore, controlling
for job titles is crucial in validating the prediction of directed search models that higher wages
attract more applicants. We also document a positive relationship between wages and the quality
of the applicant pool, consistent with evidence from the public sector in Mexico (Bó et al.,
2012). Even when we include the majority of jobs that do not post wages, we find that job titles
explain more than 80% of the variation in the quality of applicants that a vacancy attracts. This
shows that wages are not necessary for workers to direct their search, as illustrated by e.g. the
theoretical model of Menzio (2007). Thus, job titles play a key role in explaining how workers
direct their search as well as the role of wages in directed search.1
Third, we add to the literature on the causes and consequences of the wage variance. On
the empirical side, the literature that decomposes the wage variance (e.g. Abowd et al., 1999;
Woodcock, 2007; Abowd et al., 2002; Andrews et al., 2008; Iranzo et al., 2008; Woodcock,
2008) focuses on realized wages. It finds that unobserved characteristics captured by worker
and firm fixed effects together explain most of the variance in realized wages (see e.g. Table 4
in Woodcock, 2007). We show that job titles explain as much of the variance in posted wages
as worker and firm fixed effects explain in realized wages. This suggests that observable job
characteristics play an important role in explaining the wage variance. On the theoretical side,
a recent paper (Hornstein et al., 2011) argues that a large residual wage variance is inconsistent
with basic search models (i.e. without on-the-job search). We show that the wage variance is
strongly overestimated if one does not control for job titles. Posted wages, while having the
same cross-sectional variance as realized wages in the Current Population Survey, are almost
fully determined by job titles. This result suggests that job seekers face limited wage dispersion for given job characteristics and can help explain why unemployed job seekers accept the
majority of job offers (Krueger & Mueller, 2014; Wolthoff, 2015).
Our results have broader theoretical and empirical implications. On the theoretical side, our
findings speak to the importance of heterogeneity as captured by job titles for understanding the
labor market: heterogeneity may be an important source of frictions that the standard matching
function does not explicitly model. If workers and firms are very different, it becomes important
to find just the right match, and this can explain that it takes time and effort to locate the right
trading partner. Some theoretical models have explored the role of heterogeneity in workers
and firms: examples of search models with two-sided heterogeneity include Shimer & Smith
(2000), Shimer (2005a) and Eeckhout & Kircher (2010). In a related working paper (Marinescu
1 Our results are also related to the literature on the elasticity of labor supply to the individual firm (see Manning,

2011, for a review). While this literature examines how changes in firm-level employment relate to wage levels,
we analyze how wages influence the number of job applications a firm receives, an important first factor in the
process that leads to final matches.

5

& Wolthoff, 2012), we present an equilibrium search model with two-dimensional heterogeneity that rationalizes some of the stylized facts of this paper. Overall, our results suggest that
incorporating heterogeneity in both workers and jobs is a fruitful avenue for search-theoretical
research on macroeconomic issues.
On the empirical side, we introduce a new occupational classification which is based on
employers’ own description of their jobs rather than researchers’ interpretation. We show that
this new classification improves in important ways on existing occupation classifications (SOC)
and has important implications for how we understand labor markets. We expect that this classification will prove to be a useful research tool in a wide variety of contexts. For example, it
may help to shed more light on the gender and race wage gap (Blau, 1977; Groshen, 1991; Blau
& Kahn, 2000), inter-industry wage differentials (Dickens & Katz, 1986; Krueger & Summers,
1986, 1988; Murphy & Topel, 1987; Gibbons & Katz, 1992), the specificity of human capital
(Poletaev & Robinson, 2008; Kambourov & Manovskii, 2009), and occupational mobility and
worker sorting (Groes et al., 2015).
This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the job board and the data set. We
analyze the job ads that firms post in section 3 and the applicant pool that a job ad attracts in
section 4. Section 5 provides robustness checks and discussion, after which section 6 concludes.

2

Data

Background. We use proprietary data provided by CareerBuilder.com, which is the largest
online job board in the United States, visited by approximately 11 million unique job seekers
during January 2011.2 While job seekers can use the site for free, CareerBuilder charges firms
several hundred dollars to post a job ad on the website for one position for one month. A firm
that wishes to keep the ad online for another month is subject to the same fee, while a firm
that wishes to advertise multiple positions needs to pay for each position separately, although
small quantity discounts are available (see CareerBuilder, 2013). At each moment in time, the
CareerBuilder website contains over 1 million jobs.
Search Process. A firm posting a job is asked to provide various pieces of information. First,
it needs to specify a job title, e.g. “senior accountant,” which will appear at the top of the
job posting as well as in the search results. CareerBuilder encourages the firm to use simple,
recognizable job titles and avoid abbreviations, but firms are free to choose any job title they
2 See

comScore Media Metrix (2011). Monster.com is similar in size, and whether Monster or CareerBuilder is
larger depends on the exact measure used.

6

desire. Further, the firm provides the full text of the job ad, a job category and industry, and the
geographical location of the position. Finally, the firm can specify education and experience
requirements as well as the salary that it is willing to pay.
A job seeker who visits CareerBuilder.com sees a web form which allows him to specify
some keywords (typically the job title), a location, and a category (broad type of job selected
from a drop-down menu). After providing this information3 , the job seeker is presented a list
of vacancies matching his query, organized into 25 results per page. For the jobs that appear in
the list, the job seeker can see the job title, salary, location, and the name of the firm. To get
more details about a job, the worker must click on the job snippet in the list, which brings him
to a page with the full text of the job ad as well as a “job snapshot” summarizing the job’s key
characteristics. At the top and bottom of each job ad, a large “Apply Now” button is present,
which brings the worker to a page where he can send his resume and his cover letter to the
employer.
Sample. Our data set consists of vacancies posted on CareerBuilder in the Chicago and Washington, DC Designated Market Areas (DMA) between January and March 2011. A DMA is a
geographical region set up by the A.C. Nielsen Company that consists of all the counties that
make up a city’s television viewing area. DMAs are slightly larger in size than Metropolitan
Statistical Areas and they include rural zones. We observe all vacancies posted in these two locations during January and February 2011 and we observe a random subsample of the vacancies
posted in March 2011.
Variables. The CareerBuilder data is an attractive source of information compared to existing
data sets, in particular due to the large number of variables that it includes. For each vacancy,
we observe the following job characteristics: the job title, the salary (if specified), whether the
salary is hourly or annual, the education level required for the position, the experience level
required for the position, an occupation code, and the number of days the vacancy has been
posted. The occupation code is the detailed, six-digit O*NET-SOC (Standard Occupational
Classification) code.4 CareerBuilder assigns this code based on the full content of the job ad
using O*NET-SOC AutoCoder, the publicly available tool endorsed by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics.5 This procedure is consistent with the approach of commonly used labor market
3 It

is not necessary to provide information in all three fields.
http://www.onetcenter.org/taxonomy.html. We henceforth refer to this classification simply as

4 See

SOC.
5 See http://www.onetsocautocoder.com/plus/onetmatch.

7

surveys, such as the Current Population Survey (CPS).6 We further observe the following firm
characteristics: the name of the firm, an industry code, and the total number of employees in
the firm. CareerBuilder uses external data sets, such as Dun & Bradstreet, to match the twodigit NAICS (North American Industry Classification System) industry code and the number of
employees of the firm to the data.
In addition to these characteristics, we also observe several outcome variables for each
vacancy. Our first outcome variable, the number of views, represents the number of times that
a job appeared in a listing after a search. The second outcome variable, the number of clicks,
is the number of times that a job seeker clicked on the snippet to see the entire job ad. Finally,
we observe the number of applications to each job, where an application is defined as a person
clicking on the “Apply Now” button in the job ad.
From these numbers, we construct two new variables that reflect applicant behavior: the
number of applications per 100 views, and the number of clicks per 100 views. These measures
correct for heterogeneity in the number of times a job appears in a listing, allowing us to analyze
applicants’ choices among known options.
For a random subset of the vacancies of January and March 2011, we also observe some
applicant characteristics. Specifically, we observe the number of applicants broken down by
education level (if at least an associate degree) and by general work experience (in bins of
5 years). We will use these job seeker characteristics as proxies for worker productivity to
analyze the quality of the applicant pool that a firm attracts.
Cleaning. We express all salaries in yearly amounts, assuming a full-time work schedule.
When a salary range is provided, we use the middle of the interval for most of the analysis,
but we perform robustness checks in section 5. To reduce the impact of outliers and errors, we
clean the wage data by removing the bottom and top 0.5% of the salaries.
Because job titles are free-form, many unique ones exist and the frequency distribution is
highly skewed to the right. To improve consistency, we cleaned the data. Most importantly, we
formatted every title in lower case and removed any punctuation signs, employer names, or job
locations. In most of our analysis, we restrict attention to the first four words of a job title. As
we will discuss, because this assumption has minimal impact on the number of unique job titles
in our sample, our results are not sensitive to it.
Representativeness. Some background work (data not shown) was done to compare the job
vacancies on CareerBuilder.com with data on job vacancies in the representative JOLTS (Job
6 This

means that misclassification is unlikely to be a larger problem in the CareerBuilder data than in the CPS.
See Mellow & Sider (1983) for an analysis of inconsistencies in occupational codes in the CPS.

8

Openings and Labor Turnover Survey). The number of vacancies on CareerBuilder.com represents 35% of the total number of vacancies in the US in January 2011 as counted in JOLTS.
Compared to the distribution of vacancies across industries in JOLTS, some industries are overrepresented in the CareerBuilder data, in particular information technology; finance and insurance; and real estate, rental, and leasing. The most underrepresented industries are state and
local government, accommodation and food services, other services, and construction.
While CareerBuilder data is not representative by industry, in most other respects it is representative of the US labor market, as documented by Marinescu & Rathelot (2014). Using a
representative sample of vacancies and job seekers from CareerBuilder.com in 2012, they show
that the distribution of vacancies across occupations is essentially identical (correlation of 0.95)
to the distribution of vacancies across all jobs on the Internet as captured by the Help Wanted
Online data. Furthermore, the distribution of unemployed job seekers on CareerBuilder.com
across occupations is similar to that of the nationally representative Current Population Survey
(correlation of more than 0.7). Hence, the vacancies and job seekers on CareerBuilder.com are
broadly representative of the US economy as a whole, and they form a substantial fraction of
the market.
Descriptive Statistics. Table 1 shows the summary statistics for our sample. The full sample
consists of more than 60,000 job openings by 4,797 different firms. On average, each job was
online for 16 days, during which it was viewed as a part of a search result 6,084 times, received
281 clicks, and garnered 59 applications. Per 100 views, the average job receives almost six
clicks and approximately one application.7
Only a minority of job ads include an explicit experience requirement (0.3%) or an explicit
education requirement (42%). When specified, these requirements appear in the “job snapshot”
box at the end of the full job ad, but they do not appear in the job snippet that job seekers first see
in the search results. Therefore, employers may choose not to fill in education and experience
requirements if they feel that the overall job description is sufficiently informative.
We observe a posted wage for approximately 20% of the jobs. When present, the wage
does appear in the job snippet as part of the search results. The average posted yearly salary
is just over $57,000, and we will show in more detail below that posted wages on the website
have the same distribution as the wages of full-time workers in the Current Population Survey.
In the smaller sample with posted wages, there are 1,369 unique firms. Finally, we observe the
average applicant quality for approximately 2,300 positions. The average applicant has between
16 and 17 years of education (conditional on holding at least an associate degree) and just over
7 Keep

in mind that the average of ratios does not necessarily need to equal the ratio of averages.

9

13 years of work experience.

3

Job Ads

We start our empirical analysis by studying firms’ decisions regarding the job ads that they
post. We provide evidence that job titles are the key way in which firms communicate the
characteristics of their vacancies (including the wage).

3.1

Job Titles

All job ads in our sample specify a job title. This job title is prominently featured on the employment website and is the main piece of information that workers use to search the CareerBuilder
database. This suggests that job titles play a key role in the search and matching process. Since
an analysis of job titles is—to the best of our knowledge—novel in the literature, we start by
providing some descriptives.
The full sample of more than 60,000 job openings contains 22,009 unique job titles. Truncation to the first four words marginally reduces this number to 20,447. In the subsample of
jobs with posted wages, the corresponding numbers are 4,669 and 4,553, respectively. In Table
2, we list the ten most common job titles (after truncation), both for the full sample and for the
subsample of jobs that post wages. Note that the most common job titles are typically at most
three words long. We also show the most common job titles if we truncate the job title to the
first two words or the first word. Figure 1 provides a more comprehensive overview of frequent
job titles in the form of a word cloud, in which the size of a job title depends on its frequency.
Inspection of the table and the figures reveals that job titles often describe occupations, e.g.
“administrative assistant,” “customer service representative,” or “senior accountant.” This raises
the question of how job titles compare to other definitions of occupations, in particular the occupational classification (SOC) of the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Since our data includes SOC
codes, we can explicitly make this comparison. Perhaps the most obvious difference between
job titles and SOC codes concerns their variety: in our full sample, the number of unique job
titles is more than 25 times the number of unique SOC codes.8 In other words, job titles provide
a finer classification. For example, they distinguish between “inside sales representative” and
“outside sales representative,” between “executive assistant” and “administrative assistant,” and
between “senior accountant” and “staff accoutant”—while each of the two jobs in these pairs
8 20,447

versus 762, to be exact. In the subsample with posted wages, the difference is smaller, but still a factor
of eight (4,553 versus 594). Note that the SOC classification distinguishes 840 occupations in total, some of which
do not appear in our data.

10

would have the same SOC code. While some of the larger variety in job titles might be due
to noise in employers’ word choice, we will show in the following sections that distinctions
between job titles are economically significant.

3.2

Wages

While all job ads contain a job title, only 20% of vacancies in our sample post a wage. We interpret this as a sign that a job title provides sufficiently precise information on compensation such
that, in equilibrium, firms consider it unnecessary to also post a wage.9 To provide evidence for
this idea, we first analyze firms’ decision to post a wage or not, and then firms’ decision of how
much to offer, conditional on posting a wage.
3.2.1

Wage Posting

Table 3 displays our results regarding whether firms post a wage or not. Using a linear probability model, we find that both job titles (column I) and firm fixed effects (column II) have
high explanatory power for the decision to post a wage: they each explain around 70% of the
variance in wage-posting behavior. Including both simultaneously essentially explains all of the
variation in job posting behavior (the R2 is 0.93 in column III), while including additional job
characteristics does not substantially improve the model fit (column IV). Finally, in column V,
the left-hand side variable is the firm fixed effect estimated in column I. We find that job titles
explain most of the firm fixed effects. That is, the types of jobs that firms advertise, as embodied
in the job titles in their ads, account for systematic differences in wage-posting behavior across
firms.
3.2.2

Wage Variance

To determine which observable characteristics are most important in explaining posted wages,
we regress log wages on various sets of controls. The results of this exercise are presented in
Table 4. Following most of the literature on realized wages, we start by regressing the posted
wages on firm fixed effects. This explains about 50% of the variance (column I). As we demonstrate in column II, job titles do a better job: fixed effects for (the first four words of) the job
9 An

additional explanation might be the fact that some companies use Applicant Tracking Systems (ATS)
software that keeps track of job postings and applications. This software typically removes the wage information
by default before sending out the job posting to online job boards such as CareerBuilder (private communication
with CareerBuilder.com). However, this is unlikely the full story. First, the fact that most job ads do not advertise
wages is consistent with the worker survey data of Hall & Krueger (2012) and evidence from job boards in other
countries where ATS may be less common (Brencic, 2012; Kuhn & Shen, 2012). Second, if firms really cared
about advertising wages, it would be suboptimal for them to rely on software that removes this information.

11

titles explain more than 90% of the wage variance. This result is not due to the fact that there are
many unique job titles. To demonstrate this, we consider two measures of fit, the adjusted R2
and the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC), which, unlike R2 , account for the number of controls. As table 4 shows, both measures favor the specification with job title fixed effects over
the one with firm fixed effects. We also perform a permutation test in which we re-estimate
the specification with job title fixed effects (column II) 1000 times with randomly re-assigned
wages. The average adjusted R2 is 0 in this case, confirming that our results are not simply the
result of the large number of job titles.10
Specifications that include both firm and job title fixed effects as well as other job characteristics can explain nearly all of the variation in posted wages (column III and IV). Hence,
firm fixed effects explain most of the wage variance that remains after controlling for job titles,
implying that within job title variation in posted wages can largely be explained by firm fixed
effects. However, since job titles already explain 90%, the additional explanatory power compared to job titles alone is relatively small. This suggests that job titles are the most important
determinant of differences in posted wages across vacancies, and that job titles might explain
the differences in posted wages across firms as well. To test this latter hypothesis directly, we
regress the firm fixed effects estimated in column I on job title fixed effects. We find that job
titles can explain about 90% of the variance in firm fixed effects (column V). Hence, we conclude that most of the systematic differences in posted wages across firms can be explained by
firms posting jobs with different job titles.
One might wonder whether the fact that some firms post a wage range, rather than a single
wage, affects this conclusion. This is not the case. First, as we show in section 5, our results are
robust to alternative ways of dealing with wage ranges. Second, a natural interpretation of wage
ranges is that firms plan to condition the wage that they eventually pay on the type of the worker
that they hire. This means that the range does not actually contribute to the wage dispersion that
workers of a particular type face.11
Another way of assessing the degree of wage variance within a job title is to consider the
mean-min ratio, introduced by Hornstein et al. (2011). They show that calibration of basic
search models to the US labor market implies a gap between the mean and the lowest wage in
the labor market of at most 5%, corresponding to a mean-min ratio of less than 1.05. If the
degree of wage dispersion were larger, the model would imply that workers should not accept a
new job as quickly as is observed in the data, but should search longer to find a higher-paying
10 These

results are available upon request.
Shimer (2005a) for an example of a model in which each firm posts a menu of wages, one for each
possible type of worker. Hence, a worker of a given type who gets hired by a given firm does not face any
uncertainty regarding the wage that he will receive.
11 See

12

job.
In the working paper version, Hornstein et al. (2007) demonstrate that the mean-min ratio
in the US Census typically exceeds 2. However, since they calculate the mean-min ratio within
SOC codes, our results suggest that they are overestimating the degree of frictional wage dispersion. We show in appendix B that the the mean-min ratio within a job title is much smaller
than within an SOC. Indeed, it can be as low as 1.22, which means that controlling for job
titles resolves more than 90% of the original discrepancy between the predictions of the calibrated model and the data. Hence, our results indicate that job seekers accept jobs relatively
quickly because the degree of wage dispersion within a job title is limited. That is, as long as
job seekers are aiming for a specific job title, they cannot realistically hope to find a job with
well above-average pay.
Overall, our results on the determinants of posted wages as well as wage-posting behavior
imply that knowing the job title is enough to determine the level of the offered wage and whether
the wage will be explicitly posted. Job titles are so informative that firms may not need to post
the wage for a position. Job seekers familiar with an industry should be able to infer the wage
from the job title.
3.2.3

Comparison with CPS

Our conclusion that there is little residual wage variation is at odds with much of the literature,
which attributes an important role to frictional wage dispersion and/or worker and firm fixed
effects. However, we analyze posted (i.e., offered) wages rather than realized (i.e., accepted)
wages. We now study the extent to which this difference in posted vs. realized wages explains
our results. To do so, we exploit a commonly used data set with realized wages, the CPS.
Wage Distribution. To compare posted wages on CareerBuilder.com to earned wages in the
labor market, we use data from the basic monthly CPS from January and February 2011. We
restrict the CPS data to employed individuals in the Chicago and Washington, DC MSAs, such
that the sample covers approximately the same time frame and geographic area as the CareerBuilder data.
The results of the comparison between the two data sets are displayed in Figure 2. The upper
panel shows that the posted wage distribution is more compressed than the realized wage distribution. However, the CareerBuilder data does not properly distinguish full-time from part-time
jobs: in particular, hourly wages are converted to full-time equivalent. Furthermore, CareerBuilder data does not account for sporadic patterns of employment that could occur for some
workers in the CPS. Therefore, posted wages mostly capture full-time work. Another differ13

ence between the CPS and CareerBuilder.com is that CPS earnings are top-coded. To make the
two data sets more comparable, we restrict the CPS data to workers who work full-time and
whose earnings are not top-coded, and the CareerBuilder data to earnings levels that are not
top-coded in the CPS. With these restrictions, the distribution of realized wages in the CPS and
the distribution of posted wages in CareerBuilder are almost identical (Figure 2, lower panel).
Therefore, we conclude that the distribution of posted wages on CareerBuilder.com is very close
to the distribution of realized wages in the CPS for full-time workers.12
Effect of Occupations. To further compare the CareerBuilder data to the CPS, we investigate
the effect of occupational controls in both data sets. Although we do not observe job titles in
the CPS, we can control for occupations via the SOC codes. Table 5 presents three wage regressions for the CPS with increasingly finer occupation controls. We use the CPS weights for the
outgoing rotation group. In column I, we regress log weekly earnings on the most aggregated
classification (major occupations), distinguishing 11 different occupations. This explains approximately 15% of the variation in the wages. Column II and III show the specifications with
23 minor and 523 detailed occupations13 , respectively. This increases the (adjusted) R2 . The
most detailed occupational classification available in the CPS explains slightly over a third of
the wage variance (column III), leaving about two thirds of the wage variance unexplained.
Having shown that SOC codes can explain about a third of the variance in wages in the
CPS, we now analyze to what degree SOC codes can explain the variance in posted wages. In
columns IV, V, and VI, we use the CareerBuilder sample and run the same specifications as in
columns I, II, and III. The results in terms of the explained wage variation are strikingly similar
to the CPS sample: major occupations explain about 15% of the variance in posted wages and
detailed occupations explain slightly over a third of the variance. This similarity between the
explanatory power of occupations when using the CPS and the CareerBuilder data sets supports
the idea that occupations are equally important in explaining realized wages and posted wages.
While the most detailed SOC codes available in the CPS distinguish between 523 occupations, the CareerBuilder data includes a much more detailed measure of occupations: job
titles. As we have shown, job titles can explain more than 90% of the variance in posted wages
(column VII). Since the explanatory power of occupations is essentially the same in the CPS
12 Of

course, the two distributions do not need to coincide. It is straightforward to specify a search model where
realized wages first-order stochastically dominate posted wages. The goal here is merely to show that posted wages
at CareerBuilder are similar to wages in the labor market as a whole.
13 The CareerBuilder data uses the SOC 2000 classification while CPS uses Census occupational codes based on
SOC 2010. To address this difference in classification, we converted SOC 2000 to SOC 2010 and then to Census
codes. Because SOC 2010 is more detailed than the SOC 2000, a small number of Census codes had to be slightly
aggregated. In Table 5, the same occupational classifications are used for both CareerBuilder and CPS data.

14

and CareerBuilder samples, it is possible that job titles, were they available in the CPS, would
explain most of the variance in realized wages. This is an exciting area for future research.

3.3

Word Analysis

To better understand the explanatory power of job titles, in this section we estimate an additional
specification for the wage variance as well as for the wage-posting decision. In this exercise,
we take the residuals of each dependent variable, after controlling for detailed SOC codes,
and we regress them on a set of dummy variables for each word appearing in the job title.
Compared to job title fixed effects, this specification is restrictive because it ignores the order
and combinations in which words appear in a job title. It assumes, for example, that the word
“assistant” has the same effect every time it appears.14 Yet, this specification allows us to
determine which words are most important. Because the analysis of wage determinants is more
familiar, we start with examining which words are associated with higher wages. We then move
on to analyze which words are associated with a higher probability of posting a wage.
3.3.1

Wage Variance

The results of the regression of the wage residuals on the word dummies are presented in column
II of Table 6. Not surprisingly, this specification explains a smaller share of the wage variation
than the specification with job title fixed effects (column I). That said, it still explains about half
of the within-SOC variance in posted wages.
Next we explore which words are most important in explaining wages. In Table 7, we list
words that appear at least 100 times and are significant at least at the 5% level in the specification from column II in Table 6. We checked the job titles in which these words appear
and classified the words into three categories. The first column includes words that signal the
expected experience level of the holder of the job title. Within an SOC code, job titles that include the words “manager” or “senior” have higher than average posted wages, whereas wages
are lower than average for titles that include the words “specialist” or “junior”. For instance,
within the SOC code 13-2011 (“Accountants and Auditors”), accounting managers and senior
accountants earn more than accounting specialists and junior accountants. In the second column are words that denote specialties or skills. For example, within the SOC code 41-3099
(“Sales Representatives, Services, All Other”) or 41-4012 (“Sales Representatives, Wholesale
and Manufacturing, Except Technical and Scientific Products”), inside sales jobs, which require
employees to contact customers by phone, pay less than outside sales jobs, where employees
14 Examples

of such jobs include “executive assistant,” “assistant store manager,” and “assistant professor.”.

15

must travel and meet face-to-face with customers.15 Finally, the third column is similar to the
second column, but focuses on computer skills and specialties. For example, within SOC code
15-1071 (“Network and Computer Systems Administrators”), network administrators earn less
than systems administrators.
Taken together, the frequent words listed Table 7 explain about 20% of the wage residuals
after accounting for SOC (Table 6, column III). Therefore, at least 20% of the within-SOC wage
variance is due to differences in seniority as well as in skills and specialties. When we regress
the wage residuals on the frequent words that denote seniority from the first column of Table 7,
we find that these words alone explain about 14% of the within-SOC variance in posted wages
(Table 6, column IV). Overall, we find that an important reason why job titles explain wages
better than SOC codes is their ability to reflect differences across jobs in management/seniority
and skills/specialties.
Figure 3 provides a more complete overview of the words that are associated with either
higher or lower wages. The size of the words depends on their frequency, while the intensity
of the color represents the magnitude of their effect. We can classify the words in this figure
roughly the same way was the frequent words from table 7. For example, “president” and
“intern” indicate very different levels of seniority and have opposing effects on the wage, just
as one would expect. “Scientist” and “retail” are examples of skills/specialties leading to a
higher and a lower wage, respectively. Finally, in terms of computer skills, the word “linux” is
associated with higher wages, while the generic term “computer” leads to lower wages.
3.3.2

Wage Posting

The words that significantly increase or decrease the probability that a job ad contains a wage
are displayed in Figure 4. Unlike the figure for the wage level, this figure does not show a
clear pattern. In particular, both “high-wage” words and “low-wage” words (from Figure 3) can
predict a higher probability of posting a wage. For example, if we consider words indicating
seniority, then both “manager” (higher wage) and “junior” (lower wage) increase the probability that a wage is present in the ad, while “chief” (higher wage) and “representative” (lower
wage) decrease this probability. If we consider words indicating specialization, then both “web”
(higher wage) and “retail” (lower wage) increase the probability of posting a wage, while both
15 The

most frequent word among those that are associated with higher wages in the second column is "-". This
is not a typo; this character typically separates the main job title from additional details about the job. These
additional details were deemed important enough for the firm to specify them in the job title. Presumably, all other
things equal, a more specialized job comes with a higher pay. Some examples of the use of "-" are: "web developer
- c# developer - net developer - vb net developer" or "web developer - ruby developer - php developer - ror pearl
java".

16

“-” (higher wage) and “associate” (lower wage) decrease the probability of posting a wage.
Hence, the result of Brencic (2012) that jobs with higher skill requirements are less likely
to post wages does not hold within SOC codes in our data set. This suggests that such an effect,
if present, operates across SOC codes. Indeed, if we regress the wage-posting dummy on educational requirements alone, we find that jobs that require a high school degree are significantly
more likely to post a wage than jobs requiring a college degree.
In summary, our results indicate that job titles capture a large amount of job heterogeneity
ignored by detailed SOC codes. In particular, job titles reflect heterogeneity in seniority as well
as in skills and specialization that SOC codes do not. Our word analysis also illustrates that
free-form Internet text data has the power to deepen our understanding of job heterogeneity in
the labor market. While text analysis has been used in other areas of economics, in particular
news analysis (e.g. Gentzkow & Shapiro, 2010), we show a promising new use of such text
analysis for the study of labor markets.

4

Applicants

After analyzing job ads, we now turn to workers’ application behavior. In particular, we analyze
which job characteristics affect the number and the average quality of the applicants that a
vacancy attracts. We again find that job titles play a fundamental role.

4.1

Number of Applicants

We start with examining the relationship between log wages and the number of applications per
100 views16 . The results of this exercise are presented in table 8.
Without controls, we find that there is a significant negative association between the wage
and the number of applicants a vacancy gets: a 10% increase in the wage is associated with a
6.3% decline in applications per view (column I).17 Adding controls such as job characteristics
as well as detailed occupation fixed effects (column II) and firm fixed effects (column III) increases the R2 , but it does not change the negative relationship between wages and the number
of applicants. The coefficient on the wage and its significance remain essentially unchanged as
more controls are added, indicating a 5.8% decline in the number of applications in response to
a 10% increase in the wage offer.
16 We use the number of applications per 100 job views to correct for heterogeneity in the number of views across

jobs. An alternative choice for the outcome variable is simply the logarithm of the number of applicants for each
job. We find that our key results from Table 8 are qualitatively unaffected by this alternative outcome definition.
17 A 10% increase in the wage decreases the number of applications per 100 views by 0.770 log (1.1) = 0.073,
which is a 6.3% decline compared to the sample average of 1.168.

17

Since job titles turned out to be important in explaining the wages that firms post, it is
reasonable to expect that they also play a role in workers’ application decisions. Therefore,
in columns IV and V, we repeat the specifications of columns II and III, respectively, while
replacing the SOC code fixed effects with job title fixed effects. This allows us to estimate
the relationship between wages and the number of applicants among even more homogeneous
groups of jobs.
Controlling for job title fixed effects instead of SOC codes fundamentally changes the results. In particular, it reverses the negative relationship between wages and the number of applications seen in columns I, II, and III. The coefficient on the wage is now positive and significant.
That is, within job title, higher wages are associated with more applicants, as one would expect
on the basis of economic theory. When we include firm fixed effects to absorb even more firmside heterogeneity (column V), the same pattern emerges, although both the coefficient and the
standard error increase somewhat. The point estimate implies that a 10% increase in the wage
is associated with a 7.4% increase in the number of applicants per 100 views.
Comparison and Interpretation. The adjusted R2 and the AIC strongly favor the specifications with job titles. This suggests that the negative relationship between wages and applications
found when using SOC codes is spurious. In other words, jobs with the same SOC can still differ considerably in their characteristics. These differences directly affect both the wage and
the number of applicants, rendering estimates obtained without controlling for job title heterogeneity inconsistent. Admitteldy, job titles do not capture all heterogeneity. Yet, the fact that
they reverse the sign on the wage coefficient indicates that they capture a crucial component
of heterogeneity, and that they are important for understanding the relationship between wages
and applicant behavior.
The fact that a positive relationship between wages and applications arises after controlling
for relevant heterogeneity has another important implication. It suggests that workers are able
to target their applications to jobs that are better matches. Perhaps this is not surprising given
the design of CareerBuilder.com, which makes it easy for job seekers to quickly compare a
large number of vacancies. Nevertheless, this result is important because it validates models of
directed search (e.g., Moen, 1997; Shimer, 1996) as realistic models of labor market search,
relative to canonical random search models (e.g., Pissarides, 1985; Mortensen & Pissarides,
1994). While these models have strikingly different implications for labor market outcomes,
empirical evidence on either side of the debate is scant. The limited evidence that exists presents
a mixed or a negative association between wages and applications (see Holzer et al., 1991;
Faberman & Menzio, 2010). As these studies use specifications with controls for occupations

18

and/or sectors but not for job titles, our analysis suggests that omitted variable bias might be
driving their results.

4.2

Quality of Applicants

To examine the quality of the applicants that a vacancy attracts, we use two different measures
of the quality of an applicant pool: i) the average level of work experience among applicants,
and ii) the average education level among applicants, expressed in years of education.
Average Experience. Table 9 displays the results for the average experience level. We find
that, across all jobs, job titles explain most of the variance in the average experience level of
applicants (column I): the R2 is 0.95. Among jobs with a posted wage, job titles also explain
most of the variance in the average experience level of applicants across jobs (column II). While
wages also explain variation in the average experience level of applicants, they have much
lower explanatory power than job titles (compare the R2 in column II vs. column III). Adding
the wage on top of job titles barely improves the model fit (compare the R2 in column II vs.
column IV). The specification in column IV, which has the highest explanatory power of all
our specifications, indicates that a 10% increase in the wage is associated with an increase in
the experience of the average applicant by 0.12 years, or roughly 1%. While higher wages do
attract more experienced applicants within a job title, job titles alone account for most of the
variation in applicant experience across jobs.
Average Education. In table 10, we focus on the education level of the average applicant.
The results are very similar to what we found when explaining the experience of the average
applicant. That is, job titles explain most of the variation in the average level of education of
applicants across jobs (column I and II). Wages add little explanatory power once we control
for job titles (compare columns III and IV), even though higher wages do attract more educated
applicants within a job title (column IV).
Interpretation. Job titles explain most of the variation in the experience and education levels
of applicants across jobs. Our results suggest that more educated and more experienced workers
do not, for the most part, earn higher wages for doing the same job better. Instead, higher levels
of education and experience allow workers to access job titles with higher pay. The sorting of
workers into different job titles is likely to play an important role in explaining the impact of
education and experience on wages.

19

While the data limitations and the small magnitude of the effects necessitate caution, the
fact that wages are associated with significantly better applicants in each specification suggests
a real effect. This result gives further credence to the idea that search in this market is directed
rather than random. That is, low-skill and high-skill workers sort themselves into low-wage and
high-wage jobs, respectively.

4.3
4.3.1

Word Analysis
Number of Applicants

We now discuss words that are associated with a larger or smaller number of applicants per view
within SOC code (Figure 5). Many of the words that predict a greater number of applicants per
view are also words that predict lower wages (compare with Figure 3). These include words
denoting lower seniority and experience, such as “assistant”, “support”, “specialist”, “coordinator”, “entry”, and “junior”. As for words denoting specialities, we can see, for example, that
lower-wage inside sales jobs receive more applications than the average job in the same SOC.
Conversely, many of the words that predict a lower number of applicants per view within
SOC are words that also predict higher wages. The two word clouds are remarkably similar.
Words that denote higher seniority and management positions such as “manager”, “senior”, and
“director” are associated with a smaller number of applicants. Words that are associated with
higher paying specialities or areas, such as “developer”, “engineer”, and “linux”, have a lower
number of applicants.
Overall, examining the words that predict wages and words that predict the number of applicants enlightens us on the negative relationship between wages and applicants within SOC.
Within SOC, words in the job title associated with higher wages predict a lower number of
applicants per view, and vice versa for words in the job title associated with lower wages. Substantively, jobs with higher seniority or managerial responsibilities tend to pay higher wages and
attract fewer applicants. Similarly, specialties with higher pay tend to attract fewer applicants.
4.3.2

Quality of Applicants

We now turn to the quality of applicants and examine words that predict higher or lower education and experience within an SOC code. Because the sample size for this exercise is much
smaller, we report the results in Table 11 rather than a word cloud.
Words that predict higher experience or higher education tend to be words that also predict
higher wages, and vice versa for words that predict lower experience or education. For example, words that indicate higher seniority or management such as “manager” and “senior” are
20

associated with higher experience, while words like “director” and “chief” are associated with
both higher experience and higher education. Lower education and experience are associated
with certain specialties. The example of “rn" (registered nurse) is interesting, as it is associated
with both lower experience and lower education. This is explained by the fact that, within SOC
29-1111 (“Registered Nurses”), “rn” indicates a lower level job compared to job titles where
“rn” does not appear, such as “nurse manager,” “nurse clinician,” and “director of nursing.”
Overall, examining the behavior of applicants reveals that words in the job title are powerful
predictors of the number and quality of applicants that a vacancy receives. Job titles not only
explain firms’ wage-posting behavior, but they also play a key role in directing workers’ search.

5
5.1

Robustness and Discussion
Robustness and Further Results

We have shown that job titles explain most of the variance in posted wages. One reason for this
large explanatory power may be that there are many unique job titles in the sample. However,
restricting the sample to job titles that appear at least twice does not change the results (compare
Table 4 to Table A.1 in the appendix). Thus, even when focusing on job titles that appear in at
least two job postings, we find that job titles explain more than 90% of the variance in posted
wages.
Our analysis of the wage variance has shown that job titles essentially determine posted
wages. However, firms often post a wage range rather than a single wage, and we have focused
so far on explaining the midpoint of this range. In Table A.2, we show that job titles are just
as powerful in explaining the minimum of the range (column I) and the maximum of the range
(column III). We also find, again, that SOC codes explain less than 40% of the variance in
the minimum or the maximum offered wage (columns II and IV). Finally, we investigate the
power of job titles in explaining how large the wage range is. We define the wage range as the
maximum minus the minimum divided by the midpoint. We divide the range by the midpoint
to adjust for the fact that higher wage jobs may also have larger absolute ranges. This range
variable takes the value of zero when only one wage value is posted. Remarkably, we find that
job titles have high explanatory power for wage ranges as well: they explain about 80% of the
variance in the wage range. By contrast, SOC codes only explain about 20% of the variance in
the wage range. We conclude that job titles explain most of the variance in the minimum, the
midpoint and the maximum of the posted wage range, as well as in the size of the posted wage
range.

21

We have shown that the first four words in the job title explain most of the variance in
posted wages. How sensitive is the explanatory power of job titles to the number of words that
are used? Table A.3 examines the explanatory power of the first n words of the job title for
various values of n. The first word of the job title already has a great deal of explanatory power:
first word fixed effects explain about 60% of the wage variance. Astonishingly, the first word
of the job title has greater explanatory power than the most detailed occupational classification
that can be used in the CPS (see Table 5, column VI). Using the first three words of the job
title significantly improves the explanatory power of the model, with an R2 of 0.93. Using the
first four words only slightly improves the explanatory power compared to using the first three
words. Finally, using all words in the job title essentially does not add any explanatory power
compared to using the first four words. These results show that the first four words of the job
title convey almost all of the information that is relevant for posted wages, and justify our choice
of using the first four words to define the job title.
We have analyzed the impact of wages on the number of applicants and have shown that
this impact is only estimated to be positive when job titles are controlled for. However, omitted
variable bias could contaminate the relationship between wages and the number of applications.
Since we cannot control for the full text of the job ad, we may be missing information that is
relevant for the worker’s application decision. To assess whether this is the case, we turn to an
examination of the impact of the wage on clicks per 100 views. Recall that when a job is listed
as a snippet on the result page, only the posted wage, job title, firm, and DMA are listed. The
applicant must click to see more details. Hence, we have all the variables that can drive the
applicant’s click decision, eliminating the scope for omitted variable bias.
Table A.4 explores the relationship between wages and clicks per 100 views: the results are
similar to those obtained when applications per 100 views is the dependent variable (Table 8).
When no controls are used (column I), we see a significant and negative association between the
wage and clicks per 100 views. When controlling for basic job characteristics, firm fixed effects,
and job title fixed effects, the coefficient on the wage becomes positive and highly significant
(column V), implying that a 10% increase in the wage is associated with a 2.9% increase in
clicks per 100 views. The fact that the qualitative results in Table 8 can be reproduced for clicks
per view, an outcome whose determinants are fully known, improves our confidence in our basic
results. A higher wage is generally associated with fewer clicks and fewer applications per view.
It is only within job title that a higher wage results in more clicks and more applications per
view. Finding a reversal in the relationship between wages and clicks when controlling for job
titles provides further credibility to our results for the number of applications, and confirms the
important role of job titles in understanding applicant decisions.

22

5.2

Discussion

Directed Search. Labor market frictions are important to understand economic phenomena
like unemployment or the distribution of wages (Rogerson et al., 2005). In the search and
matching literature, such frictions are explicitly modelled. There are two main ways of modeling meetings between workers and firms: random search and directed search. Typically, random
search leads to inefficient outcomes with unemployment being inefficiently low or high, while
directed search leads to efficient outcomes. The key reason why directed search is more efficient
than random search is that directed search allows for greater competition between employers. In
directed search models (also called competitive search), workers can observe job characteristics
and direct their applications to a specific subset of jobs. Therefore, employers have an incentive
to compete on characteristics in order to attract workers. By contrast, in random search models,
workers and firms meet randomly, and sequentially. Thus, parties to a bilateral worker-firm
meeting have some monopoly power because going to another meeting is costly. If the random
search model is coupled with bargaining over wages, then the outcome of the model is inefficient unless the workers’ bargaining power satisfies the Hosios (1990) condition. By contrast,
in directed search models, competition typically leads to the efficient outcome.
Nowadays, the overwhelming majority of vacancies are posted on the Internet (Barnichon,
2010). Furthermore, Internet job search is associated with higher job finding rates than offline
job search (Kuhn & Mansour, 2014). The informational structure of job boards (including
CareerBuilder) is such that directed search is the more realistic assumption. Indeed, workers are
able to (i) observe the characteristics of a number of jobs18 and (ii) decide which jobs to apply
to based on these characteristics. Therefore, there is clearly competition between employers.
However, this does not tell us exactly how directed search works in this environment, and the
theoretical literature has developed several types of directed search models.
In the most stylized version of directed search, workers and firms are homogeneous. Firms
post wages and workers direct their applications based on observed wages (see e.g. Moen,
1997). Such a model predicts that higher wage jobs should attract more applications: firms
are willing to pay higher wages because they can fill their vacancies faster thanks to the higher
number of applicants.19 This prediction that higher wage jobs attract more applicants is verified
in our data, but only within job title. This suggests that it is only within job title that workers and
jobs are homogeneous enough to satisfy the prediction of the model. Conversely, this implies
18 In

fact, Acemoglu & Shimer (1999) show that it can be enough for workers to observe the characteristics of
just two random jobs in order to achieve efficiency in a directed search model.
19 With one application per worker, this relationship is off the equilibrium path. In equilibrium, a positive
relationship between posted wages and the number of applicants can for example be obtained by allowing for
multiple applications per worker as in Galenianos & Kircher (2009).

23

that there is much job and worker heterogeneity across job titles, even within a given SOC.
Directed search models can be extended to capture such job and worker heterogeneity (see
e.g. Shi, 2001; Shimer, 2005a; Eeckhout & Kircher, 2010). In these models, firms use wages to
induce the efficient sorting of different types of workers across jobs.20 If firms cannot communicate job characteristics and workers must search randomly (see e.g. Shimer & Smith, 2000),
then sorting will typically not be perfect and inefficiencies will arise (see related literature discussion in Shimer, 2005a). In our data, workers observe job characteristics before applying, and
we find evidence of sorting on wages. Specifically, we find that higher wage jobs attract better
applicants (higher education and more experience) both across and within a job title.
Importantly, directed search models do not necessitate posting the wage. Indeed, the crucial
ingredient of directed search is the presence of information about jobs that allows for competition between firms to attract workers. In the theoretical literature, there are at least two examples
of directed search models that do not have posted wages yet still yield efficient outcomes. Acemoglu & Shimer (1999) show that posting a bargaining parameter can be enough to achieve
efficiency. Menzio (2007) develops a model of cheap talk where firms post non-binding signals
about their wages.
In our empirical work, we find that only a minority of firms post wages. Yet, this is consistent with directed search if firms can convey information about their jobs using other signals. In
particular, we show that the job title is an important mechanism for firms to communicate information about their jobs. Indeed, job titles explain most of the wage variance among jobs with
a posted wage. Furthermore, across all jobs, including those that do not post wages, job titles
explain more than 80% of the variation in the education and experience of applicants, which
shows that job titles are used by workers to direct their search.
Overall, our evidence is consistent with many predictions of directed search models. Even
though most jobs do not post wages, we have shown that employers are able to communicate
important job characteristics through job titles, which is consistent with the directed search
framework. Indeed, the key feature of directed search is competition between employers based
on the advertisement of job characteristics. Such competition is the reason why directed search
models typically lead to an efficient level of unemployment. In the next subsection, we discuss
in more detail the informational content of job titles, a key instrument used by employers to
advertise their job characteristics.
20 The

exact relations between wages, the number of applicants and the quality of applicants often depend on the
fine details of the model.

24

Informational Content of Job Titles. We have found that job titles can explain most of the
variance in posted wages and in the quality of applicants that a vacancy receives, while SOC
codes explain a much lower share of the variance. We interpret our empirical results as a
implying that the SOC occupational classification masks important heterogeneity across jobs
in required skills and/or job duties. This heterogeneity makes jobs differentially attractive to
different types of workers. However, one may wonder whether our results are consistent with
alternative interpretations. For example, could it be the case that firms use job titles simply
to signal or justify higher wages without there being any differences in required skills or job
duties? We provide two arguments against job titles being mere signals for wages.
First, words in the job title that are predictive of higher wages are typically also indicative
of differences in job duties and/or skills. Clearly, a “java programmer” needs different skills
than a “C++ programmer”, and does not just get paid more for the same work. Among the
most common job titles (Table 2, panel B), we find higher paid “outside sales” jobs and lower
paid “inside sales” jobs (Table 7). These two jobs have different job duties: outside sales jobs
involve travelling to meet customers face-to-face, while inside sales jobs involve talking to
customers by phone from a fixed location.21 “Management” or “senior” job titles pay more
but also typically involve managing people on top of other job duties. For example, to take
some of the most common “senior” job titles (Table 2), “senior accountants” supervise “junior
accountants” or “staff accountants.” Likewise, “senior financial analysts” supervise “junior
financial analysts.”22 Furthermore, senior jobs also typically have higher relevant experience
requirements, implying that the worker needs higher skill to be hired for the job.23 Hence,
the job title is not simply a signal for higher pay. The words in the job title can contain real
information about job duties and/or required skills.
Second, we can rely on our results regarding applicant behavior to show that job titles with
different wages attract applicants with different skills. As we have shown, different job titles
attract applicants with systematically different levels of education and experience (Table 9 and
Table 10). Moreover, we have shown that, within SOC code, higher-paid jobs attract fewer
applicants (Table 8, col. II), and it is only within job title that higher-paid jobs attract more
applicants. This provides additional support for the idea that jobs with different job titles have
21 For

a comparison of these two jobs, see e.g.
Wikipedia.org (http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Sales) or Monster.com (http://career-advice.monster.com/job-search/career-assessment/
inside-sales-or-outside-sales/article.aspx).
22 Investopedia.com, a website devoted to information about investing, makes clear the distinctions between the job duties of financial analysts and accountants at various levels of seniority. See http://www.
investopedia.com/financial-edge/0213/a-day-in-the-life-of-a-financial-analyst.aspx and
http://www.investopedia.com/terms/j/junior-accountant.asp
23 A familiar example from academia is the distinction between assistant and associate professor: to be hired as
an associate professor, a candidate must have a much stronger publication record.

25

different job duties or require different skills. After all, if all jobs within an SOC code had
the same job duties and skill requirements irrespective of their job title, then we would expect
a positive relationship between wages and the number of applicants. Yet, this is not what we
observe in the data: the relationship between wages and the number of applicants is negative,
even controlling for SOC codes. Hence, we can conclude that there are substantial differences
in job duties or skill requirements across different jobs within an SOC code, and workers selfselect as a function of job characteristics. For example, higher-skill workers apply relatively
more often to higher-skilled, higher-paying jobs, and vice versa for lower skilled workers. By
contrast, the relation between posted wages and the number of applicants is positive within a job
title, indicating that job heterogeneity in duties and skill requirements within a job title is much
smaller than across job titles within a given SOC. Hence, applicant behavior is consistent with
higher-paying job titles requiring higher skills (or different job duties) rather than just paying
more for the same job duties.
Overall, the evidence from our analysis of both job posting and applicant behavior supports
the interpretation that the SOC classification misses important differences in required skills
and/or job duties among jobs with different job titles. Jobs are substantially more heterogeneous
than what is captured by the most detailed occupational classification.
Wage Dispersion. Because jobs within an SOC are heterogeneous, wage dispersion within
an SOC is not pure frictional wage dispersion. Indeed, due to differences in skill requirements,
a given worker would not be hired in each job within an SOC code with equal probability.
Similarly, differences in job duties across jobs imply that jobs within an SOC are not equally
desirable for a given worker. Hence, from the point of view of each worker, the distribution of
wages that he might earn is more compressed and the degree of frictional wage dispersion is
smaller than if all jobs within an SOC were identical. Therefore, the presence of job heterogeneity within an SOC supports our observation in section 3.2.2 that measuring wage dispersion
within an SOC overestimates pure wage dispersion.
These results are important because wage dispersion can be interpreted as a measure of
search frictions in a labor market. If the degree of wage dispersion is small, a worker who
receives a wage offer has little incentive to turn this offer down to continue to search for a
better one. In that sense, our results can help explain an important stylized fact of many labor
markets: the majority of job offers are accepted by unemployed workers (Krueger & Mueller,
2014; Wolthoff, 2015).

26

6

Conclusion

In this paper, we have used new data from CareerBuilder.com to show that the words contained
in job titles play a key role in the search and matching process. Indeed, all employers post a
job title while only 20% of jobs have a posted wage. Even among jobs with a posted wage, job
titles explain 90% of the variance in posted wages. Furthermore, job titles explain more than
80% of the variance in the education and experience levels of applicants that a vacancy attracts.
Job titles are much more specific than the most detailed SOC occupational classification used
in the Current Population Survey. Without such a specific measure of occupations, one can
obtain spurious results. For example, we find that, within an SOC code, higher paying jobs
attract fewer applicants; the relationship between posted wages and the number of applicants
only becomes positive within job titles.
A key reason why job titles explain wages and applicant behavior better than SOC codes is
that words in job titles capture important distinctions between jobs along the seniority/management
and the skills/specialization dimensions. Overall, our results show that words in job titles play
a much more important role than posted wages in the first stages of the search and matching
process: employers use job titles to advertise their jobs, and workers use job titles to direct their
search.
Our results show that job titles are a powerful tool to describe job characteristics, and perform much better than SOC codes across a variety of dimensions. Our findings thus open
fruitful avenues for future research to better understand a variety of labor market issues, and in
particular wage differentials and human capital investment.

27

References
Abowd, J. M., Creecy, R. H., & Kramarz, F. (2002). Computing Person and Firm Effects
Using Linked Longitudinal Employer-Employee Data. Longitudinal Employer-Household
Dynamics Technical Paper 2002-06, Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Census Bureau.
Abowd, J. M., Kramarz, F., & Margolis, D. N. (1999). High wage workers and high wage firms.
Econometrica, 67(2), 251–333.
Acemoglu, D. & Shimer, R. (1999). Holdups and Efficiency with Search Frictions. International Economic Review, 40(4), 827–849.
Andrews, M. J., Gill, L., Schank, T., & Upward, R. (2008). High wage workers and low wage
firms: negative assortative matching or limited mobility bias? Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society: Series A (Statistics in Society), 171(3), 673–697.
Barnichon, R. (2010). Building a composite Help-Wanted Index. Economics Letters, 109(3),
175–178.
Barron, J. M., Bishop, J., & Dunkelberg, W. C. (1985). Employer search: The interviewing and
hiring of new employees. Review of Economics and Statistics, 67, 43–52.
Barron, J. M., Black, D. A., & Loewenstein, M. A. (1987). Employer size: The implications
for search, training, capital investment, starting wages, and wage growth. Journal of Labor
Economics, 5, 76–89.
Blau, F. D. (1977). Equal pay in the office. Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books.
Blau, F. D. & Kahn, L. M. (2000). Gender differences in pay. Journal of Economic Perspectives,
14(4), 75–100.
Bó, E. D., Finan, F., & Rossi, M. (2012). Strengthening State Capabilities: The Role of Financial Incentives in the Call to Public Service. Working Paper 18156, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Brencic, V. (2012). Wage posting: evidence from job ads. Canadian Journal of Economics,
45(4), 1529–1559.
Brenc̆ic̆, V. & Norris, J. B. (2012). Employers’ on-line recruitment and screening practices.
Economic Inquiry, 50(1), 94–111.

28

Brown, J. & Matsa, D. (2014). Boarding a sinking ship? An investigation of job applications to
distressed firms. mimeo.
CareerBuilder (2013). Job Postings.
comScore Media Metrix (2011). comScore Media Metrix Ranks Top 50 U.S. Web Properties
for January 2011.
Dickens, W. T. & Katz, L. F. (1986). Interindustry Wage Differences and Industry Characteristics. Working Paper 2014, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Eeckhout, J. & Kircher, P. (2010). Sorting and decentralized price competition. Econometrica,
78, 539–574.
Faberman, J. R. & Menzio, G. (2010). Evidence on the relationship between recruiting and the
starting wage. mimeo.
Faberman, R. J. & Kudlyak, M. (2014). The Intensity of Job Search and Search Duration.
Working Paper 14-12, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.
Galenianos, M. & Kircher, P. (2009). Directed search with multiple job applications. Journal
of Economic Theory, 114, 445–471.
Gee, L. (2014). The more you know: How applicant pool information affects application rates.
mimeo.
Gentzkow, M. & Shapiro, J. M. (2010). What drives media slant? evidence from U.S. daily
newspapers. Econometrica, 78(1), 35–71.
Gibbons, R. & Katz, L. F. (1992). Does unmeasured ability explain inter-industry wage differentials? Review of Economic Studies, 59(3), 515–35.
Groes, F., Manovskii, I., & Kircher, P. (2015). The U-shapes of occupational mobility. Review
of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
Groshen, E. L. (1991). The structure of the female/male wage differential: Is it who you are,
what you do, or where you work? The Journal of Human Resources, 26(3), 457–472.
Hall, R. E. & Krueger, A. B. (2012). Evidence on the incidence of wage posting, wage bargaining, and on-the-job search. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 4(4), 56–67.

29

Holzer, H., Katz, L., & Krueger, A. (1991). Job queues and wages. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 106, 739–768.
Hornstein, A., Krusell, P., & Violante, G. L. (2007). Frictional Wage Dispersion in Search
Models: A Quantitative Assessment. Working Paper 13674, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Hornstein, A., Krusell, P., & Violante, G. L. (2011). Frictional wage dispersion in search
models: A quantitative assessment. American Economic Review, 101(7), 2873–2898.
Hosios, A. J. (1990). On the Efficiency of Matching and Related Models of Search and Unemployment. The Review of Economic Studies, 57(2), 279–298.
Iranzo, S., Schivardi, F., & Tosetti, E. (2008). Skill dispersion and firm productivity: An analysis
with employer-employee matched data. Journal of Labor Economics, 26(2), 247–285.
Kambourov, G. & Manovskii, I. (2009). Occupational mobility and wage inequality. Review of
Economic Studies, 76, 731–759.
Krueger, A. B. & Mueller, A. I. (2014). A Contribution to the Empirics of Reservation Wages.
Working Paper 19870, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Krueger, A. B. & Summers, L. H. (1986). Reflections on the Inter-Industry Wage Structure.
Working Paper 1968, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Krueger, A. B. & Summers, L. H. (1988). Efficiency wages and the inter-industry wage structure. Econometrica, 56(2), 259–93.
Kuhn, P. & Mansour, H. (2014). Is Internet Job Search Still Ineffective? The Economic Journal,
124(581), 1213–1233.
Kuhn, P. & Shen, K. (2012). Gender discrimination in job ads: Evidence from china. mimeo.
Manning, A. (2011). Chapter 11 - imperfect competition in the labor market. In Handbook of
Labor Economics, volume Volume 4, Part B (pp. 973–1041). Elsevier.
Marinescu, I. (2014). The general equilibrium impacts of unemployment insurance: evidence
from a large online job board. Working paper.
Marinescu, I. & Rathelot, R. (2014). Mismatch unemployment and the geography of job search.
mimeo.
30

Marinescu, I. & Wolthoff, R. P. (2012). Wages, applications and skills. mimeo available online
at http://federation.ens.fr/ydepot/semin/texte1213/MAR2013WAG.pdf.
Mellow, W. & Sider, H. (1983). Accuracy of response in labor market surveys: Evidence and
implications. Journal of Labor Economics, 1(4), pp. 331–344.
Menzio, G. (2007). A theory of partially directed search. Journal of Political Economy, 115(5),
748–769.
Moen, E. R. (1997). Competitive search equilibrium. Journal of Political Economy, 105, 385–
411.
Mortensen, D. T. & Pissarides, C. A. (1994). Job creation and job destruction in the theory of
unemployment. Review of Economic Studies, 61, 397–415.
Murphy, K. & Topel, R. (1987). Unemployment, risk, and earnings: testing for equalizing wage
differences in the labor market. In K. Lang & J. Leonard (Eds.), Unemployment and the
Structure of Labor Markets. Basil Blackwell Inc.
Pallais, A. (2012). Inefficient hiring in entry-level labor markets.
Petrongolo, B. & Pissarides, C. A. (2001). Looking into the black box: A survey of the matching
function. Journal of Economic Literature, 39, 390–431.
Pissarides, C. A. (1985). Short-run equilibrium dynamics of unemployment, vacancies and real
wages. American Economic Review, 75, 676–690.
Poletaev, M. & Robinson, C. (2008). Human capital specificity: Evidence from the Dictionary of Occupational Titles and Displaced Worker Surveys, 1984-2000. Journal of Labor
Economics, 26(3), 387–420.
Rogerson, R., Shimer, R., & Wright, R. (2005). Search-theoretic models of the labor market: A
survey. Journal of Economic Literature, 43(4), 959–988.
Shi, S. (2001). Frictional assignment I: Efficiency. Journal of Economic Theory, 98, 232–260.
Shimer, R. (1996). Essays in Search Theory. PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Shimer, R. (2005a). The assignment of workers to jobs in an economy with coordination frictions. Journal of Political Economy, 113(5), 996–1025.

31

Shimer, R. (2005b). The cyclical behavior of equilibrium unemployment and vacancies. American Economic Review, 95(1), 25–49.
Shimer, R. & Smith, L. (2000). Assortative matching and search. Econometrica, 68(2), 343–
369.
Wolthoff, R. P. (2015). Applications and interviews: Firms’ recruiting decisions in a frictional
labor market. mimeo.
Woodcock, S. D. (2007). Match Effects. Discussion Paper dp07-13, Department of Economics,
Simon Fraser University.
Woodcock, S. D. (2008). Wage differentials in the presence of unobserved worker, firm, and
match heterogeneity. Labour Economics, 15(4), 771–793.
Yashiv, E. (2007). Labor search and matching in macroeconomics. European Economic Review,
51(8), 1859 – 1895.

32

Table 1: Summary Statistics
obs.

mean

s.d.

min

max

Job characteristics
Yearly wage
Required experience
Required education
Vacancy duration

11,715
168
25,931
61,135

57,323
3.20
14.88
15.67

31,690
2.80
1.88
8.86

13,500
0.50
12.00
0.00

185,000
10.00
24.00
31.00

Firm characteristics
Number of employees

61,135

18,824

59,280

1

2,100,000

Outcome variables
Number of views
Number of clicks
Number of applications
Clicks per 100 views
Applications per 100 views

61,135
61,135
61,135
60,979
61,051

6,084.02
280.97
59.35
5.64
1.17

6,133.50
312.11
121.68
5.58
2.57

0
0
0
0
0

262,160
7,519
4,984
100
100

14
2.5

24
26

Applicant characteristics
Years of education
Years of experience

2,282
16.63
1.35
2,379
13.28
5.13
Source: CareerBuilder.com

33

Table 2: Ten most common job titles
First 4 words
customer service
representative
administrative assistant
project manager
sales representative
customer service
openings in
sales representative
customer service
staff accountant
outside sales representative
senior accountant
full time retail sales
First 4 words
customer service
representative
staff accountant
administrative assistant
senior accountant
executive assistant
outside sales representative
senior financial analyst
controller
financial analyst
chiropractic technician

Panel A: all job titles
Freq.
First 2 words
273
customer service

Freq.
895

First 1 word
senior

Freq.
4,176

242
221
218
188

sales representative
director of
project manager
entry level

865
580
553
476

sales
director
customer
medical

2,450
1,080
1,034
897

188

administrative assistant

395

project

883

business
manager
rn
account

870
801
742
654

First 1 word
senior

Freq.
810

sales
customer
administrative
accounting
outside
director
medical
executive
account

369
277
191
172
166
146
146
143
132

184
outside sales
374
176
inside sales
307
166
business development
279
150
business analyst
267
Panel B: job titles with a posted wage
Freq.
First 2 words
Freq.
120
customer service
260
98
administrative assistant
93
outside sales
92
senior accountant
63
staff accountant
62
inside sales
56
director of
54
entry level
49
executive assistant
48
accounts payable
Source: CareerBuilder.com

34

154
150
116
110
106
96
86
85
77

Figure 1: Job titles on CareerBuilder.com
All Jobs:

Jobs with Posted Wage:

Note: Job titles are truncated to the first four words. Only job titles that appear in at least 10 job
postings are represented. Word cloud created using www.tagul.com. Tagul uses word frequency
to determine the size of the words.
Source: CareerBuilder.com
35

Table 3: Explaining wage posting behavior
I
Posts wage
Yes***

II
Posts wage

III
Posts wage
Yes***
Yes***

IV
V
VARIABLES
Posts wage Firm f.e.
Job title f.e.
Yes***
Yes***
Firm f.e.
Yes***
Yes***
Job characteristics
Yes***
Observations
61,132
61,135
61,132
61,132
61,132
2
R
0.747
0.697
0.928
0.933
0.765
2
Adj. R
0.619
0.672
0.884
0.892
0.647
AIC
-21,907
-11,056
-93,107
-97,856
-48,551
Note: Linear probability model. In columns I-IV, the dependent variable is log yearly posted
wage. In column V, the dependent variable is the firm effect estimated in column I. Stars next
to “Yes” show the level of significance of the F-test for the joint significance of that group of
controls: ***p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. Job characteristics include vacancy duration, a
dummy for salary expressed per hour, required education and experience, designated market
area, and calendar month.
Source: CareerBuilder.com
Table 4: Explaining the variance in posted wages
I
Posted wage

II
Posted wage
Yes***

IV
V
VARIABLES
Posted wage Firm f.e.
Job title fixed effects
Yes***
Yes***
Firm fixed effects
Yes***
Yes***
Job characteristics
Yes***
Observations
11,715
11,715
11,715
11,715
11,715
2
R
0.558
0.902
0.973
0.975
0.902
2
Adj. R
0.499
0.840
0.952
0.956
0.839
AIC
9,900
-14,639
-21,758
-22,778
-17,895
Note: In columns I-IV, the dependent variable is log yearly posted wage. In column V, the
dependent variable is the firm effect estimated in column II. Stars next to “Yes” show the level
of significance of the F-test for the joint significance of that group of controls: ***p < 0.01, **
p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. Job characteristics include vacancy duration, a dummy for salary expressed
per hour, required education and experience, designated market area, and calendar month.
Source: CareerBuilder.com

36

III
Posted wage
Yes***
Yes***

Figure 2: The distribution of earnings in the CPS vs. posted wages on CareerBuilder.com

Note: A small number of outliers (log yearly earnings < 8) has been omitted for the CPS data.
Source: Current Population Survey and CareerBuilder.com

37

Table 5: Using SOC codes fixed effects to explain wages: CPS vs CareerBuilder data
Major

CPS
Minor

Detailed

Major

CareerBuilder
Minor Detailed

Job
Titles
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
Observations
1,587
1,587
1,587
10,465
10,465
10,465
10,465
R2
0.149
0.195
0.480
0.144
0.167
0.412
0.943
2
Adj. R
0.144
0.184
0.362
0.143
0.166
0.387
0.907
AIC
4,369
4,280
3,587
15,414
15,125
11,487 -12,925
Note: In columns I-III, the dependent variable is log weekly earnings. In columns IV-VII, the
dependent variable is log yearly posted wage. Columns II and IV control for major occupation
groups fixed effects. Columns II and V control for minor occupation groups fixed effects.
Columns III and VI control for detailed occupation groups fixed effects. Column VII controls
for job title fixed effects. The specifications in columns IV-VII only use jobs for which an SOC
code was present.
Source: Current Population Survey and CareerBuilder.com

Table 6: Using words to explain within SOC wage variation
I
Wage resid.
Yes

II
Wage resid.

III
Wage resid.

IV
Wage resid.

VARIABLES
Job title f.e.
Words in job title f.e.
Yes
Frequent words f.e.
Yes
Frequent words denoting experience
Yes
and seniority f.e.
Observations
11,715
11,715
11,715
11,715
R2
0.871
0.571
0.226
0.136
2
Adj. R
0.790
0.490
0.222
0.135
AIC
-10,752
7,088
10,390
11,597
Note: The dependent variable is wage residuals after a regression of log yearly posted wage on
detailed SOC codes fixed effects. f.e. stands for fixed effects. Frequent words are those listed
in Table 7. Frequent words denoting experience and seniority are those in the first column of
Table 7.
Source: CareerBuilder.com

38

Table 7: Words that explain wage residuals after detailed SOC fixed effects
Sign of word coefficient

Job level:
Specialization / Skills Computer
seniority / management
representative
accountant
network
assistant
account
specialist
project
associate
medical
entry
marketing
Negative
coordinator
quality
(lower wages)
support
inside
clerk
bilingual
operator
office
part-time
advisor
staff
receptionist
junior
recruiter
manager
engineer
senior
sales
developer
executive
consultant
systems
director
administrative
software
Positive
management
business
architect
(higher wages)
supervisor
outside
web
of
with
net
ii
nurse
java
lead
maintenance
it
to
health
hr
or
controller
auditor
Note: The words included are significant at the 5% level in explaining the residuals after a
regression of the posted wage on SOC codes fixed effects (Table 6, col. II). Words are included
when they appear at least 100 times. Words are ordered by frequency and underlined when they
appear at least 500 times.
Source: CareerBuilder.com

39

Figure 3: Words that predict wages within a given SOC code
Higher Wages:

[0.044;0.060];

[-1.101;-0.169];

[0.077;0.200];
Lower Wages:

[-0.167;-0.104];

[0.202;1.576] log points

[-0.101;-0.063] log points

Note: Words that are significant at the 5% level in explaining the residuals after a regression of
the posted wage on SOC codes fixed effects (Table 6, column II) and appear at least 10 times.
The big rectangle is "-", which typically separates the main job title from additional details.
Word cloud created using www.tagul.com. The size of a word represents its frequency, while
the color represents the tercile of its coefficient, weighted by frequency.
Source: CareerBuilder.com
40

Figure 4: Words that predict probability of posting a wage within a given SOC code
Higher Probability:

[0.015;0.042];

[-0.720;-0.048];

[0.046;0.107];
[0.109;0.859] percentage points
Lower Probability:

[-0.046;-0.032];

[-0.027;-0.027] percentage points

Note: The words included are significant at the 5% level in explaining the residuals after a
regression of the “Posts wage” dummy on SOC codes fixed effects and appear at least 10 times.
The big rectangle is "-", which typically separates the main job title from additional details.
Word cloud created using www.tagul.com. The size of a word represents its frequency, while
the color represents the tercile of its coefficient, weighted by frequency.
Source: CareerBuilder.com
41

Table 8: The impact of wages on the number of applicants per 100 views

Log(Posted Wage)

I
-0.770***
(0.052)

II
-0.642***
(0.075)
Yes
Yes

III
-0.710***
(0.087)
Yes
Yes
Yes

IV
V
1.268*** 0.947*
(0.373) (0.517)
Yes

Job characteristics
SOC f.e.
Firm f.e.
Yes
Job title f.e.
Yes
Yes
Observations
11,708
11,708
11,708
11,708
11,708
R2
0.017
0.133
0.363
0.464
0.584
2
Adj. R
0.0165
0.0835
0.235
0.123
0.268
AIC
61,152
59,754
57,200
54,049
52,042
Note: The dependent variable is the number of applications divided by the number of job views
divided by 100. "f.e." stands for "fixed effects". SOC fixed effects are for detailed codes.
Job characteristics include vacancy duration, a dummy for salary expressed per hour, required
education and experience, designated market area, and calendar month. Robust standard errors
in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.
Source: CareerBuilder.com
Table 9: Explaining applicants’ average experience
I
All jobs
VARIABLES

Years exp.

II
Jobs with
a posted wage
Years exp.

Log(Posted Wage)
Job title f.e.

Yes

Yes

III
Jobs with
a posted wage
Years exp.

IV
Jobs with
a posted wage
Years exp.

2.174***
(0.203)

1.242*
(0.708)
Yes

Observations
2,379
1,755
1,755
1,755
2
R
0.948
0.956
0.238
0.958
2
Adj. R
0.803
0.824
0.238
0.833
AIC
4,934
3,303
8,293
3,212
Note: The dependent variable is the average number of years of experience among the applicants to each job. The regressions are weighted by the number of applicants to each vacancy using Stata’s analytic weights. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05,
* p < 0.1.
Source: CareerBuilder.com

42

Table 10: Explaining applicants’ average education
I

Years educ.

II
Jobs with
a posted wage
Years educ.

Yes

Yes

All jobs
VARIABLES
Log(Posted Wage)
Job title f.e.

III
Jobs with
a posted wage
Years educ.
0.757***
(0.045)

IV
Jobs with
a posted wage
Years educ.
0.313*
(0.173)
Yes

Observations
2,282
1,696
1,696
1,696
2
R
0.961
0.961
0.282
0.963
Adj. R2
0.845
0.840
0.281
0.849
AIC
-2,115
-1,699
3,239
-1,803
Note: The dependent variable is the average number of years of education among the applicants
to each job. The regressions are weighted by the number of applicants to each vacancy using
Stata’s analytic weights. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, *
p < 0.1. Source: CareerBuilder.com
Table 11: Words that predict higher or lower experience and education
of applicants within an SOC code
Experience +
manager
senior
director
executive
of
retail
management
supervisor
controller
design
consulting
dba
chief
asp

Experience rn
web
center
insurance
loan
3

Education + Education director
rn
developer
customer
nurse
services
it
needed
net
warehouse
controller
healthcare
research
license
performance
desk
agent
summer
vice
forklift
distribution
hvac
chief
Note: Words that appear at least 10 times and that are significant at the 5% level in explaining
the residuals after a regression of the average education or average experience of applicants on
SOC codes fixed effects. Words are ordered by frequency and underlined when they appear at
least 100 times. Source: CareerBuilder.com

43

Figure 5: Words that predict the number of applicants per view within a given SOC code
Higher Number:

[0.154;0.251];

[-3.920;-0.377];

[0.269;0.482];
[0.517;4.974] appl. per 100 views
Lower Number:

[-0.373;-0.301];

[-0.299;-0.164] appl. per 100 views

Note: Words that are significant at the 5% level in explaining the residuals after a regression
of the number of applicants per view on SOC codes fixed effects and appear at least 10 times.
The big rectangle is "-", which typically separates the main job title from additional details.
Word cloud created using www.tagul.com. The size of a word represents its frequency, while
the color represents the tercile of its coefficient, weighted by frequency.
Source: CareerBuilder.com
44

Online Appendix
Appendix A

Robustness

Table A.1: Explaining the variation in posted wages: sample restricted
to job titles that appear at least twice
I
Posted wage
Yes***

II
Posted wage

III
Posted wage
Yes***
Yes***

IV
V
VARIABLES
Posted wage Firm f.e.
Job title f.e.
Yes***
Yes***
Firm f.e.
Yes***
Yes***
Job characteristics
Yes***
Observations
10,467
10,467
10,467
10,467
10,467
2
R
0.937
0.568
0.969
0.972
0.891
2
Adj. R
0.908
0.509
0.952
0.956
0.841
AIC
-11,650
8,507
-18,156
-19,063
-11,856
Note: In columns I-IV, the dependent variable is log yearly posted wage. In column V, the
dependent variable is the firm effect estimated in column I. Stars next to “Yes” show the level
of significance of the F-test for the joint significance of that group of controls: ***p < 0.01, **
p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. Job characteristics include vacancy duration, a dummy for salary expressed
per hour, required education and experience, designated market area, and calendar month.
Source: CareerBuilder.com
Table A.2: Explaining the variation in posted wages: minimum wage
offered, maximum wage offered, and wage range
Min. offered wage
Max. offered wage
Wage range
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
Job title f.e.
Yes
Yes
Yes
SOC f.e.
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
11,717 11,717
12,383
12,383
11,898 11,898
R-squared
0.941
0.399
0.943
0.386
0.861
0.236
Adj. R-squared 0.904
0.367
0.908
0.354
0.772
0.196
AIC
-14,347 12,891
-12,721 16,778
-29,113 -8,849
Note: “Wage range” is the maximum offered wage minus the minimum offered wage divided
by the midpoint of the range.
Source: CareerBuilder.com

45

Table A.3: Posted wages: the explanatory power of job titles and how
it varies with truncating the job title after the first n words

VARIABLES
Job title f.e.

I
Posted wage

II
Posted wage

III
Posted wage

IV
Posted wage

V
Posted wage

1 word

2 word

3 words

4 words

All words

Observations
11,715
11,715
11,715
11,715
11,715
R2
0.610
0.865
0.925
0.944
0.946
2
Adj. R
0.568
0.817
0.885
0.909
0.910
AIC
8,416
-4,010
-10,968
-14,359
-14,726
Note: All columns include job title fixed effects, but the definition of job title is different in
each column. In column V, all words in the job title are used to define the job title. In columns
I-IV, the first n words are used to define the job title.
Source: CareerBuilder.com
Table A.4: The impact of posted wages on clicks per 100 views

Log(Posted Wage)

I
-1.045***
(0.089)

II
-0.597***
(0.130)
Yes
Yes

III
-0.711***
(0.167)
Yes

IV
2.035***
(0.399)

V
1.930***
(0.454)
Yes

Job characteristics
SOC f.e.
Firm f.e.
Yes
Yes
Job title f.e.
Yes
Yes
Observations
11,694
11,694
11,694
11,694
11,694
R2
0.011
0.168
0.389
0.564
0.643
2
Adj. R
0.011
0.121
0.267
0.287
0.371
AIC
72,956
71,012
68,453
63,366
62,012
Note: The dependent variable is the number of clicks divided by the number of job views
divided by 100. "f.e." stands for "fixed effects". SOC fixed effects are for detailed SOC codes.
Job characteristics include vacancy duration, a dummy for salary expressed per hour, required
education and experience, designated market area, and calendar month. Robust standard errors
in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.
Source: CareerBuilder.com

46

Appendix B

Frictional Wage Dispersion

Hornstein et al. (2011) calculate the mean-min ratio from a Mincer regression using the US
census. When defining occupations as a combination of an SOC code and a geographic area,
they obtain a ratio of 2.74 (see Table 2 in their paper, for full-time, full-year workers).
We first reproduce this number in the CareerBuilder data. Maintaining the same definition
of an occupation, controlling for vacancy duration, a dummy for salary expressed per hour,
required education and experience, and calendar month gives a mean-min ratio of 2.44, which
is only slightly lower than the estimate of Hornstein et al. (2007). Restricting the set of controls
to required education and experience only makes little difference and yields a mean-min ratio
of 2.47 (see row 1 in Table B.5).
Subsequently, we change the definition of an occupation to a combination of a job title and
a geographic area. In line with our results in section 3.2, this has a large impact on the estimate
of the degree of wage dispersion. Depending on the set of controls, we find a mean-min ratio of
1.22 or 1.40 (see row 2 in Table B.5).
Table B.5: Frictional wage dispersion: the mean / min ratio
Census
CareerBuilder
Mincer regression Full controls
Mean / min
Mean / min
Occupation and geographic area
Job title and geographic area

2.74

2.44
1.22

CareerBuilder
Restricted controls
Mean / min
2.47
1.40

To assess how these estimates compare to the values by basic search models, we repeat the
calibration of Hornstein et al. (2011) with aggregate data from our sample period. Using the
methodology of Shimer (2005b) on 2011 BLS data, we set the job-finding rate λu∗ equal to 0.191
and the job-destruction rate σ equal to 0.022. Maintaining the assumptions that the interest rate
r is 0.0041 and the replacement rate ρ equals 0.4, this yields a ratio
Mm =

λu∗
r+σ
λu∗
r+σ

+1

= 1.078.

+ρ

Hence, while the degree of wage dispersion in the data is still larger than what is implied by the
calibration, controlling for job titles rather than SOCs reduces the gap by no less than 90%. We
therefore conclude that job titles play a crucial role in reconciling the calibration results with
empirical measures of frictional wage dispersion.

47

