NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO HOSPITAL-OWNED SKILLED NURSING FACILITIES PROVIDE BETTER
POST-ACUTE CARE QUALITY?
Momotazur Rahman
Edward C. Norton
David C. Grabowski
Working Paper 22515
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22515

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016

We would like to thank Christian Brostrup-Jensen and other members of CGHCR for helping us
with data retrieval. We are grateful for comments by Guy David and to seminar participants at the
London School of Economics, ASHEcon, CIRANO (Montreal), Tulane University and Texas
A&M University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Momotazur Rahman, Edward C. Norton, and David C. Grabowski. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Hospital-Owned Skilled Nursing Facilities Provide Better Post-Acute Care Quality?
Momotazur Rahman, Edward C. Norton, and David C. Grabowski
NBER Working Paper No. 22515
August 2016
JEL No. I11,I18
ABSTRACT
As hospitals are increasingly held accountable for patients' post-discharge outcomes under new
payment models, hospitals may choose to acquire skilled nursing facilities (SNFs) to better manage
these outcomes. This raises the question of whether patients discharged to hospital-based SNFs have
better outcomes. In unadjusted comparisons, hospital-based SNF patients have much lower Medicare
utilization in the 180 days following discharge relative to freestanding SNF patients. We solved the
problem of differential selection into hospital-based and freestanding SNFs by using differential
distance from home to the nearest hospital with a SNF relative to the distance from home to the
nearest hospital without a SNF as an instrument. We found that hospital-based SNF patients spent
roughly 5 more days in the community and 6 fewer days in the SNF in the 180 days following their
original hospital discharge with no significant effect on mortality or hospital readmission.

Momotazur Rahman
Center for Gerontology and Health Care Research
121 South Main Street, S-6
Providence, RI-02912
momotazur_rahman@brown.edu
Edward C. Norton
Department of Health Management and Policy
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
School of Public Health
1415 Washington Heights, M3108 SPHII
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2029
and NBER
ecnorton@umich.edu

David C. Grabowski
Harvard University
Department of Health Care Policy
Harvard Medical School
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
grabowski@med.harvard.edu

1. Introduction
Medicare skilling nursing facility (SNF) care has been a major focus of recent policy
discussions because, although they provide valuable care for many, they also serve as a substitute
for both more expensive and less expensive types of care (Newhouse 2013). In the context of
poor outcomes such as long SNF stays and high rates of hospital readmissions, some have
questioned the underlying value of these services given their high cost to the Medicare program
(Ackerly and Grabowski 2014). One factor that has potentially contributed to poor outcomes is
the fragmentation in delivery between hospitals and SNFs. One recent study suggested that
stronger hospital-SNF linkages, independent of common ownership, were found to reduce rehospitalization rates (Rahman et al. 2013a). As hospitals are increasingly held accountable for
patients' post-discharge outcomes under new payment models, hospitals may choose to acquire
SNFs to better manage these outcomes. An open research question is whether patients who go to
hospital-based SNFs have better outcomes at lower episode costs than patients who go to nonhospital-based SNFs.
The number of hospital-based SNFs has ebbed and flowed over the decades in response
to policy changes. As way of background, Medicare covers medical care for older adults
including hospital and post-acute care services, while Medicaid is a means-tested programs that
covers chronic nursing home care. As a bit of history, hospital-based1 SNFs were largely an
afterthought in the 1970s and early 1980s when Medicare reimbursed inpatient hospital care on a
cost-based basis. However, when Medicare shifted to the inpatient prospective payment system
(PPS) in 1982, hospitals were paid a fixed amount per discharge and they were no longer

1

The colloquial term in the literature for hospital-owned skilled nursing facilities (SNFs) are “hospital-based” SNFs.
We acknowledge that some hospital-owned SNFs are not technically based in the hospital, but given the widespread
use of this term, we employ the term hospital-based in this study to encompass all SNFs owned by a hospital even if
they are located outside of the hospital campus.

1

incentivized to provide additional services or days of inpatient care. Given the payment incentive
to discharge “sicker and quicker” (Sager et al. 1989), many hospitals formed their own SNFs as a
potential discharge location. At that time, Medicare paid SNFs on a cost-based basis. Relative to
freestanding SNFs, hospital-based SNFs had higher costs per day and shorter length-of-stay.
Hospitals claimed this was due to a more complex case-mix, while freestanding SNFs suggested
it was due to accounting practices and unnecessary staffing costs. The number of hospital-based
SNFs peaked in 1998 with 2,173 facilities nationwide (or 13.83% of all SNFs). In 1998,
Medicare adopted a PPS system for SNFs that imposed a uniform payment system on
freestanding and hospital-based SNFs that did not recognize potential cost differences across the
two settings other than those related to case-mix, area wages, and urban or rural location.
Following the SNF PPS, many hospitals closed their SNFs (Rahman, Zinn, and Mor 2013c). By
2014, only about 800 SNFs (or 5% of all SNFs) in the U.S. were hospital-based.
Answering the research question of the effect of SNF ownership on outcomes and costs is
complicated by selection. Clearly, whether a hospital discharges a patient to its’ own SNF is not
random. Prior research has suggested that good candidates for faster recovery and discharge to
the community are preferentially selected into hospital-based SNFs (Stearns et al. 2006). Thus,
simple comparisons of discharge outcomes across hospital-based and freestanding SNFs,
controlling for observable characteristics, will not yield causal estimates of the effect of SNF
hospital-based status on discharge outcomes. To address this issue, we instrument for choice of
a hospital-based SNF using differential distance from the patient’s home to the nearest hospital
with and without a SNF. Because distance is important towards predicting hospital choice and
an individual chooses where to live without regard as to whether nearby hospitals own SNFs, the
identifying assumption is that the instrument will be correlated with selection of a hospital with a

2

SNF but independent of patient-specific health issues that would determine selection. With this
instrument, we mimic randomization of residents into hospital-based SNFs when estimating the
effects of hospital-based status on SNF discharge outcomes.
Using national Minimum Data Set assessments linked with Medicare claims, we study a
national cohort of residents who were newly admitted to SNFs from a hospital in 2009. After
instrumenting for hospital-based status, we found that hospital-based SNF patients spent 5.7
fewer days in a SNF relative to patients discharged to free-standing SNFs and 4.8 more days min
the community without home health services.

2. Conceptual Framework and Related Research
2.1 Conceptual Framework
This conceptual framework explains the economics behind three choices central to our
empirical analysis of SNF quality of care for patients who enter a SNF upon hospital discharge.
First, the hospital chooses whether or not to have a hospital-based SNF. Second, after falling ill
or needing treatment, the patient chooses the hospital, which may or may not have a hospitalbased SNF. Third, upon discharge the patient (in consultation with clinicians or discharge
coordinators) chooses which SNF to enter. These three choices, which are made with an eye to
quality of care, make it impossible to run simple ordinary least squares regression to identify the
causal effect of being in a hospital-based SNF on quality of care. Fortunately, our conceptual
framework also reveals a valid instrumental variable. We discuss each choice in turn.
Hospitals choose whether to have a hospital-based SNF or not, based on the expected
profit from owning a hospital-based SNF compared to not owning one. A hospital then chooses

3

to have a hospital-based SNF if the following expression comparing the expected present
discounted difference between revenues and costs holds.

E −

|  -   > E −

| 

This simple framework helps explain which types of hospitals are more likely to own a hospitalbased SNF and how this choice is endogenous with quality.
The main costs of running a nursing home are capital, labor, administrative overhead
(including IT), and other input costs. Hospitals may have a lower cost of capital for raising
money to build or expand, or may face higher costs if land prices near the hospital are higher
than in more suburban or rural settings where nursing homes are typically located. Average
labor costs per filled bed could be lower in a hospital-based SNF if nurses can be redeployed
easily between the hospital and the SNF. Average costs can be lower in a vertically integrated
hospital-based SNF that shares fixed costs of overhead or purchasing supplies. In sum, larger
hospitals are more likely to have a hospital-based SNF than smaller hospitals.
On the revenue side, there are some clear advantages and disadvantages to having a
hospital-based SNF. The fixed cost of running a SNF means that a hospital would need a
sufficiently large number of discharges to make it likely that the SNF would be at, or near,
capacity most of the time. A small hospital with few Medicare discharges would have higher
variability in the occupancy rate, leading to lower average revenue per bed.
Hospitals with a hospital-based SNF have reasons to selectively steer certain patients to
remain in the hospital system. Given that Medicare pays the same daily rate for all for SNF postacute patients in a given resource utilization group (RUG), profitability across patients differs

4

entirely by their costs. Within a given RUG, hospitals then have an incentive to select the least
costly patients to be admitted to their own SNF and to send the more expensive patients to
freestanding facilities. Over the last few years, CMS has given hospitals an additional reason to
select particular patients for care in the hospital-based SNFthe hospital readmissions reduction
program and the hospital value-based purchasing programs penalize hospitals that have high
readmission rates and high 30-day episode spending. If a hospital believes that a patient is at risk
for readmission or high post-discharge expenses, the hospital can monitor that patient’s progress
better when admitted to their own SNF.
Both of these patient selection issues cause endogeneity in a simple regression to predict
quality outcomes based on whether a patient enters a hospital-based or a freestanding SNF.
Patients selected to enter a hospital-based SNF due to expected low costs will have better health
status that is unobservable to the econometrician, causing omitted variable bias. Patients
selected to enter a hospital-based SNF due to concerns about mortality and risk of readmission
cause bias due to reverse causality.
Turning to the patient’s choice of hospital, this complex function depends on things
including referral patterns, past experience, expectations of quality of care, patient health status,
and distance. Similarly, the choice of which SNF to go to (for patients discharged to a SNF)
depends on things including whether the hospital has a hospital-based SNF, referral patterns, past
experience, expectations of quality of care, patient health status, and distance. All else equal,
patients prefer to travel a shorter distance to receive medical care. Therefore, we expect that
some function of distance will strongly predict both the choice of hospital and the choice of
whether the patient is admitted to a hospital-based SNF, and that distance is unrelated to the
endogenous parts of the choices including the patient’s unobserved health status. In short, some

5

function of distance will be a strong and valid instrumental variable for whether the patient is
admitted to a hospital-based SNF upon discharge.
This conceptual framework also provides an economic justification for why hospitalbased SNFs may provide better quality of care than freestanding SNFs, thus motivating our
central research question. Hospital-based SNFs may produce better discharge outcomes relative
to freestanding SNFs due to both economies of joint production and specialization. In this case,
joint production leads to better communication between hospital and nursing home staff in part
through a shared health IT system. Given that CMS pay-for-performance programs now
penalize hospitals with high mortality, high readmissions rates, and high episode payments,
hospitals with a hospital-based SNF can better align incentives in a vertically integrated system.
For example, if a patient at risk of readmission is kept in a hospital-based SNF, then the hospital
can develop a care plan appropriate for preventing avoidable readmissions.
The second pathway through which hospital-based SNFs may affect outcomes is via
specialization (Norton 2000). In most freestanding SNFs, post-acute care SNF patients
constitute a relatively small proportion of total residents. The majority of nursing home residents
are long-stay, chronically ill individuals covered by Medicaid. Previous research has suggested
that some residents do better when nursing homes specialize in treating a narrow range of
patients (Grabowski et al. 2010; Grabowski, Gruber, and Angelelli 2008; Konetzka et al. 2006).
That is, when high- and low-margin payer groups receive care alongside one another, outcomes
for higher-margin patients typically decline, while outcomes for lower-margin patients typically
increase. We hypothesize that hospital-based SNFs will be more specialized in care for highmargin patients because—unlike most freestanding SNFs—they do not have to cross-subsidize
lower-margin patients covered by Medicaid.

6

Our conceptual framework argues that hospital-based SNFs are likely to have higher
quality of care than freestanding SNFs, that a simple regression will produce biased estimates of
the causal effect of type of SNF on discharge outcomes, and that a function of distance will be a
valid instrumental variable.

2.2 Previous Literature
Few studies have specifically focused on the relationship between hospital-based status
and SNF quality of care, yet most SNF quality studies control for hospital-based status as a
covariate in the regression model (for reviews, see Grabowski and Norton 2012; Norton 2000). A
large literature has focused on the related issue of cost and case-mix differences across
freestanding and hospital-based SNFs. In a review of the early pre-PPS SNF evidence, Wiener
and colleagues (1986) concluded that hospital-based SNF patients were twice as costly per day
as freestanding SNF patients but case-mix differences explained less than half of the cost
differential. Using an endogenous switching model with data from the mid-1990s, Pizer and
colleagues (2002) concluded that the entire cost differential is attributable to setting effects and
case-mix selection plays a negligible role. In an analysis of 1999 data following the adoption of
the SNF PPS, hospital-based SNFs were found to have higher per diem costs for nursing and
non-therapy ancillary services, while freestanding SNFs had higher average costs for
rehabilitation services (Liu and Black 2003).
In terms of research focusing on outcomes, Liu and Black (2003) examined unadjusted
discharge outcomes. Hospital-based SNFs had lower length-of-stay (13 days versus 27 days),
mortality (4% versus 7%), and hospital readmission (23% versus 28%). Whether these outcomes
are related to case-mix or differences in care is impossible to tease out from this study. Rahman

7

and colleagues (2013c) found local markets with greater closure of hospital-based SNFs between
1999 and 2006 experienced increased 30-day hospital readmissions. Stearns and colleagues
(2006) used propensity stratification to compare patient outcomes across hospital-based and
freestanding SNFs. The authors found that patients admitted to hospital-based SNFs had 16.7%
shorter stays, a 7.7% greater likelihood of home discharge within 30 days, and 2.3% fewer
preventable 30-day hospital readmissions. As the authors acknowledge about their study, “(o)ne
limitation of our analysis is that unobserved selection still may explain the remaining differences
in outcomes for patients of hospital-based SNFs. A natural approach to investigate this issue is to
use instrumental variables (IV) models” (page 620).
We were only able to identify one previous study that examined patient outcomes in
hospital-based SNFs using an IV approach. Specifically, David and colleagues (2013) instrument
for a particular hospital owning a SNF by using the rate of SNF ownership by other hospitals in
the same market. Using this approach, the authors found lower 60-day hospital readmission rates
for patients discharged to a SNF owned by that hospital.

3. Data and Study Sample
3.1 Data sets
For this study we need detailed data on individuals, including where they resided on each
day following discharge, when they died, and total Medicare reimbursement on all covered
services up to 180 days post discharge. We used several sources of data in this study to obtain
SNF and individual characteristics including the Minimum Data Set (MDS), Medicare claims,
the Medicare denominator file, SNF provider data, zip code level population characteristics
based on census 2000, and data from the American Hospital Association (AHA).

8

The MDS assessment forms are completed for all residents in certified SNFs upon
admission and then at least quarterly thereafter. The MDS instrument has numerous data
elements and includes summary measures of cognitive and physical functioning, continence,
pain, mood state, diagnoses, health conditions, mortality risk, special treatments, and medication
use. Numerous reliability and validity studies reveal that most MDS items achieve an intra-class
correlation of 0.6 (Abt Associates Inc. 2002; Hawes et al. 1995; Mor 2004; Mor et al. 2011;
Morris et al. 1990; Phillips et al. 1997).
The Medicare Standard Analytic File includes all claims related to inpatient, skilled
nursing facility care, home health, and hospice services for Medicare fee-for-service enrollees.
All Part A claims (inpatient, SNF) include dates of service and up to 25 diagnoses. The Medicare
enrollment file identifies individuals enrolled in Medicare within a given year and includes
demographic data, survival status, residential zip code, and program eligibility information for
Parts A, B and D, Medicare Advantage (managed care), and Medicaid.
The Online Survey Certification and Reporting (OSCAR) System is a compilation of data
elements collected by surveyors during inspection surveys conducted at nursing facilities.
Surveys are conducted at least once during every 15-month period to certify participation in the
Medicare and Medicaid programs. The database includes organizational characteristics such as
the number of beds, ownership, and chain membership and aggregate patient characteristics.
The AHA data are a census of United States hospitals based on the AHA Annual Survey of
Hospitals. The database includes different structural characteristics of hospitals. In this study, we
used AHA data from the 2007 survey.
3.2 Study cohort

9

Applying the Residential History File methodology (Intrator et al. 2011), which
concatenates MDS assessment and Medicare claims into individual beneficiary trajectories, we
identified all Medicare fee-for-service (FFS) beneficiaries who were discharged directly from an
acute general hospital to a SNF for post-acute care in 2009. We excluded patients with any SNF
residence history in one year prior to admission because they would be frailer than post-acute
care patients from the community. We found 1.2 million individuals who were discharged from
hospital to SNFs during the study period who did not have a prior nursing home stay. We
dropped about 24 percent of the individuals who did not reside in the 48 contiguous states, were
not discharged from an acute general hospital, or were missing relevant hospital or SNF
identification. Our final sample consisted of 827,541 Medicare FFS beneficiaries discharged
from 3,173 acute care hospitals to 14,374 SNFs.
3.3 Outcome Variables
To determine the post-acute outcomes, we followed each patient for 30 or 180 days after
their SNF admission by concatenating Medicare enrollment, Medicare claims claims and MDS
using the residential history algorithm (Intrator et al. 2011). On any given day, an individual can
be in one of the following five settings: death, hospital, SNF, home with home health care and
home without home health care. We constructed five outcome variables representing the number
of days in different settings such that summation of these variables for any individual is 180. The
mean number of days in different settings has been reported in Table 2. The mean number of
days in a nursing home is about 51 days. Of note, the number of days in a particular setting may
involve residence with different providers. Patients are sometimes transferred between hospital
based and free standing SNFs. About 16% of our patients who were initially discharged to a
hospital based SNF later stayed a free-standing SNF (with 11% direct transfer). Transfers from

10

free-standing SNF to hospital based SNF is very rare. We also ran a related analysis examining
the likelihood of these five outcomes on a day-by-day basis.
Of note, these five categories of outcomes show a patient’s location on a given day, but
they do not necessarily identify the intensity of services used by the patient on that day. As such,
we also examined specific types of care use over a one-month and six-month discharge period.
The 30-day outcomes align with the incentives in the CMS pay-for-performance programs, while
the 180-day outcomes give a longer-run perspective. More specifically, we examined aggregated
Medicare spending as well as Medicare spending on inpatient, SNF, and home health services
during these time windows. As shown in Table 2, Medicare spent about $8,000 on acute hospital
care, $14,000 on SNF care and $2,500 on home health care in the six months following SNF
admission for an average patient. These reimbursements do not necessarily correspond to the
number of days in a setting because some services are paid by the patient (out-of-pocket) or by
other insurers (including Medicaid). We also examined death (0/1) and any hospital readmission.
22% of the patients discharged to a SNF died within six months, while about half of all the
patients experienced a hospital readmission within six months following SNF admission.
3.4 Main explanatory variable
Our main explanatory variable is an indicator of whether the treatment SNF is hospital
based or not. We identified the hospital affiliation of a SNF from OSCAR data which also
provides the identification number of the affiliated hospital. We did not use AHA data to identify
hospitals with SNF because AHA appears to under-count the number of hospitals with hospitalbased SNF and do not provide the identification of the affiliated SNF.
3.5 Control variables

11

We included control variables from four different sources. We obtained age, gender, race,
and Medicaid eligibility from the Medicare enrollment file. We merged zip code characteristics
based on 2000 census using patient’s residential zip code from Medicare enrollment data. These
zip code level variables are poverty rate among elderly population, physical and mental disability
rate, share of Medicare beneficiaries enrolled in Medicare Advantage, population density and
racial composition of elderly population.
From the index hospitalization claims prior to SNF admission, we included Elixhauser
(Elixhauser et al. 1998) and Deyo (Deyo, Cherkin, and Ciol 1992) co-morbidity indexes, hospital
length of stay, and the number of intensive care unit (ICU) days during the hospitalization. We
used home health claims to construct an indicator of home health utilization before the index
hospital stay. Other clinical characteristics were obtained from the MDS and include indicators
for common diagnoses (e.g., diabetes, serious mental illness etc.), the number of medications
taken in the last seven days, the Morris late loss ADL scale (Morris, Fries, and Morris 1999), the
cognitive performance scale (Morris et al. 1994), the resource utilization group (5.12) (Fries and
Cooney 1985; Fries et al. 1994) and the Changes in Health, End-stage disease, Signs and
Symptoms (CHESS) score (Hirdes, Frijters, and Teare 2003). The control variables are
summarized for the full sample (see Table 3).

4. Methods
4.1 Empirical specification
This paper estimates the relationship between patient outcomes (number of days in five
mutually exclusive and exhaustive states, and Medicare payments) and SNF hospital-based status,
controlling for patient factors and hospital referral region fixed effects.

12

   = "# + "% & + '   ( + )*++ + 
where    is the outcome for patient i discharged to nursing n. & indicates whether
the treating SNF n is hospital based or not. '   is a vector of the individual’s demographic,
clinical and residential zip-code characteristics. )*++ are hospital referral region fixed effects.
We expect that the coefficients on "% to differ for each outcome.
4.2 Instrument
The differential selection of individuals into hospital-based SNFs may reflect both
demand and supply side factors. On the demand side, this selection may relate to the value that
certain individuals place in receiving services from a hospital with their own SNF. In other
words, patients in worse health have the most to gain from vertically integrated SNF care. On the
supply side, hospitals that own their own SNF can siphon off those most desirable patients likely
to benefit from SNF care. Although Medicare SNF payment is case-mix adjusted, the system
uses a relatively narrow set of patient conditions in adjusting payments.
If unobserved health is similarly correlated with SNF choice and quality, the assumption
underlying the linear regression model is violated. However, we can still generate a consistent
estimate of the effect of hospital-based status on quality if we can identify a variable DD that is
correlated with hospital-based status but not the error term ( ) in the quality equation. Given
DD, we can calculate an IV estimate of the effect of hospital-based status on quality.
We assume that differential distance between the nearest hospital with and without a SNF
will strongly predict entry into a hospital-based SNF. That is, individuals that live closer to a
hospital with a SNF are more likely to be admitted to that hospital, and then conditional on being
admitted to that hospital, they are more likely receive care in a hospital-based SNF. Our data
suggest that 42% of patients discharged from a hospital with a SNF were admitted to a hospital13

based SNF versus 2% of patients discharged from a hospital without a SNF. A large health
services literature establishes the importance of distance in the choice of provider (e.g., Brooks et
al. 2006; Hirth et al. 2003; McClellan, McNeil, and Newhouse 1994; Rahman and Foster 2015;
Rahman et al. 2014; Tan et al. 2012). Indeed, in our study, the median distance traveled to a
hospital was 11.5 kilometers (or 7.1 miles). In the study that most closely mirrors the distancebased instrument used in this study, Grabowski and colleagues (2013) found the relative
proximity to nonprofit and for-profit SNFs to be a strong predictor of the type of SNF chosen.
One important difference in this paper is that we use differential distance to the nearest hospital
with and without a SNF (rather than the differential distance to the nearest SNFs). The use of the
hospital distance is warranted in this study because we are leveraging hospitals increased
likelihood of discharging to a hospital-owned SNF.
We also expect differential distance to be uncorrelated with unobserved factors that may
influence outcomes. We assert that individuals choose a place of residence without regard to the
proximity of hospitals with and without a SNF. This accords with common sense, and does not
preclude people from making housing choices on the basis of proximity to a hospital. The
relatively low rate of elderly migration supports this assumption (U.S. Census Bureau 2003). As
such, we hypothesize that the differential distance measure is predetermined for potential SNF
patients and unrelated to unobserved SNF outcomes. In the next section, we report a falsification
test to validate this assumption. We also report mean characteristics by value of the differential
distance (above or below median) in a balance table (see Table 3).
To construct a differential distance (DD) measure for SNF patients, we calculated the
distance using the great circle formula from the centroid of the resident’s zip code prior to
hospital admission, as reported in Medicare enrollment data, to the exact geo-address of the

14

nearest hospital with and without a SNF based on the latitude and longitude of the respective
facilities. We used natural log of distance between zip code and the nearest hospital with and
without SNF. The differential measure was then calculated as the natural log of distance to the
nearest hospital with a SNF minus natural log of the distance to the nearest hospital without a
SNF. In other words, the measure’s interpretation is how much farther the patient would have to
travel to be admitted to the nearest hospital with a SNF. A negative value on this measure
indicates that the nearest hospital is one with a SNF. Therefore, we expect a negative coefficient
on differential distance in the first-stage results.
Our instrument is strong and valid. First, the instrument is balanced with respect to the
covariates (see Table 3). Our analyses are based on comparisons of where patients lived relative
to the closest hospitals with and without a SNF. Thus, we split the sample by whether the
instrument was above or below the median to check for balance in the observable characteristics.
Although many of the paired comparisons were statistically significantly different at the 5
percent level due to the extraordinarily large sample size, the patient characteristics were
virtually identical across the two samples. The fact that none of these measured patients’
demographic and clinical characteristics are correlated with the instrument makes it hard to argue
that there are obvious sources of confounders that would make the instrument invalid.
Second, the instrument is a strong predictor of the endogenous variable, hospital-based
SNF status, in the first stage (see Table 4). Column 1 reports the first stage where the IV is the
linear differential distance i.e., distance (in kilometers) of the nearest hospital with a SNF minus
the distance to the nearest hospital without a SNF. The first-stage estimates suggest that a one
kilometer increase in the differential distance between then nearest hospitals with and without a
SNF led to a 0.2 percentage point decrease in the likelihood of being admitted to a hospital-based

15

SNF. The second column reports the first stage where the IV is the difference in natural log
distance between the nearest hospital with and without a SNF (i.e., the natural log of the ratio of
distances). We used the log version of differential distance for our main analysis because of it is
less susceptible to the influence of extreme outliers in differential distance. The t-statistic based
on robust standard error is 20.06, meaning that the F-statistic is over 400. The partial R-squared
is 0.057. This is after controlling for hospital referral region fixed effects, so that the prediction is
based entirely on within-referral region correlations. Clearly, the instrument strongly predicts
the patient’s choice of a hospital-based SNF.
As a final specification check, we conducted a falsification test of our instrument, which
we draw from the identification strategy of an unrelated recent study. Doyle (2011) used people
treated in Florida that did not reside there (“vacationers”) as a means of addressing selection of
individuals into high and low cost areas in studying the relationship between spending and health
care outcomes. We borrow from this idea by examining individuals who enter a hospital far
away from their primary residence. The concentration of hospitals with SNFs around their
primary residence should not affect entry into a hospital-based SNF for those individuals who
enter a SNF near a family member living elsewhere or get sick or need surgery while on vacation.
For this sub-sample of “vacationers,” the first stage should be close to zero. If it is negative and
large, then we could conclude that where individuals live relative to the nearest hospitals with
and without SNFs is correlated with unmeasured quality (which would violate the assumption
underlying a valid instrument).
In conducting this falsification test, we excluded individuals entering hospital less than
100 km and alternately define this vacationer sub-sample as individuals entering a hospital over
100 km (N=48,287 or 5.8% of full sample), 200 km (N=27,449 or 3.3% of full sample) or 500

16

km (N=17,996 or 2.2% of full sample) away from their primary residence. The results suggest a
weak first-stage estimate of the DD instrument for the vacationer sub-samples (see columns 3-5
in Table 4). When we use a cutoff of 100 kilometers to define the vacationer sub-sample, the
first-stage estimate is roughly 23% as large as the result from the full sample. When we use a
cutoff of 200 kilometers, the effect is about 7% as large as the full sample. When we use a cutoff
of 500 kilometers, the first-stage estimate becomes statistically insignificant and it is 3.2% as
large as the result from the full sample. This gradual decline in the first stage relationship
suggests that we can say with some precision that this falsification check does not support the
idea that an individual’s place of residence relative to the nearest hospitals with and without
SNFs is strongly correlated with other (unmeasured) factors that predict quality of care.
We used the typical fixed effect 2SLS estimation (using xtivreg2 command in Stata) to
estimate equation (1). All the test statistics are based on robust standard errors.

5. Results
4.1 Primary Findings
The estimates of the effect of hospital-based SNF status on the days spent in different
discharge settings are presented in Table 5. Once again, we examine the first 180 days following
discharge of the individual from the hospital. In the table, we present both the standard model
that treats hospital-based status as exogenous (OLS model, row 2-3), and the IV model that treats
hospital-based status as endogenous (row 4). We show the OLS and IV results both with HRR
fixed effects. For the majority of outcomes, the results are quite different across the two models.
In the OLS model treating hospital-based status as exogenous, we obtain results similar to
earlier estimates in the literature. That is, we find that hospital-based SNF patients spend 14

17

fewer days in a SNF over the 180 day post-discharge period and 8.8 more days in the community
without home health care and 4.1 days with home health care. We find very slight increases in
mortality (0.952 days) and any hospitalization (0.258 days). When we included HRR fixed
effects in the OLS model, the results generally became even larger, suggesting fewer days in
SNF and more days in the community. The fact that the within-HRR effects are so large is
consistent with the idea that hospitals are differentially selecting patients that are good
candidates for a quick discharge into their own SNFs.
When we account for endogenous ownership in the IV models, we obtain results of a
much more plausible magnitude. Specifically, patients admitted to hospital-based SNFs spend
5.7 days less in a SNF relative to patients discharged to free-standing SNFs and 4.8 days more in
the community without home health services. When you put these results together, freestanding
SNF patients spend relatively more time in a health care institution and less time in community
in the 180 days following their original hospital discharge than hospital-based SNF patients.
Figure 2 presents the daily distribution of individuals in the study cohort as they
transitioned through different locations of care following their first-time admission to hospitalbased and freestanding SNFs. Differences in the likelihood of residing in a given setting emerge
quickly. On any given day, free-standing SNF patients were more likely to stay in nursing homes
and less likely to be discharged back to the community without receiving home health care, as
compared to hospital-based SNF patients. We observed about six more home health care days for
hospital-based SNF patients (see row 1, Table 5). According to panel D of figure 2, all these
extra home health days were during the first two months following discharge.
In order to examine the distribution of discharge outcomes on a day-to-day basis, we
estimated 180 daily linear probability models for each competing outcome using HRR fixed

18

effects and treating an admission to a hospital-based SNF as endogenous. Ideally, we should
have estimated multinomial outcome model for each day and calculated the marginal effects of
admission to hospital based SNF for each competing outcome. However, the presence of the
HRR fixed effect made the estimation procedure computationally very intensive. We plotted the
estimated effect of admission to hospital-based SNF on competing outcomes with respect to days
in Figure 3. We found differential impacts of hospital-based status over the 180-day window. For
hospital-based SNF patients, the likelihood of home health care use was higher initially while
SNF use was lower. Around day 20, the difference in home health care and SNF use reached its’
maximum. The fact that Medicare copayments begin at day 20 may be related to the differential
utilization across freestanding and hospital-based SNFs. Discharge home was higher for hospitalbased SNF patients during the first three months following discharge. Patients in hospital-based
SNFs were less likely to go back to hospital in the first week following discharge and then the
effect becomes statistically insignificant. This effect of fewer immediate bounce backs to the
hospital is consistent with other studies (Rahman et al. 2013a; Rahman et al. 2013c). There no
significant impact on mortality. All the effects were statistically insignificant after 100 days of
SNF admission, implying that there was no permanent effect of treatment in hospital based SNF
as we observed with the unadjusted gap in Figure 2. This figure also suggests our estimated
effects are not picking up any permanent unobserved patient characteristics that are associated
with hospital based SNF selection and outcomes.
We also considered the impact of being treated in a hospital-based SNF on Medicare
spending in the first month and six months following hospital discharge (see Tables 6 and 7). In
the unadjusted comparison, 30-day Medicare spending following discharge was $3,432 lower for
individuals discharged from a hospital-based SNF. When we controlled for the covariates and

19

included HRR fixed effects, the difference fell to $2,456. When we ran an IV model, the
Medicare savings was $2,882. In these IV models, we observed a small and statistically
insignificant impact on mortality, suggesting the savings were not a result of censoring due to
mortality. The main source of savings was lower SNF spending, with some additional savings
from inpatient care and some additional spending on home health care. Comparing Table 6 with
Table 7, the only savings by month six was from lower SNF payments.

4.2 Specification Checks
In order to examine the robustness of our primary model specification, we ran a series of
alternate models (see Table 9). We first experimented with an alternate form of the DD
instrument in which we used a linear distance instead of natural log transformed distance and a
binary instrument (above/below DD median) to take account of skewed values. Patients who live
in areas with no hospitals with SNFs will have large differential distance values using the linear
distance instrument. On the other hand, the binary version of the DD instrument will suppress the
role of large absolute values. The estimated effects using linear differential distance are much
larger. However our baseline results were similar to the results generated with a binary
instrument, suggesting our results are not being driven by outliers of the standard instrument.
Another potential issue is that the effects we observed might be predominantly
concentrated in certain markets. As shown in table 1, hospital based SNFs are more prevalent in
rural areas i.e. 30% of all free-standing SNFs and 50% of all hospital based SNFs are located in
rural counties. When we estimated our models conditional on urban and rural markets, we found
that the results for rural markets were relatively similar to the overall results. We also
investigated whether the magnitude of our result varied based on the competitiveness of the local

20

market. Using the county to approximate the market, we split the sample based on the median
Herfindahl value. We found quite similar effects in both types of markets.
Another potential check on selection is to focus our results on only those individuals
without a planned hospitalization. For example, a patient with a scheduled knee replacement
surgery will be able to weigh potential rehabilitation options across hospitals. However, for an
individual with an unplanned hospitalization, they will not be able to consider issues related to
whether the hospital has their own SNF. To investigate this issue, we examined hip fracture,
acute myocardial infarction (AMI), and stroke patients. The pattern of all three diagnosis results
was similar to the overall population, although both groups had even higher SNF utilization
among hospital-based SNF patients.
One final concern is that hospital quality of care could be higher in hospitals with a
hospital-based SNF than in hospitals without one, and that higher quality of inpatient care could
spuriously cause our results. Although this is a valid concern, with Table 3 showing
insignificant differences in treating hospital characteristics between patients with lower and
higher values of the IV, our methods protect against this kind of bias. Our models control for
HRR fixed effects, sweeping away crude geographic differences. The local average treatment
effect of the IV analysis is that of the marginal patient whose choice of SNF is determined by
happenstance of home location, not those patients who chose to go to the hospital because of
perceived differences in quality of care. If inpatient quality of care was so important, we would
expect to see significant differences in mortality and readmission rates in the first few days post
discharge, yet we do not see such differences.

21

In summary, the specification checks generally suggest our primary findings are robust,
although we did observe some heterogeneity across different markets (urban/rural, more/less
competitive markets).

6. Conclusion
The research question of whether hospital-based SNFs produce better outcomes at lower
Medicare payments is important given recent Medicare policies that hold health care systems and
payers accountable for post-hospital discharge outcomes and spending. Our conceptual
framework provides economic reasons for why hospital-based SNFs may be different (and
better) than freestanding SNFs. On the other hand, it also suggests that simple correlations will
yield biased results due to selection. Our instrumental variable is strong and valid. The
instrumental variables results then give consistent estimates of the causal effect of going to a
hospital-based SNF (compared to a freestanding SNF). The 30-day results are most policy
relevant while the 180-day results provide a better understanding of the long-run effects.
Our paper is suggestive of the idea that hospital-based SNFs generate some savings for
Medicare over the 6-month hospital discharge period. These savings are largely achieved via
lower SNF spending. As health care systems and payers increasingly take on risk for Medicare
hospital discharge episodes, these results provide some support for vertical integration of
hospitals and SNFs. Hospitals are faced with a “make-or-buy” decision in terms of partnering
with SNFs in that they can own their own SNF or they can establish relationships with
freestanding SNFs. ACOs and hospital networks are currently developing strategies to develop
networks of SNF partners (Lage et al. 2015; Maly et al. 2012). Previous research suggests that
when hospitals concentrate their discharges in a particular SNF, they will have lower

22

readmission rates from this SNF (Rahman et al. 2013b; Schoenfeld et al. 2016). From a policy
perspective, the key issue will be whether the potential additional savings we have observed in
this study are enough to justify the increased costs of owning a SNF under global and
accountable payment systems.
We have found that discharge to a hospital-based SNF leads to more rapid community
discharge with a lower likelihood of hospital readmission. From a consumer perspective,
potential value exists in seeking care at hospitals that own their own SNFs. This issue could be
reported on Hospital Compare as a potential signal of quality for elective procedures that could
require post-acute care (e.g., lower extremity joint replacement).
A potential limitation of this study is that it is based on SNF admissions in 2009. Though
the data are about six years old, the effect of more integrated acute and post-acute care on
patient’s discharge outcomes is not likely to change over time. Additionally, we must be careful
in over-interpreting these results. The marginal patient in our model is someone who received
treatment in a hospital-based SNF due to their prior residence being differentially closer to a
hospital with a SNF. The experience of these individuals may not generalize to the universe of
SNF patients. However, at least for these patients at the margin, we do observe some potential
savings associated with hospital-based SNFs via lower SNF utilization.
In sum, we found that hospital-based SNF patients spent more days in the community and
fewer days in the SNF in the 180 days following their original hospital discharge with no
significant effect on mortality or hospital readmission. Medicare spent almost $2,900 less on a
hospital-based SNF patient in the 30 days following their original hospital discharge. As health
care systems and payers increasingly take on risk for Medicare hospital discharge episodes, these
findings provide some support for vertical integration of hospitals and SNFs.

23

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Christian Brostrup-Jensen and other members of CGHCR for
helping us with data retrieval. We are grateful for comments by seminar participants at the
London School of Economics, ASHEcon, CIRANO (Montreal), Tulane University and Texas
A&M University.

24

References
Abt Associates Inc. 2002. “MegaQI Covariate Analysis and Recommendations: Identification
and Evaluation of Existing Quality Indicators That Are Appropriate for Use in Long-Term Care
Settings.” Prepared by D. Kidder, M. Rennison, H. Goldberg, D. Warner, B. Bell, L. Hadden, J.
Morris, R. Jones, & V. Mor, for Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (Contract No. 50095-0062 TO #4).
Ackerly, D. C. and D. C. Grabowski. 2014. “Post-acute care reform--beyond the ACA.” The New
England journal of medicine 370(8): 689-91.
Brooks, J. M., C. P. Irwin, L. G. Hunsicker, M. J. Flanigan, E. A. Chrischilles, and J. F.
Pendergast. 2006. “Effect of dialysis center profit-status on patient survival: a comparison of
risk-adjustment and instrumental variable approaches.” Health Serv Res 41(6): 2267-89.
David, G., E. Rawley, and D. Polsky. 2013. “Integration and Task Allocation: Evidence from
Patient Care.” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 22(3): 617-39.
Deyo, R. A., D. C. Cherkin, and M. A. Ciol. 1992. “Adapting a clinical comorbidity index for
use with ICD-9-CM administrative databases.” J Clin Epidemiol 45(6): 613-9.
Doyle, J. J. 2011. “Returns to Local-Area Healthcare Spending: Evidence from Health Shocks to
Patients Far From Home.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3(3): 221-43.
Elixhauser, A., C. Steiner, D. R. Harris, and R. M. Coffey. 1998. “Comorbidity measures for use
with administrative data.” Med Care 36(1): 8-27.
Fries, B. E. and L. M. Cooney, Jr. 1985. “Resource utilization groups. A patient classification
system for long-term care.” Med Care 23(2): 110-22.

25

Fries, B. E., D. P. Schneider, W. J. Foley, M. Gavazzi, R. Burke, and E. Cornelius. 1994.
“Refining a case-mix measure for nursing homes: Resource Utilization Groups (RUG-III).” Med
Care 32(7): 668-85.
Grabowski, D. C., Z. Feng, R. Hirth, M. Rahman, and V. Mor. 2013. “Effect of nursing home
ownership on the quality of post-acute care: an instrumental variables approach.” J Health Econ
32(1): 12-21.
Grabowski, D. C., Z. Feng, O. Intrator, and V. Mor. 2010. “Medicaid bed-hold policy and
Medicare skilled nursing facility rehospitalizations.” Health Services Research 45(6 Pt 2): 196380.
Grabowski, D. C., J. Gruber, and J. J. Angelelli. 2008. “Nursing Home Quality as a Common
Good.” Review of Economics and Statistics 90(4): 754-64.
Grabowski, D. C. and E. C. Norton. 2012. “Nursing Home Quality of Care.” In The Elgar
Companion to Health Economics, Second Edition, edited by A. M. Jones, pp. 307-17.
Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing, Inc.
Hawes, C., J. N. Morris, C. D. Phillips, V. Mor, B. E. Fries, and S. Nonemaker. 1995.
“Reliability estimates for the Minimum Data Set for nursing home resident assessment and care
screening (MDS).” Gerontologist 35(2): 172-8.
Hirdes, J. P., D. H. Frijters, and G. F. Teare. 2003. “The MDS-CHESS scale: a new measure to
predict mortality in institutionalized older people.” J Am Geriatr Soc 51(1): 96-100.
Hirth, R. A., M. E. Chernew, M. N. Turenne, M. V. Pauly, S. M. Orzol, and P. J. Held. 2003.
“Chronic illness, treatment choice and workforce participation.” Int J Health Care Finance Econ
3(3): 167-81.

26

Intrator, O., J. Hiris, K. Berg, S. C. Miller, and V. Mor. 2011. “The residential history file:
studying nursing home residents' long-term care histories(*).” Health Serv Res 46(1 Pt 1): 12037.
Konetzka, R. T., E. C. Norton, P. D. Sloane, K. E. Kilpatrick, and S. C. Stearns. 2006. “Medicare
prospective payment and quality of care for long-stay nursing facility residents.” Medical Care
44(3): 270-6.
Lage, D. E., D. Rusinak, D. Carr, D. C. Grabowski, and D. C. Ackerly. 2015. “Creating a
network of high-quality skilled nursing facilities: preliminary data on the postacute care quality
improvement experiences of an accountable care organization.” J Am Geriatr Soc 63(4): 804-8.
Liu, K. and K. J. Black. 2003. “Hospital-based and freestanding skilled nursing facilities: any
cause for differential Medicare payments?” Inquiry : a journal of medical care organization,
provision and financing 40(1): 94-104.
Maly, M. B., S. Lawrence, M. K. Jordan, W. J. Davies, M. J. Weiss, L. Deitrick, and D. SalasLopez. 2012. “Prioritizing partners across the continuum.” J Am Med Dir Assoc 13(9): 811-6.
McClellan, M., B. J. McNeil, and J. P. Newhouse. 1994. “Does more intensive treatment of acute
myocardial infarction in the elderly reduce mortality? Analysis using instrumental variables.”
Jama 272(11): 859-66.
Mor, V. 2004. “A comprehensive clinical assessment tool to inform policy and practice:
applications of the minimum data set.” Medical care 42(4 Suppl): III50-9.
Mor, V., O. Intrator, M. A. Unruh, and S. Cai. 2011. “Temporal and Geographic variation in the
validity and internal consistency of the Nursing Home Resident Assessment Minimum Data Set
2.0.” BMC health services research 11: 78.

27

Morris, J. N., B. E. Fries, D. R. Mehr, C. Hawes, C. Phillips, V. Mor, and L. A. Lipsitz. 1994.
“MDS Cognitive Performance Scale.” J Gerontol 49(4): M174-82.
Morris, J. N., B. E. Fries, and S. A. Morris. 1999. “Scaling ADLs within the MDS.” J Gerontol A
Biol Sci Med Sci 54(11): M546-53.
Morris, J. N., C. Hawes, B. E. Fries, C. D. Phillips, V. Mor, S. Katz, K. Murphy, M. L.
Drugovich, and A. S. Friedlob. 1990. “Designing the national resident assessment instrument for
nursing homes.” Gerontologist 30(3): 293-307.
Newhouse, J. P. G., A.;Graham,R.P.;McCoy,M.A.;Mancher,M;Kibria,A (Editors). 2013.
“Interim Report of the Committee on Geographic Variation in Health Care Spending and
Promotion of High-Value Health Care: Preliminary Committee Observations.” Washington,D.C.:
The National Academies Press.
Norton, E. C. 2000. “Long-Term Care.” In Handbook of health Economics, edited by A. J.
Culyer and J. P. Newhouse, pp. 955-94. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, North-Holland.
Norton, E. C. and D. O. Staiger. 1994. “How Hospital Ownership Affects Access to Care of the
Uninsured.” Rand Journal of Economics 25(1): 171-85.
Phillips, C. D., J. N. Morris, C. Hawes, B. E. Fries, V. Mor, M. Nennstiel, and V. Iannacchione.
1997. “Association of the Resident Assessment Instrument (RAI) with changes in function,
cognition, and psychosocial status.” J Am Geriatr Soc 45(8): 986-93.
Pizer, S. D., A. J. White, and C. White. 2002. “Why are hospital-based nursing homes so costly?
Relative importance of acuity and treatment setting.” Medical Care 40(5): 405-15.
Rahman, M. and A. D. Foster. 2015. “Racial segregation and quality of care disparity in US
nursing homes.” J Health Econ 39: 1-16.

28

Rahman, M., A. D. Foster, D. C. Grabowski, J. S. Zinn, and V. Mor. 2013a. “Effect of hospitalSNF referral linkages on rehospitalization.” Health Services Research 48(6 Pt 1): 1898-919.
Rahman, M., A. D. Foster, D. C. Grabowski, J. S. Zinn, and V. Mor. 2013b. “Effect of hospitalSNF referral linkages on rehospitalization.” Health Serv Res 48(6 Pt 1): 1898-919.
Rahman, M., D. C. Grabowski, P. L. Gozalo, K. S. Thomas, and V. Mor. 2014. “Are dual
eligibles admitted to poorer quality skilled nursing facilities?” Health Serv Res 49(3): 798-817.
Rahman, M., J. S. Zinn, and V. Mor. 2013c. “The impact of hospital-based skilled nursing
facility closures on rehospitalizations.” Health Serv Res 48(2 Pt 1): 499-518.
Sager, M. A., D. V. Easterling, D. A. Kindig, and O. W. Anderson. 1989. “Changes in the
location of death after passage of Medicare's prospective payment system. A national study.” N
Engl J Med 320(7): 433-9.
Schoenfeld, A. J., X. Zhang, D. C. Grabowski, V. Mor, J. S. Weissman, and M. Rahman. 2016.
“Hospital-skilled nursing facility referral linkage reduces readmission rates among Medicare
patients receiving major surgery.” Surgery.
Stearns, S. C., K. Dalton, G. M. Holmes, and S. M. Seagrave. 2006. “Using propensity
stratification to compare patient outcomes in hospital-based versus freestanding skilled-nursing
facilities.” Med Care Res Rev 63(5): 599-622.
Tan, H. J., E. C. Norton, Z. Ye, K. S. Hafez, J. L. Gore, and D. C. Miller. 2012. “Long-term
survival following partial vs radical nephrectomy among older patients with early-stage kidney
cancer.” JAMA 307(15): 1629-35.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2003. “Internal Migration of the Older Population: 1995-2000.” Census
2000 Special Reports. U.S. Department of Commerce.

29

Wiener, J., K. Liu, and G. Schieber. 1986. “Case-mix differences between hospital-based and
freestanding skilled nursing facilities. A review of the evidence.” Medical Care 24(12): 1173-82.

30

Table 1: Characteristics of skilled nursing facilities (SNFs)
Freestanding
Hospital-based
N=14,626
N=1,124
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
Total beds in SNF
109.57 60.23
61.45
82.06
Facility is part of a chain
0.56
0.50
0.32
0.47
Facility is run for-profit
0.72
0.45
0.12
0.32
Located in urban county
0.70
0.46
0.51
0.50
Percent occupancy
83.45
15.08
77.96
21.18
Total registered nurse hours/day/resident
0.38
0.69
1.68
2.22
Total licensed practical nurse hours/day/resident
0.87
0.90
1.38
1.67
Total certified nurse aide hours/day/resident
2.23
1.24
3.30
2.63
Admissions black (%)
10.36
17.38
7.56
14.04
Annual admissions/bed (#)
1.77
1.68
8.20
9.95
Proportion of SNF days per total nursing home days
17.74
14.88
40.00
40.13
Average case mix index at admission to SNF
1.05
0.11
1.07
0.16
Average ADL score on admission (0-28)
16.18
3.00
15.31
3.59
Residents physically restrained (%)
3.77
6.19
2.56
7.17
Residents receiving antipsychotics (%)
26.85
14.70
15.93
15.44
Non-psychotic residents receiving antipsychotics (%)
19.76
9.31
13.27
13.20
Weighted deficiency score, all deficiencies
80.34
81.64
59.20
53.37
PPNH Hospitalizations per resident/year/SNF (%)
0.31
0.18
0.43
0.40
Notes: ADL = activities of daily living; PPNH = potentially preventable nursing home

31

Table 2: Summary of (N=827,513)
Mean

Std. Dev.

Days in different setting in the 180 days following hospital discharge
Death (# of days)
Hospital (# of days)
Skilled nursing facility (# of days)
Community with home health care (# of days)
Community (# of days)

25.19
8.29
51.01
28.44
67.06

52.79
18.02
52.00
38.47
63.85

Accumulated outcomes in first 30 days following discharge
Reimbursement for Inpatient hospital care ($)
Reimbursement for SNF care ($)
Reimbursement for Home health care ($)
Total reimbursement ($)
Death
Any hospital readmission

2,256
9,160
415
11,903
0.071
0.201

6,327
4,438
781
6,815
0.257
0.401

Accumulated outcomes in first 180 days following discharge
Reimbursement for Inpatient hospital care ($)
Reimbursement for SNF care ($)
Reimbursement for Home health care ($)
Total reimbursement ($)
Death
Any hospital readmission

8,214
14,413
2,545
25,790
0.220
0.446

32

16,978
10,673
3,299
22,151
0.414
0.497

Table 3: Person-level characteristics by differential distance (DD) between nearest hospital
with SNF and nearest without SNF (N=827,513)
IV above the
IV below the
HRR level
All
HRR level
Median
Median
N
827,541
392,400
435,141
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
Main explanatory variable
Hospital-based status
0.12
0.33
0.17
0.38
0.07
0.26
Patient’s demographic characteristics
Age
81.34
7.86
81.18
7.87
81.49
7.85
Female
0.66
0.48
0.65
0.48
0.66
0.47
Black
0.07
0.26
0.08
0.26
0.07
0.25
Other race
0.03
0.17
0.03
0.17
0.03
0.18
Dual eligible on the month of admission
0.19
0.39
0.19
0.39
0.19
0.39
Married
0.35
0.48
0.35
0.48
0.34
0.47
Patient’s Clinical characteristics
Length of stay of index hospitalization
7.78
5.92
7.82
5.93
7.74
5.91
Number of days with home health use in
2.58
6.69
2.53
6.64
2.62
6.74
30 days before SNF admission
Deyo index greater than 2
0.43
0.50
0.43
0.50
0.43
0.49
Elexhauser index greater than 2
0.51
0.50
0.51
0.50
0.51
0.50
ICU days in index hospitalization
2.22
4.77
2.22
4.78
2.22
4.77
Diabetes
0.30
0.46
0.30
0.46
0.30
0.46
Congestive heart failure
0.21
0.41
0.21
0.41
0.21
0.41
Hip fracture
0.09
0.28
0.09
0.28
0.09
0.28
Cerebrovascular Disease
0.11
0.31
0.11
0.31
0.11
0.31
Bipolar disorder
0.01
0.09
0.01
0.09
0.01
0.10
Schizophrenia
0.01
0.07
0.01
0.07
0.01
0.07
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
0.20
0.40
0.20
0.40
0.20
0.40
Number of medications taken in last seven
12.17
4.83
12.25
4.87
12.10
4.78
days
Morris additive Activity of Daily Living
16.54
5.31
16.49
5.35
16.58
5.28
(ADL) score
Fries/Morris cognitive performance scale
1.29
1.53
1.28
1.54
1.30
1.53
(CPS)
CHESS
1.55
1.03
1.54
1.02
1.56
1.03
Resource Utilization Group III
6.06
1.83
6.02
1.85
6.10
1.81
Patient’s residential zip code
characteristics
% of 65+ age population under poverty
9.14
6.15
9.36
6.41
8.94
5.93
line
33

% of population with physical disability
% of population with mental disability
% of Medicare population enrolled in
Managed care
Population density
% of 65+ age population who are African
American
Hospital characteristics
Number of general beds
Government run hospital
For-profit hospital
Full time equivalent doctor per bed
Full time equivalent registered nurse per
bed
Number of inpatient days per bed
Number of admissions per bed
Instrumental variable
Differential distance (ln of nearest hospital
w SNF minus ln of nearest hospital w/out
SNF)

27.01
9.96

7.19
4.34

26.51
9.82

6.59
4.02

14.99

14.55

15.86

15.11

369.8

795.4

466.6

1132

7.35

15.86

6.67

13.89

145.7
0.30
0.31
0.47

199.7
0.09
0.08
0.23

139.0
0.29
0.27
0.48

200.8
0.10
0.14
0.20

152.2
0.30
0.35
0.45

3.14
490.4
96.65

1.80
402.5
49.36

3.20
521.5
97.56

2.03
519.1
57.44

3.08
458.4
95.72

1.52
222.4
39.35

0.95

1.45

0.00

1.20

1.81

1.08

26.74
9.89

6.87
4.17

15.45
420.7

14.84
972.6

6.99

14.83

200.3
0.10
0.11
0.22

Notes: CHESS = Changes in Health, End-stage disease, Signs and Symptoms scale

34

Table 4: First-stage results, regression of a hospital with a skilled nursing facility (SNF) on differential distance

All

All

Entered
hospital
100km+

Entered
hospital
200km+

Entered
hospital
500km+

Differential Distance (natural log of
-0.0579*** -0.0135*** -0.0044***
-0.00184
nearest hospital w/ SNF – natural log
of nearest w/out)
Differential Distance (nearest hospital
-.0017***
w/ SNF – nearest w/out)
t-statistics
8.78
20.06
6.77
3.31
1.21
F-statistics
77.01
402.40
45.87
10.98
1.47
Partial R-squared
0.031
0.057
Observations
826,485
826,485
48,287
27,449
17,996
R-squared
0.0927
0.104
0.041
0.037
0.035
Note: All the regressions include patients and residential zip-code level explanatory variables listed in table 3 and hospital referral
region (HRR) fixed effects. Test statistics are based on robust standard error.

35

Table 5: Effects of being treated in a hospital-based skilled nursing facility (SNF) on the
number of days in different settings in the 180 days following SNF admission (N=827,513)
Number of days
Death

Hospital

SNF

Unadjusted difference

-5.658***
[0.178]

-0.0896
[0.0608]

-21.93***
[0.174]

Community
with home
health care
5.926***
[0.130]

Adjusted difference

0.951***
[0.169]

0.257***
[0.0614]

-14.12***
[0.167]

4.131***
[0.129]

8.781***
[0.184]

Adjusted difference with
HRR fixed effects

0.553***
[0.181]

0.469***
[0.0656]

-16.91***
[0.177]

5.038***
[0.136]

10.85***
[0.195]

0.853

-0.607**

-5.711***

0.704

4.761***

[0.760]

[0.276]

[0.748]

[0.574]

[0.819]

IV with HRR fixed
effects

Community
21.75***
[0.214]

Note: Regressions reported in last three rows include patients and residential zip-code level explanatory
variables listed in table 3. Standard errors are reported in square brackets and are based on robust standard
error.

36

Table 6: Estimated effect of being treated in a hospital-based skilled nursing facility (SNF) on
Medicare spending, mortality, and hospital readmission in 30 days following hospital discharge
(N=827,513)

Unadjusted
difference

Inpatient
hospital
-74.82***
[21.36]

Reimbursement ($)
Home
SNF
health
-3,765***
421.1***
[14.40]
[2.596]

Adjusted
difference

-90.75***
[21.32]

-2,826***
[13.34]

Adjusted
difference with
HRR fixed effects

-56.50**
[22.79]

Any Death

Any hospital
readmission

-3,432***
[22.70]

-0.0159***
[0.000867]

-0.0154***
[0.00135]

345.0***
[2.555]

-2,566***
[22.03]

0.00609***
[0.000854]

-0.0179***
[0.00134]

-2,790***

373.5***

-2,456***

0.00491***

-0.0152***

[13.91]

[2.703]

[23.25]

[0.000913]

[0.00144]

total

-224.9**
-2,871***
222.7***
-2,882***
0.00679*
-0.0339***
IV with HRR
fixed effects
[95.89]
[58.55]
[11.40]
[97.85]
[0.00384]
[0.00597]
Note: Regressions reported in last three rows include patients and residential zip-code level explanatory
variables listed in table 3. Standard errors are reported in square brackets and are based on robust standard
error.

37

Table 7: Estimated effect of being treated in a hospital-based skilled nursing facility (SNF) on
Medicare spending, mortality, and hospital readmission in six months following hospital
discharge (N=827,513)

Unadjusted
difference

Inpatient
hospital
-337.0***
[57.32]

Medicare spending ($)
Home
SNF
health
-6,336***
332.4***
[35.35]
[11.13]

Adjusted
difference

-331.3***
[56.90]

-4,440***
[33.98]

Adjusted
difference with
HRR fixed
effects

-326.6***
[60.72]

Any Death

Any hospital
readmission

-6,520***
[74.44]

-0.0480***
[0.00140]

-0.0276***
[0.00168]

270.6***
[11.09]

-4,528***
[72.73]

0.0046***
[0.00133]

-0.0266***
[0.00167]

-4,677***

413.8***

-4,550***

0.00127

-0.0271***

[35.89]

[11.70]

[77.23]

[0.00142]

[0.00178]

total

IV with HRR
-42.99
-3,858***
-56.57
-4,196***
0.00268
-0.0404***
fixed effects
[255.4]
[151.0]
[49.26]
[324.9]
[0.00597]
[0.00751]
Note: Regressions reported in last three rows include patients and residential zip-code level explanatory
variables listed in table 3. Standard errors are reported in square brackets and are based on robust standard
errors.

38

Table 8: Specification checks (N=827,513 unless otherwise noted)
Number of days in a given setting
Death
Hospital
SNF
HHA
Home
0.853
-0.607**
-5.711***
0.704
4.761***
Baseline model
[0.760]
[0.276]
[0.748]
[0.574]
[0.819]
-2.445**
-1.371***
-6.207***
2.535***
7.488***
Linear differential distance
[1.045]
[0.404]
[0.983]
[0.780]
[1.137]
Binary DD measure
-0.174
-0.708*
-7.111***
1.255
6.738***
(above/below) median
[1.080]
[0.387]
[1.068]
[0.810]
[1.165]
2.166*
-1.122**
-2.900**
0.231
1.625
Urban SNFs only (N= 690,991)
[1.221]
[0.454]
[1.195]
[0.927]
[1.328]
-1.02
0.246
-10.15***
3.750***
7.170***
Rural SNFs only (N= 136,010)
[1.195]
[0.395]
[1.256]
[0.897]
[1.262]
High competition markets (N=
0.737
-0.570*
-5.134***
0.57
4.396***
768,508)
[0.882]
[0.318]
[0.874]
[0.667]
[0.957]
Low competition markets (N=
0.303
-0.701
-5.731**
2.906
3.223
58,493)
[2.354]
[0.845]
[2.483]
[1.792]
[2.441]
Hip fracture patients
-1.375
-2.523***
-7.158***
4.399**
6.656**
(N=69,352)
[2.397]
[0.937]
[2.740]
[2.040]
[2.743]
Acute myocardial infarction
3.346
-1.755
-2.803
-2.966
4.178
patients (N=19,068)
[6.892]
[2.196]
[5.944]
[4.549]
[6.562]
2.418
1.473
-10.49**
-0.286
6.881*
Stroke patients (N=27,397)
[4.245]
[1.362]
[4.660]
[2.950]
[3.896]
0.985
-0.512*
-7.226***
1.410**
5.342***
Model including hospital
characteristics (N= 719,484)
[0.846]
[0.306]
[0.843]
[0.644]
[0.916]
Note: All the regressions excluding the last row include patients and residential zip-code level
explanatory variables listed in table 3 and hospital referral region (HRR) fixed effects. Regressions
reported in the last raw included hospital characteristics Standard errors are based on robust standard error.

39

Figure 1: Fraction of skilled nursing facility (SNF) patients in state who were treated in a hospital that owned a SNF

40

Figure 2: Fraction of patients in a given setting in days following hospital discharge

41

Figure 3: Instrumented impact of being discharged to hospital-based skilled nursing facility

42

