                                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE EFFECTS OF PRE-TRIAL DETENTION ON CONVICTION, FUTURE CRIME, AND EMPLOYMENT:
                    EVIDENCE FROM RANDOMLY ASSIGNED JUDGES

                                                Will Dobbie
                                                Jacob Goldin
                                                Crystal Yang

                                             Working Paper 22511
                                     http://www.nber.org/papers/w22511


                           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                                          August 2016




     We thank Amanda Agan, Adam Cox, Hank Farber, Louis Kaplow, Adam Looney, Alex Mas,
     Magne Mogstad, Michael Mueller-Smith, Erin Murphy, Steven Shavell, Megan Stevenson, and
     numerous seminar participants for helpful comments and suggestions. Molly Bunke, Kevin
     DeLuca, Sabrina Lee, and Amy Wickett provided excellent research assistance. The views
     expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the view of the U.S.
     Department of Treasury. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
     necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

     NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
     peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
     official NBER publications.

     © 2016 by Will Dobbie, Jacob Goldin, and Crystal Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
     text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
     credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Pre-Trial Detention on Conviction, Future Crime, and Employment: Evidence
from Randomly Assigned Judges
Will Dobbie, Jacob Goldin, and Crystal Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 22511
August 2016
JEL No. J24,J70,K14,K42

                                          ABSTRACT

Over 20 percent of prison and jail inmates in the United States are currently awaiting trial, but
little is known about the impact of pre-trial detention on defendants. This paper uses the detention
tendencies of quasi-randomly assigned bail judges to estimate the causal effects of pre-trial
detention on subsequent defendant outcomes. Using data from administrative court and tax
records, we find that being detained before trial significantly increases the probability of a
conviction, primarily through an increase in guilty pleas. Pre-trial detention has no detectable
effect on future crime, but decreases pre-trial crime and failures to appear in court. We also find
suggestive evidence that pre-trial detention decreases formal sector employment and the receipt
of employment- and tax-related government benefits. We argue that these results are consistent
with (i) pre-trial detention weakening defendants' bargaining position during plea negotiations,
and (ii) a criminal conviction lowering defendants' prospects in the formal labor market.


Will Dobbie                                      Crystal Yang
Industrial Relations Section                     Harvard Law School
Princeton University                             1585 Massachusetts Avenue
Firestone Library                                Griswold 301
Princeton, NJ 08544-2098                         Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                         cyang@law.harvard.edu
wdobbie@princeton.edu

Jacob Goldin
Stanford Law School
559 Nathan Abbott Way
Stanford, CA 94305-8610
jsgoldin@law.stanford.edu
        “The defendant with means can afford to pay bail. He can afford to buy his freedom.
        But the poorer defendant cannot pay the price. He languishes in jail weeks, months, and
        perhaps even years before trial. He does not stay in jail because he is guilty. He does
        not stay in jail because any sentence has been passed. He does not stay in jail because
        he is any more likely to flee before trial. He stays in jail for one reason only – he stays
        in jail because he is poor.”
        – President Lyndon Johnson, at the signing of the Bail Reform Act of 1966

    Each year, the United States imprisons more than half a million individuals who have never
been convicted of a crime, largely because they are unable to post bail (Walmsley 2013). Over the
past twenty years, the proportion of felony defendants released with no conditions decreased from
26 percent to 14 percent. The average bail amount has also doubled from $25,400 to $55,400 over
this time period, with over 70 percent of felony defendants now assigned bail amounts greater than
$5,000 (Reaves 2013). Even when the bail amount is set at a relatively low level, the majority of
defendants cannot afford to post bail. For example, in Philadelphia and Miami-Dade, the setting
of our study, only about 50 percent of defendants were able to post bail when it was set at $5,000
or less.
    In theory, the bail system is meant to balance three competing objectives: (1) allow all but the
most dangerous criminal defendants to go free before trial, (2) ensure that defendants appear at
all required court proceedings, and (3) protect the public by preventing new crime. Consider, for
example, monetary bail, which allows a defendant to go free before trial by posting a percentage of
the bail amount. If a defendant fails to appear in court, commits a new crime, or violates any other
conditions of release, he or she forfeits the deposit and is liable for the remaining bail amount. As
a result, defendants released through monetary bail have an increased incentive to comply with the
release conditions.
    In practice, however, there is a heated debate on whether the bail system achieves these objec-
tives. Critics of the bail system argue that pre-trial detention is unlikely to protect the public or
reduce bail jumping if release is not based on risk, but rather factors like race or financial resources.
Some are particularly concerned that excessive bail and pre-trial detention disrupts defendants’
lives, putting jobs at risk and increasing the pressure to accept an unfavorable plea bargain to avoid
a lengthy stay in jail before trial.1 Others claim that the bail system is operating as designed, and
that releasing more defendants would increase both pre-trial crime and bail jumping. This debate
is currently playing out across the country, as a number of cities and states consider reforming their
bail systems.2 Yet, despite the attention generated by the ongoing efforts to reform the bail system,

    1
      As one lawyer told the New York Times, “[m]ost of our clients are people who have crawled their way up from
poverty or are in the throes of poverty....Our clients work in service-level positions where if you’re gone for a day, you
lose your job....People who live in shelters, where if they miss their curfews, they lose their housing....So when our
clients have bail set, they suffer on the inside, they worry about what’s happening on the outside, and when they get
out, they come back to a world that’s more difficult than the already difficult situation that they were in before.”
See http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/16/magazine/the-bail-trap.html.
    2
      For example, some cities are considering the use of risk-based assessment tools to more accurately predict each


                                                            1
there is little systematic evidence on the social costs or benefits of detaining an individual before
trial.
    Estimating the causal impact of pre-trial detention on criminal defendants has been complicated
by two important issues. First, there are few datasets that include information on both bail hearings
and long-term outcomes for a large number of defendants.3 Second, detained defendants are likely
different from defendants who are not detained, biasing cross-sectional comparisons. For example,
defendants detained pre-trial may be more likely to be guilty or more likely to commit another
crime in the future.4
    In this paper, we use new data linking over 420,000 criminal defendants from two large, urban
counties to administrative court and tax records to estimate the social costs of pre-trial detention
in terms of criminal case outcomes and foregone earnings. To shed light on the potential benefits of
pre-trial detention, we also estimate the extent to which pre-trial release affects bail jumping and
future criminal behavior. Finally, we investigate how pre-trial detention affects tax filing behavior
and the take-up of employment-related benefits such as the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC). By
examining a wide range of important outcomes, we establish a new set of facts on both the social
costs and social benefits of the current bail system.
    Our empirical strategy exploits plausibly exogenous variation in pre-trial release from the quasi-
random assignment of cases to bail judges who vary in the leniency of their bail decisions. This
empirical design recovers the causal effects of pre-trial release for individuals at the margin of
release; i.e. cases on which bail judges disagree on the appropriate bail conditions. We measure
bail judge leniency using a leave-out, residualized measure based on all other cases that a bail
judge has handled during the year. The leave-out leniency measure is highly predictive of detention
decisions, but uncorrelated with case and defendant characteristics. Importantly, bail judges in
our sample are different from trial and sentencing judges, allowing us to separately identify the
effects of being assigned to a lenient bail judge as opposed to a lenient judge in all phases of the
case. This instrumental variables (IV) research strategy is similar to that used by Kling (2006),
Aizer and Doyle (2015), and Mueller-Smith (2015) to estimate the impact of incarceration in the


defendant’s flight risk and other release options such as electronic monitoring. Other cities, such as New York City,
have earmarked substantial funds to supervise low-risk defendants instead of requiring them to post bail or face
pre-trial detention. In May 2015, Illinois lawmakers passed a bill requiring that a nonviolent defendant be released
pre-trial without bond if his or her case has not been resolved within 30 days. In addition, communities have created
charitable bail organizations like the Bronx Freedom Fund and the Brooklyn Community Bail, which posts bail for
individuals held on misdemeanor charges when bail is set at $2,000 or less.
    3
      Data tracking defendants often contain some information on pre-trial detention and follow individuals through
the criminal justice process (i.e. arrest, charging, trial, and sentencing), but do not contain unique identifiers that
allow defendants to be linked to longer-term outcomes. For example, the Bureau of Justice Statistics’ State Court
Processing Statistics (SCPS) program periodically tracks a sample of felony cases for about 110,000 defendants from
a representative sample of 40 of the nation’s 75 most populous counties.
    4
      Prior work based on cross-sectional comparisons has yielded mixed results, with some papers suggesting little
impact of pre-trial detention on conviction rates (Goldkamp 1980), and others finding a significant relationship
between pre-trial detention and the probability of conviction (Ares, Rankin, and Sturz 1963, Cohen and Reaves 2007,
Phillips 2008) and incarceration (Foote 1954, Williams 2003, Oleson et al. 2014). There is mixed evidence on whether
bail amounts are correlated with the probability of jumping bail (Landes 1973, Clarke, Freeman, and Koch 1976,
Myers 1981).


                                                          2
United States, Bhuller et al. (2016) to estimate the impact of incarceration in Norway, and Di Tella
and Schargrodsky (2013) to estimate the impact of electronic monitoring versus incarceration in
Argentina.5
    We begin by estimating the impact of pre-trial release on case outcomes. Pre-trial release
may affect case outcomes by reducing a defendant’s incentive to plead guilty to obtain a faster
release from jail, or by affecting a defendant’s ability to prepare an adequate defense or negotiate a
settlement with prosecutors. It is also possible that seeing detained defendants in jail uniforms and
shackles may bias trial judges or jurors. Our two-stage least squares results suggest statistically and
economically significant effects for most case outcomes. Pre-trial release decreases the probability
of being found guilty by 15.6 percentage points, a 27.3 percent change from the mean for detained
defendants. The probability of pleading guilty also decreases by 12.0 percentage points, a 27.5
percent change. Both effects are larger for drug and property defendants, defendants charged with
misdemeanors, and defendants with no prior offenses in the past year. The effect of pre-trial release
on incarceration in the full sample is small and not precisely estimated, but large and statistically
significant for defendants charged with felonies and drug offenses (i.e. cases where the baseline rates
of incarceration are highest).
    Next, we explore the impact of pre-trial release on court appearances and future crime. We
find that pre-trial release increases the probability of failing to appear in court by 15.0 percentage
points, a 124.0 percent increase from the detained defendant mean. Pre-trial release also increases
the likelihood of rearrest prior to case disposition by 7.6 percentage points, a 37.6 percent change.
These results suggest that while pre-trial detention has a negative impact on case outcomes, it also
reduces failures to appear in court and pre-trial crime, two of the purported benefits of the bail
system. Conversely, we find no detectable effects of pre-trial release on measures of future crime
up to four years later. These results suggest that pre-trial detention has a short-run mechanical
incapacitation effect on defendants who are detained, but minimal effects on crime once we include
arrests following case disposition.
    Finally, we examine the effects of pre-trial release on formal sector employment, tax filing be-
havior, and social benefits receipt. Apart from direct employment effects, pre-trial release may
impact defendant welfare by affecting the take-up of social safety net programs. In particular, being
released before trial may strengthen defendants’ ties to the formal employment sector or affect their
attitudes towards the government, which may change the likelihood that they file a tax return.
Because certain social benefit programs such as the EITC are only available through the tax code,
changes in tax filing behavior may affect take-up of such programs.6 Similarly, pre-trial release may
    5
      Outside of the criminal justice setting, Chang and Schoar (2008), Dobbie and Song (2015), Dobbie, Goldsmith-
Pinkham, and Yang (2015) use bankruptcy judge propensities to grant bankruptcy protection; Maestas, Mullen and
Strand (2013), French and Song (2014), Dahl, Kostol, and Mogstad (2014), and Autor, Kostol, and Mogstad (2015)
use disability examiner propensities to approve disability claims; and Doyle (2007, 2008) uses case worker propensities
to place children in foster care.
    6
      In addition, because the EITC cannot be claimed on the basis of income earned while incarcerated, pre-trial
detention may reduce tax benefit claiming behavior through this channel as well. More generally, helping those
with criminal convictions reenter the formal employment sector is a central feature of tax policy with respect to this
population. For example, the Work Opportunity Tax Credit subsidizes employers who hire individuals that have


                                                          3
affect participation in social welfare programs such as Unemployment Insurance (UI), which are
also tied to formal sector employment. We find suggestive evidence that pre-trial release increases
both formal sector employment and the receipt of employment- and tax-related government ben-
efits. Pre-trial release increases the probability of filing a tax return three to four years after the
bail hearing by 4.3 percentage points, a 14.0 percent increase from the detained defendant mean.
Pre-trial release also increases the amount of UI benefits received over the same time period by
$323, a 131.8 percent increase, and the amount of EITC benefits received by $239, a 66.4 percent
increase. While less precisely estimated, we find that pre-trial release also increases the probability
of employment in the formal labor market three to four years after the bail hearing by 10.2 percent-
age points, a 26.9 percent increase. The probability of having any formal sector income over this
time period increases by 8.5 percentage points, a 18.3 percent increase. The results are substantially
larger among individuals with no prior offenses in the past year and among individuals who were
employed in the year prior to their bail decision.
    We argue that these results are consistent with (i) pre-trial release significantly strengthening a
defendant’s bargaining position during plea negotiations, and (ii) a criminal conviction significantly
lowering defendants’ ties to the formal labor market. Our findings contribute to an important litera-
ture documenting the negative labor market consequences of incarceration following a guilty verdict
(e.g. Pager 2003, Western 2006, Mueller-Smith 2015, Agan and Starr 2016).7 Our results suggest
that these adverse labor market effects begin at the pre-trial stage prior to any finding of guilt, while
also highlighting the potential costs of weakening a defendant’s negotiating position before trial.
Yet, we also find that pre-trial detention provides some social benefits through the incapacitation of
defendants, leading to decreases in both pre-trial crime and missed court appearances. As a result,
we are unable to draw sharp welfare conclusions about the optimality of the current bail system
without strong, ad-hoc assumptions. That being said, our findings underscore the potential value
to defendants of alternatives like electronic monitoring that would facilitate pre-trial release while
preserving many of the social benefits the current system provides.
    Our results also speak to the optimal design of the tax code and other policies meant to promote
economic opportunity. In particular, our findings suggest that to increase labor force attachment,
it may be more cost-effective to adopt policies that prevent some of the negative effects of pre-
trial detention from occurring in the first place, as opposed to focusing primarily on programs like
the EITC and the Work Opportunity Tax Credit that encourage formal sector employment upon
defendants’ reentry into society.
    In parallel work, Gupta, Hansman, and Frenchman (2016), Leslie and Pope (2016), and Steven-
son (2016) use similar approaches to estimate the impact of bail decisions on case outcomes. Gupta,
Hansman, and Frenchman (2016) find that the assignment of money bail causes a 6.0 percentage

been convicted of a felony in the past year.
    7
      Our results are also related to a broad literature documenting the presence of racial disparities at various stages
of the criminal justice process (e.g., Ayres and Waldfogel 1994, Bushway and Gelbach 2011, McIntyre and Baradaran
2013, Rehavi and Starr 2014, Anwar, Bayer, and Hjalmarsson 2012, Abrams, Bertrand, and Mullainathan 2012,
Alesina and La Ferrara 2014), and suggest that any costs of pre-trial detention are disproportionately borne by black
defendants.


                                                           4
point rise in the likelihood of being convicted and a 0.7 percentage point yearly rise in recidivism
in Philadelphia and Pittsburgh, Leslie and Pope (2016) find that pre-trial detention causes a 14.2
percentage point increase in the probability of conviction in New York City, and Stevenson (2016)
finds that pre-trial detention leads to a 6.6 percentage point increase in the likelihood of being con-
victed in Philadelphia. We view our results on case outcomes as being broadly consistent with these
papers. However, none of these papers is able to examine non-criminal outcomes such as formal
sector employment or social benefits take-up.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section I provides a brief overview of
the bail system and judge assignment in our context. Section II describes our data and provides
summary statistics. Section III describes our empirical strategy. Section IV presents the results,
Section V offers interpretation, and Section VI concludes. An online appendix provides additional
results and detailed information on the outcomes used in our analysis.


                             I. The Bail System in the United States

                                                    A. Overview

In the United States, the bail system is meant to allow all but the most dangerous criminal suspects
to be released from custody while ensuring both their appearance at required court proceedings and
the public’s safety. The federal right to non-excessive bail before trial is guaranteed by the Eighth
Amendment to the U.S. Constitution,8 with almost all state constitutions granting similar rights to
defendants.9
    In most jurisdictions, bail conditions are determined by a bail judge within 24 to 48 hours of
a defendant’s arrest. The assigned bail judge has a number of potential options when setting bail.
First, defendants who show minimal risk of flight may be released on their promise to return for
all court proceedings, known broadly as release on recognizance (ROR). Second, defendants may
be released subject to some non-monetary conditions such as monitoring or drug treatment when
the court finds that these measures are required to prevent flight or harm to the public. Third,

     8
       The Eighth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution states that “[e]xcessive bail shall not be required.” In 1966,
Congress passed the Bail Reform Act, designed to allow for release of federal defendants who were too poor to
post bail, the first significant reform in federal bail legislation since the Judiciary Act of 1789. Generally speaking,
the 1966 Bail Reform Act provided that all defendants accused of federal crimes would be released from custody
without having to post any bond unless the government could demonstrate that the defendant was likely to flee the
jurisdiction to avoid prosecution. The next major reform in federal bail law was the Bail Reform Act of 1984, which
allowed for defendants to be held until trial if the government could prove that they were dangerous to others in the
community. In addition, the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure specify that before conviction, a person arrested
for an offense “not punishable by death shall be admitted to bail,” as the “right to freedom before conviction permits
the unhampered preparation of a defense, and serves to prevent the infliction of punishment prior to conviction.”
(U.S. Supreme Court).
     9
       For instance, Article I, §14 of the Pennsylvania Constitution states that “[a]ll prisoners shall be bailable by
sufficient sureties, unless for capital offenses or for offenses for which the maximum sentence is life imprisonment or
unless no condition or combination of conditions other than imprisonment will reasonably assure the safety of any
person and the community...,” and Article I, §14 of the Florida Constitution states that “[u]nless charged with a
capital offense or an offense punishable by life imprisonment...every person charged with a crime...shall be entitled
to pretrial release on reasonable conditions.”


                                                           5
defendants may be required to post a bail payment to secure release if they pose an appreciable
risk of flight or threat of harm to the public. Defendants are typically required to pay 10 percent
of the bail amount to secure release, with most of the bail money refunded after the case if there
were no failures to appear for court or other release violations.10 Those who do not have the 10
percent deposit in cash can borrow this amount from a commercial bail bondsman, who will accept
cars, houses, jewelry and other forms of collateral for their loan. Bail bondsman also charge a non-
refundable fee for their services, generally 10 percent of the total bail amount.11 If the defendant
fails to appear, he or the bail surety is theoretically liable for the full value of the bail amount
and forfeits any amount already paid. Finally, for more serious crimes, the bail judge may also
require that the defendant be detained pending trial by denying bail altogether. Bail denial is
often mandatory in first- or second-degree murder cases, but can be imposed for other crimes when
the bail judge finds that no set of conditions for release will guarantee appearance or protect the
community from the threat of harm posed by the suspect.
    The bail hearing is typically very brief – in Philadelphia and Miami-Dade counties, our setting,
most hearings last less than five minutes. The bail judge will usually consider factors such as
the nature of the alleged offense, the weight of the evidence against the defendant, any record of
prior flight or bail violations, and the financial ability of the defendant to pay bail (Foote 1954).12
Because each defendant poses a different set of risks, bail judges are granted considerable discretion
in evaluating each defendant’s circumstances when making decisions about release. In addition,
because bail hearings occur very shortly after arrest, judges generally have limited information on
which to base their decisions (Goldkamp and Gottfredson 1988). This discretion, coupled with
limited information, results in substantial differences in bail decisions across bail judges. At the
hearing, the defendant also receives a copy of the criminal complaint, is advised of his or her rights,
and appointed counsel if indigent. Defendants generally have the opportunity to appeal the initial
bail decision in later proceedings, which can lead to modifications of the initial bail conditions.13
   10
      In Philadelphia, 70 percent of the bail deposit is available for refund 31 days after the final disposition of the
case. The City of Philadelphia retains the remaining 30 percent of the deposit, up to $750, even if charges get dropped
or the defendant is acquitted on all charges.
   11
      A bail bondsman is any person or corporation that acts as a surety by pledging money or property as bail for
the appearance of persons accused in court. If the defendant misses a court appearance, the bail agency will often
hire someone to locate the missing defendant and have him taken back into custody. The bail bondsman may also
choose to sue the defendant or whoever helped to guarantee the bond to recoup the bail amount. Repayment may
come in the form of cash, but it can also be made by seizure of the assets used to secure the bail bond.
   12
      For example, under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, “the bail authority shall consider all available
information as that information is relevant to the defendant’s appearance or nonappearance at subsequent proceedings,
or compliance or noncompliance with the conditions of the bail bond,” including information such as the nature of
the offense, the defendant’s employment status and relationships, and whether the defendant has a record of bail
violations or flight. See Pa. R. Crim. P. 523. Under the Florida Rules of Criminal Procedure, judges consider similar
factors such as “the nature and circumstances of the offense charged and the penalty provided by law; the weight of
the evidence against the defendant;...the defendant’s past and present conduct, including any record of convictions,
previous flight to avoid prosecution, or failure to appear at court proceedings; the nature and probability of danger
that the defendant’s release poses to the community; [and] the source of funds used to post bail.” See Fl. R. Crim.
P. 3.131.
   13
      Bail reductions will generally not be granted if a defendant has detainers or open bench warrants. In considering
whether to reduce bail, the subsequent judge will take in account the severity of the crime, prior failures to appear
for court, the amount of bail, and whether essential witnesses have appeared in court.


                                                           6
    Following the bail hearing, defendants usually attend a preliminary arraignment, where the court
determines whether there is probable cause for the case and the defendant formally enters a plea of
guilty or not guilty.14 If the case is not dismissed and the defendant does not plead guilty, the case
proceeds to trial by judge (bench trial) or jury (jury trial). Plea bargaining usually begins around
the time of arraignment and can continue throughout the criminal proceedings.15 If defendants
plead guilty or are found guilty, they are sentenced in a later hearing. Appendix Figure 1 provides
the general timeline of the criminal justice process in a typical jurisdiction, although the precise
timing of the process differs across jurisdictions.

                     B. Our Setting: Philadelphia County and Miami-Dade County

Philadelphia County: Immediately following arrest in Philadelphia County, defendants are brought
to six police stations around the city where they are interviewed by the city’s Pre-trial Services
Bail Unit. The Bail Unit operates 24 hours a day, seven days a week, and interviews all adults
charged with offenses in Philadelphia through videoconference, collecting information on the arrested
individual’s charge severity, personal and financial history, family or community ties, and criminal
history. The Bail Unit then uses this information to calculate a release recommendation based on a
4-by-10 grid of bail guidelines (see Appendix Figure 2) that is presented to the bail judge. However,
these bail guidelines are only followed by the bail judge about half the time, with judges often
imposing monetary bail instead of the recommended non-monetary options (Shubik-Richards and
Stemen 2010).
    After the Pre-Trial Services interview is completed and the charges are approved by the Philadel-
phia District Attorney’s Office, the defendant is brought in for a bail hearing. Since the mid 1990s,
the bail hearing is conducted through videoconference by the bail judge on duty, with representatives
from the district attorney and local public defender’s offices (or private defense counsel if present).
While a defense lawyer is present at the bail hearing, there is no real opportunity for defendants
to speak with the attorney prior to the hearing. At the hearing itself, the bail judge reads the
charges to the defendant, informs the defendant of his or her right to counsel, sets bail after hearing
from representatives from the prosecutor’s office and defendant’s counsel, and schedules the next
court date. After the bail hearing, the defendant has an opportunity to post bail, secure counsel,
and notify others of the arrest. If the defendant is unable to post bail, he is detained, but has the
opportunity to petition for bail modification in subsequent court proceedings.

Miami-Dade County: The Miami-Dade bail system follows a similar procedure, with one important
exception. As opposed to Philadelphia where all defendants are required to have a bail hearing,

  14
      In Miami-Dade, misdemeanor arraignments coincide with the bail hearing, but felony arraignments generally
occur several weeks after the bail hearing. In contrast, in Philadelphia, all arraignments usually happen within a
month of the bail hearing.
   15
      Prior work finds that approximately 95 percent of felony convictions are reached through a plea deal (see Durose
and Langan 2007). Philadelphia differs from many other jurisdictions in its wide use of bench trials on felony cases
and relatively low rates of both conviction and plea bargaining. In our sample from Philadelphia, 45 percent of
defendants were not found guilty, 41 percent pled guilty before trial, and 15 percent were found guilty at trial.


                                                          7
most defendants in Miami-Dade can avoid a bail hearing by posting an amount designated by a
standard bail schedule immediately following arrest and booking.16 The Miami-Dade County bail
schedule ranks offenses according to their seriousness and assigns an amount of bond that must be
posted to permit a defendant’s release. Critics have argued that this schedule discriminates against
poor defendants by setting a fixed price on release according to the charged offense rather than
taking into account a defendant’s propensity for flight or crime. Approximately 30 percent of all
defendants are able to secure release immediately, and the other 70 percent attend a bail hearing
where their bail is determined by the assigned bail judge (Goldkamp and Gottfredson 1988).
    If a defendant is unable to post bail immediately in Miami-Dade, there is a bail hearing within
24 hours of arrest where defendants can argue for a reduced bail amount. For the 70 percent of
defendants who attend the bail hearing, Miami-Dade conducts separate daily hearings for felony
and misdemeanor cases. Both bail hearings are conducted by the bail judge on duty through
videoconference to the central detention center. At the bail hearing, the court will determine
whether or not there is sufficient probable cause to detain the arrestee and if so, the appropriate
bail conditions. The standard bail amount may be lowered, raised, or remain the same depending
on the case situation and the arguments made by defense counsel and the prosecutor. If a bail
judge grants monetary bail, he or she often follows the amount recommended by the standard bail
schedule, but the choice between monetary versus non-monetary bail conditions varies widely across
judges in Miami-Dade (Goldkamp and Gottfredson 1988). Felony defendants are also screened by
a Pre-Trial Services officer to identify individuals who may be eligible for pre-trial release. The
information from the screening process is presented by this officer at the defendant’s bail hearing.

Mapping to Empirical Design: Our empirical strategy exploits variation in the pre-trial release
tendencies of the assigned bail judge. There are four features of the Philadelphia and Miami-Dade
bail systems that make them an appropriate setting for our research design. First, there are multiple
bail judges serving simultaneously, allowing us to measure variation in bail decisions across judges.
At any point in time, the Philadelphia Municipal Court has six arraignment court magistrates
who work in the Preliminary Arraignment Court.17 In Miami-Dade, there are multiple bail judges
serving simultaneously to hear weekend bond hearings, allowing us to measure variation in bail
decisions across judges for these cases. Approximately 60 different bail judges rotate through the
felony and misdemeanor shift each Saturday and Sunday throughout the year.18
    Second, the assignment of judges is based on rotation systems, providing quasi-random variation
in which bail judge a defendant is assigned to. In Philadelphia, the six magistrates serve rotating

   16
      Non-bailable offenses include murder and domestic violence offenses. For a current version of the bail schedule
by offense type, see http://www.brennanbailbonds.com/dade-county-bond-schedule-numerical.pdf.
   17
      These judges serve four-year terms, are appointed by the Municipal Court Board of Judges, and are eligible for
an unlimited number of reappointments. The bail judge positions were created by the Pennsylvania state legislature
in 1984 in order to relieve the workload of Philadelphia Municipal Court judges. By law, Philadelphia bail judges
are not required to be lawyers.
   18
      We drop all cases heard by bail judges during the week in Miami-Dade, as only one judge typically handles
these weekday hearings. The weekend bail judges are trial court judges from the misdemeanor and felony courts in
Miami-Dade that assist the bail court with weekend cases.


                                                         8
eight-hour shifts in order to balance caseloads. Three judges serve together every five days, with
one bail judge serving the morning shift (7:30AM-3:30PM), another serving the afternoon shift
(3:30PM-11:30PM), and the final judge serving the night shift (11:30PM-7:30AM). While it may be
endogenous whether a defendant is arrested in the morning or at night or on a different day of the
week, the fact that these six magistrates rotate through all shifts and all days of the week allows us
to isolate the independent effect of the judge from day-of-week and time-of-day effects. Similarly,
in Miami-Dade, judges rotate through the felony and misdemeanor bail hearings each weekend to
ensure balanced caseloads during the year. Every Saturday and Sunday beginning at 9:00AM, one
judge serves the misdemeanor shift and another judge serves the felony shift. Because of the large
number of judges in Miami-Dade, any given judge works a bail shift approximately once or twice a
year.19
    Third, there is very limited scope for influencing which bail judge will hear the case, as most
individuals are brought for a bail hearing shortly following arrest. In Philadelphia, all adults arrested
and charged with a felony or misdemeanor appear before an arraignment court magistrate for
a formal bail arraignment proceeding, which is usually scheduled within 24 hours of arrest. A
defendant brought in for his preliminary arraignment is automatically assigned to the bail judge
on duty. There is also limited room for influencing which bail judge will hear the case in Miami-
Dade, as arrested felony and misdemeanor defendants are brought in for their hearing within 24
hours following arrest to the bail judge on duty. However, given that defendants can post bail
immediately following arrest in Miami-Dade without having a bail hearing, there is the possibility
that defendants may selectively post bail depending on the identity of the assigned bail judge. It is
also theoretically possible that a defendant may self-surrender to the police in order to strategically
time their bail hearing to a particular bail judge. As a partial check on this important assumption
of random assignment, we test the relationship between observable characteristics and bail judge
assignment.
    Fourth, in both the Philadelphia and Miami-Dade systems, the bail judge is different from trial
and sentencing judges, allowing us to separately identify the effects of being assigned to a lenient
bail judge as opposed to a lenient bail, trial, and sentencing judge. Following the preliminary
arraignment, cases in Philadelphia are assigned to a completely separate pool of trial judges. The
bail judge in Miami-Dade County is also different from trial and sentencing judges. While the
composition of the Miami-Dade trial courts is comprised of the same judges that rotate through

   19
     There are two potential complications with the judge rotation systems used in our setting. First, most defen-
dants in our sample have the opportunity to appeal the initial bail decision in later proceedings, which can lead to
modifications of the initial bail conditions. In our sample, approximately 20 percent of defendants petition for some
modification of the initial bail decision. These subsequent bail decisions will be often be made by a different judge
than the initial bail decision. We calculate our judge instrument using the first assigned bail judge. While this may
lead to a weaker first stage relationship between pre-trial release and bail judge assignment, it has the advantage of
not capturing any (potential) non-random assignment to subsequent bail judges. The second complication is that
bail judges in our sample occasionally exchange scheduled shifts to work around conflicts when one judge cannot
appear in court that day. This practice leads to some modest differences in the probability that particular judges are
assigned to a specific day-of-the-week or specific shift time. We therefore account for both time and shift fixed effects
when calculating judge leniency. We discuss this issue in greater detail below.


                                                           9
weekend bail shifts, the case is newly assigned after the bail hearing.20


                                                      II. Data

                                  A. Data Sources and Sample Construction

Our empirical analysis uses court data from Philadelphia and Miami-Dade merged to tax data
from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). The Data Appendix contains relevant information on the
cleaning and coding of the variables used in our analysis. This section summarizes the most relevant
information from the appendix.
    In Philadelphia, court records are available for the Pennsylvania Court of Common Pleas and
the Philadelphia Municipal Court for all defendants arrested and charged between 2007-2014. In
Miami-Dade, court records are available for the Miami-Dade County Criminal Court and Circuit
Criminal Court for all defendants arrested between 2006-2014. For both jurisdictions, the raw court
data have information at the charge, case, and defendant levels. The charge-level data include
information on the original arrest charge, the filing charge, and the final disposition charge. We also
have information on the severity of each charge based on state-specific offense grades, the outcome for
each charge, and the punishment for each guilty charge.21 The case-level data include information
on attorney type, arrest date, and the date of and judge presiding over each court appearance
from arraignment to sentencing. Importantly, the case-level data also include information on bail
type, bail amount when monetary bail is set, and whether bail was met. Case-level data from
Philadelphia also allow us to measure whether a defendant received a subsequent bail modification,
failed to appear in court for a required proceeding (as proxied by the issuance of a bench warrant or
the holding of a bench warrant hearing), or absconded from the jurisdiction. Finally, the defendant-
level data include information on each defendant’s name, gender, ethnicity, date of birth, and zip

   20
       The rotation schedules of the bail judges also do not align with the schedule of any other actors in the criminal
justice system. In Philadelphia, non-capital attorneys handle matters within specified units, meaning that a different
attorney handles each stage of the criminal proceedings such that staff is deployed on a “horizontal” basis. For instance,
charging and bail are handled exclusively by Assistant District Attorneys in the Charging Unit. In the Trial Division
Bureaus, a separate pool of Assistant District Attorneys handle misdemeanor trials and felony preliminary hearings.
Likewise, if the defendant is represented by the Defender Association, he or she will have a different defense attorney
at each stage because public defenders are assigned to courtrooms rather than to individual clients. In Miami-Dade,
attorney representation is also deployed on a “horizontal” basis with different attorneys handling different stages of
the criminal justice process. For instance, the Attorney General’s office has a group of attorneys in the Criminal
Intake Unit, which screens and files charges generally within 21-30 days following arrest. Similarly, in the Public
Defender’s Office, certain attorneys work in the Felony Early Representation Unit, aimed at serving clients between
arrest and arraignment.
    21
       In Florida, there are five distinct offense grades: F1 (first degree felony), F2 (second degree felony), F3 (third
degree felony), M1 (first degree misdemeanor), and M2 (second degree misdemeanor). In Florida, misdemeanors are
less serious crimes, punishable by up to one year in county jail whereas felonies are punishable by the death penalty
or incarceration in a state prison. In Pennsylvania, there are 10 distinct offense grades: H (homicide), F1 (first degree
felony), F2 (second degree felony), F3 (third degree felony), F (ungraded felony), M1 (first degree misdemeanor),
M2 (second degree misdemeanor), M3 (third degree misdemeanor), M (ungraded misdemeanor), and S (summary
offense). In Pennsylvania, summary offenses are minor breaks in the law punishable by up to 90 days in jail such
as disorderly conduct, underage drinking, shoplifting (first offense), and criminal mischief. Individuals convicted of
misdemeanors could be imprisoned for up to five years and individuals convicted of felonies could be sentenced to
prison for more than five years.


                                                           10
code of residence. The presence of unique defendant identifiers allows us to measure both the
number of prior offenses and any recidivism in the same county during our sample period.
    We make three sample restrictions to the court data. First, we drop the handful of cases with
missing bail judge information as we cannot measure judge leniency for these individuals. Second,
we drop the 30 percent of defendants in Miami-Dade who never have a bail hearing because they
post bail immediately following arrest and booking. Third, we drop all weekday cases in Miami-
Dade. Recall that in Miami-Dade, bail judges are assigned on a rotating basis only on the weekends.
In contrast, bail judges are assigned on a rotating basis on all days in Philadelphia. The analysis
sample contains 328,492 cases from 172,407 unique defendants in Philadelpha and 97,538 cases from
66,067 unique defendants in Miami-Dade.
    To explore the impact of pre-trial release on subsequent formal sector employment, tax filing
behavior, and the receipt of social insurance, we matched these court records to administrative
tax records at the IRS. The IRS data include every individual who has ever acquired a social
security number (SSN), including those who are institutionalized.22 Information on formal sector
earnings and employment comes from annual W-2s issued by employers, and from tax returns filed
by individual taxpayers. Individuals with no W-2s or self-reported income in any particular year
are assumed to have had no earnings in that year. Individuals with zero earnings are included in all
regressions throughout the paper to capture any effects of pre-trial release on the extensive margin.
We define an individual as being employed in the formal labor sector if W-2 earnings are greater
than zero in a given year.
    To measure total household earnings, we use adjusted gross income (AGI) based on income from
all sources (wages, interest, self-employment, UI benefits, etc.) as reported on the individual’s tax
return. For individuals who did not file a tax return, we impute AGI to equal the individual’s W-2
earnings plus UI income reported by the state UI agency. We define an individual as having any
income if AGI is greater than zero in a given year. All dollar amounts are in terms of year 2013
dollars and reported in thousands of dollars. We top- and bottom-code earnings in each year at the
99th and 1st percentiles, respectively, to reduce the influence of outliers. To increase precision, we
typically use the average (inflation indexed) individual and household income from the first two full
years after the bail hearing, and average from the third and fourth years after the bail hearing, as
outcome measures.
    The IRS data also include information on Unemployment Insurance (UI) from information re-
turns filed with the IRS by state UI agencies, and information on the Earned Income Tax Credit
(EITC) claimed by the taxpayer on his or her return. Following the earnings measure, we use the
average (inflation indexed) receipt of UI and EITC earnings from the first two full years, and average
from the third and fourth years after the bail hearing, as outcome measures.
    We match the court data to administrative tax data from the IRS using first and last name, date
of birth, gender, zipcode, and state of residence.23 We were able to successfully match approximately
   22
    Undocumented immigrants without a valid SSN are not included in these data.
   23
    Specifically, defendants were first matched to Social Security records on the basis of their date of birth, gender,
and the first four letters of their last name. Duplicate matches were iteratively pruned based on (1) whether the


                                                          11
77 percent of individuals in the court data. Our match rate in Philadelphia is 81 percent and our
match rate in Miami-Dade is 73 percent. The probability of being matched to the IRS data is not
significantly related to judge leniency (see Table 3). For outcomes contained in the IRS data, we
limit our estimation sample to these matched cases.

                                            B. Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 reports summary statistics for our estimation sample. We present summary statistics for
those who are detained pre-trial and those who are released pre-trial. We measure pre-trial release
based on whether a defendant is released within three days of the bail hearing, as recent policy
initiatives focus on this time period.24 In Section IV.E, we explore the robustness of our results to
alternative measures of pre-trial release. Additional summary statistics by bail type are presented
in Appendix Table 1.
    Panel A of Table 1 provides summary statistics on bail decisions in our setting. Among defen-
dants who are released pre-trial within the first three days, 36.8 percent are released ROR, 21.7
percent are released on non-monetary bail, and 41.5 percent are released on monetary bail with an
average bail amount of $12,497 and median bail amount of $5,000. In contrast, among those who
are detained for three days, 94 percent are detained on monetary bail with an average bail amount
of $52,577 and median bail amount of $7,500.
    Panel B presents demographic characteristics of defendants. In our sample, 38.5 percent of
detained defendants are white and 60.5 percent are black. Among released defendants, 42.4 percent
are white and 55.6 percent are black. Detained defendants are more likely to be male than female,
and more likely to have a prior offense in the past year. On average, both detained and released
defendants are approximately 33 years of age at the time of bail.
    Panel C presents offense characteristics of defendants in our sample. Detained defendants are
arrested and charged for more offenses and are more likely to be charged with violent or property
offenses. Specifically, the average detained defendant is charged with 3.7 offenses compared to
2.5 offenses for released defendants. Among detained defendants, 28.9 percent are charged with a
violent offense and 34.6 percent are charged with a property offense. In contrast, only 19.1 percent of
released defendants are charged with a violent offense and 18.5 percent are charged with a property
offense. Released defendants are also much more likely to be charged with drug offenses. In general,
released defendants are substantially less likely to be charged with felonies compared to detained
defendants.
    Panel D presents case outcomes, future crime, and labor market outcomes by detention status.
In our sample, 57.1 percent of detained defendants are found guilty of at least one charge compared

defendant ever filed a tax return or received an information return reporting residence in the state of residence; (2)
whether the first three letters of the defendant’s first name matched a first name reported on a tax return or other
informational return; and (3) whether the defendant’s zipcode matched a zipcode reported with a tax return or
informational return. Remaining duplicates were dropped from the sample. Because the filing of tax and information
returns may be related to pre-trial release, we restrict the matching process to tax information submitted before the
year of the defendant’s arrest.
   24
      See, for example, the 3DaysCount project at the Pretrial Justice Institute.


                                                         12
to 48.7 percent of released defendants. Forty-three percent of detained defendants plead guilty
compared to just 20.8 percent of released defendants. Detained defendants are also 15.0 percent more
likely to be incarcerated compared to released defendants, and have prison sentences that are 264.6
days longer on average. Conversely, released defendants are more likely to fail to appear in court
and more likely to abscond from the jurisdiction, with 17.9 percent of released defendants failing
to appear compared to 12.1 percent of detained defendants. Released defendants also experience
a longer time between bail and case disposition compared to detained defendants, with released
defendants waiting 247.1 days between bail and disposition compared to 200.2 days for detained
defendants.
   In terms of crime, released defendants are more likely to be rearrested prior to case disposition
compared to detained defendants, with 23.6 percent of released defendants rearrested before dispo-
sition compared to 20.2 percent of detained defendants. Released defendants, however, are also less
likely to be rearrested in the several years after the bail hearing. By three to four years post-bail,
26.8 percent of released defendants are rearrested compared to 32.2 percent of detained defendants.
   Finally, released defendants earn substantially more in the two years post-bail compared to
detained defendants and are more likely to be employed. In our sample, 37.8 percent of detained
defendants are employed compared to 50.9 percent of released defendants. Given these low rates of
employment, annual wage earnings of all defendants are also low, with detained defendants making
$5,202 in reported earnings compared to $7,897 for released defendants. Released defendants are
also more likely to receive any income in the the first two years post-bail compared to detained
defendants. Differences in earnings outcomes of released and detained defendants also persist three
to four years post-bail. By three to four years post-bail, 37.9 percent of detained defendants are
employed in the formal labor market compared to 48.2 percent of released defendants, with detained
defendants make annual reported earnings of $5,861 compared to $8,363 for released defendants.


                                       III. Research Design

Overview: For individual i, consider a model that relates outcomes such as earnings to an indicator
for whether the individual was released before his or her trial for case c, Releasedict :

                               Yict = β0 + β1 Releasedict + β2 Xict + εict                            (1)

where Yict is the outcome of interest for individual i in court c in year t, Xict is a vector of case- and
defendant-level control variables, and εict is an error term. The key problem for inference is that
OLS estimates of equation (1) are likely to be biased by the correlation between pre-trial release
and unobserved defendant characteristics that are correlated with the outcomes. For example, bail
judges may be more likely to detain defendants who have the highest risk of committing a new
crime in the future. In this scenario, OLS estimates will be biased towards a finding that pre-trial
release lowers future crime.
   To address this issue, we estimate the causal impact of pre-trial release using a measure of the


                                                   13
tendency of a quasi-randomly-assigned bail judge to release a defendant pre-trial as an instrument
for release. In this specification, we interpret any difference in the outcomes for defendants assigned
to more or less lenient bail judges as the causal effect of the change in the probability of pre-
trial release associated with judge assignment. This empirical design identifies the local average
treatment effect (LATE), i.e., the causal effect of bail decisions for individuals on the margin of
being released before trial.

Instrumental Variable Calculation: We construct our instrument using a residualized, leave-out
judge leniency measure that accounts for case selection following Dahl et al. (2014). Because the
judge assignment procedures in Philadelphia and Miami-Dade are not truly random as in other
settings, selection may impact our estimates if we used a simple leave-out mean to measure judge
leniency following the previous literature (e.g. Kling 2006, Aizer and Doyle 2015). For example,
bail hearings following DUI arrests disproportionately occur in the evenings and on particular days
of the week, leading to case selection. If certain bail judges are more likely to work evening or
weekend shifts due to shift substitutions, the simple leave-out mean will be biased.
    Given the rotation systems in both counties, we account for court-by-bail year-by-bail day of
week fixed effects and court-by-bail month-by-bail day of week fixed effects. In Philadelphia, we
add additional bail-day of week-by-bail shift fixed effects. Including these exhaustive court-by-
time effects effectively limits the comparison to defendants at risk of being assigned to the same
set of judges. With the inclusion of these controls, we can interpret the within-cell variation in
the instrument as variation in the propensity of a quasi-randomly assigned bail judge to release a
defendant relative to the other cases seen in the same shift and/or same day of the week.25
    Let the residual pre-trial release decision after removing the effect of these court-by-time fixed
effects be denoted by:

                             Released∗ict = Releasedict − γXict = Zctj + εict                               (2)

where Xict includes the respective court-by-time fixed effects. The residual release decision, Released∗ict ,
includes our measure of judge leniency Zctj , as well as idiosyncratic defendant level variation εict .
    For each case, we then use these residual bail release decisions to construct the leave-out mean
decision of the assigned judge within a bail year:
                                                  ntj
                                                  X                                      !
                                          1
                          Zctj =                         (Released∗ikt ) − Released∗ict                     (3)
                                       ntj − 1
                                                   k=0

where ntj is the number of cases seen by judge j in year t. We calculate the instrument across all
case types (i.e. both felonies and misdemeanors), but allow the instrument to vary across years. In
robustness checks, we allow judge tendencies to vary by case severity and by crime type.
    The leave-out judge measure given by equation (3) is the release rate for the first assigned judge
  25
      Our approach is also similar to the procedure used to estimate teacher value-added accounting for baseline
differences across students (e.g. Chetty, Friedman, and Rockoff 2014).


                                                           14
after accounting for the court-by-time fixed effects. This leave-out measure is important for our
analysis because regressing outcomes for defendant i on our judge leniency measure without leaving
out the data from defendant i would introduce the same estimation errors on both the left and right
hand side of the regression and produce biased estimates of the causal impact of being released
pre-trial. In our two-stage least-squares results, we use our predicted judge leniency measure, Zctj ,
as an instrumental variable for whether the defendant is released pre-trial.

Judge Variation: Figure 1 presents the distribution of our residualized judge leniency measure for
pre-trial release at the judge-by-year level. Our sample includes nine total bail judges in Philadelphia
and 170 total bail judges in Miami-Dade. In any given year, there are six bail judges serving in
Philadelphia and approximately 60 serving in Miami-Dade. In Philadelphia, the average number
of cases per judge is 36,499 during the sample period of 2007-2014, with the typical judge-by-year
cell including 6,596 cases. In Miami-Dade, the average number of cases per judge is 573 during the
sample period of 2006-2014, with the typical judge-by-year cell including 187 cases.
   Controlling for our vector of court-by-time effects, the judge release measure ranges from -0.150
to 0.179 with a standard deviation of 0.030. In other words, moving from the least to most lenient
judge increases the probability of pre-trial release by 32.9 percentage points, a 59.6 percent change
from the mean three day release rate of 55.2 percentage points.
   In practice, a judge affects whether a defendant is released pre-trial through a combination of
different bail decisions (Table 1). Some judges may release defendants through ROR. Others may
release defendants through conditional non-monetary release. Finally, some judges may impose
monetary bail that a defendant is able to post to secure his or her release. Appendix Figure
3 presents the distribution of residualized judge leniency for these other bail margins and shows
substantial variation across judges in the use of each bail type. In our preferred specification, we
collapse these various bail decisions into a binary decision of whether the defendant is released
within three days of the bail hearing because it captures a margin of particular policy relevance.
Section IV.E explores the impact of other margins such as being assigned monetary bail.
   To determine which bail decisions are most predictive of whether a defendant is released pre-
trial, we regress pre-trial release on each residualized judge leniency measure separately calculated
for ROR, non-monetary bail, monetary bail, and bail amount (including zeros). See Appendix Table
2. We find that judges who are more likely to use conditional non-monetary bail are also more likely
to release defendants pre-trial. Additionally, judges who are more likely to use monetary bail and
assign higher monetary bail amounts are less likely to release defendants pre-trial. These results
suggest that defendants on the margin of pre-trial release are those for whom judges disagree about
the appropriateness of non-monetary bail versus monetary bail.
   One question might be why judges differ in their bail decisions. We have few detailed character-
istics of judges to help illuminate this question. While interesting for thinking about the design of
the bail determination process, it is not critical to our analysis to know precisely why some judges
are more lenient than others. What is critical is that some judges are systematically more lenient
than others, that cases are randomly assigned to judges conditional on our court-by-time fixed ef-

                                                  15
fects, and that defendants released by a strict judge would also be released by a lenient one. We
now consider whether each of these conditions holds in our data.

First Stage: To examine the first stage relationship between bail judge leniency and whether an
accused defendant is released pre-trial (Released), we estimate the following equation for individual
i and case c, assigned to judge j at time t using a linear probability model:

                                Releasedict = α1 Zctj + α2 Xict + εict                             (4)

where the vector Xict includes court-by-time fixed effects. As described previously, Zctj are leave-
out (jackknife) measures of judge leniency that are allowed to vary across years. We obtain similar
results using a probit model, which is unsurprising given that the mean three day pre-trial release
rate is 0.552 and far from zero or one. Robust standard errors are clustered at the individual level.
   Figure 1 provides a graphical representation of the first stage relationship between our residual-
ized measure of judge leniency and the probability of pre-trial release controlling for our exhaustive
set of court-by-time fixed effects, overlaid over the distribution of judge leniency. The graph is a
flexible analog to equation (4), where we plot a local linear regression of actual individual pre-trial
release against judge leniency. The individual rate of pre-trial release is monotonically increasing
in our leniency measure, and is close to linear. A 10 percentage point increase in the residual-
ized judge’s release rate in other cases is associated with an approximately seven percentage point
increase in the probability that an individual is released before trial.
   Table 2 presents formal first stage results from equation (4). Column 1 of Table 2 presents the
mean three day pre-trial release rate. Column 2 begins by reporting results only with court-by-time
fixed effects. Column 3 adds our baseline crime and defendant controls: race, gender, age, whether
the defendant had a prior offense in the past year, the number of charged offenses, indicators for
crime type (drug, DUI, property, violent, other) and crime severity (felony or misdemeanor), and
indicators for missing characteristics. Finally, column 4 adds our baseline IRS controls for the year
prior to bail: tax filing status, the amount of reported W-2 earnings, household income, UI, and
EITC, indicators for any W-2 earnings, household income, UI, and EITC, and indicators for missing
IRS data.
   Consistent with Figure 1, we find that our residualized judge instrument is highly predictive of
whether an arrested defendant is released pre-trial, with an F-statistic for the instrument of 569.1.
Including controls in columns 3 and 4 do not change the magnitude of the estimated first stage
effect, consistent with the quasi-randomness of bail judge assignment. With all controls (column 4),
our results show that a defendant assigned to a bail judge that is 10 percentage points more likely
to release a defendant pre-trial is 6.9 percentage points more likely to be released pre-trial. This
estimate suggests that moving from the least to most lenient judge would imply an increase in the
likelihood of pre-trial release by 22.7 percentage points, a 41.1 percent increase from the mean rate
of pre-trial release.
   The probability of pre-trial release does not increase one-for-one with our measure of judge


                                                  16
leniency, likely because of measurement error that attenuates the effect toward zero. For instance,
judge leniency may drift over the course of the year or fluctuate with case characteristics, reducing
the accuracy of our leave-one-out measure. Nevertheless, the results from Figure 1 and Table 2
confirm that judge leniency is highly predictive of detention outcomes in our setting.
   Appendix Table 3 presents additional first stage results. We find that a defendant assigned to a
bail judge that is 10 percentage points more likely to release a defendant pre-trial is 4.0 percentage
points less likely to petition for bail modification, 6.8 percentage points more likely to be released
within 14 days of the bail hearing, and 5.7 percentage points more likely to ever be released before
trial. These results indicate that the bail decision made by the first assigned bail judge is extremely
persistent.

Instrument Validity: Two additional conditions must hold to interpret our two-stage least squares
estimates as the local average treatment effect (LATE) of pre-trial release: (1) bail judge assignment
only impacts defendant outcomes through the probability of pre-trial release, and (2) the impact of
judge assignment on the probability of pre-trial release is monotonic across defendants.
   Table 3 verifies that assignment of cases to bail judges is random after we condition on our court-
by-time fixed effects. The first column of Table 3 uses a linear probability model to test whether
case and defendant characteristics are predictive of pre-trial release. These estimates capture both
differences in the bail conditions set by the bail judges and differences in these defendants’ ability
to meet the bail conditions. We control for court-by-time fixed effects and cluster standard errors
at the individual level. We find that male defendants are 11.4 percentage points less likely to be
released pre-trial compared to similar female defendants, a 20.7 percent decrease from the mean
pre-trial release rate of 55.2 percent. Black defendants are 3.9 percentage points less likely to be
released compared to white defendants, a 7.1 percent decrease from the mean. Defendants with
a prior offense in the past year are 15.3 percentage points less likely to be released compared to
defendants with no prior offense, a 27.7 percent decrease. Additionally, defendants arrested for
felonies are 25.4 percentage points less likely to be released than those arrested for misdemeanors,
a 46.0 percent decrease. Drug defendants are 11.9 percentage points more likely to be released
compared to defendants in the omitted category, and DUI defendants are 10.6 percentages points
more likely to be released. Violent defendants are 1.6 percentage points less likely to be released
compared to defendants in the omitted category, while property defendants are 0.9 percentage points
more likely to be released. Finally, individuals who are matched to IRS records, and defendants
with higher baseline earnings, UI benefits, EITC benefits, and baseline employment status are more
likely to be released pre-trial.
   Column 2 assesses whether these same case and defendant characteristics are predictive of our
judge leniency measure using an identical specification. We find evidence that bail judges of differing
tendencies are assigned very similar defendants (joint p-value = 0.26), suggesting that the exclusion
restriction is valid in our setting.
   Nevertheless, the exclusion restriction could also be violated if bail conditions imposed by judges
had an independent effect on outcomes other than through the channel of pre-trial release. For exam-

                                                  17
ple, conditional on a defendant posting monetary bail, a higher bail amount may have independent
effects on outcomes. Note that in our setting, the exclusion restriction is more likely to be valid
than in the context of using sentencing judge tendencies as an instrument for incarceration (Kling
2006, Mueller-Smith 2015). In the context of sentencing, judges impose multiple treatments such
as incarceration, probation, and fines (Mueller-Smith 2015). In contrast, bail judges in our setting
exclusively handle the setting of bail and a separate judge takes over the subsequent trial and sen-
tencing processes. However, to the extent that the exclusion restriction is violated, our reduced form
estimates can be interpreted as the causal impact of being assigned to a more or less lenient bail
judge. These reduced form results are available in Appendix Table 4. Our reduced form estimates
are very similar to the two-stage least estimates throughout, consistent with the strong first stage
relationship between the propensity of the assigned judge to release a defendant pre-trial and one’s
own detention outcome.
   The second condition needed to interpret our estimates as the LATE of pre-trial release is that the
impact of judge assignment on the probability of pre-trial release is monotonic across defendants. In
our setting, this monotonicity assumption requires that individuals released by a strict judge would
also be released by a more lenient judge, and similarly that individuals detained by a lenient judge
would also be detained by a stricter judge. One testable implication of the monotonicity assumption
is that the first stage estimates should be non-negative for all subsamples. Panel A of Appendix
Table 5 and Appendix Table 6 present these first stage results using the full sample of cases to
calculate our measure of judge leniency. In all subsamples, we find that our residualized measure of
judge leniency is consistently positive and sizable, in line with the monotonicity assumption.
   A second implication of the monotonicity assumption is that judges who are stricter towards
one group (e.g., minority defendants) are also relatively strict towards other defendants outside
of this group (e.g., white defendants). Following Bhuller et al. (2016), we test this assumption
by estimating first stage results for all subsamples, but recalculate our judge leniency instrument
in each subsample using cases from the opposing subsample. Panel B of Appendix Table 5 and
Appendix Table 6 present these results. In all subsamples, we find that our first stage estimates
using this “reverse-sample instrument” are positive and statistically different from zero.
   Appendix Figure 4 further explores how judges treat cases of observably different defendants
by plotting our residualized judge leniency measures calculated separately by race, offense type,
offense severity, prior criminal history, and employment status. Each plot reports the coefficient
and standard error from an OLS regression relating each measure of judge leniency. Consistent
with our monotonicity assumption, we find that the slopes relating the relationship between judge
leniency in one group and judge leniency in another group is non-negative, suggesting that judge
tendencies are similar across observably different defendants and cases. We provide further evidence
that the monotonicity condition is satisfied in robustness checks.




                                                 18
                                            IV. Results

In this section, we examine the effects of pre-trial release using the judge IV strategy described
above. We first analyze the effects of pre-trial release on case outcomes, before turning to its effects
on bail jumping, future crime, and labor market outcomes.

                                          A. Case Outcomes

Table 4 presents OLS and two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of being released from jail
within three days of the bail hearing on various case outcomes. Column 1 reports the dependent
variable mean for defendants who are detained pre-trial. Columns 2-4 report OLS estimates where
each column further controls for potential omitted variables to learn about the source(s) and size
of any bias. Column 2 begins by reporting results only with court-by-time fixed effects. Column
3 adds our baseline crime and defendant controls: race, gender, age, whether the defendant had a
prior offense in the past year, the number of charged offenses, indicators for crime type (drug, DUI,
property, violent, other) and crime severity (felony or misdemeanor), and indicators for missing
characteristics. Finally, column 4 adds our baseline IRS controls for the year prior to bail: tax filing
status, the amount of reported W-2 earnings, household income, UI, and EITC, indicators for any
W-2 earnings, household income, UI, and EITC, and indicators for missing IRS data. Columns 5-7
report analogous two-stage least squares results where we instrument for pre-trial release within
three days using the leave-out measure of judge leniency described in Section III. Robust standard
errors clustered at the individual level are reported throughout.
   The OLS estimates show that released defendants have significantly better case outcomes than
detained defendants. In all specifications, released defendants are significantly less likely to be found
guilty of an offense, to plead guilty to a charge, and to be incarcerated following case disposition.
However, the magnitudes of these OLS estimates are extremely sensitive to the addition of baseline
crime controls. For example, in our OLS results with only our court-by-time fixed effects (column
2), we find that a defendant who is released pre-trial is 18.6 percentage points less likely to plead
guilty, a 42.7 percent decrease from the mean for detained defendants. When we add baseline crime
and defendant controls (column 3), the magnitude of the estimate is more than halved, dropping
to 9.2 percentage points. In contrast, adding baseline IRS controls (column 4) does not change the
size of the estimate, which remains at 9.2 percentage points. These results suggest that, at least
for case outcomes, crime and defendant controls are important for addressing potential omitted
variable bias. Controls for baseline labor market outcomes appear relatively unimportant for these
case outcomes.
   The two-stage least squares estimates in columns 5-7 improve upon our OLS estimates by exploit-
ing plausibly exogenous variation in pre-trial release from the quasi-random assignment of cases to
bail judges. These two-stage least squares results confirm that defendants released before trial have
significantly better case outcomes than otherwise similar defendants detained before trial. With the
full set of controls (column 7), we find that the marginal released defendant is 15.6 percentage points


                                                   19
less likely to be found guilty, a 27.3 percent decrease from the mean, and 12.0 percentage points
less likely to plead guilty, a 27.5 percent decrease from the mean. These results are consistent with
the theory that pre-trial release improves a defendant’s bargaining position in plea negotiations. In
Appendix Table 7, we find that marginal released defendants are also convicted of fewer offenses,
more likely to be convicted of a lesser charge, and less likely to plead guilty to time served.
    We find that the marginal released defendant is also 3.0 percentage points less likely to be
incarcerated after case disposition, a 10.1 percent decrease from the mean, although the estimate is
not statistically significant. Large standard errors mean that the difference between the OLS and
two-stage least squares estimates for incarceration is not statistically significant, however. In Section
IV.D, we find that the impact of pre-trial release on incarceration is large and statistically significant
for felony and drug defendants, cases with a much higher baseline rate of incarceration. These results
suggest that pre-trial release reduces post-trial incarceration primarily for defendants charged with
more severe crimes, most likely through a reduction in the extensive margin of conviction rather
than the intensive margin of punishment conditional on conviction.
    To make the counterfactual more precise, we estimate results that differentiate between release
without any conditions (ROR) and release with conditions. By separately estimating these two
decision margins relative to detention, we can test whether our results are driven solely by a defen-
dant being released before trial, or by some combination of pre-trial release and release conditions
imposed by the bail judge. Unfortunately, our data do not allow us to identify the specific conditions
of release, ranging from minimal requirements like reporting to a Pre-Trial Services officer to more
intensive conditions like electronic monitoring or home confinement.26
    In Appendix Table 9, we present OLS and two-stage least squares estimates of the impact of
being released from jail within three days of the bail hearing with and without conditions. While
the OLS results suggest that pre-trial release improves case outcomes more for defendants who are
released with no conditions relative to those who are released with conditions, the two-stage least
squares estimates show no statistically significant differences in the effect of pre-trial release on
marginal defendants with and without conditions. For example, the marginal defendant released
with no conditions is 12.9 percentage points less likely to plead guilty and the marginal defendant
released with conditions is 11.9 percentage points less likely to plead guilty. Our standard errors
are also precise enough that we can rule out any large differences by release type. These findings
suggest that pre-trial release by itself improves case outcomes.

                                   B. Bail Jumping and Future Crime

The results described above suggest that there are significant costs of pre-trial detention for de-
fendants. However, it is also possible that pre-trial detention benefits society by increasing court
appearances or by reducing bail jumping and future crime.

  26
     In Appendix Table 8, we document a strong first stage relationship between a defendant’s pre-trial release
conditions and the assigned judge’s propensity for release with or without conditions, with judges independently
varying across these two margins.


                                                      20
    Table 5 examines the impact of pre-trial release on various procedural measures of court perfor-
mance. We find that pre-trial release leads to substantial increases in failing to appear for required
court appearances and fleeing from the jurisdiction.27 The OLS estimates show that released de-
fendants are significantly more likely to miss a court appearance and jump bail. However, the
magnitudes of these OLS estimates are extremely sensitive to the addition of baseline crime con-
trols. For example, in our OLS results with only our court-by-time fixed effects (column 2), we
find that a defendant who is released pre-trial is 6.3 percentage points more likely to miss a court
appearance, a 52.1 percent decrease from the mean for detained defendants. When we add baseline
crime and defendant controls (column 3), the magnitude of the estimate drops to only 0.7 percent-
age points. Adding baseline IRS controls (column 4) does not significantly change the size of the
estimate.
    Our two-stage least squares results also suggest that released defendants are more likely to miss
court appearances and jump bail. Controlling for our full set of controls (column 7), we find that the
marginal released defendant is 15.0 percentage points more likely to fail to appear in court, a 124.0
percent increase from the mean. Bail jumping also increases by 0.6 percentage points, a 300 percent
increase from the detained defendant mean, but the estimate is not statistically significant due to
the relative infrequency of this outcome. As before, we find no statistically significant differences in
the effect of pre-trial release on failures to appear for marginal defendants released with and without
conditions (Appendix Table 9).
    We also find that the marginal released defendant waits an extra 48.6 days between bail and
case disposition, a 24.3 percent increase from the mean. Increases in case disposition length may
be due to speedy trial rules in both Pennsylvania and Florida, which effectively place limits on how
long a defendant can be detained pre-trial.28 In addition, marginal released defendants may wait
longer between bail and case disposition because they are less likely to plead guilty.
    Table 6 presents estimates of the impact of pre-trial release on future criminal behavior. We
explore both short-run (mechanical) effects prior to case disposition and longer-term effects up to
four years after the bail hearing. For crime within two years, our sample is limited to the 306,634
defendants who we observe for two years following the bail hearing, and for crime within four years,
our sample is limited to the 202,166 defendants who we observe for four years following the bail
hearing. We measure crime using rearrests, but the results follow a similar pattern if we use new
convictions instead.
    Both with and without baseline controls, our OLS results show that released defendants are
more likely to be arrested before case disposition, but less likely to be arrested in future years. For
example, with all baseline controls (column 4), we find that released defendants are 5.8 percentage

   27
     These measures are only available in our Philadelphia sample.
   28
     In Pennsylvania, other than cases in which a defendant is not entitled to release on bail, a defendant generally
cannot be detained for longer than 180 days from the date the complaint is filed. In Florida, formal charges are
usually filed within 21 days of arrest, and may not be delayed beyond 33 days. If charges have not been filed within
33 days of arrest, any defendants who are detained will be released from custody ROR. In Florida, persons charged
with felonies are entitled to be brought to trial within 175 days of having been taken into custody and persons charged
with misdemeanors are entitled to be brought to trial within 90 days of having been taken into custody.


                                                          21
points more likely to be rearrested compared to a detained defendant, a 28.7 percent increase from
the mean. These results are largely mechanical – it is impossible to be rearrested for a new crime
when one is incapacitated. Nevertheless, these results suggest that released defendants are still
engaged in some criminal behavior before case disposition. In contrast, released defendants are 1.8
percentage points less likely to be rearrested in the two years following the bail hearing, including
the time period prior to case disposition. Similarly, released defendants are 4.7 percentage points
less likely to be rearrested in the third to fourth years following the bail hearing. In contrast to the
case outcomes results, the OLS results are relatively insensitive to the addition of controls for crime
characteristics or baseline labor market outcomes.
   Our two-stage least squares results follow a similar pattern for arrests prior to case disposition
and in the first two years following the bail hearing. With all baseline controls (column 7), we
find that the marginal released defendant is 7.6 percentage points more likely to be rearrested for
a new crime prior to disposition, a 37.6 percent increase from the mean, but 5.0 percentage points
less likely to be arrested in the two years following the bail hearing. The point estimate for our
two year result is not statistically significant, however. In contrast to the OLS results, we find a
positive but statistically insignificant point estimate on rearrest in the third to fourth years following
the bail hearing. Taken together, we interpret these results as suggesting that pre-trial detention
prevents new criminal activity prior to case disposition through a short-run incapacitation effect,
but has little net impact on future crime following case disposition. However, we emphasize that
for longer-run measures of crime, the large standard errors and smaller sample size makes definitive
conclusions difficult. Finally, we again find that our results on future crime are similar for marginal
defendants who are released with and without conditions (Appendix Table 9).

                        C. Labor Market and Tax Administration Outcomes

Table 7 presents estimates of the impact of pre-trial release on individual-level formal sector earnings
and employment. For outcomes measured as the average across the first two years post-bail hearing,
our sample is limited to the 302,816 defendants matched to IRS data with cases before 2013, and
for outcomes measured as the average over the third to fourth years post-bail hearing, our sample
is limited to the 224,319 defendants matched to IRS data with cases before 2011.
   The OLS estimates in Table 7 show that released defendants have significantly higher formal
sector earnings and employment following the bail hearing. For example, with all baseline controls
(column 4), released defendants are 5.1 percentage points more likely to be employed within two
years of the bail hearing, a 13.5 percent increase from the mean, and 3.6 percentage points more
likely to have any income, a 7.8 percent increase from the mean. However, the magnitude of
these OLS estimates are extremely sensitive to the addition of baseline labor market controls. For
example, with no baseline controls (column 2), the OLS estimates suggest that released defendants
earn approximately $2,681 more per year than detained defendants in the two years following the
bail hearing, a 51.5 percent increase from the mean. Adding baseline crime and defendant controls
does little to alter the significance and magnitude of these results (column 3). However, the estimate


                                                   22
falls to only $406 with the addition of the baseline IRS controls. The OLS results follow a similar
pattern for formal sector earnings and employment in the third to fourth years following the bail
hearing. These results imply that, perhaps not surprisingly, controlling for baseline earnings and
employment is critical when estimating the impact of pre-trial release on labor market outcomes.
    The two-stage least squares estimates are broadly similar to the OLS estimates with baseline
controls, but much less precisely estimated. With our full set of baseline controls (column 7), we
find that marginal released defendants are 9.7 percentage points more likely to have any income two
years after bail, a 21.0 percent increase from the mean. Estimates on other outcomes in the first two
years post-bail hearing are smaller and not statistically different from zero. By three to four years
post-bail hearing, released defendants are 10.2 percentage points more likely to be employed in the
formal labor sector, a 26.9 percent increase from the mean. Formal sector earnings are $1,024 higher
over the same time period, a 17.5 percent increase from the mean, and the probability of having any
income is 8.5 percentage points higher, a 18.3 percent increase from the mean. Although neither of
these estimates are statistically significant, they are broadly consistent with the more precise OLS
estimates with our full set of baseline controls (column 4). When we separately identify marginal
defendants who are released with and without conditions, we find no significant differences in the
impact of pre-trial release by release type (Appendix Table 9).29
    Table 8 presents estimates for tax filing, UI receipt, and EITC receipt – measures of formal sector
engagement that are particularly welfare-relevant in our low-income population. For example, only
30.8 percent of detained defendants file a tax return three to four years after the bail hearing, much
lower than would be typical for the average working-age adult. In our two-stage least squares results
with the full set of controls (column 7), we find that released defendants are 9.5 percentage points
more likely to file a tax return one to two years post-bail, a 22.4 percent increase from the mean.
Pre-trial release also increases the receipt of EITC benefits by $185 over the same time period, a
55.4 percent increase. Three to four years post-bail, released defendants are 4.3 percentage points
more likely to file a tax return, a 14.0 percent increase from the mean, and receive an additional
$323 in UI benefits and $239 in EITC benefits, 131.8 and 66.4 percent increases from the mean,
respectively. These results suggest that pre-trial release allows individuals to remain connected to
the formal sector, both through employment in the formal labor market and the increased take-up
of social benefits that are tied to formal sector employment.

                                               D. Subsample Results

Table 9 presents selected two-stage least squares subsample results by crime severity and highest
crime type. We find that the effects on case outcomes are consistently larger for misdemeanor

   29
      A valid question is why we find a significant impact of pre-trial release on the extensive margin, but insignificant
effects on the intensive margin. One possible explanation is that our intensive margin estimates are particularly
noisy due to the right-skewness of the income distribution among defendants in our sample. Consistent with this
explanation, we find that total household income is significantly higher among marginal released defendants when we
top-code earnings at the 75th percentile of the earnings distribution in our sample. These results are available upon
request from the authors.


                                                           23
offenses. For example, released misdemeanor defendants are 19.0 percentage points less likely to
be found guilty and 18.6 percentage points less likely to plead guilty. In contrast, released felony
defendants are only 10.0 percentage points less likely to be found guilty and 1.2 percentage points
less likely to plead guilty. However, effects on incarceration are nearly 10 percentage points larger
for felony defendants, likely because the baseline rate of incarceration is nearly three times higher
for felonies compared to misdemeanors. Released felony defendants are also 9.4 percentage points
more likely to miss a court appearance compared to released misdemeanor defendants, potentially
because felony defendants have a higher flight risk. Effects for other outcomes are largely similar
for the two groups.
   By crime type, case outcomes are most precisely estimated for drug and property defendants.
For example, released drug defendants are 10.8 percentage points less likely to be found guilty
and 12.8 percentage points less likely to be incarcerated. Released property defendants are 14.3
percentage points less likely to be found guilty and 10.7 percentage points less likely to plead guilty.
However, the point estimates for nearly all outcomes, particularly labor market outcomes, are larger
for defendants charged with violent offenses, although large standard errors mean that few of the
estimates are statistically significant. With that caveat, it is possible that the larger labor market
effects for violent offenders are due to the greater stigma associated with a conviction for a violent
offense (Holzer et al. 2003).
   Table 10 presents additional subsample results by defendant race, prior criminal history, and
baseline employment status. We find that for nearly all outcomes, our estimates are larger for
white defendants compared to black defendants. For example, released white defendants are 25.9
percentage points less likely to be found guilty and 19.8 percentage points less likely to plead guilty,
compared to only 10.1 percentage points and 12.2 percentage points less likely for released black
defendants. Released white defendants are also more likely to be rearrested prior to disposition
than released black defendants. Finally, we find that released white defendants are substantially
more likely to have any income several years post-bail compared to released black defendants.
   By criminal history, we find that the impacts of pre-trial release are largest for those without a
prior offense in the past year. For individuals without a recent prior offense, released defendants are
20.2 percentage points less likely to be found guilty, 15.2 percentage points less likely to plead guilty,
and 10.7 percentage points more likely to be employed three to four years post-bail. In contrast,
almost all results for individuals with a recent prior offense are small and imprecisely estimated.
These results suggest that the social costs imposed by pre-trial detention are relatively larger for
those with more limited ties to the criminal justice system.
   We also find suggestive evidence that pre-trial release improves case outcomes the most for
defendants who were employed in the year prior to bail. For example, among those employed
prior to the bail hearing, released defendants are 18.5 percentage points less likely to be found
guilty, 10.9 percentage points less likely to plead guilty, and 7.3 percentage points less likely to be
incarcerated. In contrast, among those not employed prior to the bail hearing, released defendants
are 10.3 percentage points less likely to be found guilty, 10.7 percentage points less likely to plead


                                                   24
guilty, and 2.0 percentage points less likely to be incarcerated. While not precisely estimated, our
labor market results are also larger for individuals who were employed prior to bail. Overall, these
results suggest that pre-trial detention imposes relatively larger costs on individuals with stronger
ties to the formal labor sector.

                                         E. Robustness Checks

Appendix Table 10 explores the sensitivity of our main results to alternative specifications. Column
1 uses a leave-out measure of judge leniency that is allowed to differ for misdemeanors and felonies,
thereby relaxing the monotonicity assumption. Column 2 uses a leave-out measure that is allowed
to differ for the five mutually exclusive crime types – drug, violent, DUI, property, and other –
again relaxing the monotonicity assumption. Column 3 estimates results on whether the defendant
is ever released pre-trial, and column 4 estimates results on whether the defendant is assigned non-
monetary bail. Column 5 uses a randomly selected subset of 25 percent of cases to calculate a
leave-out measure of judge leniency that is used as an instrument in the mutually exclusive subset
of cases. Column 6 calculates judge leniency based on the scheduled bail judge, which differs from
the assigned bail judge approximately 30 percent of the time, and column 7 presents results using a
full set of judge fixed effects as instruments. Appendix Table 11 presents our main results separately
for Philadelphia (column 1), Miami-Dade (column 2), and the sample matched to the IRS (column
3). Results across all specifications are similar to our preferred specification. None of the estimates
suggest that our preferred estimates are invalid.


                                            V. Discussion

In this section, we tentatively explore the potential mechanisms that might explain our findings on
case and labor market outcomes.

Case Outcomes: Pre-trial release could improve case outcomes through at least two main channels.
First, pre-trial release may strengthen a defendant’s bargaining position during plea negotiations.
For example, it is possible that pre-trial release decreases a defendant’s incentive to plead guilty to
obtain a faster release from jail. Along the same lines, it is also possible that pre-trial release affects
a defendant’s ability to prepare an adequate defense or negotiate a settlement with prosecutors. The
second reason that pre-trial release could impact conviction rates is that seeing detained defendants
in jail uniforms and shackles may bias judges or jurors at trial. For example, jurors may assume
that only guilty defendants are detained before trial.
   While there is no conclusive evidence on this issue, two pieces of evidence suggest that our results
are likely driven by changes in a defendant’s bargaining position. First, as discussed previously, we
find that released defendants are substantially less likely to be convicted of any offense due to a
reduction in guilty pleas, not changes in conviction rates at trial where jury bias may come into
play. Second, we find that those who are released pre-trial receive more favorable plea deals than
those who are detained. For example, we find that released defendants are substantially more likely

                                                    25
to be convicted of a lesser charge and are convicted of fewer total offenses (Appendix Table 7). The
fact that so many of our results are driven by changes at the plea bargaining phase, and not the trial
phase, suggests that pre-trial release improves case outcomes primarily through a strengthening of
defendants’ bargaining positions.

Labor Market Outcomes: Pre-trial release could improve labor market outcomes through at least
three main channels. First, pre-trial release might increase labor market attachment through a
mechanical incapacitation effect since defendants cannot work in the formal sector while detained
or incarcerated post-conviction. Defendants who are imprisoned are also ineligible to claim UI
benefits and EITC benefits for wages earned while incarcerated. Second, pre-trial release might
improve outcomes because detention is highly disruptive to defendants’ lives, potentially leading to
job loss, which makes it harder for defendants to find new employment. Finally, pre-trial detention
could independently lower future employment prospects through the stigma of a criminal conviction
(e.g. Mueller-Smith 2015, Agan and Starr 2016), which could in turn limit defendants’ eligibility
for employment-related benefits like UI and EITC.
   We view our results as being inconsistent with the incapacitation channel. For example, we find
that pre-trial release increases formal labor market employment in the three to four years post-bail,
but the average sentence length in our sample is only 186 days. Among misdemeanor offenses, the
average sentence length is 30 days, yet we continue to find suggestive evidence of increased labor
market attachment several years post-bail.
   To partially test whether pre-trial release improves labor market outcomes through the criminal
conviction channel, we explore whether those who are more likely to be employed in the labor market
are also those who do not have a criminal conviction. In Appendix Table 12, we present estimates
of the joint probability of conviction and employment in the several years post-bail. We find that
in the first two years after the bail hearing, our main employment results are primarily driven by
an increase in the joint probability of not having a criminal conviction and being employed in the
formal labor market. By the third to fourth years after the bail hearing, our employment estimates
are entirely driven by the joint probability of having no criminal conviction and being employed.
We conclude from these results that pre-trial release primarily affects future labor market outcomes
through the channel of a criminal conviction.


                                         VI. Conclusion

This paper estimates the impact of being released before trial on criminal case outcomes, future
crime, formal sector employment, and the receipt of government benefits. We find that pre-trial
release significantly decreases the probability of conviction, primarily through a decrease in guilty
pleas. Pre-trial release mechanically increases pre-trial crime and failures to appear in court, but
has no detectable effect on future crime. Finally, we find suggestive evidence that pre-trial release
increases formal sector attachment both through an increase in formal sector employment and the
receipt of tax- and employment-related government benefits. Many of the estimated effects are


                                                 26
larger for defendants with no prior offenses in the past year and defendants employed in the year
prior to bail. We argue that these results are consistent with (i) pre-trial release strengthening
defendants’ bargaining position during plea negotiations, and (ii) a criminal conviction lowering
defendants’ attachment to the formal labor market.
   Our results suggest that it may be welfare enhancing to use alternatives to pre-trial detention,
at least on the margin. For example, Di Tella and Schargrodsky (2013) find that recidivism rates
are substantially lower among individuals who randomly receive electronic monitoring compared to
detention. Electronic monitoring is also extremely cost-effective compared to jail, with the annual
cost of electronic monitoring in the United States at roughly $3,650 compared to over $30,000 for
incarceration. To the extent that their results extend to our setting, electronic monitoring could
provide many of the same benefits of pre-trial detention without the substantial costs to defendants
documented in our analysis.
   In addition, our results offer important lessons for tax administration and policy related to
individuals who interact with the criminal justice system. As described above, we find that criminal
defendants are substantially more likely to file a tax return and to claim the EITC in subsequent
years if they are released pre-trial. One possible explanation is that pre-trial release raises the
likelihood of formal sector employment, which is a prerequisite for claiming the EITC. In turn,
eligibility for the EITC may greatly increase the incentives for individuals to file tax returns. Another
explanation is that pre-trial release may contribute to tax filing and benefit take-up by improving
(all else equal) defendants’ attitudes towards the government. These findings suggest that bail
reform and outreach to those with criminal convictions may be useful methods for increasing tax
filing and the take-up of social benefits.
   There are at least three caveats to our analysis. First, we are unable to estimate the deterrent
effects of a more or less strict bail system. If a more strict bail system has a large deterrent effect,
our analysis will understate the benefits of a harsher bail judge. Second, we are unable to measure
the impacts of pre-trial detention on informal sector earnings or consumption. If lost formal sector
earnings are largely replaced by informal earnings, the case against pre-trial detention is perhaps
weaker. Finally, we are unable to draw any sharp welfare conclusions about the optimality of the
current bail system using our research design. The substantial costs of the bail system documented
in our analysis must be weighed against the social benefits of increasing court appearances and
decreasing pre-trial crime. While beyond the scope of this paper, developing a framework to assess
the welfare effects of the bail system is an important area of future work.




                                                   27
                                          References

 [1] Abrams, David S., Marianne Bertrand, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2012. “Do Judges Vary in
        Their Treatment of Race?” Journal of Legal Studies, 41(2): 347-383.
 [2] Agan, Amanda Y., and Sonja B. Starr. 2016. “Ban the Box, Criminal Records, and Statistical
        Discrimination: A Field Experiment.” University of Michigan Law & Econ Research Paper
        No. 16-012.
 [3] Aizer, Anna, and Joseph Doyle, Jr. 2015. “Juvenile Incarceration, Human Capital, and Fu-
        ture Crime: Evidence from Randomly-Assigned Judges.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
        130(2): 759-803.
 [4] Alesina, Alberto, and Eliana La Ferrara. 2014. “A Test of Racial Bias in Capital Sentencing.”
        American Economic Review, 104(11): 3397-3433.
 [5] Anwar, Shamena, Patrick Bayer, and Randi Hjalmarsson. 2012. “The Impact of Jury Race in
        Criminal Trials.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(2): 1017-1055.
 [6] Ares, Charles E., and Anne Rankin, and Herbert Sturz. 1963. “The Manhattan Bail Project:
        An Interim Report on the Use of Pre-trial Parole.” New York University Law Review 38(1):
        67-95.
 [7] Autor, David, Andreas Ravndal Kostol, and Magne Mogstad. 2015. “Disability Benefits, Con-
        sumption Insurance, and Household Labor Supply.” MIT Working Paper.
 [8] Ayres, Ian, and Joel Waldfogel. 1994. “A Market Test for Race Discrimination in Bail Setting.”
        Stanford Law Review, 46(5): 987-1047.
 [9] Bhuller, Manudeep, Gordon B. Dahl, Katrine V. Loken, and Magne Mogstad. 2016. “Incarcer-
        ation, Recidivism and Employment.” Unpublished Working Paper.
[10] Bushway, Shawn D., and Jonah B. Gelbach. 2011. “Testing for Racial Discrimination in Bail
        Setting Using Nonparametric Estimation of a Parametric Model.” Unpublished Working
        Paper.
[11] Chang, Tom, and Antoinette Schoar. 2008. “Judge Specific Differences in Chapter 11 and Firm
        Outcomes.” Unpublished Working Paper.
[12] Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Jonah Rockoff. 2014. “Measuring the Impacts of Teachers
        I: Evaluating Bias in Teacher Value-Added Estimates.” American Economic Review, 104(9):
        2593-2632.
[13] Clarke, Stevens H., Jean L. Freeman, and Gary G. Koch. 1976. “Bail Risk: A Multivariate
        Analysis.” Journal of Legal Studies, 5(2):341-385.
[14] Cohen, Thomas H., and Brian A. Reaves. 2007. “State Court Processing Statistics, 1990-2004:
        Pretrial Release of Felony Defendants in State Courts.” Washington, DC: U.S. Department
        of Justice.


                                                28
[15] Dahl, Gordon B., Andreas Ravndal Kostol, and Magne Mogstad. 2014. “Family Welfare Cul-
        tures.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129 (4): 1711-1752.
[16] Di Tella, Rafael, and Ernesto Schargrodsky. 2013. “Criminal Recidivism after Prison and Elec-
        tronic Monitoring.” Journal of Political Economy, 121(1): 28-73.
[17] Dobbie, Will, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, and Crystal Yang. 2015. “Consumer Bankruptcy and
        Financial Health.” NBER Working Paper No. 21032.
[18] Dobbie, Will, and Jae Song. 2015. “Debt Relief and Debtor Outcomes: Measuring the Effects
        of Consumer Bankruptcy Protection.” American Economic Review, 105(3): 1272-1311.
[19] Doyle, Joseph. 2007. “Child Protection and Child Outcomes: Measuring the Effects of Foster
        Care.” American Economic Review, 97(5): 1583-1610.
[20] Doyle, Joseph. 2008. “Child Protection and Adult Crime: Using Investigator Assignment to
        Estimate Causal Effects of Foster Care.” Journal of Political Economy, 116(4): 746-770.
[21] Durose, Matthew R., and Patrick A. Langan. 2007. “Felony Sentences in State Courts, 2004.”
        Bureau of Justice Statistics.
[22] French, Eric, and Jae Song. 2014. “The Effect of Disability Insurance Receipt on Labor Supply.”
        American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(2): 291-337.
[23] Foote, Caleb. 1954. “Compelling Appearance in Court: Administration of Bail in Philadelphia.”
        University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 102: 1031-1079.
[24] Goldkamp, J. S. 1980. “The Effects of Detention on Judicial Decisions: A Closer Look.” Justice
        System Journal, 5: 234-257.
[25] Goldkamp, J. S., and M.R. Gottfredson. 1988. “Development of Bail/Pretrial Release Guidelines
        in Maricopa County Superior Court, Dade County Circuit Court and Boston Municipal
        Court. Washington, D.C.:National Institute of Justice.
[26] Gupta, Arpit, Christopher Hansman, and Ethan Frenchman. 2016. “The Heavy Costs of High
        Bail: Evidence from Judge Randomization.” Unpublished Working Paper.
[27] Holzer, Harry, Steven Raphael, and Michael Stoll. 2003. “Employer Demand for Ex-Offenders:
        Recent Evidence from Los Angeles.” Unpublished Working Paper.
[28] Kling, Jeffrey. 2006. “Incarceration Length, Employment, and Earnings.” American Economic
        Review, 96(3): 863-876.
[29] Landes, William M. 1973. “The Bail System: An Economic Approach.” Journal of Legal Studies,
        2: 79-105.
[30] Leslie, Emily, and Nolan G. Pope. 2016. “The Unintended Impact of Pretrial Detention on Case
        Outcomes: Evidence from NYC Arraignments.” Unpublished Working Paper.
[31] Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen Mullen, and Alexander Strand. 2013. “Does Disability Insurance
        Receipt Discourage Work? Using Examiner Assignment to Estimate Causal Effects of SSDI
        Receipt.” American Economic Review, 103(5): 1797-1829.

                                                29
[32] McIntyre, Frank, and Shima Baradaran. 2013. “Race, Prediction, and Pretrial Detention.”
        Journal of Empirical Legal Studies, 10(4): 741-770.
[33] Mueller-Smith, Michael. 2015. “The Criminal and Labor Market Impacts of Incarceration.”
        Unpublished Working Paper.
[34] Myers, Samuel L., Jr. 1981. “The Economics of Bail Jumping.” Journal of Legal Studies,
        10(2):381-396.
[35] Oleson, James C., Christopher T. Lowenkamp, John Wooldredge, Marie VanNostrand, and
        Timothy P. Cadigan. 2014. “The Sentencing Consequences of Federal Pretrial Supervision.”
        Crime & Delinquency: 1-21.
[36] Pager, Devah. 2003. “The Mark of a Criminal Record.” American Journal of Sociology, 108:
        937-975.
[37] Phillips, Mary T. 2008. “Bail, Detention, and Felony Case Outcomes.” New York Criminal
        Justice Agency, Inc.
[38] Reaves, Brian A. 2013. “Felony Defendants in Large Urban Counties, 2009 - Statistical Tables.”
        Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice.
[39] Rehavi, M. Marit, and Sonja B. Starr. 2014. “Racial Disparity in Federal Criminal Sentences.”
        Journal of Political Economy, 122(6): 1320-1354.
[40] Shubik-Richards, Claire and Don Stemen. 2010. “Philadelphia’s Crowded, Costly Jails: The
        Search for Safe Solutions.” Technical Report, Pew Charitable Trusts Philadelphia Research
        Initiative.
[41] Stevenson, Megan. 2016. “Distortion of Justice: How the Inability to Pay Bail Affects Case
        Outcomes.” Unpublished Working Paper.
[42] Walmsley, Roy. 2013. “World Prison Population List (tenth edition),” International Centre for
        Prison Studies, London, United Kingdom.
[43] Western, Bruce. 2006. Punishment and Inequality in America. New York: Russell Sage Foun-
        dation.
[44] Williams, Marian R. 2003. “The Effect of Pretrial Detention on Imprisonment Decisions.” Crim-
        inal Justice Review, 28: 299-316.




                                                30
                                                  Table 1
                                            Descriptive Statistics
                                                                  Initial Bail Decision
                                                                  Detained Released
                        Panel A: Bail Type                           (1)         (2)
                         Release on Recognizance                    0.017       0.368
                         Non-Monetary Bail                          0.042       0.217
                         Monetary Bail                              0.940       0.415
                         Bail Amount (in thousands)                52.577       12.497

                        Panel B: Characteristics
                         Male                                      0.875       0.785
                         White                                     0.385        0.424
                         Black                                     0.605        0.556
                         Age at Bail Decision                      33.896      33.468
                         Prior Offense in Past Year                0.335       0.193

                        Panel C: Charge Characteristics
                         Number of Offenses                         3.729       2.508
                         Felony Offense                             0.635       0.327
                         Misdemeanor Only                           0.365       0.673
                         Any Drug Offense                           0.288       0.420
                         Any DUI Offense                            0.024       0.116
                         Any Violent Offense                        0.289       0.191
                         Any Property Offense                       0.346       0.185

                        Panel D: Outcomes
                         Any Guilty Offense                        0.571        0.487
                         Guilty Plea                               0.436        0.208
                         Any Incarceration                         0.296        0.146
                         Failure to Appear in Court                0.121        0.179
                         Absconded                                 0.002        0.007
                         Days to Case Decision                    200.237      247.114
                         Rearrest Prior to Disposition             0.202        0.236
                         Rearrest in 0-2 Years                     0.453        0.397
                         Rearrest in 3-4 Years                     0.322        0.268
                         Earnings (thousands) in 1-2 Years         5.202        7.897
                         Employed in 1-2 Years                     0.378        0.509
                         Any Income in 1-2 Years                   0.462        0.521
                         Earnings (thousands) in 3-4 Years         5.861        8.363
                         Employed in 3-4 Years                     0.379        0.482
                         Any Income in 3-4 Years                   0.465        0.507

                        Panel E: Data Quality
                         Missing Race                              0.273        0.483
                        Observations                              190,769      235,261
Notes: This table reports descriptive statistics for the sample of defendants from Philadelphia and Miami-Dade
counties. Data from Philadelphia are from 2007-2014 and data from Miami-Dade are from 2006-2014. Information
on ethnicity, gender, age, and criminal outcomes is derived from court records. Information on earnings, employment,
and income is derived from the IRS data and is only available for the 77 percent of the criminal records matched to
these data. See the data appendix for additional details on the sample and variable construction.




                                                       31
                                                 Table 2
                                   Judge Leniency and Pre-Trial Release
                                              Sample
                                               Mean                   Judge Leniency
                                                (1)              (2)        (3)       (4)
                       Pre-Trial Release      0.552            0.693∗∗∗ 0.690∗∗∗ 0.687∗∗∗
                                             (0.497)          (0.025)    (0.023)   (0.023)
                     Court x Year FE             –               Yes        Yes       Yes
                     Crime Controls              –               No         Yes       Yes
                     IRS Controls                –               No         No        Yes
                     Observations             426,030          426,030    426,030   426,030
Notes: This table reports first stage results. The regressions are estimated on the sample as described in the notes to
Table 1. Judge leniency is estimated using data from other cases assigned to a bail judge in the same year following
the procedure described in Section III. The dependent variable is an indicator for being released before trial within
three days of the bail hearing. Column 1 reports the mean and standard deviation of the dependent variable. Column
2 reports results controlling for our full set of court-by-time fixed effects. Column 3 adds crime and defendant baseline
controls: defendant race, defendant gender, defendant age, whether the defendant had a prior offense with the past
year, number of offenses, indicators for whether the defendant is arrested for a drug, DUI, violent, or property
offense, whether the most serious offense is a felony, and indicators for missing characteristics. Column 4 adds a
full set of baseline IRS controls: whether the defendant was matched to the IRS data, baseline individual wages,
baseline household wages, baseline UI, baseline EITC, baseline tax filing status, baseline employment, baseline any
UI, baseline any EITC, baseline any income, and indicators for missing income data. Robust standard errors clustered
at the individual level are reported in parentheses. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent
level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                         32
                                                    Table 3
                                            Test of Randomization
                                                             Pre-Trial         Judge
                                                              Release        Leniency
                                                                (1)             (2)
                             Male                            −0.11385∗∗∗     −0.00003
                                                              (0.00199)       (0.00013)
                             Black                           −0.03922∗∗∗       0.00005
                                                              (0.00194)       (0.00015)
                             Age at Bail Decision            −0.01197∗∗∗     −0.00006
                                                              (0.00065)       (0.00005)
                             Prior Offense in Past Year      −0.15286∗∗∗       0.00010
                                                              (0.00164)       (0.00011)
                             Number of Offenses              −0.02469∗∗∗     −0.00001
                                                              (0.00032)       (0.00002)
                             Felony Offense                  −0.25377∗∗∗       0.00011
                                                              (0.00198)       (0.00010)
                             Any Drug Offense                  0.11910∗∗∗      0.00014
                                                              (0.00192)       (0.00013)
                             Any DUI Offense                   0.10627∗∗∗      0.00022
                                                              (0.00261)       (0.00015)
                             Any Violent Offense             −0.01563∗∗∗       0.00013
                                                              (0.00226)       (0.00015)
                             Any Property Offense              0.00832∗∗∗    −0.00027∗
                                                              (0.00201)       (0.00015)
                             Matched to IRS Data               0.00759∗∗∗    −0.00004
                                                              (0.00208)       (0.00014)
                             Baseline Earnings                 0.00112∗∗∗    −0.00001
                                                              (0.00008)       (0.00001)
                             Baseline UI                       0.00287∗∗∗    −0.00002
                                                              (0.00042)       (0.00002)
                             Baseline EITC                     0.01187∗∗∗      0.00002
                                                              (0.00102)       (0.00007)
                             Baseline Filed Return             0.04826∗∗∗    −0.00018
                                                              (0.00252)       (0.00019)
                             Baseline Employed                 0.02529∗∗∗      0.00015
                                                              (0.00205)       (0.00015)
                             Baseline Any EITC               −0.01631∗∗∗       0.00006
                                                              (0.00347)       (0.00026)
                             Baseline Any Income               0.00000         0.00000
                                                              (0.00000)       (0.00000)
                             Baseline Any UI                   0.02333∗∗∗      0.00032
                                                              (0.00396)       (0.00026)
                           Joint F-Test                       [0.00000]       [0.26686]
                           Observations                       426,030         426,030
Notes: This table reports reduced form results testing the random assignment of cases to bail judges. Judge leniency
is estimated using data from other cases assigned to a bail judge in the same year following the procedure described
in Section III. Column 1 reports estimates from an OLS regression of pre-trial release on the variables listed and
court-by-time fixed effects. Column 2 reports estimates from an OLS regression of judge leniency on the variables
listed and court-by-time fixed effects. The p-value reported at the bottom of columns 1-2 is for a F-test of the joint
significance of the variables listed in the rows. Robust standard errors clustered at the individual level are reported
in parentheses in all specifications. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * =
significant at 10 percent level. See the data appendix for additional details on the sample and variable construction.



                                                        33
                                                                           Table 4
                                                            Pre-Trial Release and Case Outcomes
                                                Detained
                                                 Mean                    OLS Results                                 2SLS Results
                                                   (1)             (2)       (3)              (4)              (5)        (6)             (7)
                       Any Guilty Offense        0.571          −0.070∗∗∗ −0.052∗∗∗        −0.050∗∗∗        −0.149∗∗∗ −0.157∗∗∗        −0.156∗∗∗
                                                (0.495)          (0.002)   (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.036)    (0.033)         (0.034)
                       Guilty Plea               0.436          −0.186∗∗∗ −0.092∗∗∗        −0.092∗∗∗        −0.115∗∗∗ −0.121∗∗∗        −0.120∗∗∗
                                                (0.496)          (0.002)   (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.034)    (0.032)         (0.032)
                       Any Incarceration         0.296          −0.158∗∗∗ −0.101∗∗∗        −0.098∗∗∗        −0.018     −0.032          −0.030
                                                (0.457)          (0.001)   (0.001)          (0.001)          (0.028)    (0.027)         (0.027)
                     Court x Year FE                –              Yes       Yes              Yes              Yes        Yes             Yes
                     Crime Controls                 –              No        Yes              Yes              No         Yes             Yes
                     IRS Controls                   –              No        No               Yes              No         No              Yes
                     Observations               190,769          426,030   426,030          426,030          426,030    426,030         426,030
     Notes: This table reports OLS and two-stage least squares results of the impact of pre-trial release. The regressions are estimated on the sample as
     described in the notes to Table 1. The dependent variable is listed in each row. Two-stage least squares models instrument for pre-trial detention using
     a judge leniency measure that is estimated using data from other cases assigned to a bail judge in the same year following the procedure described in
     Section III. All specifications control for court-by-time fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the individual level are reported in parentheses.




34
     *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.
                                                                           Table 5
                                                           Pre-Trial Release and Process Outcomes
                                                     Detained
                                                       Mean                    OLS Results                                 2SLS Results
                                                         (1)             (2)       (3)             (4)             (5)          (6)           (7)
                  Failure to Appear in Court            0.121          0.063∗∗∗ 0.007∗∗∗         0.010∗∗∗         0.153∗∗∗     0.149∗∗∗      0.150∗∗∗
                                                       (0.326)        (0.001)   (0.001)         (0.001)          (0.032)      (0.031)       (0.031)
                  Absconded                             0.002          0.005∗∗∗ 0.002∗∗∗         0.002∗∗∗         0.006        0.006         0.006
                                                       (0.045)        (0.000)   (0.000)         (0.000)          (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.006)
                  Days to Case Decision              200.237          13.449∗∗∗ 34.174∗∗∗       34.117∗∗∗        52.980∗∗∗ 48.674∗∗∗        48.591∗∗∗
                                                    (250.014)         (0.851)   (0.886)         (0.895)         (15.761)     (15.543)      (15.610)
                Court x Year FE                           –              Yes       Yes             Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes
                Crime Controls                            –              No        Yes             Yes             No           Yes           Yes
                IRS Controls                              –              No        No              Yes             No           No            Yes
                Observations                          190,769          426,030   426,030         426,030         426,030      426,030       426,030
     Notes: This table reports OLS and two-stage least squares results of the impact of pre-trial release. The regressions are estimated on the sample as
     described in the notes to Table 1. The dependent variable is listed in each row. Two-stage least squares models instrument for pre-trial detention using
     a judge leniency measure that is estimated using data from other cases assigned to a bail judge in the same year following the procedure described in
     Section III. All specifications control for court-by-time fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the individual level are reported in parentheses.




35
     *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.
                                                                            Table 6
                                                              Pre-Trial Release and Future Crime
                                                     Detained
                                                      Mean                       OLS Results                                 2SLS Results
                                                        (1)              (2)         (3)            (4)             (5)           (6)          (7)
                  Rearrest Prior to Disposition       0.202             0.042∗∗∗    0.055∗∗∗       0.058∗∗∗        0.077∗∗       0.074∗∗      0.076∗∗
                                                     (0.402)           (0.001)     (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.033)       (0.033)      (0.033)
                  Rearrest in 0-2 Years               0.453           −0.049∗∗∗ −0.025∗∗∗        −0.018∗∗∗       −0.056        −0.054       −0.050
                                                     (0.498)           (0.002)     (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.049)       (0.048)      (0.047)
                  Rearrest in 3-4 Years               0.322           −0.060∗∗∗ −0.053∗∗∗        −0.047∗∗∗         0.059         0.061        0.063
                                                     (0.467)           (0.002)     (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.053)       (0.054)      (0.054)
               Court x Year FE                           –               Yes         Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes
               Crime Controls                            –               No          Yes            Yes             No            Yes          Yes
               IRS Controls                              –               No          No             Yes             No            No           Yes
               Observations                          190,769           426,030     426,030        426,030         426,030       426,030      426,030
     Notes: This table reports OLS and two-stage least squares results of the impact of pre-trial release. The regressions are estimated on the sample as
     described in the notes to Table 1. The dependent variable is listed in each row. Two-stage least squares models instrument for pre-trial detention using
     a judge leniency measure that is estimated using data from other cases assigned to a bail judge in the same year following the procedure described in
     Section III. All specifications control for court-by-time fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the individual level are reported in parentheses.




36
     *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.
                                                                           Table 7
                                                       Pre-Trial Release and Labor Market Outcomes
                                                         Detained
                                                           Mean                      OLS Results                              2SLS Results
                 Panel A: Years 1-2                         (1)             (2)          (3)        (4)              (5)           (6)       (7)
                  Employed                                 0.378          0.134∗∗∗     0.102∗∗∗ 0.051∗∗∗           0.073         0.068      0.037
                                                          (0.485)        (0.002)      (0.002)    (0.002)          (0.049)       (0.049)    (0.043)
                   Any Income                              0.462          0.103∗∗∗     0.080∗∗∗ 0.036∗∗∗           0.131∗∗∗      0.125∗∗∗   0.097∗∗
                                                          (0.499)        (0.002)      (0.002)    (0.002)          (0.048)       (0.048)    (0.045)
                   Earnings (thousands)                    5.202          2.681∗∗∗     2.239∗∗∗ 0.406∗∗∗           0.461         0.793    −0.462
                                                         (15.108)        (0.071)      (0.073)    (0.044)          (1.536)       (1.539)    (0.976)
                   Household Income (thousands)           10.215          2.689∗∗∗     2.191∗∗∗ 0.241∗∗∗           2.250         2.770    −0.251
                                                         (22.741)        (0.105)      (0.107)    (0.065)          (2.214)       (2.228)    (1.532)

                 Panel B: Years 3-4
                  Employed                                 0.379          0.103∗∗∗     0.077∗∗∗    0.032∗∗∗        0.111∗       0.118∗∗      0.102∗
                                                          (0.485)        (0.002)      (0.003)     (0.002)         (0.057)      (0.058)      (0.053)
                   Any Income                              0.465          0.089∗∗∗     0.066∗∗∗    0.030∗∗∗        0.112∗∗      0.110∗       0.085
                                                          (0.499)        (0.002)      (0.003)     (0.002)         (0.055)      (0.057)      (0.054)




37
                   Earnings (thousands)                    5.861          2.416∗∗∗     1.995∗∗∗    0.224∗∗∗        0.334        1.142        1.024
                                                         (15.806)        (0.085)      (0.088)     (0.061)         (1.858)      (1.898)      (1.338)
                   Household Income (thousands)           10.953          2.434∗∗∗     1.946∗∗∗    0.036           1.259        2.085      −0.083
                                                         (23.879)        (0.126)      (0.130)     (0.088)         (2.664)      (2.729)      (2.022)
                 Court x Year FE                             –              Yes          Yes         Yes             Yes          Yes         Yes
                 Crime Controls                              –              No           Yes         Yes             No           Yes         Yes
                 IRS Controls                                –              No           No          Yes             No           No          Yes
                 Observations                             147,295         338,793      338,793     338,793         338,793      338,793     338,793
     Notes: This table reports OLS and two-stage least squares results of the impact of pre-trial release. The regressions are estimated on the sample as
     described in the notes to Table 1. The dependent variable is listed in each row. Two-stage least squares models instrument for pre-trial detention using
     a judge leniency measure that is estimated using data from other cases assigned to a bail judge in the same year following the procedure described in
     Section III. All specifications control for court-by-time fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the individual level are reported in parentheses.
     *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.
                                                                          Table 8
                                                       Pre-Trial Release and Social Benefits Take-Up
                                                  Detained
                                                   Mean                        OLS Results                          2SLS Results
                        Panel A: Years 1-2           (1)              (2)          (3)        (4)             (5)        (6)        (7)
                         Filed Return              0.424            0.091∗∗∗     0.071∗∗∗ 0.032∗∗∗          0.126∗∗∗ 0.122∗∗∗ 0.095∗∗
                                                  (0.494)          (0.002)      (0.002)    (0.002)         (0.039)    (0.039)    (0.037)
                           UI (thousands)          0.282            0.413∗∗∗     0.375∗∗∗ 0.205∗∗∗          0.170      0.178      0.060
                                                  (1.535)          (0.008)      (0.010)    (0.009)         (0.176)    (0.178)    (0.171)
                           EITC (thousands)        0.334            0.189∗∗∗     0.154∗∗∗ 0.093∗∗∗          0.252∗∗    0.237∗∗    0.185∗
                                                  (0.954)          (0.004)      (0.005)    (0.004)         (0.110)    (0.109)    (0.099)
                           Any UI                  0.066            0.067∗∗∗     0.058∗∗∗ 0.030∗∗∗          0.058∗∗    0.058∗∗    0.036
                                                  (0.248)          (0.001)      (0.001)    (0.001)         (0.028)    (0.028)    (0.026)
                           Any EITC                0.220            0.070∗∗∗     0.055∗∗∗ 0.033∗∗∗          0.122∗∗∗ 0.114∗∗∗ 0.100∗∗
                                                  (0.414)          (0.002)      (0.002)    (0.002)         (0.044)    (0.043)    (0.042)

                        Panel B: Years 3-4
                         Filed Return               0.308           0.056∗∗∗     0.043∗∗∗    0.019∗∗∗       0.065∗∗      0.062∗      0.043
                                                   (0.462)         (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.002)        (0.033)      (0.033)     (0.032)




38
                           UI (thousands)           0.245           0.276∗∗∗     0.253∗∗∗    0.155∗∗∗       0.326∗       0.361∗      0.323
                                                   (1.333)         (0.008)      (0.009)     (0.008)        (0.195)      (0.201)     (0.198)
                           EITC (thousands)         0.360           0.177∗∗∗     0.139∗∗∗    0.090∗∗∗       0.345∗∗      0.312∗∗     0.239∗
                                                   (1.002)         (0.005)      (0.006)     (0.006)        (0.134)      (0.135)     (0.128)
                           Any UI                   0.064           0.055∗∗∗     0.048∗∗∗    0.030∗∗∗       0.027        0.030       0.020
                                                   (0.245)         (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)        (0.033)      (0.034)     (0.033)
                           Any EITC                 0.234           0.057∗∗∗     0.042∗∗∗    0.026∗∗∗       0.143∗∗∗     0.134∗∗     0.113∗∗
                                                   (0.423)         (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.002)        (0.052)      (0.052)     (0.051)
                        Court x Year FE                –              Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes
                        Crime Controls                 –              No           Yes         Yes            No           Yes         Yes
                        IRS Controls                   –              No           No          Yes            No           No          Yes
                        Observations               147,295          338,793      338,793     338,793        338,793      338,793     338,793
     Notes: This table reports OLS and two-stage least squares results of the impact of pre-trial release. The regressions are estimated on the sample as
     described in the notes to Table 1. The dependent variable is listed in each row. Two-stage least squares models instrument for pre-trial detention using
     a judge leniency measure that is estimated using data from other cases assigned to a bail judge in the same year following the procedure described in
     Section III. All specifications control for court-by-time fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the individual level are reported in parentheses.
     *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.
                                                  Table 9
                                      Results by Crime Characteristics
                                        Crime Severity                                Crime   Type
                                       Misd.      Felony             Drug           DUI       Property    Violent
                                        (1)        (2)                (3)           (4)          (5)        (6)
  Any Guilty Offense                 −0.190∗∗∗ −0.100              −0.108∗         0.085      −0.143∗∗∗ −0.538
                                      (0.035)    (0.068)            (0.063)       (0.121)      (0.050)    (0.382)
                                      [0.509]    [0.543]            [0.667]       [0.528]      [0.548]    [0.291]
  Guilty Plea                        −0.186∗∗∗ −0.012              −0.088        −0.028       −0.107∗∗ −0.203
                                      (0.032)    (0.068)            (0.061)       (0.108)      (0.049)    (0.298)
                                      [0.214]    [0.420]            [0.349]       [0.264]      [0.411]    [0.200]
  Any Incarceration                    0.017    −0.116∗            −0.128∗∗        0.109        0.005    −0.274
                                      (0.019)    (0.065)            (0.055)       (0.114)      (0.043)    (0.263)
                                      [0.112]    [0.330]            [0.255]       [0.430]      [0.223]    [0.148]
  Failure to Appear in Court           0.116∗∗∗   0.210∗∗∗           0.193∗∗       0.095        0.141∗∗∗   0.120
                                      (0.041)    (0.049)            (0.079)       (0.102)      (0.036)    (0.246)
                                      [0.201]    [0.101]            [0.237]       [0.182]      [0.187]    [0.082]
  Rearrest Prior to Disposition        0.084∗∗∗   0.064              0.012         0.045        0.038      0.385
                                      (0.029)    (0.074)            (0.065)       (0.097)      (0.055)    (0.359)
                                      [0.192]    [0.254]            [0.271]       [0.163]      [0.251]    [0.142]
  Employed in 1-2 Years                0.038      0.033              0.132∗      −0.060       −0.002       0.475
                                      (0.050)    (0.075)            (0.080)       (0.114)      (0.075)    (0.318)
                                      [0.481]    [0.418]            [0.424]       [0.601]      [0.397]    [0.490]
  Any Income in 1-2 Years              0.114∗∗    0.074              0.116       −0.020         0.044      0.627∗
                                      (0.052)    (0.078)            (0.083)       (0.121)      (0.078)    (0.345)
                                      [0.509]    [0.480]            [0.458]       [0.591]      [0.485]    [0.524]
  Employed in 3-4 Years                0.091      0.117              0.119       −0.031       −0.111       0.877∗∗
                                      (0.061)    (0.091)            (0.096)       (0.228)      (0.105)    (0.378)
                                      [0.458]    [0.414]            [0.407]       [0.568]      [0.387]    [0.469]
  Any Income in 3-4 Years              0.058      0.122              0.028       −0.183         0.057      0.576∗
                                      (0.063)    (0.092)            (0.097)       (0.239)      (0.105)    (0.329)
                                      [0.492]    [0.486]            [0.461]       [0.556]      [0.477]    [0.500]
Court x Year FE                         Yes        Yes                Yes           Yes          Yes        Yes
Crime Controls                          Yes        Yes                Yes           Yes          Yes        Yes
IRS Controls                            Yes        Yes                Yes           Yes          Yes        Yes
Observations                          228,056    197,974            117,666        20,786       73,057     34,514
Notes: This table reports two-stage least squares results of the impact of pre-trial release for selected case types.
The regressions are estimated on the judge sample as described in the notes to Table 1. The dependent variable is
listed in each row. Two-stage least squares models instrument for pre-trial detention using a judge leniency measure
that is estimated using data from other cases assigned to a bail judge in the same year following the procedure
described in Section III. All specifications control for court-by-time fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered
at the individual level are reported in parentheses. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent
level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                         39
                                                Table 10
                                   Results by Defendant Characteristics
                                       Black      White            No Priors       Priors        Not Emp. Employed
                                        (1)        (2)                (3)           (4)             (5)        (6)
  Any Guilty Offense                 −0.101∗    −0.259∗∗∗          −0.202∗∗∗     −0.053          −0.103∗∗   −0.185∗∗∗
                                      (0.053)    (0.064)            (0.042)       (0.055)         (0.050)    (0.058)
                                      [0.565]    [0.581]            [0.495]       [0.611]         [0.547]    [0.501]
  Guilty Plea                        −0.122∗∗ −0.198∗∗∗            −0.152∗∗∗     −0.054          −0.107∗∗   −0.109∗∗
                                      (0.053)    (0.063)            (0.039)       (0.055)         (0.048)    (0.055)
                                      [0.377]    [0.385]            [0.283]       [0.388]         [0.323]    [0.289]
  Any Incarceration                  −0.049     −0.049             −0.024        −0.040          −0.020     −0.073
                                      (0.044)    (0.051)            (0.033)       (0.046)         (0.041)    (0.045)
                                      [0.276]    [0.239]            [0.190]       [0.281]         [0.231]    [0.195]
  Failure to Appear in Court           0.212∗∗∗   0.166∗∗            0.135∗∗∗      0.185∗∗∗        0.138∗∗∗   0.111∗
                                      (0.068)    (0.073)            (0.042)       (0.044)         (0.045)    (0.059)
                                      [0.201]    [0.209]            [0.149]       [0.181]         [0.171]    [0.143]
  Rearrest Prior to Disposition      −0.057       0.123∗             0.078∗∗       0.064           0.045      0.072
                                      (0.053)    (0.064)            (0.040)       (0.053)         (0.050)    (0.057)
                                      [0.231]    [0.213]            [0.195]       [0.294]         [0.242]    [0.210]
  Employed in 1-2 Years                0.063      0.059              0.047         0.009           0.016      0.053
                                      (0.071)    (0.092)            (0.051)       (0.075)         (0.058)    (0.065)
                                      [0.403]    [0.444]            [0.485]       [0.358]         [0.234]    [0.689]
  Any Income in 1-2 Years              0.098      0.222∗∗            0.139∗∗∗    −0.004            0.081      0.119∗
                                      (0.074)    (0.097)            (0.053)       (0.080)         (0.063)    (0.064)
                                      [0.481]    [0.490]            [0.511]       [0.452]         [0.357]    [0.646]
  Employed in 3-4 Years                0.034      0.038              0.107∗        0.075           0.076      0.133∗
                                      (0.098)    (0.136)            (0.060)       (0.105)         (0.069)    (0.081)
                                      [0.389]    [0.425]            [0.464]       [0.363]         [0.246]    [0.634]
  Any Income in 3-4 Years            −0.027       0.290∗∗            0.111∗        0.023           0.065      0.133∗
                                      (0.097)    (0.143)            (0.061)       (0.107)         (0.074)    (0.078)
                                      [0.466]    [0.495]            [0.512]       [0.422]         [0.356]    [0.625]
Court x Year FE                         Yes        Yes                Yes           Yes             Yes        Yes
Crime Controls                          Yes        Yes                Yes           Yes             Yes        Yes
IRS Controls                            Yes        Yes                Yes           Yes             Yes        Yes
Observations                          155,310    104,918            316,644       109,386         178,060   160,733
Notes: This table reports two-stage least squares results of the impact of pre-trial release by defendant type. The
regressions are estimated on the judge sample as described in the notes to Table 1. The dependent variable is listed
in each row. Two-stage least squares models instrument for pre-trial detention using a judge leniency measure that
is estimated using data from other cases assigned to a bail judge in the same year following the procedure described
in Section III. All specifications control for court-by-time fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the
individual level are reported in parentheses. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level,
* = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                         40
                                               Figure 1
                        Distribution of Judge Leniency Measure and First Stage




                                           .15




                                                                                                       .7
                                                                                                             Residualized Rate of Pre-Trial Release
                                                                                                       .65
                      Fraction of Sample
                                           .1




                                                                                                       .6
                                           .05




                                                                                                       .55
                                                                                                       .5
                                           0




                                                 -.15   -.1   -.05         0          .05   .1   .15
                                                                     Judge Leniency

Notes: This figure reports the distribution of the judge leniency measure that is estimated using data from other
cases assigned to a bail judge in the same year following the procedure described in Section III.




                                                                          41
                                            Appendix Table 1
                                    Descriptive Statistics by Bail Type
                                                                     Initial Bail Decision
                                                            ROR        Non-Monetary Monetary
               Panel A: Characteristics                      (1)             (2)             (3)
                Male                                        0.765           0.786           0.846
                White                                       0.422           0.434          0.382
                Black                                       0.555           0.556          0.604
                Age at Bail Decision                       34.157           33.894         33.229
                Prior Offense in Past Year                 0.145            0.277          0.281

               Panel B: Charge Characteristics
                Number of Offenses                           1.887         2.047           3.735
                Felony Offense                               0.134         0.423           0.633
                Misdemeanor Only                             0.866         0.577           0.367
                Any Drug Offense                             0.490         0.501           0.306
                Any DUI Offense                              0.190         0.049           0.044
                Any Violent Offense                          0.042         0.093           0.348
                Any Property Offense                         0.165         0.281           0.268

               Panel C: Outcomes
                Any Guilty Offense                         0.516           0.569           0.493
                Guilty Plea                                0.140           0.262           0.342
                Any Incarceration                          0.132           0.184           0.267
                Failure to Appear in Court                 0.251           0.263           0.099
                Absconded                                  0.013           0.007           0.002
                Days to Case Decision                     261.294         232.109         229.731
                Rearrest Prior to Disposition              0.234           0.314           0.216
                Rearrest in 0-2 Years                      0.373           0.479           0.414
                Rearrest in 3-4 Years                      0.251           0.316           0.297
                Earnings (thousands) in 1-2 Years          8.015           5.871           6.460
                Employed in 1-2 Years                      0.514           0.443           0.438
                Any Income in 1-2 Years                    0.510           0.498           0.491
                Earnings (thousands) in 3-4 Years          8.657           6.380           7.049
                Employed in 3-4 Years                      0.495           0.421           0.428
                Any Income in 3-4 Years                    0.504           0.496           0.485

               Panel D: Data Quality
                Missing Race                                0.488         0.359            0.371
               Observations                                89,870         59,134          271,646
Notes: This table reports descriptive statistics by bail decision. The sample is described in the notes to Table 1. See
the data appendix for additional details on the sample and variable construction.




                                                        42
                                            Appendix Table 2
                                      Predictors of Pre-Trial Release
                                                        (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)
              Residualized ROR Rate                   0.020
                                                     (0.013)
              Residualized Non-Monetary Rate                      0.146∗∗∗
                                                                 (0.011)
              Residualized Monetary Rate                                     −0.482∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.019)
              Residualized Monetary Amount                                                −0.002∗∗∗
                                                                                          (0.000)
            Observations                              426,030     426,030     426,030      426,030
Notes: This table reports the pair-wise correlation between different judge leniency measures. The correlations are
calculated using the sample as described in the notes to Table 1. Judge leniency is estimated using data from other
cases assigned to a bail judge the same year following the procedure described in Section III. *** = significant at 1
percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                       43
                                              Appendix Table 3
                                        Additional First Stage Results
                                                  Sample
                                                   Mean                  Judge Leniency
                                                    (1)            (2)         (3)        (4)
                Bail Modification Petition        0.208         −0.399∗∗∗ −0.398∗∗∗ −0.398∗∗∗
                                                 (0.406)         (0.033)    (0.032)     (0.032)
                Released in 14 Days               0.593           0.684∗∗∗   0.680∗∗∗    0.677∗∗∗
                                                 (0.491)         (0.025)    (0.024)     (0.023)
                Released Before Trial             0.713           0.576∗∗∗   0.570∗∗∗    0.568∗∗∗
                                                 (0.452)         (0.024)    (0.023)     (0.023)
              Court x Year FE                        –             Yes        Yes         Yes
              Crime Controls                         –             No         Yes         Yes
              IRS Controls                           –             No          No         Yes
              Observations                        426,030        426,030    426,030     426,030
Notes: This table reports additional first stage results. The regressions are estimated on the sample as described in the
notes to Table 1. The dependent variable is listed in each row. Judge leniency is estimated using data from other cases
assigned to a bail judge in the same year following the procedure described in Section III. All specifications control
for court-by-time fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the individual level are reported in parentheses
in all specifications. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10
percent level.




                                                         44
                                           Appendix Table 4
                                  Reduced Form Effect of Judge Leniency
                                                   Detained
                                                    Mean                      OLS Results
                                                      (1)             (2)         (3)            (4)
              Any Guilty Offense                    0.571          −0.103∗∗∗ −0.109∗∗∗        −0.107∗∗∗
                                                   (0.495)          (0.025)     (0.023)        (0.023)
              Guilty Plea                           0.436          −0.080∗∗∗ −0.083∗∗∗        −0.083∗∗∗
                                                   (0.496)          (0.024)     (0.022)        (0.022)
              Any Incarceration                     0.296          −0.012      −0.022         −0.021
                                                   (0.457)          (0.019)     (0.019)        (0.018)
              Failure to Appear in Court            0.121            0.142∗∗∗    0.138∗∗∗       0.139∗∗∗
                                                   (0.326)          (0.029)     (0.029)        (0.029)
              Rearrest Prior to Disposition         0.202            0.054∗∗     0.051∗∗        0.052∗∗
                                                   (0.402)          (0.023)     (0.022)        (0.022)
              Employed in 1-2 Years                 0.378            0.049       0.045          0.025
                                                   (0.485)          (0.034)     (0.033)        (0.029)
              Any Income in 1-2 Years               0.462            0.089∗∗∗    0.083∗∗∗       0.064∗∗
                                                   (0.499)          (0.032)     (0.032)        (0.030)
              Employed in 3-4 Years                 0.379            0.076∗      0.078∗∗        0.067∗
                                                   (0.485)          (0.039)     (0.038)        (0.035)
              Any Income in 3-4 Years               0.465            0.076∗∗     0.073∗         0.056
                                                   (0.499)          (0.038)     (0.037)        (0.035)
            Court x Year FE                            –              Yes         Yes            Yes
            Crime Controls                             –              No          Yes            Yes
            IRS Controls                               –              No          No             Yes
            Observations                           190,769          426,030     426,030        426,030
Notes: This table reports reduced form OLS estimates of case outcomes on our residualized judge leniency measure
described in Section III. The regressions are estimated on the sample as described in the notes to Table 1. The
dependent variable is listed in each row. All specifications control for court-by-time fixed effects. Robust standard
errors clustered at the individual level are reported in parentheses in all specifications. *** = significant at 1 percent
level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                          45
                                            Appendix Table 5
                               First Stage Results by Case Characteristics
                                     Crime Severity                          Crime     Type
                                    Misd.     Felony             Drug      DUI         Property Violent
    Panel A: Full Sample              (1)       (2)               (3)       (4)            (5)       (6)
     Judge Leniency                 0.875∗∗∗ 0.498∗∗∗           0.705∗∗∗ 1.269∗∗∗        0.923∗∗∗ 0.136∗∗∗
                                   (0.030)   (0.035)           (0.042)   (0.113)       (0.044)    (0.053)
                                   [0.694]   [0.388]           [0.636]   [0.854]        [0.393]   [0.488]

    Panel B: Reverse Sample
     Judge Leniency                 1.126∗∗∗ 0.831∗∗∗           1.014∗∗∗ 1.311∗∗∗        1.195∗∗∗ 0.424∗∗∗
                                   (0.030)   (0.035)           (0.042)   (0.113)        (0.043)   (0.053)
                                   [0.694]   [0.388]           [0.636]   [0.854]        [0.393]   [0.488]
    Court x Year FE                   Yes       Yes               Yes       Yes           Yes        Yes
    Crime Controls                    Yes       Yes               Yes       Yes           Yes        Yes
    IRS Controls                      Yes       Yes               Yes       Yes           Yes        Yes
    Observations                    228,056   197,974           117,666   20,786         80,690    73,057
Notes: This table reports first stage results for selected case types. The regressions are estimated on the sample as
described in the notes to Table 1. In Panel A, judge leniency is estimated using all cases assigned to a bail judge in
the same year following the procedure described in Section III. In Panel B, judge leniency is estimated using data
excluding own-type cases assigned to a bail judge in the same year following the procedure described in Section
III. The dependent variable is an indicator for being released before trial within three days of the bail hearing. All
specifications control for court-by-time fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the individual level are
reported in parentheses and the mean of the dependent variable is reported in brackets in all specifications. *** =
significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                        46
                                          Apppendix Table 6
                            First Stage Results by Defendant Characteristics
                                  Black     White            No Prior    Prior             Emp.    Non-Emp.
  Panel A: Full Sample              (1)       (2)               (3)       (4)               (5)       (6)
   Judge Leniency                 0.668∗∗∗ 0.601∗∗∗           0.645∗∗∗ 0.810∗∗∗           0.649∗∗∗   0.715∗∗∗
                                 (0.036)   (0.039)           (0.028)   (0.041)           (0.039)    (0.035)
                                 [0.451]   [0.491]           [0.600]   [0.415]           [0.619]    [0.517]

  Panel B: Reverse Sample
   Judge Leniency                 1.009∗∗∗ 0.969∗∗∗           0.964∗∗∗ 1.050∗∗∗           0.952∗∗∗       1.005∗∗∗
                                 (0.035)   (0.039)           (0.031)   (0.041)           (0.038)       (0.035)
                                 [0.451]   [0.491]           [0.600]   [0.415]           [0.619]        [0.517]
  Court x Year FE                   Yes       Yes              Yes        Yes               Yes           Yes
  Crime Controls                    Yes       Yes              Yes        Yes               Yes           Yes
  IRS Controls                      Yes       Yes              Yes        Yes               Yes           Yes
  Observations                    155,310   104,918          316,644    109,386           160,733      178,060
Notes: This table reports first stage results for selected defendant types. The regressions are estimated on the sample
as described in the notes to Table 1. In Panel A, judge leniency is estimated using all cases assigned to a bail judge
in the same year following the procedure described in Section III. In Panel B, judge leniency is estimated using data
excluding own-type cases assigned to a bail judge in the same year following the procedure described in Section
III. The dependent variable is an indicator for being released before trial within three days of the bail hearing. All
specifications control for court-by-time fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the individual level are
reported in parentheses and the mean of the dependent variable is reported in brackets in all specifications. *** =
significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                        47
                                                                        Appendix Table 7
                                                                        Additional Results
                                             Detained
                                                Mean                       OLS Results                                         2SLS Results
                                                 (1)              (2)          (3)        (4)                          (5)          (6)         (7)
        Number of Guilty Offenses                0.927          −0.241∗∗∗    −0.078∗∗∗  −0.075∗∗∗                    −0.182∗∗     −0.187∗∗∗   −0.186∗∗∗
                                                (1.745)          (0.004)      (0.004)    (0.004)                      (0.074)      (0.069)     (0.069)
        Guilty Plea to Time Served               0.202          −0.140∗∗∗    −0.064∗∗∗  −0.062∗∗∗                    −0.141∗∗∗    −0.131∗∗∗   −0.130∗∗∗
                                                (0.401)          (0.002)      (0.002)    (0.002)                      (0.037)      (0.035)     (0.035)
        Offense Charged Down                     0.482            0.015∗∗∗     0.051∗∗∗   0.048∗∗∗                     0.082∗∗      0.088∗∗     0.086∗∗
                                                (0.500)          (0.002)      (0.002)    (0.002)                      (0.036)      (0.035)     (0.035)
        Max Days Incarcerated                  332.244         −293.075∗∗∗ −156.557∗∗∗ −155.805∗∗∗                 −144.049     −146.112    −144.745
                                           (2, 617.928)          (4.197)      (4.227)    (4.554)                    (210.643)    (211.005)   (211.974)
      Court x Year FE                             –               Yes          Yes        Yes                          Yes          Yes         Yes
      Crime Controls                              –               No           Yes        Yes                          No           Yes         Yes
      IRS Controls                                –               No           No         Yes                          No           No          Yes
      Observations                            190,769           426,030      426,030    426,030                      426,030      426,030     426,030
     Notes: This table reports additional OLS and two-stage least squares results of the impact of pre-trial release. The regressions are estimated on the
     sample as described in the notes to Table 1. The dependent variable is listed in each row. Two-stage least squares models instrument for pre-trial




48
     detention using a judge leniency measure that is estimated using data from other cases assigned to a bail judge in the same year following the procedure
     described in Section III. All specifications control for court-by-time fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the individual level are reported in
     parentheses. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.
                                              Appendix Table 8
                                     First Stage Results by Release Type
                                                                             Judge Leniency
                                                         Sample             No          With
                                                          Mean          Conditions Conditions
                                                           (1)              (2)           (3)
                    Released with No Conditions          0.203             0.938∗∗∗   −0.040∗∗∗
                                                        (0.402)           (0.017)       (0.014)
                    Released with Conditions             0.349           −0.265∗∗∗       0.728∗∗∗
                                                        (0.477)           (0.026)       (0.024)
                  Court x Year FE                           –              Yes           Yes
                  Crime Controls                            –              Yes           Yes
                  IRS Controls                              –              Yes           Yes
                  Observations                           426,030         426,030       426,030
Notes: This table reports additional first stage results for two types of pre-trial release: release ROR with no conditions
and release with conditions. The regressions are estimated on the sample as described in the notes to Table 1. The
dependent variable is listed in each row. Estimates in columns 2 and 3 are from the same OLS specification. Judge
leniency is estimated using data from other cases assigned to a bail judge in the same year following the procedure
described in Section III. All specifications control for court-by-time fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered
at the individual level are reported in parentheses in all specifications. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** =
significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                          49
                                              Appendix Table 9
                                           Results by Release Type
                                                             OLS Results                      2SLS Results
                                      Detained             No         With                  No         With
                                       Mean            Conditions Conditions            Conditions Conditions
                                         (1)               (2)         (3)                  (4)          (5)
  Any Guilty Offense                   0.571            −0.075∗∗∗   −0.042∗∗∗            −0.168∗∗∗    −0.154∗∗∗
                                      (0.495)            (0.002)     (0.002)              (0.036)      (0.034)
  Guilty Plea                          0.436            −0.137∗∗∗   −0.079∗∗∗            −0.129∗∗∗    −0.119∗∗∗
                                      (0.496)            (0.002)     (0.002)              (0.034)      (0.032)
  Any Incarceration                    0.296            −0.107∗∗∗   −0.096∗∗∗            −0.015       −0.032
                                      (0.457)            (0.002)     (0.001)              (0.028)      (0.027)
  Failure to Appear in Court           0.121              0.060∗∗∗  −0.006∗∗∗              0.178∗∗∗     0.151∗∗∗
                                      (0.326)            (0.002)     (0.001)              (0.033)      (0.031)
  Rearrest Prior to Disposition        0.202              0.058∗∗∗    0.058∗∗∗             0.091∗∗∗     0.074∗∗
                                      (0.402)            (0.002)     (0.002)              (0.034)      (0.033)
  Employed in 1-2 Years                0.378              0.053∗∗∗    0.050∗∗∗             0.042        0.037
                                      (0.485)            (0.003)     (0.002)              (0.046)      (0.043)
  Any Income in 1-2 Years              0.462              0.036∗∗∗    0.036∗∗∗             0.094∗∗      0.097∗∗
                                      (0.499)            (0.003)     (0.002)              (0.048)      (0.045)
  Employed in 3-4 Years                0.379              0.041∗∗∗    0.029∗∗∗             0.085        0.102∗
                                      (0.485)            (0.003)     (0.002)              (0.055)      (0.053)
  Any Income in 3-4 Years              0.465              0.032∗∗∗    0.029∗∗∗             0.045        0.087
                                      (0.499)            (0.003)     (0.002)              (0.056)      (0.054)
Court x Year FE                           –               Yes          Yes                 Yes          Yes
Crime Controls                            –               Yes          Yes                 Yes          Yes
IRS Controls                              –               Yes          Yes                 Yes          Yes
Observations                          190,769           426,030     426,030              426,030      426,030
Notes: This table reports OLS and two-stage least squares results of the impact of two types of pre-trial release:
release ROR with no conditions and release with conditions. The regressions are estimated on the sample as described
in the notes to Table 1. The dependent variable is listed in each row. Estimates in columns 2 and 3 are from the
same OLS specification, and estimates in columns 4 and 5 are from the same two-stage least squares specification.
All specifications control for court-by-time fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the individual level are
reported in parentheses. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10
percent level.




                                                         50
                                                                    Appendix Table 10
                                                      Robustness of Two-Stage Least Squares Results
                                                                               Judge Leniency
                                                       Crime      Crime    Release    Non-Money      Split    Scheduled
                                                     Severity     Type      Ever          Bail      Sample       Judge                      Judge FE
                                                        (1)        (2)       (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)                          (7)
                 Any Guilty Offense                  −0.141∗∗∗ −0.173∗∗∗ −0.212∗∗∗      −0.076∗∗∗ −0.174∗∗∗ −0.147∗∗∗                       −0.192∗∗∗
                                                      (0.027)    (0.027)   (0.039)       (0.021)    (0.039)     (0.036)                      (0.034)
                 Guilty Plea                         −0.131∗∗∗ −0.134∗∗∗ −0.203∗∗∗      −0.045∗∗ −0.131∗∗∗ −0.129∗∗∗                        −0.166∗∗∗
                                                      (0.026)    (0.026)   (0.038)       (0.020)    (0.038)     (0.035)                      (0.032)
                 Any Incarceration                     0.012    −0.043∗∗ −0.035         −0.010     −0.035      −0.032                       −0.044
                                                      (0.021)    (0.021)   (0.030)       (0.017)    (0.031)     (0.029)                      (0.027)
                 Failure to Appear in Court            0.116∗∗∗   0.148∗∗∗  0.235∗∗∗      0.081∗∗∗   0.128∗∗∗    0.117∗∗∗                     0.097∗∗∗
                                                      (0.026)    (0.023)   (0.049)       (0.018)    (0.036)     (0.036)                      (0.037)
                 Rearrest Prior to Disposition         0.075∗∗∗   0.101∗∗∗  0.086∗∗       0.065∗∗∗   0.060       0.068∗                       0.062∗
                                                      (0.025)    (0.025)   (0.039)       (0.020)    (0.038)     (0.036)                      (0.033)
                 Employed in 1-2 Years                 0.041      0.026     0.010         0.023      0.040       0.047                        0.017
                                                      (0.036)    (0.035)   (0.065)       (0.027)    (0.049)     (0.048)                      (0.039)
                 Any Income in 1-2 Years               0.070∗     0.042     0.128∗      −0.005       0.033       0.123∗∗                      0.040




51
                                                      (0.038)    (0.036)   (0.068)       (0.028)    (0.051)     (0.050)                      (0.040)
                 Employed in 3-4 Years                 0.027      0.069∗    0.092         0.073∗∗    0.091       0.091                        0.080∗
                                                      (0.043)    (0.041)   (0.079)       (0.032)    (0.060)     (0.058)                      (0.045)
                 Any Income in 3-4 Years               0.050      0.020     0.162∗∗       0.030      0.074       0.095                        0.029
                                                      (0.044)    (0.041)   (0.081)       (0.032)    (0.061)     (0.059)                      (0.046)
               Court x Year FE                          Yes        Yes       Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes                          Yes
               Crime Controls                           Yes        Yes       Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes                          Yes
               IRS Controls                             Yes        Yes       Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes                          Yes
               Observations                           426,030    426,030   426,030     426,030      319,677    426,030                       426,030
     Notes: This table reports robustness checks of our two-stage least squares results. The regressions are estimated on the sample as described in the notes
     to Table 1. The dependent variable is listed in each row. Column 1 allows judge leniency to vary across felonies and misdemeanors. Column 2 allows
     judge leniency to vary across the 5 mutually exclusive crime types. Column 3 uses an indicator for ever being released before trial to calculate judge
     leniency. Column 4 uses an indicator for the assignment of non-monetary bail. Column 5 calculates judge leniency using a 25 percent random subset of
     the data and estimates the treatment effects in the opposing subset of data. Column 6 uses the scheduled bail judge to calculate judge leniency. Column
     7 uses an exhaustive set of judge fixed effects as instruments. All specifications control for court-by-time fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered
     at the individual level are reported in parentheses. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent
     level.
                                        Appendix Table 11
                      Robustness of Two-Stage Least Squares Results by Sample
                                                       Philadelphia    Miami       IRS
                                                           Only         Only     Sample
                                                            (1)          (2)        (3)
                    Any Guilty Offense                    −0.126∗∗∗ −0.182∗∗∗ −0.143∗∗∗
                                                           (0.041)    (0.054)    (0.038)
                    Guilty Plea                           −0.041     −0.205∗∗∗ −0.113∗∗∗
                                                           (0.035)    (0.054)    (0.037)
                    Any Incarceration                     −0.012     −0.041     −0.043
                                                           (0.032)    (0.044)    (0.030)
                    Failure to Appear in Court              0.150∗∗∗      –       0.125∗∗∗
                                                           (0.031)               (0.036)
                    Rearrest Prior to Disposition           0.135∗∗∗   0.015      0.058
                                                           (0.036)    (0.056)    (0.038)
                    Employed in 1-2 Years                 −0.003       0.087      0.037
                                                           (0.045)    (0.086)    (0.043)
                    Any Income in 1-2 Years               −0.023       0.294∗∗∗   0.097∗∗
                                                           (0.046)    (0.092)    (0.045)
                    Employed in 3-4 Years                   0.160∗∗∗   0.003      0.102∗
                                                           (0.055)    (0.104)    (0.053)
                    Any Income in 3-4 Years                 0.061      0.138      0.085
                                                           (0.056)    (0.106)    (0.054)
                  Court x Year FE                          Yes          Yes        Yes
                  Crime Controls                           Yes          Yes        Yes
                  IRS Controls                             Yes          Yes        Yes
                  Observations                           328,492       97,538    338,793
Notes: This table reports robustness checks of our two-stage least squares results across different samples. The
dependent variable is listed in each row. Column 1 restricts the sample to Philadelphia. Column 2 restricts the
sample to Miami-Dade. Column 3 restricts the sample to cases matched to the IRS data. All specifications control
for court-by-time fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the individual level are reported in parentheses.
*** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at 10 percent level.




                                                        52
                                                                   Appendix Table 12
                                              Effects on Joint Probabilities of Conviction and Employment
                                                      Detained
                                                       Mean                      OLS Results                                2SLS Results
               Panel A: Years 1-2                        (1)             (2)         (3)           (4)              (5)          (6)          (7)
                Guilty and Employed                    0.187            0.028∗∗∗    0.022∗∗∗      0.000          −0.054∗      −0.059∗      −0.072∗∗
                                                      (0.390)          (0.001)     (0.002)       (0.002)          (0.033)      (0.032)      (0.031)
                 Guilty and Not Employed               0.333          −0.095∗∗∗ −0.070∗∗∗       −0.045∗∗∗        −0.075∗∗ −0.075∗∗         −0.061∗
                                                      (0.471)          (0.002)     (0.002)       (0.002)          (0.036)      (0.035)      (0.034)
                 Not Guilty and Employed               0.152            0.090∗∗∗    0.069∗∗∗      0.045∗∗∗         0.107∗∗∗     0.109∗∗∗     0.095∗∗∗
                                                      (0.359)          (0.001)     (0.002)       (0.002)          (0.032)      (0.031)      (0.031)
                 Not Guilty and Not Employed           0.225          −0.024∗∗∗ −0.022∗∗∗       −0.001             0.022        0.025        0.037
                                                      (0.417)          (0.002)     (0.002)       (0.002)          (0.033)      (0.033)      (0.032)

               Panel B: Years 3-4
                Guilty and Employed                    0.138            0.009∗∗∗  0.009∗∗∗ −0.005∗∗∗             −0.003       −0.005       −0.014
                                                      (0.345)          (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)               (0.028)      (0.027)      (0.027)
                 Guilty and Not Employed               0.237          −0.053∗∗∗ −0.036∗∗∗ −0.020∗∗∗              −0.039       −0.039       −0.029
                                                      (0.425)          (0.001)   (0.002)    (0.001)               (0.031)      (0.031)      (0.030)




53
                 Not Guilty and Employed               0.108            0.057∗∗∗  0.042∗∗∗   0.025∗∗∗              0.064∗∗      0.064∗∗      0.055∗∗
                                                      (0.310)          (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)               (0.027)      (0.027)      (0.026)
                 Not Guilty and Not Employed           0.165          −0.013∗∗∗ −0.014∗∗∗ −0.001                 −0.022       −0.020       −0.012
                                                      (0.371)          (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)               (0.028)      (0.028)      (0.028)
               Court x Year FE                            –              Yes       Yes        Yes                   Yes          Yes          Yes
               Crime Controls                             –              No        Yes        Yes                   No           Yes          Yes
               IRS Controls                               –              No        No         Yes                   No           No           Yes
               Observations                           147,295          338,793   338,793    338,793               338,793      338,793      338,793
     Notes: This table reports additional OLS and two-stage least squares results of the impact of pre-trial release on the joint probability of conviction and
     employment. The regressions are estimated on the sample as described in the notes to Table 1. The dependent variable is listed in each row. Two-stage
     least squares models instrument for pre-trial detention using a judge leniency measure that is estimated using data from other cases assigned to a bail
     judge in the same year following the procedure described in Section III. All specifications control for court-by-time fixed effects. Robust standard errors
     clustered at the individual level are reported in parentheses. *** = significant at 1 percent level, ** = significant at 5 percent level, * = significant at
     10 percent level.
                                Appendix Figure 1
                               Criminal Case Process


                              Released                        Plea Deal
                              Phl: 62%                        Phl: 26%
                             Miami: 32%                      Miami: 47%




              Bail Hearing                                                    Guilty
     Arrest    Phl: 100%                       Arraignment                   Phl: 34%
              Miami: 70%                                                    Miami: 17%




54
                              Detained                       No Plea Deal
                              Phl: 38%                        Phl: 74%
                             Miami: 68%                      Miami: 53%




                                                                            Not Guilty
                                                                             Phl: 66%
                                                                            Miami: 83%
                                                                                                           Appendix
                                                                                                   PHILADELPHIA BAILFigure 2
                                                                                                                     GUIDELINES GRID
                                                                                                        Bail Guidelines in Philadelphia

                                                             LOW <-----------------------------------------------Charge Seriousness-------------------------------------------------------------> HIGH
                                                                 1             2              3              4           5           6              7              8               9             10
                                                                                                                                                                $1,500-        $2,200-        $3,000-
                                                               ROR           ROR            ROR            ROR         ROR         ROR            ROR           $4,500         $6,700        $12,000
                                                     1
                                                                   1             5             9            13           17            21            25           29            33           37
                                                                                                                                                               $3,000-       $3,700-      $3,700-
                                                                 ROR           ROR          ROR           ROR           ROR        ROSC 1        ROSC 1        $6,700        $8,200       $12,000
                                                         2
                                                                   2             6            10            14           18            22            26           30            34           38
                                                                                                                                                               $3,700-       $4,500-      $6,700-
                                                                 ROR         ROSC 1        ROSC 1       ROSC 1        ROSC 2       ROSC 2        ROSC 2        $7,500        $9,700       $22,500
                                                         3
                                                                   3             7            11            15           19            23            27           31            35           39
                                                                                                                                                 $3,700-       $4,500-      $4,500-       $9,000-
                                                               ROSC 1        ROSC 1        ROSC 1       ROSC 2        ROSC 2       ROSC 2        $6,700        $7,500       $12,000       $75,000




55
                                                         4




           HIGH <----------Risk Level--------> LOW
                                                                   4             8            12            16           20            24            28           32            36           40


                                   Updated: September 12, 2012
     Notes: This figure illustrates the bail guidelines in Philadelphia. The guidelines classify defendants into 40 possible categories and suggest four basic
     types of release options. Charge seriousness ranges from one to 10, with 10 the most serious. Risk level ranges from one to four, with four the highest
     risk, and is based on the risk of a defendant failing to appear in court and committing new offenses. ROR is release on recognizance. ROSC is release
     on special conditions.
                                                                              Appendix Figure 3
                                                             Distribution of Alternative Judge Leniency Measures

                                                            ROR                                                                                           Non-Monetary Bail
                        .15




                                                                                                                                     .15
   Fraction of Sample




                                                                                                                Fraction of Sample
                        .1




                                                                                                                                     .1
                        .05




                                                                                                                                     .05
                        0




                                                                                                                                     0
                              -.15         -.1       -.05          0         .05          .1        .15                                    -.25   -.2   -.15     -.1      -.05   0   .05      .1   .15   .2    .25
                                                          ROR Judge Leniency                                                                                   Non-Monetary Bail Judge Leniency


                                           Monetary Bail Indicator                                                                                      Monetary Bail Amount
                        .15




                                                                                                                                     .2
                                                                                                                Fraction of Sample
   Fraction of Sample




                                                                                                                                     .15
                        .1




                                                                                                                                     .1
                        .05




                                                                                                                                     .05
                        0




                                                                                                                                     0




                              -.25   -.2     -.15   -.1     -.05   0   .05         .1   .15    .2    .25                               -15000                     -5000                    5000               15000
                                                    Monetary Bail Judge Leniency                                                                           Monetary Bail Amount Judge Leniency


Notes: These figures report the distribution of various judge leniency measures that are estimated using data from
cases assigned to a bail judge in other dates following the procedure described in Section III.




                                                                                                           56
                                                                             Appendix Figure 4
                                                            Judge Leniency by Defendant and Case Characteristics




                                                                                                                                                      .05
                              .3
                                                                                                                                                               β = 0.181
                              .2      β = 0.189                                                                                                                   (0.092)
                                         (0.121)




                                                                                                                                                      .025
                              .1
           Non-Felony




                                                                                                                                       Non-DUI
                              0




                                                                                                                                                      0
                              -.1




                                                                                                                                                      -.025
                              -.2
                              -.3




                                                                                                                                                      -.05
                                     -.3              -.2            -.1              0               .1          .2        .3                                            -.05                 -.025               0            .025            .05
                                                                                    Felony                                                                                                                DUI
                              .25




                                                                                                                                                      .25
                                           β = 0.152                                                                                                                β = 0.212
                                              (0.059)                                                                                                                  (0.029)
                              .15




                                                                                                                                                      .15
                                                                                                                                       Non-Property
                              .05




                                                                                                                                                      .05
           Non-Drug
                              -.05




                                                                                                                                                      -.05
                              -.15




                                                                                                                                                      -.15
                              -.25




                                                                                                                                                      -.25




                                     -.4        -.3            -.2         -.1        0          .1        .2          .3   .4                                -.4        -.3          -.2       -.1            0       .1      .2          .3   .4
                                                                                     Drug                                                                                                               Property
                                                                                                                                                      .25
                              .3




                                                                                                                                                                     β = 0.388
                                           β = 0.032                                                                                                                    (0.047)
                              .2




                                                                                                                                                      .15




                                              (0.050)
                              .1
           Non-Violent




                                                                                                                                                      .05
                                                                                                                                       Black
                              0




                                                                                                                                                      -.05
                              -.1




                                                                                                                                                      -.15
                              -.2




                                                                                                                                                      -.25
                              -.3




                                     -.4        -.3            -.2         -.1        0          .1        .2          .3   .4                                -.25             -.15              -.05              .05              .15         .25
                                                                                    Violent                                                                                                              White
                                                                                                                                                      .25
                              .25




                                            β = 0.259                                                                                                                     b = 0.401
                                               (0.042)                                                                                                                       (0.077)
                                                                                                                                                      .15
                              .15
           No Prior Offense




                                                                                                                                       Not Employed
                                                                                                                                                      .05
                              .05




                                                                                                                                                      -.05
                              -.05




                                                                                                                                                      -.15
                              -.15




                                                                                                                                                      -.25
                              -.25




                                     -.25               -.15                -.05              .05               .15         .25                                        -.25             -.15            -.05             .05         .15        .25
                                                                                 Prior Offense                                                                                                         Employed


Notes: These figures show the correlation between our residualized measure of judge leniency for different groups
of defendants. DUI cases are only available in Philadelphia. We take the average leniency for each group over all
available years of data. The solid line shows the best linear fit estimated using OLS relating each judge leniency
measure.




                                                                                                                                  57
