NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE OPPORTUNITY COSTS OF ENTREPRENEURS IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE
Timothy J. Kehoe
Pau S. Pujolas
Kim J. Ruhl
Working Paper 22514
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22514

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Timothy J. Kehoe, Pau S. Pujolas, and Kim J. Ruhl. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Opportunity Costs of Entrepreneurs in International Trade
Timothy J. Kehoe, Pau S. Pujolas, and Kim J. Ruhl
NBER Working Paper No. 22514
August 2016
JEL No. D31,D43,F12
ABSTRACT
We show that a trade model with an exogenous set of heterogeneous firms with fixed operating
costs has the same aggregate outcomes as a span-of-control model. Fixed costs in the
heterogeneous-firm model are entrepreneurs’ forgone wage in the span-of-control model.

Timothy J. Kehoe
University of Minnesota
Department of Economics
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455-0462
and Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
and also NBER
tkehoe@umn.edu
Pau S. Pujolas
Department of Economics
McMaster University
1280 Main Street West
Hamilton, Ontario L8S 4M4
Canada
pau@pujolasfons.com

Kim J. Ruhl
Department of Economics
Pennsylvania State University
Kern Building
University Park, PA 16802
kjr42@psu.edu

1. Introduction
Melitz (2003) develops a seminal model in which heterogeneous firms face fixed costs of entering
monopolistically competitive markets. A popular variation is that of Chaney (2008), who makes
three simplifying assumptions: the underlying distribution of firm efficiencies is Pareto; a global
equity fund pays agents equal shares of the profits of firms in all countries; and the measure of
potential firms is exogenous. The first two assumptions simply the model, making it analytically
tractable. Here, we provide a reinterpretation of the third assumption.
We extend the closed economy span-of-control model of Lucas (1978) to n countries, each
requiring a fixed cost to service a foreign market and each populated by agents with Dixit-Stiglitz
(1977) love-for-variety preferences. Each agent is endowed with an entrepreneurial talent and one
unit of labor. If the agent chooses to operate a firm, he forgoes the wage he could have earned
supplying labor. This is equivalent to operating a firm in the heterogeneous-firm model when the
fixed cost is one unit of labor. Consequently, the extended span-of-control model and the model
developed by Chaney (2008) have identical aggregate equilibrium variables. In the span-of-control
model, however, firms are owned by individual agents, so individual income and consumption
vary.
In our span-of-control model, trade liberalization generates a change in the distribution of
income. The change in firm profits induced by liberalization is passed through to the owner’s
income. Melitz (2003) focuses on the case where trade liberalization causes more productive firms
to expand and their profits to increase and other, less productive, firms to exit the market. In this
case, trade liberalization causes income distribution to become more unequal.
There is limited research that uses span-of-control models to analyze international trade.
Ma (2015) develops a span-of-control model where, as here, trade is generated by Dixit-Stiglitz
preferences. Antras, Garicano, and Rossi-Hansberg (2006) develop a version of the Garicano
(2000) model — which can be interpreted as a generalization of the Lucas model — in an
international framework to study offshoring.
2.

A trade model with fixed costs and a fixed measure of potential firms

Chaney (2008) assumes that all agents own shares in a global equity fund. We assume, instead,
that agents earn only the profits of the firms in their own country. To show that our version of the
Chaney model has an equilibrium in which the aggregate variables are the same as in the span-of1

control model, we initially impose three assumptions: First, the fixed cost of setting up a firm to
produce for domestic consumption is one unit of labor. Second, parameter values are such that
any firm that finds it profitable to export also finds it profitable to produce for domestic
consumption. Third, the measure of potential firms is equal to the measure of workers. We later
generalize these assumptions.
2.1. Agents
Country i , i  1,..., n , is populated by a continuum of agents of measure i , each endowed with
one unit of labor. There are homogeneous-good producers and differentiated-good producers. Each
agent owns an equal share in all firms in his country so that his income is wi   i / i where wi is
the wage. Since the utility function is homothetic, we model a representative agent who supplies
i units of labor, receives profits,  i , and solves

max (1   ) log(c0i )  ( /  ) log  ci ( )  d 

c0 i , ci ( )

Mi

(1)

s.t. p0i c0i   pi ( )ci ( )  d   wi i   i ,
Mi

where c0i is the consumption of the homogeneous good, and p0i is its price; M i is the set of
differentiated goods consumed in country i ; ci ( ) is the consumption of variety  ; pi ( ) is its
price; and 0    1 , 0    1
The consumer’s demand for good  is
c( , pi ( ), Pi , wi i   i ) 

 ( wi i   i )
pi ( )

1
1 

Pi


1 

,

(2)

where

 mi

1 
Pi    pi ( ) d  
0



2



1 



.

(3)

2.2. Homogeneous-good firms
The homogeneous good is produced using the production function y0i  ai  0i and sold in
competitive markets. Good 0 is freely traded, so
p0  p0i 

wi
ai

(4)

if country i produces good 0. We choose good 0 as the numeraire and set p0  1 .
2.3. Differentiated-good firms
Country i is endowed with a measure of potential differentiated-good firms, i . We assume that

i  i . Each potential firm can produce a unique good,  , with marginal efficiency xi ( )  0
drawn from the cumulative probability distribution Gi ( x) . Chaney (2008) assumes that this
distribution is Pareto. If Gi ( x) is Pareto with the same curvature parameter all countries, then the
equilibrium can be calculated analytically.
The firm in country i that produces good  for sale in country j has the production
function

yij ( ) 

xi ( )

 ij

max[ ij   ij , 0] .

(5)

Here  ij , is the fixed cost of exporting from country i to country j , and  ij xi ( ) is the variable
cost. We assume that  ii  1 . The firm must ship  ij  1 units of the good for one unit to arrive;
we set  ii  1 .
The firm acts as a monopolistic competitor, taking demand c( , pij ( ), Pj , w j  j   j ) as
given and choosing its price pij ( ) to solve


 ij ( )  max  p 
p




wi ij 
 c( , p, Pj , w j  j   j )  wi ij , 0 
xi ( ) 


by setting

3

(6)

pij ( ) 

wi ij

 xi ( )

.

(7)

The pricing rule (7) allows us to index a firm by its efficiency x  xi ( ) .
2.4. Market clearing and equilibrium
The set of firms that export to country j ,  ij , is characterized by a cutoff value, xˆij such that

 ij ( xˆij )  0 .

(8)

Firms with productivity greater than xˆij sell to country j , and firms with productivity less than
xˆij do not. We assume that parameters are such that xˆij  xˆii for all country pairs i, j . If countries

are symmetric, then the assumption that  ij   ii for j  i , ensures that this condition holds. Since
we allow for considerable asymmetries across countries, we assume the condition directly. In
equilibrium xˆii is strictly larger than the lower bound on xi , that is, the measure of firms that
operate, i (1  Gi ( xˆii )) is strictly less than i . Otherwise, all of i would be used to pay fixed
costs since i  i and  ii  1 .
In each country i the condition that the market for labor clear is


 0i  i  j 1  ( ij ( x)   ij )dGi ( x)  i .

(9)

M i  nj 1  ji

(10)

n

xˆij

Notice that

is the set of goods consumed in country i , while  ii is the set of goods produced in i .
3. A span-of-control model with international trade
We generalize Lucas’s (1978) span-of-control model to incorporate international trade and
imperfect competition. Agent  in country i has a talent for operating a firm, xi ( ) . More
talented agents choose to operate their own firms while less talented agents supply labor to other
firms.
4

3.1. Agents
The world economy again consists of n countries, each populated by a continuum of agents of
measure i , each endowed with one unit of labor. Agent  has income I ( ) and solves a utility
maximization problem like (1), except that agents’ incomes are heterogeneous. Since the utility
function is homothetic, the demand function of agent  for good  is
c( , pi ( ), Pi , I i ( ))  c( , pi ( ), Pi ,1) I i ( ) ,

(11)

and the aggregate consumption of any differentiated good depends on the aggregate income of
individuals, but not on the distribution of this income across agents,



i

0

i

c( , pi ( ), Pi , I i ( ))d   c( , pi ( ), Pi ,  I i ( )d ) .
0

(12)

3.2. Firms
Homogeneous-goods firms are the same as in the previous model, but differentiated-good
producers are different. Rather than the disembodied technologies of the heterogeneous-firm
model, we assume that each agent is endowed with a technology that only he can operate by
supplying his one unit of labor as part of the management of the firm. This is why we assume that

 ii  1 .
The firm operated by agent  produces differentiated good  with marginal efficiency
x ( ) , where the distribution of technologies across households is again described by Gi ( x) .1 If

an agent operates his technology, he forgoes the wage he would have earned by working for
another firm. Since each agent is endowed with one unit of labor, this opportunity cost is wi .
3.3. Market clearing and equilibrium
The market clearing condition for the labor market in country i remains the same as (9) in the
heterogeneous-firm model. Now

In Lucas’s (1978) perfect-competition model, an agent’s entrepreneurial talent multiplies a production function with
decreasing returns to scale in the other factors. In our monopolistic-competition model, the agent’s entrepreneurial
talent multiplies a production function with constant or increasing returns to scale. The concavity of profits with
respect to inputs follows from demand.

1

5





xii

xii

i  ˆ  ii dGi ( x )  i  ˆ dGi ( x)  i (1  Gi ( xˆii ))

(13)

is the measure of agents who operate their own firms, the number of entrepreneurs. Their
opportunity cost of not working in other firms is the total fixed cost of operating firms for domestic
production.
If an agent chooses to become an entrepreneur, he earns

 i ( x( ))   j 1 ij ( x( )) .
n

(14)

If he chooses to supply labor to another entrepreneur, he earns wi . An agent's income is

Ii ( )  max wi ,  i ( x( )) .

(15)

The cutoff agent is indifferent between operating his own firm and providing labor to another firm:

 i ( xˆii )  wi  0.

(16)

Agents with talent greater than xˆii choose to operate their firms, while individuals with talent less
than xˆii provide labor.
4. The heterogeneous-firm model as a span-of-control model
In the heterogeneous-firm model, there are agents and anonymous technologies, whereas, in the
span-of-control model, technologies are embodied in the agents. The firm’s problem in the
heterogeneous-firm model and the entrepreneur’s problem in the span-of-control model coincide,
and the same set of technologies are operated in both models. Since preferences are homothetic,
aggregate consumption expenditures and aggregate trade flows in the two models are identical.
While the aggregate variables are identical in the two models, the agent-level consumption
and income in the two models are not. In the heterogeneous-firm model agents own equal shares
in operating firms, but, in the span-of-control model, the entrepreneur earns the profits of his firm
only. If we wanted to equate the agent-level distribution of income and consumption across the
two models, we could randomly assign one technology to each agent in the trade model.
To generalize the assumptions that the fixed cost of setting up a firm is one unit of labor
and that the potential measure of firms is equal to the measure of workers, we could simply change
the units in which labor is measured. With natural units for firms and labor, however, say number
6

of firms and number of workers — or number per year in a dynamic model — however, we can
change the assumption i  i to the assumption that i  i . In this case, i  i would be the
measure of workers with no ability to set up a firm. We could also choose  ii  1 and impose

 ii  1 as an additional fixed cost to be covered by hiring additional workers for setting up a firm
in the span-of-control model.
We can generalize the assumption that parameters are such that xˆii  xˆij for all country
pairs i , j in one of two ways. First, we could require that, in addition to the fixed costs  ii of
producing for domestic consumption and  ij of exporting, there is a fixed cost of one unit of labor
to set up the firm to engage in any sort of activity. With this specification, we would not require
that  ii  1 . Second, and alternatively, we could require firms to pay the fixed costs of producing
for domestic production whenever they choose to export. In this case, losses in producing for
domestic production could be covered by profits in exporting, and the cutoff productivity for
domestic production, (8), would become

 ii ( xˆii )   j i max[ ij ( xˆii ), 0]  0

(17)

where  ii ( xˆii ) can be negative. Now, the cutoff for exporting from country i to country j would
be the maximum of the zero-profit cutoff xˆij defined by condition (8) and the cutoff xˆii defined
by condition (17).
Our span-of-control model easily generalizes to a model in which agents have
heterogeneous labor abilities as well as heterogeneous entrepreneurial abilities. Such a model is
equivalent to a heterogeneous-firm model with heterogeneous fixed costs.

7

References
Antràs, P., L. Garicano, and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2006), “Offshoring in a Knowledge Economy,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(1), 31–77.
Chaney, T. (2008), “Distorted Gravity: The Intensive and Extensive Margins of International
Trade,” American Economic Review, 98(4), 1707–1721.
Dixit, A. K., and J. E. Stiglitz (1977), “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product
Diversity,” American Economic Review, 67(3), 297–308.
Garicano, L. (2000), “Hierarchies and the Organization of Knowledge in Production,” Journal of
Political Economy, 108(5), 874–904.
Lucas, R. E., Jr. (1978), “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms,” Bell Journal of Economics,
9(2), 508–523.
Ma, L. (2015), “Globalization and Top Income Shares,” Unpublished Manuscript, National
University of Singapore.
Melitz, M. J. (2003), “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
Productivity,” Econometrica, 71(6), 1695–1725.

8

