NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FAMILY DESCENT AS A SIGNAL OF MANAGERIAL QUALITY:
EVIDENCE FROM MUTUAL FUNDS
Oleg Chuprinin
Denis Sosyura
Working Paper 22517
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22517

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Oleg Chuprinin and Denis Sosyura. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Family Descent as a Signal of Managerial Quality: Evidence from Mutual Funds
Oleg Chuprinin and Denis Sosyura
NBER Working Paper No. 22517
August 2016
JEL No. D14,G23
ABSTRACT
We study the relation between mutual fund managers’ family backgrounds and their professional
performance. Using hand-collected data from individual Census records on the wealth and
income of managers’ parents, we find that managers from poor families deliver higher alphas
than managers from rich families. This result is robust to alternative measures of fund
performance, such as benchmark-adjusted return and value extracted from capital markets. We
argue that managers born poor face higher entry barriers into asset management, and only the
most skilled succeed. Consistent with this view, managers born rich are more likely to be
promoted, while those born poor are promoted only if they outperform. Overall, we establish the
first link between family descent of investment professionals and their ability to create value.

Oleg Chuprinin
UNSW Australia Business School
o.chuprinin@unsw.edu.au
Denis Sosyura
Stephen M. Ross School of Business
University of Michigan
701 Tappan St. Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
dsosyura@umich.edu

Introduction
In the majority of financial decisions, shareholders delegate decision rights to professional managers.
Thus, one of the most important tasks of shareholders is to select the most capable, high-type managers as
their agents. Inferring managerial type ex-ante is challenging. For example, the majority of CEOs at
S&P1500 firms have no prior CEO experience. Yet, given the frictions and costs of replacing managers,
this task is of first-order importance for economic outcomes in all public firms.
This paper provides evidence that public information about a manager’s family descent and
access to resources during his formative years serves as a powerful signal of managerial ability. We
exploit the fact that individuals are endowed with different opportunities at birth and, as a result, face
dramatically different entry barriers into managerial roles. For example, some can ascend to leadership
roles with the help of their inherited status, wealth, or access to professional networks, as in the extreme
case of the heirs of family-owned firms. Others are born in poverty and face limited access to education
and professional advancement during their formative years, a crucial period for subsequent career
outcomes (e.g., Bowles and Herbert (2002); Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2005)). Because individuals
from less privileged backgrounds have much higher barriers to entry into prestigious positions, only the
most skilled types can exceed these thresholds and build a career in a management profession.
Delegated asset management provides a convenient setting to test this selection mechanism. First,
because this is a service industry requiring professional qualifications, barriers to entry are particularly
steep. Second, in contrast to industrial firms where daily decisions are made by dozens of managers and
implemented by thousands of employees, managers of solo-managed mutual funds have the principal
authority over the fund’s portfolio. Third, fund managers perform standardized professional tasks within a
well-defined investment universe, and their outcomes are easily comparable in the time-series and crosssection. In contrast, many corporate decisions are not standardized, and the investment opportunity set of
corporate managers is unobservable. Finally, mutual funds account for over a half of financial wealth of
the average household, and the performance of money managers has a major impact on the majority of
U.S. investors, indicating a question of broad public interest.

1

In this paper, we study the relation between mutual fund managers’ family descent and their
performance. To identify managers’ family characteristics, we hand-collect data on the households where
managers grew up by examining photo images of individual Census records at the National Archives.1
These records provide detailed information on the income, home value, education, and occupation of a
manager’s parents during his childhood, as well as other demographic characteristics. As expected, most
fund managers come from wealthier and more educated families than those in the general population or
even the local community; e.g., the average (median) annual income of managers' fathers at the time of
Census is at the 89th (84th) percentile of the income distribution in the general U.S. male population.2 On
average, managers' fathers report 26% more years of formal education than the median male in their
census tract and own homes valued at 91% higher than the median house in their census tract. Consistent
with the notion that family economic status is an important factor for an individual’s subsequent career
progression, we observe that managers from wealthier backgrounds are more likely to attend private
universities with lower admission rates and higher tuition; e.g., the median undergraduate tuition was five
times as high in universities attended by managers from the top quintile of family wealth than those from
the bottom quintile, while the admission rate was 38 percentage points lower (78% vs 40%).
Our main finding is that mutual fund managers from wealthier backgrounds deliver significantly
weaker performance than managers descending from less wealthy families. For example, managers from
families in the top quintile of wealth underperform managers in the bottom quintile by 2.16% per year
(significant at 1%) on the basis of the four-factor alpha. Similar results hold for alternative measures of
performance, such as benchmark-adjusted fund returns and dollar value extracted from capital markets
(Berk and Van Binsbergen (2015)). E.g., an interquartile-range increase in the manager's family wealth
translates to a monthly loss equivalent to $3.34 million in 2012.

1
2

See Appendix 2 for the form layout and an example of a photo-image record.
See Figure 1 for the graphical comparison of our sample and the general population distribution.

2

Our analysis accounts for a comprehensive set of controls which proxy for the quality and type of
the manager's own education and demographics, his parents' education and professional expertise, and
fund and management firm characteristics. While it is not feasible to control for all potentially relevant
effects, it should be noted that plausible omitted variables, such as professional connections or privileged
access to information, would favor a positive relationship between family wealth and performance and
thus are unlikely to explain our findings. Likewise, the results are unlikely to be driven by differences in
risk attitudes among manager types, since our analysis features risk-adjusted performance measures. In
addition, we control for fund return volatility and skewness in all the regressions.
If less stringent selection criteria apply to the more privileged candidates, one should expect to
see a greater dispersion in quality among managers from wealthy backgrounds. In contrast, the candidates
who passed tighter selection should be more uniform in type. Consistent with this conjecture, we find that
the performance dispersion is higher in the sub-sample of managers from wealthier families. The F-ratio
of the alpha variance of the top wealth group to that of the low wealth group is robustly greater than 1,
with most of the results significant at the 1% level. E.g., the alpha variance is 12.7% (28.4%) higher in the
top tercile (quartile) than in the bottom tercile (quartile) of the wealth distribution.
Overall, our main evidence is consistent with the idea that candidates endowed with fewer
opportunities face higher selection thresholds, and only the most skilled make it into fund management.3
To shed more light on this issue, we investigate fund managers’ career progressions and study how a
manager’s likelihood of promotion varies with his family background and past performance. We define a
promotion as an event when a manager obtains an additional fund or is reassigned to a fund with greater
assets under management. For managers with negative to neutral past performance, as measured by their
past five-year alpha, promotion chances are increasing in family wealth. However, managers from poorer
families can close this gap by delivering better performance, as indicated by the negative significant
coefficient on the interaction between past performance and wealth. In other words, only the best-

3

Bowles, Gintis, and Osborne (2005) provide a comprehensive review of the research in sociology on the role of
parental economic status on individuals' careers and the associated survival mechanisms.

3

performing poor managers can compete with the wealthy managers for promotion, thus ensuring the
selection of the more talented managers among the less privileged candidates.
Next, we examine the relationship between managers' family wealth and a variety of portfolio
activity measures, such as turnover, portfolio concentration, holding horizon, and herding. The results are
directionally similar across these measures and suggest that less wealthy managers tend to be more active:
they have higher turnover and concentration but shorter holding horizon and weaker herding tendencies.
However, only the turnover coefficient is statistically significant: an interquartile-range reduction in the
family wealth increases the fund's annual turnover by 5.4% of the portfolio TNA, or about 21% of the
median annual turnover in the sample. Combined with the earlier findings, this result lends support to the
argument that more frequent trading can foster value creation (Pastor, Stambaugh, and Taylor (2015)).
In our final analysis, we test whether mutual fund investors infer managerial ability from
managers’ familial backgrounds and find little evidence that they do. Mutual fund capital flows are not
significantly related to fund managers’ family backgrounds, and this effect is similar in specifications
with and without the fund's past performance. It appears that fund investors are unlikely to incorporate
information on the fund manager's background into their investment decisions.
The central contribution of this article is to provide the first evidence on how the family descent
of investment professionals signals their ability to create value. Our findings add novel insights to
academic research on (i) managerial characteristics that predict professional performance and (ii) the
effect of formative years on individuals’ career progression and economic outcomes.
We contribute to a small number of papers in asset management that identify personal
characteristics of fund managers that predict their professional performance. So far, this literature has
focused mostly on the role of managers’ education. Chevalier and Ellison (1999) find that mutual fund
managers who attended colleges with higher average SAT scores deliver superior risk-adjusted returns,
and Li, Zhang, and Zhao (2011) find similar evidence in the context of hedge funds. Cohen, Frazzini and
Malloy (2008) show that fund managers’ educational networks yield valuable information that improves
managerial performance in connected stocks. Chaudhuri, Ivkovich, Pollet, and Trzcinka (2015) provide

4

evidence that investment funds managed by PhD graduates deliver superior risk-adjusted performance
and charge lower fees. In contrast to previous work, we document how endowed low economic status
serves as an important screening mechanism of managerial ability. Our paper is among the first in the
mutual fund literature to emphasize signaling of managerial quality based on selection.
We also extend the literature on the effect of individuals’ family environment on subsequent
economic outcomes. So far, this research has focused mostly on the economic behavior of individual
households. For example, using data from a field experiment, Chetty et al. (2011) find that a child’s
access to education predicts college attendance, earnings, and retirement savings. In two studies of
Swedish twins, the socioeconomic status of an individual’s parents helps explain future savings behavior
(Cronqvist and Siegel (2015)) and preference for value vs. growth stocks (Cronqvist, Siegel, and Yu
(2015)). In contrast to studying households’ personal decisions, we provide evidence on sophisticated
financial intermediaries whose professional choices have large welfare implications for millions of
investors. Also, to identify exposure to a socioeconomic environment, prior papers have used general
time-series patterns, such as growing up during the Great Depression (Malmendier and Nagel (2011)) or
entering the labor market in a recession (Schoar and Zuo (2013)). Our approach uses a sharper
identification by focusing on the unique economic status of each household and uncovers important crosssectional patterns.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the data and presents
summary statistics. Section III establishes the relationship between managers' family wealth and
performance measures. Section IV investigates ancillary implications of selection. Section V focuses on
portfolio activity and capital flows. A brief conclusion follows.

5

II. Data and main variables
II.A Sample construction
We begin our sample construction with the universe of U.S.-domiciled mutual funds covered by
Morningstar in 1975-2012.4 We include both defunct and active investment products (fund share classes),
ensuring that any fund ever appearing in the Morningstar database during our time period is present in the
initial sample.
To ensure an equitable comparison basis for investment managers, we restrict our sample to
domestic actively managed funds specializing in U.S. equity, thus excluding international funds, index
funds, and funds specializing in bonds, commodities, and alternative asset classes.5 To eliminate possible
errors in the data, we exclude funds with a missing name and funds whose total net assets (TNA) never
exceed $10 million during our sample period. Finally, to establish a clean correspondence between a fund
manager’s decisions and performance outcomes, we focus on solo-managed mutual funds. Accordingly,
we exclude funds that are always managed by a team of managers during our sample period.
For each fund that passes the initial filters, we obtain its historical management data from
Morningstar, which details the name of the manager and his starting and ending dates (months) in a fund.
To provide a sufficient period for evaluating managerial performance, we limit our sample to managers
with at least 24 monthly return observations. For managers who pass these initial criteria, we initiate the
data collection process described below.
First, we obtain managers’ education and employment history from their biographies in
Morningstar and FactSet and verify these data against the employment records in the Nelson Directory of
Investment Managers. We complement our data on managers’ education with records from university
alumni publications and archived university yearbooks available from ancestry.com. Where information
about a manager’s degree is missing, we contact the registrars of the university attended or the National

4

Even though some funds have return series dating back to 1960, the data on net assets is generally not available before 1975.
This filter excludes index funds, funds whose U.S. Broad Asset Class is not "U.S. Stock", funds for which Morningstar equity
style classification is not available, and funds that have sector restrictions or specialty focus (Global Category includes the word
"Sector" or Prospectus Objective includes the word "Specialty").
5

6

Student Clearinghouse, a degree-verification service provider. We supplement this information with data
on the quality of the educational institution (average SAT score of the entering class), its competitiveness
(undergraduate acceptance rate), affordability (annual tuition), and elite status (Ivy League indicator).
This information is obtained from the College Handbook, published by the College Entrance Examination
Board, and most variables are based on the 1979 data (one of the oldest editions), except for the
standardized scores, which are recorded as of 2004 due to better data availability.6
Second, we match fund managers to the Lexis Nexis Public Records database (LNPR). This
database aggregates information on nearly 500 million U.S. individuals (both alive and deceased) from
sources such as birth and death records, property tax assessment records, voting records, and utility
connection records. Prior research in finance has relied on this database to obtain personal data on fund
managers (Pool, Stoffman, and Yonker (2012); Pool, Stoffman, Yonker, and Zhang (2015)), corporate
executives (Cronqvist, Makhija, and Yonker (2012); Yermack (2014)), and financial journalists (Ahern
and Sosyura (2015)). All personal records in the database are linked to the individual’s social security
number (observable with the exception of the last four digits and linked to a unique ID). Using a
manager’s full name, age, and employment history, we establish reliable matches to LNPR for 92% of
managers in our sample. Appendix 1.A details our matching process and verification procedure. The 8%
of unmatched managers are typically those who live outside the U.S. (funds delegated to a foreign
subadvisor) and those who have the most common combinations of first and last names (e.g., Robert
Jones or John Miller) and no additional information to establish an unambiguous match. These managers
are excluded from the sample.
Next, we proceed to the main stage in our data collection – extracting personal census records for
the households where fund managers grew up. Our sample construction is guided by regulatory
constraints imposed on working with individual census records. The U.S. public law prohibits the release
of individual decennial census records with personally identifiable information for 72 years after these

6

Our results are virtually identical if we use the 2004 handbook throughout – there is a high correlation between the
1979 and the 2004 variables.

7

records are collected (92 Stat. 915; Public Law 95-416; October 5, 1978). Because of the 72-year
moratorium, the latest decennial census with personally identifiable information available at the time of
writing is the 1940 federal census (and any earlier decennial censuses), which constitutes our main source
of data. Appendix 2 shows the census form presented to households and provides an example of a
completed form.
To ensure that the census record provides an accurate reflection of a manager’s endowed social
status during childhood, we restrict our sample to managers born in or before 1945. In other words, we
allow for a maximum delay of five years between the measurement of family characteristics and the
manager’s birth. After investigating the managers’ backgrounds, we find that some of the managers were
raised outside the U.S., and, as a result, their families were not covered in the publicly available censuses.
After eliminating these cases, we end up with 357 managers with potential census records.
We follow a three-step algorithm to identify a manager’s household in the census by sequentially
checking three types of records – birth, marriage, and death – for the manager and his relatives. To ensure
a reliable match to the census, we require establishing a manager’s parents and, in some cases, siblings.
This criterion nearly eliminates the possibility of a spurious match, because the census record identified in
this process contains the unique combination of the manager’s parents and siblings who are further
verified based on their year of birth. Appendix 1.B describes how we identify the manager’s parents and
siblings and provides examples of birth, marriage, and obituary records used in the data collection. The
combination of these records allows us to establish the full names of both parents for 305 fund managers
or 85% of the 357 managers that satisfy our sample criteria.
In our final step, we use the combination of the manager’s parents and siblings to identify the
family’s record in the 1940 census (for a small subset of older managers, we also obtain the 1930 census
records). We obtain the image file of the family’s census record (shown in Appendix 2) from the digital
archive maintained by the U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. To search and access
these records, we use the interface provided by ancestry.com.

8

We are able to identify census records for 267 (88%) of the 305 managers that satisfy prior
sample filters. The unmatched observations mainly result from transcription errors in the indexing of
hand-written family names in the digital archive, which prevent us from being able to locate the record in
the archive. While we recover some of the mis-indexed records by manually going through census records
in the manager’s enumeration district, a full recovery of these observations is prohibitively costly. For a
small number of observations, we are unable to locate the 1940 census record because the managers’
parents were on an overseas trip (identified via vessel departure records) or on military duty abroad
(identified via military enlistment records). Appendix 1.B summarizes the sequence of steps in the data
collection process and provides examples of relevant records.
Because of the data limitations in this study, our sample is naturally restricted to older managers
born before or shortly after the 1940 Census. These managers account for 482 unique funds (multiple
shareclasses of the same fund are aggregated to the fund level) spanning a long time period from 1975 to
2012. This sample size is comparable to that in other studies that focus on older fund managers, such as
Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1995) (274 funds) and Chevalier and Ellison (1997) (398 funds).
After locating the manager's parents' household on ancestry.com, we manually record the
information from the digital image of the filled census form. The following data fields are of particular
interest: the father's and the mother's birth years, their annual incomes (as of 1939), their
occupation/profession, whether the family owned or rented an accommodation in 1940, the monthly rent
(if the accommodation was rented) or the approximate house value (if it was owned), 7 the parents'
employment type (a private or a government worker, an employer, a self-employed individual, or an
unpaid worker), the parents' education (completed years of elementary school, high school, and college),
and some auxiliary information, such as the number of children in the household and the number of
resident servants.
In the next section, we discuss the characteristics of fund managers and compare them with those
of other U.S. households. To make these comparisons possible, we obtain tract-level census data for the
7

Home values are recorded in increments of $500.

9

entire U.S. population and compare the characteristics of the fund manager’s household with the
characteristics of other households located in the same census tract, same county, or nationwide.8 We
obtain tract-level data for the 1940 census from the Elizabeth Mullen Bogue File, which has been used in
prior work in social economics (e.g., Sugrue (1995), Elliott and Frickel (2013)).9 Examples of tract-level
variables include total population in the tract, median home value, median monthly rent (both gross and
contract), the number of residents with school and college education, median education years, and the
number of residents without paid employment.
II.B Summary statistics
Table 1 reports summary statistics on mutual funds and fund managers in our sample. The average
(median) manager in our sample is born in 1938 (1940) – three years (same year) before we measure the
household characteristics. Even for managers born before (10th percentile is 1930) and after (90th
percentile is 1944) 1940, the Census records are close enough in time to accurately reflect the manager's
family's social situation during his childhood years. The average (median) managerial career, as measured
by the time difference between the manager's first and last appearance in the sample, is 13.4 (11.6) years,
although some managers have long careers approaching 30 years (90th percentile is 26.3 years). The peak
dollar value of assets controlled by managers in our sample has an average value of $2.96 billion and a
median value of only $647 million, highlighting the fact that a number of managers are in charge of
particularly big funds. Both figures are economically large and imply significant value effects for the
funds' investors. Most managers have strong educational backgrounds and graduate from universities with
an average (median) SAT rank of 84.4 (88.0). However, the average (median) admission rate is only
54.8% (55.9%), while the variable itself has a fairly even and wide distribution (from 10th percentile of
22.6% to 90th percentile of 86.0%), suggesting some variation in the education exclusivity.

8

The matching of addresses from individual census records to the 1940 census tracts is conducted via the Unified
Census ED Finder engine available at www.stevemorse.org/census/unified.html.
9
This data can be found, among other sources, at www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/DSDR/studies/2930 and is
available for researchers from ICPSR member institutions. The digital copy of the dataset was created by Dr. Donald
Bogue and his wife, Elizabeth Mullen Bogue, who manually entered information from printed publications released
by the Bureau of the Census.

10

The estimated average (median) value of the manager's parents' home in 1940 is $10,097 ($7,350)
but its variation is substantial (from 10th percentile of $2,500 to 90th percentile of $20,000). Monthly rent
shows a similar pattern: an average (median) rent is $43.5 ($40.0) but the 10th and 90th percentiles are
wide apart ($14.0 and $70.0, respectively). An inspection of the parents' incomes reveals that over 75% of
mothers are either out of the labor force or report an income of $0 (as evidenced by the occupation
records, many of the wives are either housewives or attend school, while most husbands hold at least a
part-time job), whereas fathers report an average (median) annual income of $2,246 ($1,900). In Figure 1
we show how the distribution of the managers' fathers' incomes compares with the distribution of incomes
in the general male population in the U.S. in 1940 (data from Census Labor Force summary files).
Finally, for both parents, the mean and the median years of education at the time of the census is 12, with
most of the respondents having completed at least the elementary school.10
Comparing household-level home values and rent to their tract-level counterparts does not reveal
a striking difference for the mean or the median. Household homes are generally more expensive than
those of the tract (median $7,350 vs. median $5,071) but the rent is similar. This pattern suggests that
managers whose parents already owned a house in their youth come from wealthier backgrounds while
those whose parents rented an accommodation are more representative of the tract's average. Naturally,
measures of variation, such as the standard deviation or the percentile range, are significantly lower at the
tract level than the household level due to diversification.
Statistics from the fund sample confirm the disparity between the mean and the median size of
managed funds ($654.9 million vs. $134.4 million). A similar pattern is observed at the fund family level
and is also confirmed by the statistics on the number of equity holdings in a fund (mean of 87.4 vs.
median of 62.0). An average (median) monthly fund return is positive at 1.00% (1.26%); however one
must consider that the stock market grew at an unprecedented rate during our sample period between
1975 and 2012. An examination of fund alphas – fund returns in excess of the returns predicted by the
10

Individual Census records report years in the elementary school, high school, and college separately, while the
tract-level Census data report the total years of education, assuming 8 (4) years for the elementary school (high
school). We follow the latter convention in constructing our measure of the duration of education.

11

four-factor model (Section III describes the computation methodology in greater detail) – reveals that an
average and median monthly alphas in our sample are negative at -0.04% (-0.48% annualized).
Panel B of Table 1 reports some sample composition statistics. 68.9% of the managers earned
some graduate degree; in particular 57.0% earned an MBA degree, while 2.9% completed a PhD. 90.4%
of the managers have either an undergraduate or a graduate degree in a field which we classify as
economics-related (see Appendix 3.A for the classification methodology) and 8.2% hold a degree in
sciences, such as physics, engineering, or mathematics. The vast majority of the managers' parents' were
employed in the private sector in 1940 and 20.8% had a finance-related job, such as an accountant or an
insurance advisor (see Appendix 3.B for the classification methodology). As expected, most of the funds
in our sample (close to 65%) belong to the Large Cap styles with the Large Growth being the dominant
category (28.4%).
In Table 2 we examine relationships among our main variables in correlation tables and by
quintiles of the managers' family income. In Panel A we focus on the parents and include household
wealth and education characteristics as well as tract wealth characteristics. Using the data from the
Census personal records, we define the following major variables: FatherIncome is the reported annual
income of the manager's father in thousands of dollars; FatherYearsEdu is the aggregate years of
education of the father by the time of the census; ParYearsEdu is the average of the father's and the
mother's education years; FinanceRelated is a dummy variable equal to 1 if at least one of the parents
held a job that we classify as finance-related, and 0 otherwise; Managerial is a dummy variable equal to 1
if at least one of the parents held a job that we classify as being in a managerial position, and 0 otherwise
(Appendix 3.B explains the classification); Rent is the monthly rent in dollars; and HomeValue is the
estimated value of the parents' home, if owned, in thousands of dollars.
The rent is strongly positively related to the father's income (correlation of 0.686). However, the
correlation between the income and the home value is weaker (0.472). We cannot correlate home value
with rent directly since these variables are available for complementary sub-samples, namely, for owned
and rented properties. The parents' education is positively related to both income and rent, with the

12

correlation coefficients of 0.372-0.373. The income, rent, and home value are all higher if at least one of
the parents has a finance-related or a managerial job, e.g., the correlation between dummy
FinanceRelated and FatherIncome is 0.352. Larger families, as proxied by the number of siblings, tend to
earn slightly smaller incomes. Tract-level median rent and home value are weakly related to the measures
of household wealth; we should note, however, that the tract-level statistics are available for only about
28% of the municipal districts in our sample (these are main agglomerations such as New York, Boston,
or Saint Louis) and are given here for comparison only – none of our regression analysis uses tract-level
variables.
In Panel B, we examine the relationship between the parents' wealth/education and the attributes
of the manager's education. For most of the variables featuring in this panel, the variable name directly
defines the measure, e.g., variables HasGraduate, HasMBA, and HasPhD are dummies taking the value
of 1 if the manager holds any graduate degree, an MBA degree, or a PhD, respectively, and 0 otherwise,
while IvyLeague is a dummy which takes the value of 1 if the manager's undergraduate institution belongs
to the Ivy League, and 0 otherwise. In addition, we define several classification variables to characterize
the type of the manager's scholarly specialization, creating dummies for economics-related fields, science
fields, and a psychology fields (see Appendix 3.A for details).
The results in Panel B reveal a robust positive relationship between the parents' wealth and the
quality or exclusivity of the manager's education. E.g., the father's income has a correlation of 0.466 with
the university tuition, 0.364 with the university's private status, 0.472 with the median university ACT
score, and -0.368 with the admission rate (correlations among the university variables have the expected
signs and do not warrant special attention). In addition, graduate education in general was more often
pursued by managers from poorer backgrounds, although this effect is not strong. Finally, the manager's
own education quality is consistently positively related to his parents' education, e.g., there is a 0.213
correlation of the parents' education years with the Ivy League dummy and a 0.343 correlation of the
parents' education with the manager's university SAT rank. Also, the manager was somewhat more likely
to pursue an economics-related education if at least one of his parents was occupied in a finance

13

profession. Perhaps surprisingly, the probability of attaining an MBA degree is slightly lower for
managers whose parents held a finance-related or a managerial position.
In Panel C of Table 2 we report mean and median values of several key variables for each quintile
of the managers' parents' household wealth. To this purpose we first construct the wealth rank variable
(henceforth, WealthRank) combining information on the income, home value, and rent. We define
WealthRank as the percentile rank of the father's income, if its value is non-missing, and the percentile
rank of HomeValue or Rent, otherwise.
Several clarifications are in order. First, we do not incorporate the mother's income in the
measure because about 80% of mothers do not report any income even if the record indicates some
employment. Also, most of the mothers are homemakers and this is more likely to happen in wealthier
families. For these reasons, incorporating mother income would detract from the precision of the wealth
estimate. Second, for about 35% of observations the fathers do not report any salary or wage income
either. However, this generally happens when the father is a proprietor of a business or an entrepreneur. In
such cases, we use the data on home value and rent to proxy for the household wealth. To make all these
measures comparable we compute their ranked percentiles which range from 1 to 100. In our main test in
Table 3 we present the analysis for both the raw measures and the ranked wealth to demonstrate the
consistency of the results. Finally, it is worth reminding that HomeValue and Rent are defined on the nonoverlapping subsamples, meaning that it does not matter in which order they enter the ranked wealth
measure.
The top three rows in Panel C of Table 2 show how the father's income, home value, and rent
vary by the wealth quintile. Both the means and the medians of all three measures are monotonically
increasing in wealth. The next row shows how the annualized fund four-factor alpha varies by its
manager's family wealth. This analysis is preliminary and does not feature any controls or fixed effects,
which are required in the formal analysis, since family wealth produces multiple effects some of which
are performance-related. At this stage we can only point out that managers from the top wealth quintile
deliver the worst performance while those from the bottom quintile are the best by comparison. This

14

result holds for both the mean and the median alpha; e.g., the top- and bottom- quintile median alphas are
-0.92% and -0.17%, respectively. However, the wealth-performance relationship is not monotonic across
the quintiles and is likely masked by many confounding effects, which we address in our multivariate
analysis in Section III. Some of these effects are even apparent in Panel C of Table 2. E.g., we can see
that the parents' education depth is robustly increasing in wealth, while the manager's own education
quality is also positively related to his parents' wealth (the manager's university admission rate decreases
from the median of 78.3% to the median of 39.7% as we move from the lowest to the highest wealth
quintile, while the median tuition increases from $975 to $4,825). Both these variables can have
implications for fund performance and need to be controlled for. The main takeaway at this stage is that
despite the fact that natural drivers of performance are increasing in wealth, the performance measure
itself shows the reverse pattern.

III. Family wealth and managers' performance
III.A Main results
We now investigate how fund managers' ability to create value for fund investors relates to their familial
backgrounds. Our main analysis focuses on fund alpha which we calculate as follows. For each fund j and
month t we estimate the coefficients in the four-factor model, which includes the three Fama-French
factors (Fama and French (1993)) and the Carhart momentum factor (Carhart (1997)),11 using monthly
return observations from the previous 36 months (t-36 to t-1) and compute the difference between the
actual fund return in month t and the return predicted by the model. This procedure yields rolling alphas
at monthly frequency, Alphajt, which we express in percentage points in all of our tests. We require at
least 30 non-missing observations for this estimation, otherwise we set Alphajt to missing.12

11

The data is from the Kenneth French's website:
http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html. We thanks the authors for making this
data available.
12
Our results are robust to the choice of the estimation window. However, many funds in our sample have long
return series which stretch across different market cycles. The three-year period allows reasonable statistical

15

The fund alpha computed from net returns is a standard measure of fund performance and fits
several objectives of our study: it quantifies the percentage value created over the salient benchmark
portfolios (size and value are the major styles in Morningstar and Lipper) and is easily available to fund
investors. However, it is not without issues. First, the alpha measure can be dynamically altered. Even
though such a manipulation cannot be directly inferred from the return series, it tends to increase the
volatility and skewness of returns. For this reason, we control for the fund volatility and skewness in all
our regressions. Second, funds often operate within the boundaries of their investment mandates and are
restricted in their investment behavior. For this reason, all our regressions include fund style fixed effects.
Moreover, even though the main market trends are cleansed in the construction of alpha, we include time
fixed effects to allow for the possibility that alpha might be easier to earn in a growing market. Finally,
we investigate the robustness of our findings to several alternative measures of performance, such as the
return net of benchmark and the value extracted from capital markets, and reach similar conclusions.
Our main right-hand side variables are designed to measure the financial standing of the
manager's family during his childhood years. For our initial tests we consider three different variables:
FatherIncome, HomeValue, and Rent defined in the previous section. We collectively call the three righthand side variables Wealth and run the following regression specifications:
Alphamjt = βWealthm + Γ1×MControlsmt-1 + Γ2×FControlsjt-1 + αY + δs + εmjt ,

(1)

where j indexes funds, t indexes months, m indexes managers, and s denotes Morningstar fund style.
Wealth is one of the three measures of the household wealth in 1940. MControls is a vector of controls
for the manager which includes ManagerAge (the difference between the observation year and the
manager's birth year) and a set of education and employment characteristics described in the previous
section, namely, ParYearsEdu, HasGraduate, HasMBA, AdmissionRate, FinanceRelated, and
Managerial. FControls is a vector of standard fund and fund family controls which includes FundSize

accuracy in the estimation without imposing the condition that the factor loadings have to remain constant over a
long period of time.

16

(log of the fund's TNA in millions of dollars), FundAge (the time in years from the month of the fund's
first appearance in the sample to month t-1), FirmSize (log of the mutual fund family TNA in millions of
dollars), LogFirmNFunds (log of the number of funds in the family), Volatility (standard deviation of
fund returns over the trailing twelve months), and Skewness (skewness of fund returns computed over the
trailing twelve months). All the controls are measured as of the end of month t-1. In these and all the
subsequent tests the standard errors are clustered at the fund level to allow for possible serial correlation
in fund returns resulting from some unobservable fund-specific institutional features.
We report the results in Panel A of Table 3. All of the three wealth measures – FatherIncome,
HomeValue, and Rent – are robustly negatively related to Alpha, with all the coefficients significant at
least at the 10% level. The results become stronger as manager-specific controls (such as education) are
added, suggesting that any failure to control for factors likely to affect performance would generally
understate the significance of the negative relationship between performance and wealth. To evaluate
economic magnitudes, consider two managers whose fathers' incomes differ by 1.8 ($1,800), which is the
interquartile range for FatherIncome in the panel sample. The monthly alpha for the manager with the
higher FatherIncome is lower by 6.9 bp (0.83% annualized).13 To compare, the median monthly alpha in
the sample is only -4.3 bp (-0.52% annualized). Considering that our managers have long careers, the
difference in the compounded risk-adjusted returns earned by different manager types over the years can
be substantial, underscoring the importance of the quality signalling mechanism discussed in this paper.
In Panel B of Table 3, we consider the aggregate measure of wealth – WealthRank – which does
not lose observations and which will be used in all the subsequent tests in the paper. For convenience, the
regression version of WealthRank is scaled by 0.01 and thus ranges from 0 to 1. In the right pane, we
focus on the quintiles of wealth; e.g., WealthRankQ2 is equal to 1 for a manager if his WealthRank is
between 0.2 and 0.4.

13

All the effects in this section are computed from the coefficients in the full specification, e.g., 1.8*-0.0384 = -6.9
bp.

17

The results from Panel B confirm and strengthen our initial conclusions. First, higher WealthRank
robustly predicts lower Alpha: an increase in WealthRank of 0.5 reduces the manager's monthly (annual)
Alpha by 7.3 bp (0.88%). Second, this effect is monotonic across the quintiles in the full specification: the
coefficient on the quintile dummy is decreasing in the quintile's ordinal number (each coefficient captures
the average difference in Alpha between that quintile and the omitted category, which is the lowest
quintile). The difference between the performance of managers from the fifth quintile of wealth and those
from the first quintile is highly significant both statistically and economically; e.g., managers from the
richest families underperform those from the poorest families by 18.0 bp monthly (2.16% annually).
The strength of the results in this section becomes even more apparent if we acknowledge that
various unobserved effects should favor richer managers and improve their performance. Even though we
strive to control for different aspects of the manager's skill set and his family's expertise, potentially
important omitted variables always exist in this type of studies. However, a reasonable endogeneity
argument would point to a positive relationship between the parents' wealth and the manager's
performance. E.g., individuals from wealthier families have better connections and access to resources,
which should aid their portfolio management task. And yet, these same privileges make it possible to
make career advancements without showing strong performance, and only if this biased selection channel
is in full effect, would we observe a negative relationship between a manager's performance and his
endowed wealth in the sample. In the next section we explore this advancement hypothesis directly by
studying the link between managers' promotions and their parents' wealth.
III.B Alternative measures of performance
In this subsection, we consider several alternative measures of fund performance. In the original tests, we
used net fund returns to construct the alpha, since we were interested in the value effects from the
perspective of a fund investor, i.e. portfolio performance net of fees. However, if we calculate the fund's
gross return by summing the expense ratio and the return earned by investors (gross return = (1+net

18

return)*(1+expense ratio)-1), re-estimate the alpha, and rerun our tests, the results remain almost
identical, as can be seen in the first two columns of Table 4.
Next, we consider fund performance evaluated relative to the fund's prospectus benchmark index.
We define BenchmarkAdjReturn as the difference between the fund's monthly gross return and the return
on the fund's benchmark index as reported by Morningstar. We also consider the abnormal return over the
benchmark (AbnReturnOverBenchmark) computed as the difference between the fund's return and the
return predicted by the factor model in which the factor is the index return series (as before, the model is
estimated over the trailing 36 months). The results for these two measures are reported in columns 3 to 4
of Table 4. Similar to the main test, the significance improves with the addition of controls. For the
benchmark-adjusted measures of performance, the economic effects are slightly stronger than for the
alpha. Interestingly, the ability to beat the benchmark is significantly higher for managers who graduated
from more elite universities: a decrease in the manager's university admission rate of 50% improves the
annualized benchmark-adjusted return by 1.05% (=-0.5*-0.1753*12).
Finally, we turn our attention to the dollar measure of the value extracted from capital markets
introduced in Berk and Van Binsbergen (2015). We compute this measure as the product of the fund's
beginning-of-the-month TNA (this TNA is adjusted for inflation by the Consumer Price Index of the
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis and is expressed in millions of 2012 dollars) and its benchmarkadjusted monthly return. This variable is different from the return-based measures of performance as it
explicitly takes into account the size of the fund portfolio. The size component is important, since the
neoclassical framework posits that fund size should adjust endogenously to the manager's ability through
flows, thus driving down the return-based measures of performance under the assumption of decreasing
returns to scale (Berk and Van Binsbergen (2015)). At the same time, as long as the equilibrium is not
reached, the value-added measure would understate the ability of managers who are constrained by fund
size. Moreover, the equity market grew rapidly over our sample period offering new investment
opportunities for fund managers every year, thus relaxing the effect of diminishing returns to scale.
Empirically, the dollar measure of value-added has correlation of 0.121 with the alpha and 0.220 with the

19

benchmark-adjusted return in our sample. The last two columns of Table 4 show the relationship between
this measure and the managers' family wealth. This relationship is negative and statistically significant at
5%. To interpret the economic effect, consider, as before, an increase in WealthRank of 0.5. This
increment is associated with a monthly loss of $3.34 million (=0.5*-6.6870), or about 58% of the
interquartile range of the value-added measure.
Overall, our evidence indicates that higher wealth at birth is negatively related to various
measures of managers' performance, the result consistent with more stringent selection of the less
privileged candidates into the profession. It is possible that managers are allocated to funds non-randomly
and that some managers end up running funds where it is easier to earn abnormal returns, such as funds
investing in the least efficient market segments (Fang, Kempf, and Trapp (2015)). However, this channel
is unlikely to explain our main results. We specifically exclude non-U.S. and specialty-focus funds, so it
is difficult to predict the ex-ante performance solely on the basis on the characteristics of the funds in our
sample. Still, we include fund-level controls and style fixed effects to capture the possibility that funds'
institutional features or mandates drive performance, as opposed to the managers' decisions. Also, to the
extent that the allocation of managers to funds is biased, we would expect managers from wealthier
families to command the more lucrative investment opportunities and earn higher returns.

IV. Additional implications of selection
In this section we examine the implications of the selection mechanism that extend beyond the
relationship between family wealth and performance.
IV.A Directional heteroscedasticity
Our explanation of the results in Section III does not imply that managers born poor are ex ante more
skilled or grow to be more skilled. Rather, we contend that candidates from wealthy families face less
stringent screening standards and, for a given level of skill, are more likely to be appointed managers. On
the other hand, unskilled candidates from poor families are filtered out and only the skilled ones make it

20

into the sample. If this mechanism holds, we should observe a higher dispersion in performance among
the managers from wealthier families, because both the low and the high type wealthy candidates make it
though. In contrast, only the high type poor candidates are able to pass the selection hurdle. Such a
selection should produce the directional heteroscedasticity effect: the variance should increase in
WealthRank.
Conventional tests for heteroscedasticity, such as White test or Breusch-Pagan-Godfrey test,
cannot identify the directional effect: any uneven pattern in residual variance will cause us to reject the
null hypothesis of no-heteroscedasticity. We therefore employ the Goldfeld-Quandt test that allows us to
compare the residual variance between low and high sub-samples of wealth. When the sample is divided
into the high and the low bin, some observations in between can be dropped to improve test precision.
Sacrificing these observations trades off Type I against Type II error. To ensure the robustness of our
findings, we consider three specifications for the Goldfeld-Quandt test: in specification 1 (2, 3) we assign
managers with WealthRank from the top half (top tercile, top quartile) of the distribution to the high bin
and managers with WealthRank from the bottom half (bottom tercile, bottom quartile) of the distribution
to the low bin. In specification 2 (3), managers from the middle tercile (two quartiles) of the distribution
are omitted from the test.
We present the results in Table 5 where for both bins we report the full and the residual variance,
calculated as the (residual) sum of squares divided by the degrees of freedom, and the F-ratio along with
the associated p-value. As we improve the precision of the test by moving closer to the ends of the
distribution, the difference in the variance grows: e.g., the unconditional F-ratio in specification (1) is
only 1.035 (significant at 5%) while that in specification (3) is 1.284 (significant at 1%). The only case
where the ratio is below 1 (insignificant 0.99) is the full-controls sample in the least precise specification
(1).
Overall, the results in this sub-section affirm the presence of the directional heteroscedasticity in
our sample. This effect is consistent with the major prediction of the selection hypothesis: that individuals
from wealthier backgrounds do not face a tight skill-contingent filter on their way to fund management.

21

Notably, our measure of performance is risk-adjusted and we also include return volatility as a control,
hence the results reported here are unlikely to be explained by differential risk-attitudes of wealthy and
poor individuals.

IV.B Promotion-to-performance sensitivity
If we could observe the whole set of prospective managers and compare it to the set of managers
eventually selected, this study would be trivial. Even though we cannot conduct such a test, we can
consider its in-sample analogue: conditional on being in the sample, a manager from a wealthier family
should find it easier to get promoted, while a manager from a poor family is only promoted if he proves
his high-quality type, i.e. shows strong performance. In conducting this analysis, we are effectively
assuming that the selection mechanism related to family wealth plays a similar role in promotions as it
plays in the initial hiring decisions.
To indentify plausible promotion events in our sample we focus on the number of funds the
manager controls and the aggregate assets of these funds. We define as promotion an event when the
number of funds the manager is in charge of increases or when his managed assets increase in such a way
that this growth cannot be attributed to capital flows or returns earned by the funds. These two promotion
events are sometimes related: the assets grow significantly because a new fund is added to the manager's
portfolio, but sometimes the assets of the old fund increase because another fund is merged with it. We do
not attempt to identify any "demotion events" because most demotions result in the termination of a
manager's employment and his exit from the sample. However, we cannot use sample exits to proxy for
these firing events because managers can, and most often do, exit the sample when they voluntarily accept
a new position outside of the mutual fund industry (e.g., become hedge fund managers).
Formally, we define two left-hand side variables as follows. IncreaseFunds is a dummy variable
equal to 1 if the number of funds the manager manages in the observation month is higher than in the
previous month, and 0 otherwise. IncreaseAssetsX2 is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the manager's total

22

managed assets in dollars in the observation month is more than double the assets in the previous month,
and 0 otherwise. The unconditional probability of being promoted in any given month is naturally low:
1.2% for IncreaseFunds and 0.75% for IncreaseAssetsX2.
Next, we relate these promotion dummies to the manager's family wealth, his past performance,
and the interaction between the two. For this analysis we only consider managers with at least five years
of data and for these managers we define past performance as the average gross monthly alpha delivered
by the manager over the past 36 or 60 months, with both periods ending in month t-1. The full regression
specification is a liner probability model with fixed effects, as indicated:14
Promotionmjt = β1PastGAlphamt + β2WealthRankm + β3PastGAlphamt*WealthRankm +
Γ1×MControlsmt-1 + Γ2×FControlsjt-1 + αY + δF + εmjt .

(2)

Table 6 presents the results of this test. In the left pane the manager's past performance is
measured over the 36-month horizon (Past3YearGAlpha) and in the right pane it is measured over the 60month horizon (Past5YearGAlpha).
We find that the promotion-to-performance sensitivity is higher for managers from less wealthy
families; in other words, these managers need to demonstrate better performance in order to get promoted.
The interaction coefficient has a consistent negative sign and is significant at the 10% level or better in six
out of eight specifications. This result is important for the selection mechanism because it suggests that
poor managers are more likely to be selected when they prove their skill whereas the selection of the
wealthier managers is less skill-dependent. We can evaluate the marginal economic effects by answering
the following question: how much better does the less wealthy manager's (25th percentile of wealth)
performance need to be so that he would stand the same chance of promotion as the wealthier manager
(75th percentile of wealth). If we consider the coefficients for the first promotion proxy in the five-year

14

Since this is no longer a fund-level regression, fund-specific variables, such as volatility and skewness, are
omitted from this analysis.

23

specification, the answer to this question is 55 bp per month, or 6.6% annualized.15 Such a performance
differential is practically unfeasible, indicating that wealthier managers continue to hold the promotion
edge over the less wealthy at normal levels of performance.
We note that while the evidence on the selective promotion is not definitive given our
measurement methodology, the actual promotion can be achieved in numerous ways which we do not
capture. A connected manager can be "promoted" by receiving a more lucrative compensation package or
a more senior title, without being given extra funds to manage. It is also likely that the selection
mechanism is much stronger at the time of entry to a job than at the time of a possible promotion,
especially considering that the selected pool of managers from less privileged backgrounds already
comprises the most talented candidates.

V. Fund management activities and flows
V.A Measures of fund activity
In this section we investigate whether managers from wealthier backgrounds pursue less or more active
fund management strategies. Of course, there are different measures of "activity" in fund management.
Most of them are based on the idea that active managers tend to trade more frequently, maintain more
concentrated portfolios with larger bets in certain stocks, and deviate more from common trading patterns.
Accordingly, we consider the following variables to proxy for managerial activity, each variable
reflecting a particular aspect of a fund manager's strategy (see Appendix 4 for the details on the variables'
construction, all fractional variables are expressed in percentage points).16

15

If the past alpha is x, the gap in promotion probabilities is 0.0053*0.5-0.0096*0.5*x. Setting this expression to 0
and solving for x gives x=0.55.
16
Most of the variables in this section make use of quarterly portfolio holdings disclosed in CDA filings and
available from Thomson Reuters. We match Morningstar funds to funds in the CRSP Mutual Fund Database by
CUSIP of the share class (this match is nearly 100% accurate as evidenced by similar fund names and a 0.99
correlation between Morningstar and CRSP fund returns) and then match CRSP funds to CDA portfolios. In the
latter step, we use the MF Links files maintained by Russ Wermers but extend the match to 2012 and verify its
quality by visually comparing fund names.

24

Turnover is defined as the annualized ratio of the sum of absolute values of dollar changes in
equity positions of the fund over the quarter to the average dollar value of the fund's portfolio (similar to
Gaspar, Massa, and Matos (2005)). The turnover measure captures the fraction of the portfolio that is
"new" relative to the previously reported snapshot of holdings.
PortfolioConcentration is the Herfindahl measure of the concentration of holdings in the fund's
portfolio at the end of the previous quarter.
HoldingHorizon measures how many months, on average, the shares present in the fund's
portfolio at the end of the quarter are held in that portfolio. This variable is calculated as in Lan, Moneta,
and Wermers (2015) "FIFO Horizon Measure" and is based on the assumption that shares bought first are
also sold first.
Herding is computed as the correlation between changes in holdings (as measured by the
percentage change in the number of shares held) of the fund over the quarter and the corresponding
changes in holdings of a hypothetical average fund in the style, whose portfolio position in a given stock
is calculated as the sum of the aggregate positions in the stock of all the funds in the style. By
construction, each herding variable is constrained between -100 and 100 and is higher for funds whose
trades are closer to the style's average in both direction and magnitude.
Next, we examine how each of these activity variables is related to the manager's family wealth
by running the following regression specification:
ActivitymjT = βWealthRankm + Γ1×MControlsmT-1 + Γ2×FControlsT-1 + αY + δs + εmjT ,

(3)

where the right-hand side variables are defined as in equation (1) and the left-hand side variables are our
measures of activity for fund j in quarter T. Table 7 presents the results of the estimation.
The evidence is directionally consistent across all the activity measures: managers from less
wealthy families tend to be more active, i.e. they have higher turnover and portfolio concentration but
shorter holding horizons and weaker herding tendencies. However, only the turnover coefficient passes
the conventional hurdles of statistical significance. The associated economic effect is also sizable: a

25

reduction in WealthRank of 0.5 increases the fund's turnover by 5.41% (=-0.5*-10.8176) of the fund's
TNA, or approximately 21% of the unconditional turnover of the median fund in the sample. This result is
consistent with the idea that turnover can be conducive to value as long as the manager has skill (Pastor,
Stambaugh, and Taylor (2015)).
V.B Flow effects
If a manager's family wealth is an observable signal of his quality, how is this signal used by individual
investors, if at all? In our final test we focus on fund flows, computed as the dollar flow (the difference
between the end-of-quarter fund TNA and the previous-quarter fund TNA multiplied by one plus the
gross return of the fund over the quarter) divided by the previous-quarter fund TNA. We regress fund
flows on WealthRank and separately consider specifications which include fund past performance
(average fund alpha over the previous twelve months) as one of the control variables. The results are
reported in Table 8. WealthRank is not significant in any specification even though it has a consistent
negative sign. In contrast, the effect of past performance – the more salient statistic – is positive and
strongly significant. Overall, it appears that most fund investors do not condition their capital allocation
on fund managers' family backgrounds. This result is hardly surprising given that information on
managers' descent is difficult to collect and that mutual fund investors lack skill and resources to perform
such an investigation.

Conclusion
We study the relation between fund managers’ family backgrounds and their professional performance
and find that managers from poor families deliver higher risk-adjusted returns than managers from rich
families. Our evidence suggests that managers endowed with a low economic status at birth face higher
entry barriers into asset management, and only the highest-quality candidates succeed in entering the
profession. This explanation is supported by the evidence on managers’ promotions, which shows that
managers with a low endowed status must deliver higher returns to stand a comparable chance of

26

promotion with their high-status peers. We also document that, consistent with the selection mechanism,
managers from wealthier backgrounds show a much higher dispersion in their performance than managers
of modest decent.
We believe our findings have implications that extend beyond asset management. Our evidence
suggests that an individual’s social status at birth may serve as an important signal of quality in other
industries with high barriers to entry, such as corporate management or professional services. We hope
that an increased focus on the role of an agent’s family background will yield valuable insights into
professional decisions of financial intermediaries, corporate managers, and other economic agents.

27

References
Ahern K., and Sosyura D., 2015. Rumor has it: Sensationalism in financial media, Review of Financial
Studies, forthcoming.
Berk J., and Van Binsbergen, J., 2015. Measuring managerial skill in the mutual fund industry, Journal of
Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Black, S. E., Devereux, and P. J., Salvanes, K. G., 2005. The more the merrier? The effect of family size
and birth order on children’s education, Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 669-700.
Bogue, Donald. Census Tract Data, 1940: Elizabeth Mullen Bogue File. ICPSR02930-v1. Ann Arbor, MI:
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor], 2000.
Bowles, S., and G. Herbert, 2002. The inheritance of inequality, Journal of Economic Perspectives 16, 330.
Bowles, S., H. Gintis, and M. Osborne (eds), 2005. Unequal Chances: Family Background and Economic
Success, Princeton, NJ: Russell Sage and Princeton University Press.
Carhart, M., 1997. On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance 52, 57-82.
Chaudhuri R., Z. Ivkovich, J. M. Pollet, and C. Trzcinka, 2015. What a difference a Ph.D. makes: More
than three little letters, working paper.
Chetty, R., Friedman, J. N., Hilger, N., Saez, E., Schanzenbach, and D. W., Yagan, D., 2011. How does
your kindergarten classroom affect your earnings? Evidence from Project STAR, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 126, 1593-1660.
Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison, 1997. Risk taking by mutual funds as a response to incentives,
Journal of Political Economy 105, 1167-1200.
Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison, 1999. Are some mutual fund managers better than others? Crosssectional patterns in behavior and performance, Journal of Finance 54, 875-899.
Cohen, L., Frazzini, A., and Malloy, C. J., 2008. The small world of investing: board connections and
mutual fund returns, Journal of Political Economy 116, 951-979.
Cronqvist, Henrik, Anil K. Makhija, and Scott E. Yonker, 2012. Behavioral consistency in corporate
finance: CEO personal and corporate leverage, Journal of Financial Economics 103, 20-40.
Cronqvist, H., and Siegel, S., 2015. The origins of savings behavior, Journal of Political Economy 123,
123-169.
Cronqvist, H., Siegel, S., and Yu, F., 2015. Value versus growth investing: Why do different investors
have different styles? Journal of Financial Economics 117, 333-349.
Elliott, James R., and Frickel, Scott, 2013. The historical nature of cities: A study of urbanization and
hazardous waste accumulation, American Sociological Review 78. 521-543.

28

Fama, Eugene F., and French, Kenneth R., 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds,
Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.
Fang, J., A. Kempf, and M. Trapp, 2015. Fund Manager Allocation, CFR working paper #10-04.
Gaspar, J. M., M. Massa, and P. Matos, 2005. Shareholder investment horizons and the market for
corporate control, Journal of Financial Economics 76, 135-165.
Grinblatt M., Titman S., and Wermers R., 1995. Momentum investment strategies, portfolio performance,
and herding: A study of mutual fund behavior, American Economic Review 85, 1088-1105.
Lan, Chunhua, Fabio Moneta, and Russ Wermers, 2015. Mutual fund investment horizon and
performance, working paper.
Li H., Zhang X., and Zhao R., 2011. Investing in talents: Manager characteristics and hedge fund
performances, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 46, 59-82.
Malmendier, U., and Nagel, S., 2011. Depression babies: Do macroeconomic experiences affect risktaking? Quarterly Journal of Economics 126, 373-416.
Pastor, L., Stambaugh, and R., Taylor, L., 2015. Do funds make more when they trade more? NBER
Working paper.
Pool, V. K., Stoffman, N., and Yonker, S. E. 2012. No place like home: Familiarity in mutual fund
manager portfolio choice, Review of Financial Studies 25, 2563-2599.
Pool, V. K., Stoffman, N., Yonker, S. E, and Zhang H., 2015. Do shocks to personal wealth affect risk
taking in delegated portfolios? Working paper.
Schoar, A., and Zuo, L., 2013. Shaped by booms and busts: How the economy impacts CEO careers and
management styles, NBER working paper #17590.
Sugrue, Thomas J., 1995. Crabgrass-roots politics: Race, rights, and the reaction against liberalism in the
urban North, 1940-1964, Journal of American History 82, 551-578.
Yermack, David, 2014. Tailspotting: Identifying and profiting from CEO vacation trips, Journal of
Financial Economics 113, 252-269.

29

Appendix 1. Matching of fund managers and identification of their ancestry
1.A Matching of fund managers to the Lexis Nexis Public Records (LNPR) Database
To identify the manager in LNPR, we first establish his full name and age. In our sample, there are no
cases of multiple fund managers with identical full names, regardless of age.
To establish a manager’s age, we use the annual editions of the Nelson Directory of Investment
Managers, which was first published in print in 1988 and was later followed by electronic versions of the
directory. For a minority of managers, we obtain data on the fund manager’s age from fund registration
filings available from the SEC. For managers who do not appear in these sources (such as those who
finished their careers before 1988), we approximate a manager’s age from the date of college graduation,
which we retrieve from the manager’s biography or obtain by contacting the university registrar.
Next, obtain the most complete version of the manager’s name, including the full middle name
and name suffixes, such as Jr., Sr., or III. If the manager’s middle name is abbreviated in fund records to a
one-letter initial, we first establish the complete middle name (e.g., the full middle name “Atkinson” that
spells out the middle initial “A”). For the majority of managers, we are able to establish the complete
names and name suffixes by using the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) investment
adviser registration records. These records include both active and inactive investment professionals who
are or were registered as investment advisers and went through the security industry's registration and
licensing process. Because these reports are based on official registration records, they include the most
complete versions of managers’ names. We use the manager’s employment history provided in FINRA
reports to confirm the accuracy of the match.
Using the manager’s full name and age, we search for that manager nationwide in LNPR. After
we establish a match based on the name and age, we require a confirmation of the match according to one
of the following criteria: (a) the individual’s LNPR employment records include the company where the
fund manager has worked; (b) the individual’s email addresses in LNPR indicate the domain of the
company where the fund manager has worked (e.g., @fidelity.com); (c) the individual lists his occupation
on voter registration records as “portfolio manager”, “investment manager”, or “investment adviser; (d)
the individual’s professional licenses in LNPR include those in the securities industry; (e) one of the
individual’s addresses in LNPR matches the official business address of the fund manager’s company.

30

1.B Identifying the ancestry of fund managers
We follow a three-step algorithm to identify a manager’s household in the census by sequentially
checking three types of records – birth, marriage, and death – for the manager and his relatives.
In the first step in this process, we retrieve a manager’s birth record by using his or her name
(including the full middle name), date of birth (year and month, from social security records in LNPR),
and the state issuing the manager’s social security number (from LNPR). Birth records are available from
the health department of each state, and we retrieve them via the database maintained by the genealogy
research service ancestry.com. The exhibit below provides an example of a birth records in our sample.
The amount of detail in each record varies by state: some states provide the full names and birth places of
both parents, others provide these data for only one parent, and still others provide only the date of birth
or place of birth.
If the full names of the manager’s parents are not available from the birth record, we proceed with
the second step, which investigates the manager’s marriage record(s). This analysis is motivated by the
fact that some marriage records provide the names of the parents of the bride and groom (the format of
the marriage record varies with the state of marriage). The exhibit below illustrates this by showing an
example of a fund manager’s marriage record in our sample. We retrieve the fund manager’s marriage
record from the database of state marriage records maintained by ancestry.com and establish a unique
match by obtaining the full names and birth years of the bride and the groom. We identify the manager’s
spouse, including ex-spouses, from the manager’s home deed records available on LNPR. In the
overwhelming majority of cases, the manager’s home deeds are written to both spouses. For managers
that have had multiple spouses, we check marriage records with all the spouses. If the names of the
manager’s parents do not appear on the marriage record, we search for the announcement of the
manager’s engagement or marriage in the digital newspaper archive provided by the University of
Michigan library, which contains historical copies of over 3,000 publications, including small local
newspapers. Marriage announcements usually identify the parents of the bride and the groom.
If we are unable to identify the manager’s parents in the first two steps, or if we need to confirm
other members of the household, we proceed with the analysis of death records. Using social security
records, LNPR identifies deceased individuals and shows their date of death. For fund managers that are
deceased at the time of writing, we obtain their obituaries by searching the digital archive of newspaper
publications and the database of obituaries maintained by the service provider legacy.com. These records
provide information on the manager’s parents and siblings (an example is shown in the exhibits below).
For the rest of the managers with missing data, we search for obituaries of their parents, most of whom
are deceased at the time of writing (the median birth year of the managers’ parents is 1908). Because
obituaries typically discuss the surviving members of the family and their spouses, we identify the
managers’ parents by locating the obituaries where the manager and his spouse are listed as the surviving
family members. These searches bring up the obituaries of managers’ parents and siblings and allow us to
reconstruct the entire immediate family of the fund manager.
31

Example of a birth record:

Example of a marriage record:

Example of an obituary:

32

Appendix 2. 1940 Federal Census form
2.A Form template

33

2.B Example of a filled record

"R" indicates a rented accommodation.
Rent is given at $200 per month.
"No" indicates that the property was not a farm.

This block shows the composition of the household.
The columns (from left to right) show: the name of the resident, his/her relationship to the head of the
household, census code for the type of resident, gender, race ("W" for white), age at the time of the
census, marital status, whether the resident was attending school or college, highest grade of education
completed, education code, and the state of birth.

34

The occupation of the father is given as "Stockbroker" and the place of
employment as "Bonding Company".
"PW" indicates the type of employment: private worker.
The last two columns give the number of weeks worked in a year and the
income, respectively (52 and $5000 for the father).
The last two rows show the data for the resident servants.

Appendix 3. Classification of education and employment
3.A Manager's scholarly specialization
We classify a manager as having economics-related education if the manager either holds an MBA
degree or holds any degree in one of the following fields of study:17
Accounting, Administration, Applied Economics, Business, Business Administration, Business
Finance, Business Organization, Commerce, Corporate Finance & Accounting, Corporate Financial
Management, Corporate/Tax Law, Economics, Economics and Mathematics, Economics and Political
Science, Finance and Economics, Finance, Finance & Economics, Finance & Investment, General
Business, Industrial Administration, Investment Management, Politics and Economics, Public
Accounting, Real Estate
We classify a manager as having science education (as opposed to one in humanities) if the manager
holds any degree in one of the following fields of study:17
Aerospace Engineering, Economics and Mathematics, Electrical engineering, Engineering, Industrial
Engineering, Mathematics and Aero Engineering, Mathematical Statistics, Mathematics, Mechanical
Engineering
We classify a manager as having a psychology-related education if the manager holds any degree in
any field of study that mentions words "psychology" or "psychological".

3.B Parents' employment type
We classify a manager as having a parent with finance-related employment if for at least one of the
parents the occupation comes from the following list:18
Accountant, Analyst (if in a bank), Assistant Vice President, Associate Accountant, Banker, Bond &
Stock Sales Broker, Bond Clerk, Bookkeeper, Broker, Cashier (if in a bank or insurance), Cashier
Accountant, Credit Department, Executive, Executive Manager, Executive Officer, Fund Manager,
Insurance Underwriter, Investment Analyst, Investment Council, Investment Specialist, Loan Officer,
Money Manager, President, Manager of Disbursements, Salesmen (if in insurance), Stock Broker, Teller
(if in a bank), Treasurer, Underwriter, Vice President
We classify a manager as having a parent with managerial employment if for at least one of the
parents the occupation comes from the following list:18
Assistant Vice President, Assistant Manager, Commander, Direct Manager, Director, Estate
Manager, Executive, Executive Manager, Executive Officer, First Lieutenant, Fund Manager, Manager,
Money Manager, Plant Superintendent, President, Manager of Disbursements, Restaurant Manager,
Sales Manager, Supervisor, Vice President

17

This list is a subset of the educational disciplines which appear in our sample of managers and is not exhaustive of
all possible economics or science fields.
18
Additionally, we classify owners of medium-to-large size businesses as having both finance-related and
managerial employment.

35

Appendix 4. Definitions of variables used in the analysis
The following indexing convention is used:
m denotes a manager, j denotes a fund, t denotes a month, T denotes a calendar quarter.
Variable name

Description

Household wealth
FatherIncomem

The annual income of the father of manager m as per the Census record.
This variable is expressed in $000 (thousands of dollars).

HomeValuem

The reported value of the house (in increments of $500) of manager m's
parents' household as per the Census record. This variable is only
reported if the family owned the property and is expressed in $000.

Rentm

The monthly rent in dollars paid by manager m's parents' household as
per the Census record. This variable is only reported if the family rented
the accommodation.

WealthRankm

Equal to 0.01 times the percentile rank of FatherIncomem in the sample of
managers for non-missing values of FatherIncomem and to 0.01 times the
percentile rank of HomeValuem or Rentm (these variables are defined on
the non-overlapping subsamples) otherwise.

WealthRankQxm

An indicator variable equal to 1 if WealthRankm falls in the xth quintile of
the WealthRank distribution over the sample of managers.

Parents' education and employment
ParYearsEdum

The average of total years of education of manager m's father and mother.

FinanceRelatedm

An indicator variable equal to 1 if either of the manager m's parents was
employed in a finance-related occupation, as classified in Appendix 3.

Managerialm

An indicator variable equal to 1 if either of the manager m's parents was
employed in a managerial occupation, as classified in Appendix 3.

Manager's demographics and education
ManagerAgemt(T)

The difference between the year of month t (quarter T) and manager m's
birth year.

HasGraduatem

An indicator variable equal to 1 if manager m has a graduate degree.19

HasMBAm

An indicator variable equal to 1 if manager m has an MBA degree.

HasPhDm

An indicator variable equal to 1 if manager m has a PhD degree.

AdmissionRatem

The undergraduate admission rate for manager m's undergraduate
institution as reported in the 1979 College Handbook.

19

Indicator variables characterizing education are set to missing if we cannot reliably establish whether a manager
holds a particular degree.

36

Fund and fund family controls
FundSizejt(T)

Log(1 + fund j's TNA in $000 at the end of month t (quarter T)).

FundAgejt(T)

The time in years from the month of fund j's first appearance in the
sample to the end of month t (quarter T).

FirmSizejt(T)

Log(1 + fund j's total family TNA in $000 at the end of month t (quarter
T)).

LogFirmNFundsjt(T)

Log(the number of funds in fund j's fund family at the end of month t
(quarter T)).

Volatilityjt

The standard deviation of fund j's monthly returns over the period [t-35,
t].

Skewnessjt

The skewness of fund j's monthly returns computed over the period [t-35,
t].

Stylej

Fund j's Morningstar style (Large Blend, Large Growth, Large Value,
Mid Blend, Mid Growth, Mid Value, Small Blend, Small Growth, or
Small Value).

Promotion indicators
IncreaseFundsmjt

An indicator variable equal to 1 if the number of funds controlled by
manager m in charge of fund j at the end of month t is higher than at the
end of month t-1.

IncreaseAssetsX2mjt

An indicator variable equal to 1 if the total dollar assets controlled by
manager m in charge of fund j at the end of month t is more than double
the assets at the end of month t-1.

Fund performance, management activity, and flows

Alphajt (GrossAlphajt)

Fund j's net (gross) return in month t minus the fitted value from the fourfactor model for which the loadings are estimated over the period (t-1, t36). If during the estimation period fewer than 30 observations are nonmissing, Alphajt (GrossAlphajt) is set to missing. This variable is
expressed in pp (percentage points).

BenchmarkAdjReturnjt

Fund j's gross return in month t minus the return on the fund's prospectus
benchmark index. This variable is expressed in pp.

37

AbnReturnOverBenchmarkjt

Fund j's gross return in month t minus the fitted value from the one-factor
model, where the factor is the fund's benchmark index return. The loadings
in the model are estimated over the period (t-1, t-36). If the estimation
period contains fewer than 30 non-missing observations,
AbnRetOverBenchmarkjt is set to missing. This variable is expressed in pp.

ValueExtractedjt

Dollar value extracted from capital markets computed as the product
between fund j's benchmark-adjusted return in month t and the fund's TNA
at the end of month t-1. The fund's TNA is converted to 2012 dollars by the
Consumer Price Index of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. This
variable is expressed in $mil (millions of dollars).

Past3YearGAlphamt

The average gross monthly alpha taken across all the fund-month
observations for manager m in the period (t-36,t-1).

Past5YearGAlphamt

The average gross monthly alpha taken across all the fund-month
observations for manager m in the period (t-60,t-1).

Past12MonthAlphajt

The average monthly alpha of fund j in the period (t-12,t-1).
The annualized ratio of the sum of the absolute dollar changes in fund j's
stock positions from quarter T-1 to quarter T to the average fund portfolio
size in these adjacent quarters. Formally,
4∗

TurnoverjT

∑∈

+
2

|

−

|
,

+
2

where NSjiT is the number of shares of stock i held by fund j at the end of
quarter T, PiT is the price of stock i at the end of quarter T, and TNAjT is the
dollar total net assets of fund j at the end of quarter T.
PortfolioConcentrationjT

The Herfindahl's measure of concentration of fund j's portfolio holdings at
the end of quarter T.

HoldingHorizonjT

First, for each stock i in fund j's portfolio at the end of quarter T, we
calculate the average number of days that its shares are held in the
portfolio, using the FIFO assumption as in Lan, Moneta, and Wermers
(2015). Next, we aggregate these stock-level variables to the fund level as
the weighted average measure in which the weights are proportional to the
stocks' portfolio weights.

HerdingjT

First, we construct a hypothetical style portfolio by aggregating (for each
stock and quarter) the dollar positions of all funds in the style. Next, for
fund j in quarter T we compute the correlation (across all the stocks in the
style portfolio) of the percentage changes in the number of shares held by
fund j from quarter T-1 to quarter T with the corresponding changes in
positions of the style portfolio. This variable is expressed in pp.
The percentage flow for fund j in quarter T computed as
− (1 +

)

,

FlowjT
where TNAjT is the dollar total net assets of fund j at the end of quarter T
and rjT is fund j's gross return over quarter T. This variable is expressed in
pp.

38

Figure 1. Distribution of Census 1940 annual incomes: general male population vs managers'
fathers

15%
General population, male

12%

Managers' fathers
9%
6%
3%
0%
$0

$1,000

$2,000

$3,000

$4,000

Salary or wage income

39

$5,000

>$5,000
$6,000

Table 1. Summary statistics
This table shows summary statistics (Panel A) and sample composition statistics (Panel B) for the main sample of 267 managers. Data
on managers' careers and education is obtained from Morningstar/FactSet manager biographies and is complemented with university
records. Managers' parents' household data is from the 1940 Census household records. Tract-level demographic variables are
computed from the summary files for the 1940 Census compiled by Elizabeth Bogue. Mutual fund and family characteristics are from
Morningstar. The procedures for the classification of fund managers' scholarly specialization and their parents' employment type are
described in Appendix 3.

Panel A. Common summary statistics
mean

st. dev.

10 perc.

25 perc.

median

75 perc.

90 perc.

1937.9

7.7

1930.0

1936.0

1940.0

1942.0

1944.0

13.4

9.2

3.58

6.25

11.58

19.08

26.25

2,957.99

9,945.04

42.12

138.90

647.29

2,141.89

5,853.79

84.4

14.3

64.0

74.0

88.0

97.0

98.0

Manager's basic information
Year of birth
Career length, years
Maximum (across years of career) assets managed, mil USD
Manager's educational institution
(as of 1980, unless stated otherwise)
University stand. score rank (SAT, 2004)
University stand. score (median ACT, 2004)

27.6

3.0

23.8

25.0

28.0

30.0

31.0

University size (undergraduate enrollment)

10,110

9,465

1,600

3,323

6,559

12,709

25,146

University tuition

3,217

1,946

702

881

3,725

4,950

5,550

Admission rate

54.8%

25.5%

22.6%

27.6%

55.9%

78.3%

86.0%

Home value

10,097

8,920

2,500

4,700

7,350

13,150

20,000

Monthly rent

43.46

31.77

14.00

25.00

40.00

50.00

70.00

Number of siblings

1.04

1.41

0.0

0.0

1.0

2.0

3.0

Number of servants

0.14

0.48

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Manager's household (household census data, 1940)

Father
Year of birth

1906.1

11.2

1892.0

1902.0

1908.0

1913.0

1917.0

Income

2,246

1,385

610

1,200

1,900

3,200

5,000

Years of education

12.4

4.0

8.0

11.0

12.0

16.0

16.0

1909.1

9.3

1897.0

1905.0

1911.0

1915.0

1919.0

Income

223

439

0

0

0

0

1,025

Years of education

12.0

3.3

8.0

11.0

12.0

14.0

16.0

Mother
Year of birth

40

Panel A, continued
Tract-level demographics (Census 1940 Bogue files)
Median home value

5,307

2,794

2,211

3,816

5,071

6,099

8,727

Median rent, contract

37.99

12.27

21.07

31.67

38.36

45.87

52.71

Median rent, gross

43.54

12.58

29.13

35.87

44.31

50.66

58.29

Fraction of population without school education

4.5%

7.1%

0.2%

0.4%

1.4%

4.4%

13.6%

Fraction of population with college education

15.7%

12.2%

2.9%

4.4%

11.9%

24.6%

33.7%

Median education years
Fraction of population with paid employment

9.9

2.1

7.6

8.2

9.2

12.2

12.5

75.5%

7.7%

65.5%

71.6%

77.6%

81.0%

83.8%

1.00%

5.10%

-4.82%

-1.70%

1.26%

3.92%

6.70%

Managed funds' characteristic
Monthly return
Monthly return volatility

4.80%

1.85%

2.65%

3.54%

4.58%

5.75%

6.99%

Monthly alpha

-0.04%

2.04%

-2.16%

-1.01%

-0.04%

0.90%

2.06%

End-of-quarter TNA, mil USD

654.91

1,641.20

10.80

34.80

134.43

545.27

1,693.23

10,100.62

31,740.97

25.64

162.20

1,522.67

6,381.48

23,374.62

87.4

78.9

30.0

39.0

62.0

101.0

177.0

End-of-quarter family TNA, mil USD
End-of-quarter number of holdings

Panel B. Sample composition statistics
Category

Manager

Category

Father

Mother

Category

Fund

Education (manager's biographical data)

Education (household census data)

Has graduate degree

66.33%

Attended elementary

95.08%

97.16%

Morningstar fund style
Large Blend

17.59%

Has PhD

3.85%

Attended high school

75.96%

78.98%

Large Growth

31.95%

Has MBA

53.30%

Attended college

43.17%

40.91%

Large Value

16.62%

Econ.-related field

92.25%

Mid Blend

3.89%

Science field

9.52%

Employment (household census data)

Mid Growth

12.48%

Psychology field

1.59%

Private worker (PW)

69.23%

86.36%

Mid Value

3.10%

Private university

68.37%

Government worker (GW)

8.33%

4.55%

Small Blend

4.23%

Ivy League university

15.82%

Own account (OA)

16.03%

9.09%

Small Growth

8.86%

Employer (E)

6.41%

0.00%

Small Value

4.07%

Unpaid worker (NP)

0.00%

0.00%

Finance-related employment

19.29%

Managerial employment

13.20%

41

Table 2. Relationships among the main variables
Panels A and B of this table show the correlation coefficients among the main variables of interest. Panel A focuses on the demographic characteristics of households and Census
tracts and Panel B focuses on education-related variables. The procedures for the classification of fund managers' scholarly specialization and their parents' employment type are
described in Appendix 3. Panel C shows mean and median values for some variables of interest for each quintile of the managers' parents' household wealth distribution as proxied
by the father's income and home value/rent. Exact variable construction methodologies are detailed in Appendix 4.

Panel A. Household and tract characteristics
Father's
income

Home
value

Rent

Num.
siblings

Num.
servants

Home
value,
tract

Contract
rent,
tract

Gross
rent,
tract

Father's
educ.

Parents'
educ.

Finance
emp.

Father's income

1.000

Home value

0.472

Rent

0.686

Number of siblings

-0.110

-0.113

-0.050

1.000

Number of servants

0.297

0.610

0.488

0.024

1.000

Home value, tract median

0.163

-0.097

0.005

-0.214

-0.122

1.000

Contract rent, tract median

0.239

0.183

0.144

-0.146

-0.029

0.589

1.000

Gross rent, tract median

0.152

0.111

0.071

-0.139

-0.036

0.539

0.974

1.000

Father's years of education

0.370

0.102

0.384

-0.060

0.213

0.253

0.155

0.109

1.000

Parents' years of education

0.373

0.174

0.372

-0.080

0.211

0.249

0.236

0.195

0.947

1.000

Finance-related employment

0.352

0.314

0.278

0.007

0.235

-0.063

0.046

0.033

0.177

0.191

1.000

Managerial employment

0.347

0.225

0.237

-0.030

0.090

0.233

0.147

0.068

0.087

0.129

0.274

Manag.
emp.

1.000
1.000

42

1.000

Panel B. Household characteristics and managers' education
Father's
income
Father's
income
Home value

Home
value

Rent

Father's
educ.

Parents'
educ.

Finance
emp.

Manag.
emp.

Grad.

PhD

MBA

Private

Ivy
League

Tuition

Adm.
rate

ACT,
median

SAT,
rank

Econ.
field

Science
field

1.000
0.472

1.000

Rent

0.686

Father's years
of education

0.370

0.102

0.384

1.000

Parents' years
of education

0.373

0.174

0.372

0.947

1.000

Financerelated
employment

0.352

0.314

0.278

0.177

0.191

1.000

Managerial
employment

0.347

0.225

0.237

0.087

0.129

0.274

1.000

Has grad.
degree

-0.196

-0.329

-0.046

0.110

0.081

-0.111

-0.107

1.000

Has PhD

-0.097

-0.150

-0.047

-0.155

-0.142

-0.001

-0.071

0.103

1.000

Has MBA

-0.155

-0.209

-0.065

0.007

-0.031

-0.044

-0.144

0.691

-0.049

1.000

Private univ.
Ivy League
univ.

0.364

0.158

0.316

0.190

0.226

0.171

0.005

-0.035

-0.086

0.010

1.000

0.359

0.209

0.469

0.222

0.213

0.153

0.097

-0.049

-0.081

0.028

0.334

1.000

Tuition

0.466

0.243

0.420

0.319

0.343

0.227

0.055

-0.046

-0.095

-0.034

0.859

0.507

1.000

Admission
rate

-0.368

-0.270

-0.369

-0.263

-0.254

-0.169

-0.035

0.045

0.140

0.012

-0.433

-0.516

-0.633

1.000

ACT, median

0.472

0.308

0.381

0.222

0.255

0.156

0.080

-0.011

-0.145

0.019

0.491

0.506

0.682

-0.800

1.000

SAT, rank

0.381

0.321

0.364

0.301

0.343

0.207

0.087

-0.052

-0.122

-0.022

0.407

0.457

0.631

-0.734

0.944

1.000

-0.101

-0.108

-0.215

-0.046

-0.048

0.046

-0.003

0.289

0.052

0.535

-0.139

-0.134

-0.162

0.224

-0.218

-0.112

1.000

-0.097

-0.155

-0.011

-0.173

-0.195

-0.019

0.031

0.064

0.500

-0.008

-0.172

-0.146

-0.213

0.115

-0.158

-0.132

-0.036

1.000

0.026

-0.033

-0.087

-0.024

-0.038

0.054

0.089

0.052

-0.020

-0.023

-0.001

0.046

0.005

-0.043

0.036

0.031

-0.102

-0.038

Econ.-related
field
Science
field
Psychology
field

Psych.
field

1.000

43

1.000

Panel C. Family wealth quintiles
Q1
mean
Father's income

Q2

median

mean

Q3

median

mean

Q4

median

mean

Q5

median

mean

median

615

600

1,335

1,340

1,884

1,900

2,870

3,000

4,551

5,000

Home value

4,009

2,790

4,609

5,000

8,109

7,250

8,882

8,750

18,262

15,000

Rent

23.87

15.00

28.43

30.00

37.57

39.00

47.58

47.00

87.95

65.00

-0.02%

-0.17%

-0.35%

-0.52%

-0.55%

-0.59%

-0.31%

-0.17%

-0.95%

-0.92%

Parents' years of education

11.0

11.5

11.3

12.0

12.6

13.0

13.1

13.3

13.4

14.0

Has grad. degree, indicator

0.68

1.00

0.75

1.00

0.76

1.00

0.73

1.00

0.50

0.50

Has PhD, indicator

0.05

0.00

0.05

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00

Has MBA, indicator

0.59

1.00

0.62

1.00

0.56

1.00

0.70

1.00

0.40

0.00

Private university, indicator

0.43

0.00

0.58

1.00

0.66

1.00

0.76

1.00

0.85

1.00

Ivy League university, indicator

0.07

0.00

0.10

0.00

0.15

0.00

0.24

0.00

0.37

0.00

2,106

975

2,748

3,115

3,045

3,400

3,793

4,500

4,143

4,825

Annualized alpha

Tuition
Admission rate

69.0%

78.3%

62.2%

70.1%

56.9%

69.8%

48.8%

39.8%

44.9%

39.7%

ACT, median

25.8

25.0

26.6

26.5

27.2

27.3

28.5

29.0

29.1

29.8

SAT, rank

79.4

77.0

78.8

81.0

81.3

83.0

89.4

92.0

90.9

95.0

44

Table 3. Family wealth and performance of fund managers
Panel A of this table shows the regressions of the funds' four-factor monthly alphas (Alpha, expressed in pp) on the measures of the
managers' parents' household wealth during the 1940 Census. FatherIncome and HomeValue are expressed in $000. HomeValue and Rent
are defined on the non-overlapping sub-samples. Panel B shows the regressions of Alpha on the percentile rank of wealth (WealthRank) –
defined as the percentile rank of FatherIncome in the sample, if its value is not missing, and the percentile rank of HomeValue or Rent in
the sample, otherwise – and the dummy variables indicating WealthRank quintiles. The percentile ranks are scaled by 0.01 and thus range
from 0 to 1. The control variables capture the manager's characteristics, his parents' education depth and employment type, as well as key
mutual fund and fund family characteristics. All the control variables are taken as of the end of the month before the observation month.
Exact variable definitions are given in Appendix 4. The inclusion of Morningstar style fixed effects and time fixed effects is indicated at
the bottom of the table. T-statistics (reported in parentheses) are based on standard errors clustered at the fund level. * (**, ***) indicates
the significance of the coefficient at the 10% (5%, 1%) level.

Panel A. Different measures of wealth
Dependent variable

Independent
variables
Wealth
FundSize

Dependent variable

Dependent variable

Alpha

Alpha

Alpha

Alpha

Alpha

Alpha

Alpha

Alpha

Alpha

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Wealth: (is proxied for by)
FatherIncome
-0.0256*
(-1.97)

-0.0311**
(-2.20)

Wealth: (is proxied for by)
HomeValue

-0.0384**
(-2.27)

-0.0044*
(-1.77)

-0.0060**
(-2.34)

-0.0069**
(-2.08)

-0.0676*** -0.0670*** -0.0748***
(-4.55)
(-4.23)
(-4.44)

-0.0548**
(-2.57)

-0.0579**
(-2.60)

-0.0616**
(-2.57)

Wealth: (is proxied for by)
Rent
-0.0015*
(-1.88)

-0.0018**
(-2.16)

-0.0018*
(-1.83)

-0.0755*** -0.0774*** -0.0962***
(-4.39)
(-4.30)
(-4.94)

FundAge

0.0036*
(1.71)

0.0035
(1.48)

0.0052**
(2.03)

0.0029
(1.11)

0.0048*
(1.66)

0.0040
(1.40)

0.0030
(1.14)

0.0037
(1.40)

0.0061**
(2.02)

ManagerAge

-0.0004
(-0.10)

-0.0001
(-0.02)

-0.0001
(-0.02)

-0.0011
(-0.38)

-0.0025
(-0.79)

-0.0039
(-0.97)

-0.0039
(-0.86)

-0.0003
(-0.06)

0.0001
(0.02)
0.0733***
(3.43)

FirmSize

0.0539*** 0.0508*** 0.0542***
(3.13)
(2.73)
(2.80)

0.0509*
(1.91)

0.0420
(1.47)

0.0395
(1.31)

0.0594***
(3.07)

0.0572***
(2.80)

LogFirmNFunds

-0.0667**
(-2.48)

-0.0678**
(-2.41)

-0.0358
(-0.81)

-0.0165
(-0.33)

-0.0126
(-0.25)

-0.0743**
(-2.40)

-0.0767** -0.0905***
(-2.36)
(-2.76)

Volatility

-0.0508*** -0.0495*** -0.0458***
(-3.87)
(-3.71)
(-3.28)

-0.0463
(-1.55)

-0.0295
(-1.14)

-0.0334
(-1.26)

-0.0697*** -0.0688*** -0.0664***
(-5.38)
(-5.11)
(-4.75)

Skewness

0.0011*** 0.0011*** 0.0012***
(2.83)
(2.75)
(2.88)

0.0015***
(2.90)

0.0011**
(2.22)

0.0012**
(2.34)

-0.0668**
(-2.37)

0.0010**
(2.34)

0.0010**
(2.30)

0.0012***
(2.68)

0.0705
(1.44)

0.0755
(1.49)

-0.0656
(-0.96)

-0.0635
(-0.87)

0.0887
(1.58)

0.1303**
(2.19)

HasMBA

-0.0854*
(-1.91)

-0.1037**
(-2.22)

0.0198
(0.31)

-0.0270
(-0.40)

-0.0235
(-0.53)

-0.0569
(-1.26)

AdmissionRate

-0.0544
(-0.83)

-0.0848
(-1.27)

0.0801
(1.13)

0.0364
(0.37)

0.0506
(0.53)

-0.0022
(-0.02)

HasGraduate

ParYearsEdu
FinanceRelated
Managerial
Time F.E.
Fund style F.E.

YES

YES

-0.0015
(-0.22)

-0.0047
(-0.51)

-0.0096
(-1.28)

0.0945**
(2.12)

0.1134
(1.57)

0.0715
(1.49)

-0.0501
(-0.92)

-0.0672
(-1.07)

-0.0877
(-1.35)

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Num. obs.

23,823

21,447

20,722

11,403

10,039

9,616

15,867

14,622

13,782

Adj. R-sq

0.0137

0.0132

0.0130

0.0169

0.0169

0.0167

0.0128

0.0128

0.0129

45

Panel B. Wealth rank and quintiles
Dependent variable
Alpha
Indep. variables
WealthRank

Alpha

Dependent variable
Alpha

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.1113**
(-2.30)

-0.1125**
(-2.13)

-0.1460**
(-2.21)

Alpha

Alpha

Alpha

Indep. variables

(4)

(5)

(6)

WealthRankQ2

-0.0208
(-0.59)

0.0021
(0.06)

-0.0060
(-0.16)

WealthRankQ3

-0.0505
(-1.37)

-0.0326
(-0.80)

-0.0496
(-1.19)

WealthRankQ4

-0.0566
(-1.49)

-0.0485
(-1.16)

-0.0862*
(-1.85)

WealthRankQ5

-0.1316***
(-3.11)

-0.1284***
(-2.76)

-0.1800***
(-3.14)

FundSize

-0.0724***
(-5.29)

-0.0722***
(-4.93)

-0.0814***
(-5.18)

FundSize

-0.0740***
(-5.47)

-0.0742***
(-5.11)

-0.0835***
(-5.27)

FundAge

0.0032*
(1.87)

0.0036*
(1.92)

0.0046**
(2.32)

FundAge

0.0034**
(1.99)

0.0039**
(2.06)

0.0048**
(2.42)

ManagerAge

-0.0020
(-0.75)

-0.0005
(-0.17)

-0.0008
(-0.23)

-0.0015
(-0.56)

-0.0001
(-0.03)

-0.0002
(-0.07)

FirmSize

0.0653***
(4.46)

0.0644***
(4.06)

0.0702***
(4.28)

FirmSize

0.0662***
(4.48)

0.0657***
(4.16)

0.0713***
(4.31)

LogFirmNFunds

-0.0760***
(-3.33)

-0.0814***
(-3.39)

-0.0873***
(-3.54)

LogFirmNFunds

-0.0763***
(-3.30)

-0.0828***
(-3.43)

-0.0898***
(-3.60)

Volatility

-0.0510***
(-4.05)

-0.0446***
(-3.92)

-0.0420***
(-3.49)

Volatility

-0.0504***
(-3.94)

-0.0447***
(-3.93)

-0.0417***
(-3.48)

Skewness

0.0011***
(3.40)

0.0010***
(2.99)

0.0011***
(3.13)

Skewness

0.0011***
(3.44)

0.0010***
(3.04)

0.0011***
(3.18)

HasGraduate

0.0650*
(1.67)

0.0781**
(1.98)

HasGraduate

0.0555
(1.39)

0.0632
(1.58)

HasMBA

-0.0601*
(-1.72)

-0.0889**
(-2.39)

HasMBA

-0.0589*
(-1.65)

-0.0811**
(-2.18)

0.0111
(0.21)

-0.0286
(-0.53)

AdmissionRate

0.0115
(0.22)

-0.0278
(-0.51)

-0.0043
(-0.78)

ParYearsEdu

AdmissionRate
ParYearsEdu

ManagerAge

0.0894**
(2.31)

FinanceRelated

0.1107***
(2.65)

FinanceRelated

-0.0479
(-1.27)

Managerial

-0.0031
(-0.58)

-0.0337
(-0.93)

Managerial

Time F.E.

YES

YES

YES

Time F.E.

YES

YES

YES

Fund style F.E.

YES

YES

YES

Fund style F.E.

YES

YES

YES

Num. obs.

31,448

28,146

26,707

Num. obs.

31,448

28,146

26,707

Adj. R-sq

0.0146

0.0146

0.0143

Adj. R-sq

0.0147

0.0146

0.0143

46

Table 4. Family wealth and performance of fund managers, alternative measures
This table shows the regressions of alternative measures of fund performance on the managers' parents' household wealth rank during the
1940 Census (defined as in Table 3). GrossAlpha is computed as the fund's before-fees return minus the return predicted by the fourfactor model, BenchmarkAdjReturn is the fund's return net of the prospectus benchmark index return, AbnReturnOverBenchmark is the
fund's gross return minus the return predicted by the benchmark-based factor model, and ValueExtracted is the dollar measure of value
extracted from capital markets (in $mil) computed as the product between the fund's benchmark-adjusted return and the fund's inflationadjusted TNA (expressed in 2012 dollars) from the previous period. The control variables capture the manager's characteristics, his
parents' education depth and employment type, as well as key mutual fund and fund family characteristics. All the control variables are
taken as of the end of the month before the observation month. Exact variable definitions are given in Appendix 4. The inclusion of the
fixed effects is indicated at the bottom of the table. T-statistics (reported in parentheses) are based on standard errors clustered at the fund
level. * (**, ***) indicates the significance of the coefficient at the 10% (5%, 1%) level.
Dependent variable

Dependent variable

Gross
Alpha

Gross
Alpha

Bench.Adj
Return

Bench.Adj
Return

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

WealthRank

-0.1052**
(-2.00)

-0.1338**
(-2.06)

-0.1193*
(-1.74)

-0.2205***
(-2.88)

FundSize

-0.0751*** -0.0849***
(-5.13)
(-5.44)

Indep. variables

-0.0559*** -0.0661***
(-3.41)
(-3.75)

Dependent variable
AbnReturn AbnReturn
Over
Over
Benchmark Benchmark
(5)
(6)

Dependent variable
Value
Extracted

Value
Extracted

(7)

(8)

-0.1186*
(-1.84)

-0.1840***
(-2.60)

-5.0593**
(-1.97)

-6.6870**
(-2.46)

-0.0602***
(-4.17)

-0.0705***
(-4.61)

-0.4500
(-0.95)

-0.5210
(-1.05)

FundAge

0.0030
(1.62)

0.0040**
(2.11)

0.0010
(0.41)

0.0029
(1.22)

0.0022
(0.97)

0.0037*
(1.68)

0.2650***
(3.31)

0.3025***
(3.54)

ManagerAge

-0.0003
(-0.09)

-0.0007
(-0.22)

0.0007
(0.20)

0.0018
(0.49)

0.0038
(1.20)

0.0043
(1.32)

0.1874
(1.24)

0.1905
(1.17)

FirmSize

0.0565***
(3.57)

0.0627***
(3.83)

0.0279
(1.40)

0.0302
(1.43)

0.0285
(1.60)

0.0332*
(1.78)

1.0510
(1.36)

1.0706
(1.32)

LogFirmNFunds

-0.0715*** -0.0766***
(-2.96)
(-3.10)

-0.0392
(-1.08)

-0.0381
(-0.99)

-0.0381
(-1.25)

-0.0372
(-1.16)

-1.1701
(-0.85)

-1.0826
(-0.74)

Volatility

-0.0395*** -0.0368***
(-3.52)
(-3.11)

-0.0240
(-1.36)

-0.0252
(-1.43)

-0.0786***
(-6.13)

-0.0774***
(-5.84)

-1.1927**
(-2.56)

-1.1976**
(-2.46)

Skewness

0.0009***
(2.66)

0.0010***
(2.81)

0.0006
(1.33)

0.0008
(1.61)

0.0015***
(3.58)

0.0017***
(4.01)

0.0038
(0.21)

0.0038
(0.21)

HasGraduate

0.0586
(1.49)

0.0738*
(1.85)

0.0258
(0.52)

0.0301
(0.60)

0.0139
(0.28)

0.0217
(0.43)

2.6393*
(1.72)

2.6338*
(1.68)

HasMBA

-0.0516
(-1.45)

-0.0829**
(-2.20)

0.0261
(0.65)

-0.0091
(-0.20)

0.0505
(1.17)

0.0198
(0.44)

-0.0146
(-0.01)

-0.1969
(-0.18)

AdmissionRate

0.0105
(0.20)

-0.0355
(-0.66)

-0.1377**
(-2.16)

-0.1753***
(-2.60)

-0.1269**
(-2.03)

-0.1712**
(-2.58)

ParYearsEdu
FinanceRelated
Managerial
Time F.E.
Fund style F.E.

YES

-6.0226*** -6.8613***
(-2.76)
(-3.12)

-0.0061
(-1.13)

0.0010
(0.16)

-0.0035
(-0.65)

-0.0785
(-0.50)

0.0854**
(2.25)

0.1685***
(3.51)

0.1245***
(2.69)

2.4676*
(1.86)

-0.0469
(-1.25)

-0.0751
(-1.50)

-0.0508
(-1.06)

0.5168
(0.49)

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Num. obs.

28,133

26,694

27,433

25,998

27,058

25,652

27,433

25,998

Adj. R-sq

0.0147

0.0144

0.0121

0.0121

0.0146

0.0146

0.0041

0.0041

47

Table 5. Goldfeld-Quandt test for heteroscedasticity due to selection on family wealth
This table shows the Goldfeld-Quandt test for the directional heteroscedasticity induced by WealthRank (defined as in Table 3). The sample of managers is split
into high and low sub-samples of WealthRank for which the (residual) variance of Alpha is compared; for example, in column (2) the middle tercile is dropped
from the analysis. The third row reports the F-statistics for the ratio of variances and the associated p-value in squared brackets.
Specification

Regressors

Constant only

Top half
v
Bottom half

Top one-third
v
Bottom one-third

Top one-fourth
v
Bottom one-fourth

(1)

(2)

(3)

Residual variance,
top WealthRank subsample

4.357

4.796

4.888

Residual variance,
bottom WealthRank subsample

4.211

4.254

3.808

1.035**
[0.010]

1.127***
[0.000]

1.284***
[0.000]

Residual variance,
top WealthRank subsample

4.325

4.721

4.917

Residual variance,
bottom WealthRank subsample

4.365

4.386

4.011

0.991
[0.703]

1.076***
[0.000]

1.226***
[0.000]

Statistics

F-statistic
[p-value]

WealthRank and controls

F-statistic
[p-value]

48

Table 6. Family wealth and managers' promotion-performance sensitivity
This table shows the linear probability regressions of the manager's promotion dummies on his past performance, his parents' household wealth rank during the
1940 Census (defined as in Table 3), and the interaction between the two. The promotion dummies indicate events when the number of funds the manager was in
charge of increased from the previous month (IncreaseFunds) or the total assets the manager controlled increased by more than twofold from the previous month
(IncreaseAssetsX2). Past performance is defined as the average monthly alpha (expressed in pp) of funds the manager managed over the past three (left pane) or
five (right pane) years. The control variables include the manager's and the firm's characteristics and are taken as of the end of the month before the observation
month. Exact variable definitions are given in Appendix 4. The inclusion of the fixed effects is indicated at the bottom of the table. T-statistics (reported in
parentheses) are based on standard errors clustered at the fund level. * (**, ***) indicates the significance of the coefficient at the 10% (5%, 1%) level.

Indep. variables
WealthRank
Past3YearGAlpha
WealthRank *
Past3YearGAlpha
ManagerAge
FirmSize
LogFirmNFunds
HasGraduate
HasMBA
AdmissionRate
ParYearsEdu
FinanceRelated
Managerial
Time F.E.
Fund style F.E.
Num. obs.
Adj. R-sq

Increase
Funds
(1)

Dependent variable
Increase
Increase
Funds
AssetsX2
(2)
(3)

-0.0002
0.0048
(-0.04)
(1.08)
0.0036
0.0031
(1.33)
(1.14)
-0.0050
-0.0039
(-1.12)
(-0.82)
-0.0007*** -0.0007***
(-3.76)
(-3.20)
0.0011
0.0011
(1.57)
(1.54)
0.0011
0.0012
(0.78)
(0.88)
-0.0023
-0.0017
(-0.77)
(-0.58)
0.0027
0.0014
(1.12)
(0.54)
0.0038
0.0046
(1.02)
(1.16)
-0.0003
(-0.95)
-0.0015
(-0.56)
-0.0071***
(-3.16)
YES
YES
YES
YES
30,632
28,981
0.0064
0.0067

0.0013
(0.79)
0.0072*
(1.94)
-0.0120**
(-2.15)
0.0003*
(1.76)
-0.0010**
(-2.34)
0.0037***
(3.35)
0.0038
(1.53)
-0.0013
(-0.63)
0.0041**
(2.24)

YES
YES
28,372
0.0069

Increase
AssetsX2
(4)

Indep. variables

0.0025
(1.08)
0.0036**
(2.38)
-0.0057**
(-2.31)
0.0004**
(2.32)
-0.0009*
(-1.92)
0.0035***
(3.09)
0.0044*
(1.70)
-0.0028
(-1.22)
0.0035*
(1.69)
-0.0001
(-0.57)
-0.0008
(-0.43)
-0.0048***
(-2.86)
YES
YES
26,890
0.0081

WealthRank
Past5YearGAlpha
WealthRank *
Past5YearGAlpha
ManagerAge
FirmSize
LogFirmNFunds
HasGraduate
HasMBA
AdmissionRate

Increase
Funds
(5)
0.0004
(0.10)
0.0061*
(1.89)
-0.0104**
(-2.13)
-0.0007***
(-3.72)
0.0011
(1.60)
0.0011
(0.77)
-0.0022
(-0.76)
0.0028
(1.14)
0.0037
(1.01)

ParYearsEdu
FinanceRelated
Managerial
Time F.E.
Fund style F.E.
Num. obs.
Adj. R-sq

49

YES
YES
30,632
0.0064

Dependent variable
Increase
Increase
Funds
AssetsX2
(6)
(7)
0.0053
(1.18)
0.0059*
(1.77)
-0.0096*
(-1.84)
-0.0007***
(-3.14)
0.0011
(1.56)
0.0012
(0.88)
-0.0017
(-0.57)
0.0014
(0.56)
0.0045
(1.14)
-0.0003
(-0.93)
-0.0014
(-0.53)
-0.0071***
(-3.16)
YES
YES
28,981
0.0068

0.0016
(0.93)
0.0084*
(1.81)
-0.0137**
(-1.99)
0.0003*
(1.77)
-0.0010**
(-2.32)
0.0037***
(3.34)
0.0038
(1.53)
-0.0013
(-0.62)
0.0040**
(2.20)

YES
YES
28,372
0.0070

Increase
AssetsX2
(8)
0.0026
(1.09)
0.0036**
(2.18)
-0.0054**
(-2.09)
0.0004**
(2.31)
-0.0009*
(-1.92)
0.0035***
(3.09)
0.0044*
(1.71)
-0.0028
(-1.22)
0.0035*
(1.68)
-0.0001
(-0.57)
-0.0008
(-0.42)
-0.0048***
(-2.86)
YES
YES
26,890
0.0080

Table 7. Family wealth and measures of fund management activity
This table shows the tests relating measures of fund management activity to the managers' parents' household wealth rank
during the 1940 Census (defined as in Table 3). The activity measures include the annualized portfolio turnover (Turnover,
expressed in pp), the Herfindahl portfolio concentration measure (PortfolioConcentration, expressed in pp), the average
duration that the shares are held in the fund's portfolio (HoldingHorizon, expressed in months, based on the FIFO assumption
of purchases and sales), and the correlation between the changes in positions of the fund and the changes in positions of the
(hypothetical) average fund in the style (Herding, expressed in pp). The control variables reflect the manager's
characteristics, his parents' education depth and employment type, as well as key mutual fund and fund family characteristics.
All the control variables are taken as of the end of the previous quarter. Exact variable definitions are given in Appendix 4.
The inclusion of the fixed effects is indicated at the bottom of the table. T-statistics (reported in parentheses) are based on
standard errors clustered at the fund level. * (**, ***) indicates the significance of the coefficient at the 10% (5%, 1%) level.
Dependent variable

Dependent variable

Dependent variable

Dependent variable

Turnover

Turnover

Portfolio
Conc.

Portfolio
Conc.

Holding
Horizon

Holding
Horizon

Herding

Herding

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

WealthRank

-11.4182**
(-2.52)

-10.8176*
(-1.80)

-0.5709
(-1.01)

-0.8466
(-1.34)

4.0190
(1.25)

4.8954
(1.34)

2.9057
(0.86)

3.7787
(1.00)

FundSize

-3.7784***
(-3.99)

-3.9565***
(-4.33)

-0.2180
(-1.51)

-0.1258
(-0.83)

1.3212*
(1.85)

1.4576**
(1.97)

4.6037***
(6.53)

4.1597***
(6.10)

FundAge

-0.3224**
(-1.97)

-0.2489
(-1.42)

0.0417
(1.29)

0.0442
(1.42)

0.5735***
(4.08)

0.5857***
(4.01)

0.0486
(0.35)

0.0186
(0.14)

ManagerAge

-0.3272
(-1.23)

-0.2685
(-1.01)

0.0755
(1.34)

0.0934*
(1.71)

0.0093
(0.05)

-0.0178
(-0.08)

-0.4359**
(-2.16)

-0.4405**
(-1.97)

FirmSize

0.1275
(0.11)

-0.1578
(-0.14)

0.0943
(0.47)

0.0949
(0.50)

0.0399
(0.05)

0.2872
(0.34)

-0.9558
(-1.16)

-0.1820
(-0.23)

LogFirmNFunds

1.8461
(1.11)

3.1415*
(1.94)

-0.5479
(-1.17)

-0.5322
(-1.26)

-2.4396*
(-1.76)

-2.9009**
(-2.11)

2.8716**
(2.32)

1.7152
(1.43)

2.6981***
(3.99)

2.5923***
(3.68)

0.0323
(0.38)

0.0643
(0.79)

-1.6356***
(-2.93)

-1.4749**
(-2.51)

-0.1677
(-0.44)

0.1652
(0.48)

Volatility

0.0299*
(1.72)

0.0313*
(1.74)

0.0032
(1.35)

0.0026
(1.30)

-0.0121
(-0.86)

-0.0146
(-0.99)

-0.0081
(-0.61)

-0.0069
(-0.50)

Skewness

-6.8020*
(-1.74)

-6.5428
(-1.65)

-0.3877
(-1.06)

-0.4061
(-1.06)

4.3791
(1.51)

4.5216
(1.55)

0.4821
(0.17)

0.6991
(0.25)

HasMBA

6.0315
(1.59)

5.7514
(1.53)

-0.0311
(-0.09)

0.2642
(0.60)

-1.7515
(-0.60)

-1.0941
(-0.35)

-3.2487
(-1.22)

-4.0418
(-1.58)

AdmissionRate

3.3168
(0.66)

1.3093
(0.23)

-0.7738
(-1.34)

-1.3592*
(-1.97)

-7.5796*
(-1.83)

-7.7177*
(-1.74)

-3.3100
(-0.86)

-6.5558
(-1.62)

Indep. variables

HasGraduate

ParYearsEdu

0.3018
(0.77)

0.0508
(1.19)

-0.3730
(-1.31)

-0.7596***
(-3.05)

FinanceRelated

-4.5795
(-1.37)

-0.6604
(-1.60)

0.2163
(0.07)

3.4182
(1.32)

Managerial

1.6052
(0.50)

1.1182*
(1.66)

0.5333
(0.21)

-2.0113
(-0.88)

Time F.E.

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Fund style F.E.

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Num. obs.

2,887

2,647

2,933

2,692

3,899

3,619

3,870

3,593

Adj. R-sq

0.2356

0.2382

0.1494

0.1926

0.3206

0.3313

0.3576

0.3747

50

Table 8. Family wealth and fund flows
This table shows the regressions of fund flows on the managers' parents' household wealth rank during 1940 Census
(defined as in Table 3) and the average monthly alpha of the fund over the previous 12 months. Flow is expressed in
pp and is computed as the dollar flow (i.e., the difference between the end-of-quarter fund TNA and the previousquarter fund TNA multiplied by one plus the gross return of the fund over the quarter) divided by the previousquarter fund TNA. The control variables reflect the manager's characteristics, his parents' education depth and
employment type, as well as key mutual fund and fund family characteristics. All the control variables are taken as
of the end of the previous quarter. Exact variable definitions are given in Appendix 4. The inclusion of the fixed
effects is indicated at the bottom of the table. T-statistics (reported in parentheses) are based on standard errors
clustered at the fund level. * (**, ***) indicates the significance of the coefficient at the 10% (5%, 1%) level.

Indep. variables

Dependent variable

Dependent variable

Flow

Flow

Flow

Flow

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-1.8991
(-1.17)

-2.2797
(-1.18)

-1.9534
(-1.34)
3.0543***
(5.78)

-2.6275
(-1.47)
3.1466***
(5.67)

-1.7425***
(-3.71)
-0.2093***
(-4.16)
0.0268
(0.35)
2.4400***
(4.77)
-3.5839***
(-5.63)
0.0858
(0.32)
0.0172*
(1.78)
-1.0369
(-0.76)
0.0719
(0.06)
-1.1199
(-0.69)

-1.7951***
(-3.62)
-0.2365***
(-4.72)
0.0186
(0.23)
2.4641***
(4.51)
-3.7995***
(-5.45)
0.1796
(0.63)
0.0181*
(1.81)
-1.1290
(-0.83)
-0.1061
(-0.09)
-0.8136
(-0.43)
0.0539
(0.39)
1.0120
(0.94)
-0.7373
(-0.64)

-1.5188***
(-3.54)
-0.1862***
(-4.00)
0.0316
(0.44)
2.0146***
(4.15)
-2.7968***
(-4.44)
0.0968
(0.35)
0.0172*
(1.85)
-1.1388
(-0.91)
0.4990
(0.41)
-0.5225
(-0.34)

-1.4836***
(-3.37)
-0.2152***
(-4.62)
0.0353
(0.47)
1.9505***
(3.77)
-2.9365***
(-4.39)
0.1480
(0.52)
0.0185*
(1.95)
-1.3885
(-1.11)
0.5150
(0.43)
0.5097
(0.29)
0.2053
(1.60)
0.9366
(0.91)
-0.5035
(-0.46)

Time F.E.

YES

YES

YES

YES

Fund style F.E.

YES

YES

YES

YES

Num. obs.

5,430

5,106

5,176

4,866

Adj. R-sq

0.0612

0.0635

0.1447

0.1509

WealthRank
Past12MonthAlpha
WealthRank *
Past12MonthAlpha
FundSize
FundAge
ManagerAge
FirmSize
LogFirmNFunds
Volatility
Skewness
HasGraduate
HasMBA
AdmissionRate
ParYearsEdu
FinanceRelated
Managerial

51

