NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE RISE IN LIFE EXPECTANCY, HEALTH TRENDS AMONG THE ELDERLY,
AND THE DEMAND FOR CARE A SELECTED LITERATURE REVIEW
Bjorn Lindgren
Working Paper 22521
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22521

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016

The work of this project was supported financially by the Swedish National Institute of Economic
Research (SNIER). The author is grateful to Erik Jonasson and other staff at the SNIER for useful
and encouraging comments on earlier versions of this paper. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Bjorn Lindgren. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Rise in Life Expectancy, Health Trends among the Elderly, and the Demand for Care A Selected Literature Review
Bjorn Lindgren
NBER Working Paper No. 22521
August 2016
JEL No. H51,I1,I38,J11,J14
ABSTRACT
The objective is to review the evidence on (a) ageing and health and (b) the demand for healthand social services among the elderly. Issues are: does health status of the elderly improve over
time, and how do the trends in health status of the elderly affect the demand for health- and
elderly care? It is not a complete review, but it covers most of recent empirical studies.
The reviewed literature provides strong evidence that the prevalence of chronic disease among
the elderly has increased over time. There is also fairly strong evidence that the consequences of
disease have become less problematic due to medical progress: decreased mortality risk, milder
and slower development over time, making the time with disease (and health-care treatment)
longer but less troublesome than before. Evidence also suggests the postponement of functional
limitations and disability. Some of the reduction in disability can be attributed to improvements in
treatments of chronic diseases, but it is also due to the increased use of assistive technology,
accessibility of buildings, etc. The results indicate that the ageing individual is expected to need
health care for a longer period of time than previous generations but elderly care for a shorter.

Bjorn Lindgren
Department of Health Sciences
Lund University
P.O. Box 157
SE-22100 LUND
Sweden
and NBER
Bjorn.Lindgren@med.lu.se

1. INTRODUCTION

Life expectancy increases, and the elderly is the fastest growing age group in the population. This
is good news, but it also provides a number of challenges to society, not least regarding health
care and elderly care. The question arises whether or not health of the elderly will be improved as
life expectancy increases and counteract a rising need for health- and elderly care, or will the
elderly in average experience a longer time than before in ill-health, with chronic disease, and
with lower capacity to carry on activities of daily life. These issues have received much theoretical
and empirical attention ever since the publication of a keynote address, held before the annual
meeting of the American Public Health Association in Miami 1976 by Ernest Gruenberg; see
Gruenberg (1977). In his speech, Gruenberg emphasized that medical research and new health
technologies had been very successful in adding more years to life but less so when it comes to
adding more health to these years. So, Gruenberg was later associated with a seemingly
pessimistic view or hypothesis of ageing and health – a scenario in which the average period of
morbidity during an individual’s lifetime would expand.
Gruenberg’s paper attracted various responses for and against his scenario of expanded
morbidity. One of the most influential papers that came out of the discussion was written by
James Fries (1980). He claimed that it was quite possible and more likely that the period of
morbidity would be compressed rather than prolonged. Two assumptions were essential, though:
a) that there is a biological limit to life expectancy and b) that individuals would be more
conscious in their health behavior. These two assumptions were both questioned by George
Manton (1982), who claimed that periods of ill-health might certainly be prolonged, when
medical research and the use of new medical technology improves life expectancy, but that these
periods might be spent in better health status, with less disability, and improved capacity to
undertake activities of daily living (ADL).
This makes for three different scenarios or hypotheses regarding ageing and health. In the
following, we will review the basic papers behind the scenarios. The main part, however, will
report on empirical findings, particularly from the U.S.A., the Netherlands, and Sweden, related
to ageing, health, and health- and elderly care. Doing so, we will emphasize that, while mortality
is fairly easy to define, health is a multidimensional concept. One central aspect of health is the
absence of disease; another one is quality of life and capacity to perform activities of daily living;
a third one is hearing, vision and other physical and mental functions. There is no obvious oneto-one correlation between these different aspects. So, different components might affect the
demand for health care and elderly care differently, and the meaning of health in a specific
environment needs to be defined or clarified. The outline is as follows:
a) Three scenarios or hypotheses on ageing and health
b) Is there a limit to life expectancy?
c) Ageing and health
d) Ageing, health and the demand for health- and elderly care
e) Conclusions

2. THREE SCENARIOS OR HYPOTHESES ON AGEING AND HEALTH
In the literature, three main scenarios or hypotheses can be distinguished: “expansion of
morbidity”, “compression of morbidity”, and “dynamic equilibrium”.
Expansion of morbidity
What gave rise to a somewhat pessimistic view on ageing and health was an analysis of 40 years
of progress in health technology, lowering mortality rates but also extending periods of morbidity
(Gruenberg, 1977). Medical research had succeeded to prolong life for a number of diseases but
without finding how to cure them completely. Gruenberg mentions several examples of chronic
diseases, i.e., diseases where the only alternative to stay ill is death: Down’s syndrome, senile
dementia, arteriosclerosis, hypertension, schizophrenia, diabetes, spina bifida, pernicious anemia,
Huntington’s chorea, and hemophiliacs. For each disease, Gruenberg reports on the medical
progress achieved and how the prevalence has increased as a result. Being a physician and an
epidemiologist, Gruenberg admits that he is disappointed, not because of the progress per se, of
course, but because too little resources having been spent on developing preventive health
technologies. This would require more research into the causes of chronic disease. By definition,
a chronic disease cannot be cured, but it might be possible to prevent. Gruenberg ends his paper
stating this recommendation: “For a period at least, health-saving must take precedence over lifesaving. And we will not move forward in enhancing health until we make the prevention of
nonfatal chronic illness our top research priority.” (Gruenberg, 1977; p. 22)
One should observe that Gruenberg did not look upon the development of health technology in
the past as given by nature without any possibilities to alter and give it a different direction in the
future. Gruenberg himself did not participate in the discussion that followed in the scientific
literature, especially after Fries’ response (Fries, 1980). He made, though, an empirical
contribution on health and the utilization of health services and the implications for setting
Medicare payments to HMOs (Gruenberg, 1989). The arguments for the expansion of morbidity
hypothesis were discussed at length by Olshansky et al. (1991).
Compression of morbidity
In the opinion of Fries (1980), increases in life expectancy would be followed by decreased
periods of morbidity. His prognosis rests on two premises: a) that the length of life is fixed and
b) that chronic disease can be postponed if people improve their life style – give up smoking,
change their eating and physical exercise habits, and drink alcohol sensibly. More and more
people of a birth cohort will survive until their “natural” time of death, producing a
rectangularization of the survival curve (Comfort, 1964). According to Fries, the United States is
already, i.e. in 1980 (sic!), approaching the biologically determined upper limit of life expectancy;
Fries believes the maximum (and also “ideal”) expected length of life at birth to be 85 years.
During these circumstances, the following predictions can be made, according to Fries: 1) the
number of very old people will not increase; 2) the average period of diminished physical vigour
will decrease; 3) chronic disease will occupy a smaller proportion of the typical life span; and 4)
the need for medical care later in life will decrease (Fries, 1980; p. 245).
One may consider the idea of a compressed period of morbidity as a possible scenario rather
than as a strict scientific hypothesis about how ageing and health will develop as a matter of fact
in the future. If there is no limit to what extent we can grow older still or if we do not bother to
change our life styles into less risky ones, then there is no reason to believe that morbidity will
account for a lesser share of life than before. Fries perceived that the same factors that were
responsible for the decline in mortality would also account for increases in health and decreases

in the incidence of chronic disease, so that chronic disease would be postponed and strike later in
life (Fries, 1980, 2000, 2001, 2003). Strategies for improving health at old age should primarily be
directed towards attempts to prevent chronic diseases (Fries and Crapo, 1981; Fries, 1989, 2002).
In several publications, Fries and associates show what improved life styles might do for health
of the elderly; see, for instance, Hubert et al. (2002). It should be observed, too, that the
assumption of a biologically determined upper limit to life is quite central for the idea or scenario
of compressed morbidity. There, Fries relies, inter alia, on biologists Shock (1960), Hayflick
(1970), Upton (1977) and Keyfitz (1978).
It is interesting to note that Fries’ hopes for the future partly coincide with Gruenberg’s. Both
emphasize preventive measures and preventive health technologies. Fries seems to put more trust
on the willingness of individuals to live a healthy life, while Gruenberg wants to see a different
direction of medical research. Both claim that mortality and chronic disease are not necessarily
directly related to each other. They have certainly quite different opinions, however, on the
potential for future increases in life expectancy.
Dynamic Equilibrium
Manton (1982) is critical to the hypothesis that there are biological limits to life and presents
theoretical, experimental and empirical arguments at length to refute it. The proportion surviving
to the most advanced ages has increased nearly 2½ times as fast as at younger ages. Moreover,
even though there are signs that an irreducible mortality rate is approaching at earlier ages, no
such indications at age 85 have been observed. He also questions the willingness by which
individuals would give up present life styles to start new and healthier lives. Fries (1980) does not
provide any evidence or clues either. Moreover, Manton emphasizes the fact that there are also
chronic diseases that are completely genetically determined (for instance, Down’s syndrome and
hemophilia) and, therefore, cannot be altered by personal choice. Manton also refers to Burch
(1976), who argues that there is a major genetic component in all risks for chronic disease.
Instead, Manton (1982) claims that life expectancy can continue to increase without any apparent
upper limit and that prevalence may well rise due to unchanged incidence rates and extended
lives. He cites US nationally representative data on disability, activity restriction, self-assessed
health, and the rate of long-term institutionalization at advanced ages, showing no marked
deterioration in health status among people 65+ during the 1960s and 1970s despite significant
increases in life expectancy. Since prevalence of disease increased during the same time period, he
concludes that something must have been accomplished to reduce the severity and associated
disability of disease.
In order to better understand the relation of morbidity and mortality as life expectancy increases,
Manton introduces the concept of a “dynamic equilibrium” (Manton, 1982; p. 226). According to
Manton, the concept involves some modification of the basic epidemiological relation that
prevalence is a function of incidence and duration. Then, if mortality decreases and incidence is
unchanged, duration (and prevalence) must increase. The question is, Manton says, in which way
duration is increased. One way is to eliminate lethal consequences of a disease, e.g., pneumonia,
while not affecting the basic rate of progression of the disease process. Another way is to change
the rate of progression; in this case, duration (and life expectancy) is increased by reducing
disease severity. Then, life expectancy may primarily be increased with the period spent in a
highly morbid state being relatively constant. Manton suggests that most of recent changes in lifeexpectancy have been of the second kind, and he refers to diabetes and hypertension, both
diseases that can be well managed with inputs of health care and changes in individual life style.
“Without treatment, mortality risks could rise; average duration, and hence prevalence, would fall.
With treatment, though prevalence increases at the expense of health resources, the quality of life

gained is often sufficiently good to justify the efforts. This position does not argue against the
merits of the primary prevention of chronic diseases (i.e., incidence reduction) but rather suggests
that positive societal benefits can accrue to disease management efforts.” (Manton, 1982; p. 227).
In summary, health-care costs will be incurred to reduce the severity of chronic disease or to slow
its rate of progression, which reduce mortality risks. In return, these costs will accelerate as life
expectancy and disease prevalence increase. Since extensions of life are produced by reductions in
the rate of progression of the disease, quality of life and ability to work will increase. This may
lead, Manton says, to greater economic productivity, not least if people can remain working at
older ages than today. Thus, increases in health-care costs should not be seen in isolation but
balanced against greater economic productivity. For individuals, the message is that they will live
longer, certainly with a larger share of life with a chronic disease, but with a higher quality of life
and improved capacity to take part in society.
Manton continued to make both theoretical and empirical contributions to the field for a long
time. In several papers, he and his colleagues analyzed successive waves of the US National
Long-Term Care Surveys (Manton et al., 1995; Manton and Land, 2000; Manton et al., 2006;
Manton et al., 2008). They showed significant declines in disability, measured as ADL (activities
of daily living) and IADL (instrumental activities of daily living) among the elderly US population
during the 1980s and 1990s. ADLs refer to personal maintenance tasks performed daily, such as
eating, getting in and out of bed, bathing, dressing, toileting, and getting around indoors. IADLs
refer to household maintenance tasks such as cooking, doing the laundry, grocery shopping,
travelling, and managing money. Based on the results of declining disability among the elderly in
earlier decades, Singer and Manton (1998) and Manton et al. (2007) make projections of lower
future spending in the Medicare insurance system. Manton (2008) raises concerns about whether
the disability declines will continue because of the current increases in obesity prevalence. Health
is part of human capital, the other main part is education (Grossman, 1972); Manton et al. (2007)
and Manton et al. (2009) discuss the effects of health capital increases in the ageing US
population on labour-force participation and long-term economic growth, respectively.
Akushevich et al. (2007) present a microsimulation model, allowing short- and long-term
population changes to be forecasted, conditional on the prevalence of one or more health risks
(smoking, excessive alcohol consumption and obesity, for instance).
Conclusion
Careful reading of the original sources for the three scenarios or hypotheses of ageing and health
somewhat modifies the picture of how they are generally described and interpreted. Careful
reading also makes clear the importance of distinguishing between the different dimensions of
health, especially between presence of disease and dimensions of health related to self-assessed
health, disability and functional capacity. The “extension of morbidity” scenario is based on an
analysis of the effects of advances in medical technology during the 1930s to 1970s, by which
mortality risks were reduced for a number of chronic diseases without affecting the onset
(incidence) of disease. So, the result was an increase in the prevalence of disease and a longer
expected life in need of health care. If the severity of disease would remain the same, the rise in
costs would be substantial. The “dynamic equilibrium” scenario is based on a thorough analysis
of the character of medical advances behind the reduced mortality rates. While some of them
have not changed the severity of diseases, most have been accompanied by both reduced severity,
slower progression of the disease process, and increased life expectancy as a result of newtechnology health-care inputs. Since no change in the incidence of disease is assumed, the
prevalence of disease and the use of health care, especially primary health care (including
pharmaceuticals) will increase, while quality of life will increase and the demand for nursing
homes and other forms of elderly- or health care decrease. The important distinction between

health as absence of disease and health as quality of life is emphasized; the share of life with a
disease is increased, while the share of life with good quality of life is increased. The first two
scenarios above are based on analyses of the impact of medical advances, constant incidence
rates, and no foreseeable limit to life extensions. The “compression of morbidity” scenario on the
other hand is based on the assumption that people will adopt healthier life styles, thereby
reducing and postponing the incidence of disease to later years of life. Since it is also assumed
that there is a biological limit to life extensions making larger future increases in life expectancy
beyond the present ones improbable, the time with morbidity and health-care use will be
compressed and both the share of disease-free life time and the share of high-quality life time will
increase. The hypotheses and assumed mechanisms behind them are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1. Hypotheses on gains in longevity and health status
Hypothesis
Expansion of morbidity

Source
Gruenberg (1977)

Healthy life expectancy
Gains in longevity
accompanied by additional
years with chronic disease

Compression of morbidity

Fries (1980)

Both disease-free and
disability-free years
increasing more than gains
in longevity

Dynamic equilibrium

Manton (1982)

Gains in longevity
accompanied by additional
years without disability, not
necessarily without chronic
disease but disease with
less severe progress due to
new medical treatments

Mechanisms assumed
Incidence of disease
unchanged, medical
progress will successfully
improve survival
probabilities for a number
of chronic diseases
requiring life-long
treatment, hence increasing
the prevalence of chronic
disease
Healthier life-styles will
decrease and/or postpone
the incidence of disease
until later ages, while there
is a defined upper limit for
life extension, hence
decreasing the prevalence
of both chronic disease and
disability
Incidence of disease
unchanged, medical
progress will successfully
improve survival
probabilities while reducing
the severity of disease,
hence increasing the
prevalence of chronic
disease but decreasing
disability

3. IS THERE A LIMIT TO LIFE EXPECTANCY?
An upper limit to life expectancy is a central assumption behind the “compression of morbidity”
scenario (Fries, 1980). Gruenberg (1977) and Manton (1982) do not make this assumption.
Whether the assumption is true or not has important consequences not only for which scenario
seems most likely but for forecasts of life expectancy, population ageing and medical and social
programmes tied to the size and health status of the elderly population. In the past, hypotheses

about an upper limit have often been based on observations of past trends in mortality; for other
methods, see, e.g., Olshansky et al. (1990).
Using life tables for the United States in 1980 and 1985, Olshansky et al. (1990) estimate an upper
bound, based on hypothesized reductions in current mortality rates necessary to achieve a life
expectancy at birth from 80 to 120 years and a life expectancy at the age of 50 from 30 to 70
years. Using conditional probabilities from US life tables, reductions in mortality required to
achieve a longevity of 80-120 years were compared to those resulting from hypothetical cures for
all cardiovascular diseases, ischemic heart disease, diabetes, and cancer. Their results indicate that
in order for life expectancy at birth to increase from present US levels to what was referred to by
Fries (1980) as the average biological limit to life, i.e., age 85, mortality rates from all causes of
death would need to decline at all ages by 55 percent, and at ages 50+ by 60 percent. Given that
hypothetical cures for major degenerative diseases would reduce total mortality by 75 percent, the
authors conclude that it is highly unlikely that life expectancy at birth will exceed the age of 85.
They admit, however, that major advances in genetic engineering and new life-extending
technologies might certainly be introduced, followed by marked declines in mortality and
increases in longevity.
Using the same methodology but extending the data base to include age- and sex-specific death
rates from 1985 to 1995 in France, Japan, and the United States, Olshansky et al. (2001)
examined whether recent trends conformed with their earlier predictions (Olshansky, 1990). They
conclude that “future gains in life expectancy will be measured in days or months rather than
years” (Olshansky et al., 2001, p.1492). According to the authors, “there are no life-style changes,
surgical procedures, vitamins, antioxidants, hormones, or techniques of genetic engineering
available today with the capacity to repeat the gains in life expectancy that were achieved during
the 20th century” (Olshansky et al., 2001, p.1492).
Referring to observed life expectancies in various countries, Oeppen and Vaupel (2002) question
the methods used by Olshansky et al. (1990, 2001) and other writers (e.g., Dublin, 1928). In their
1990 paper, e.g., Olshansky et al. asserted that life expectancy “should not exceed… 35 years at
age 50 unless major breakthroughs occur in controlling the fundamental rate of aging.”
According to Oeppen and Vaupel (2002), however, this limit was surpassed by Japanese women
in 1996. After examining a number of similar papers, Oeppen and Vaupel (2002) conclude that
the estimates of limits to life expectancy, from Dublin (1928) to Olshansky et al. (1990, 2001)
have been broken, “on average five years after publication”. Instead, Oeppen and Vaupel (2002)
refer to “the astonishing fact… (that) female life expectancy in the record-holding country has
risen for 160 years at a steady pace of almost three months per year”. In order to make better
forecasts of life expectancy, they recommend that officials charged with forecasting trends over
future decades should base their calculations on the empirical record of mortality improvements
in the past and/or by considering the gap between national performance of life expectancy and
the best-practice level.
Similar arguments against the calculations made by Olshansky et al. are put forward by Lee (2001)
and by Lee and Carter (1992). Lee (2001) refers, inter alia, to Olshansky et al. (2001), in which
they worry that “continued decline at the long-run historical rates would reduce the death rates at
ages below 30 to biologically implausible levels, and so constraints the infant mortality rate not to
fall below 5 per 1000” (Lee, 2001, p. 1654). According to Lee (2001), however, 12 countries
already reported infant mortality below this level; Iceland as low as 2.8. Lee (2001) further asserts
that it does not seem probable that medical progress suddenly would cease and conclude that it
would be “most prudent to assume that mortality will continue to decline on trend” (Lee, 2001,
p. 1654).

Tuljapurkar et al. (2000) provide further evidence. They examined mortality over five decades in
the G7 countries (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, UK, and USA). They found that
mortality at each age had declined exponentially at a roughly constant rate in each of the seven
countries. Using stochastic mortality forecasting models, they found median forecasts of life
expectancy that were substantially larger than existing official forecasts, indicating that future
dependency ratios would be largely underestimated. For 2030, the forecasts of the authors were
between 6 percent (UK) and 40 percent (Japan) higher than the official ones.
Christensen et al. (2009) updated the estimates of Oeppen and Vaupel (2002), using data from
the additional seven years available since that publication. Their results showed that life
expectancy keeps rising.
Several researchers claim, however, that current trends in obesity may slow down or even cause
declines in life expectancy within the first half of this century. Being severely obese, e.g., reduces
life expectancy by an estimated 5 to 20 years. Analysing US trends in obesity and mortality risks,
Olshansky et al. (2005) suggest that the rapid rise in childhood obesity in the USA might shorten
life expectancy by as much as five years. Warnings against the potential effects of obesity on
mortality rates, prevalence of disease, and health-care expenditures also come from, e.g.,
Goldman et al., 2005; Lakdawalla et al., 2005; Olshansky, 2005; Borg et al., 2005; Ödegaard et al.,
2008; Persson and Ödegaard, 2011; Swinburn et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2011. See also chapter 5 of
this working paper.
Conclusion
As yet, there is no evidence that the rate of improvement in older age mortality is slowing down
or that older age deaths are being compressed into a narrow age band as they approach a
hypothesized upper limit to longevity. There is, though, a significant rectangularization of
survival probabilities as suggested by Fries (1980). Obesity might reduce future declines in
average mortality rates, if current trends persist. Increasing awareness of this threat against
population health and life might reduce the problem, though.

4. AGEING AND HEALTH
Naturally, there is a link between health and longevity. People in good health live longer. In fact,
at the individual level, there is firm evidence that health status, in particular self-assessed health,
strongly predicts mortality; see, e.g., Mossey and Shapiro (1982), Idler and Benyamini (1997),
Benyamini and Idler (1999), van Doorslaer and Gerdtham (2003), Helweg-Larsen et al. (2003),
Baron-Epel et al. (2004), Benjamins et al (2004), and Shang and Goldman (2008). Individual
health status is not determined by age alone; education, income, and wealth as well as genetic
factors are also important (Grossman, 1972). Education is important to explain differences in
health-risk behaviour, which causes individual differences in health. Improvements in average
educational levels, higher average incomes, and decreasing rates of smoking are some of the
factors behind the increase in population health for many years.
Several literature reviews on changes in health status among the elderly over time are available,
even recent ones, updating results of some of the most recent studies. So, in this section, devoted
to ageing and health, we will first summarize reviews of international studies. Then we will

present recent international original studies, not covered by available reviews and, finally, review
available original studies from Sweden.
Health is a multidimensional concept. One central aspect of health is the absence of disease;
another one is quality of life and capacity to perform activities of daily living; a third one is
hearing, vision and other physical and mental functions. There is no obvious one-to-one
correlation between these aspects. One aspect, e.g., prevalence of disease (a negative indicator),
may increase, while e.g., quality of life, simultaneously improves. Thus, the meaning of health in a
specific environment needs to be defined or clarified. Most studies report on the development of
disability, fewer on the prevalence of disease. Disability is most often measured as problems to
undertake activities of daily living (ADL) or instrumental activities of daily living (IADL). ADLs
refer to personal maintenance tasks performed daily, such as eating, getting in and out of bed,
bathing, dressing, toileting, and getting around indoors. IADLs refer to household maintenance
tasks such as cooking, doing the laundry, grocery shopping, travelling, and managing money.
Recent reviews of international studies
In a systematic review, Freedman et al. (2002) assessed the quality, quantity and consistency of
U.S. trends in disability (ADL or IADL) and in physical, cognitive, and sensory functioning
among the elderly during the late 1980s and the 1990s. Out of more than 800 articles reviewed,
the authors selected and evaluated 16. The authors found that the prevalence of any disability
declined significantly; these improvements did not hold for all specific measures of disability,
however. Late-life disability declines were concentrated on IADL limitations, while there were
conflicting evidence regarding ADL disability. Cognitive impairments seemed to have declined;
limitations in hearing appeared to have been constant; evidence was mixed for self-reported
vision. Even though several measures of old age disability and limitations showed improvements,
the authors conclude that the implications of their findings for the future demand for medical
care suggest that caution is in order. Without a better understanding of the causes of these
improvements, it remains unclear “whether medical expenditures have fueled health
improvements or whether health improvements will help save medical costs in the future”
(Freedman et al., 2002; p. 3146).
Parker and Thorslund (2007) reviewed a number of Swedish and international studies. They
concluded that there were favourable trends in disability, and, if they continued, the future need
for social services and long-term care would increase at a lower rate than demography. On the
other hand, trends in disease and in some functional limitations suggest an increased need for
resources in health care, rehabilitation and compensatory interventions, such as assistive
technology.
Christensen et al. (2009) reviewed previous and recent research (especially reports published in
2005 and later) on population ageing and trends in health in highly developed countries, focusing
on prevalence of disease, risk factors, functional limitations and disability. They found that the
prevalence of diseases in the elderly has generally increased over time and that the number of life
years with morbidity has been increasing. They mention, for instance, that there have been
increases in the prevalence rates of chronic diseases, including heart disease, arthritis, and
diabetes, reported from the USA, 12 OECD countries, the Netherlands and Sweden. Obesity has
been increasing in almost all studied populations, implying higher risks of death and of
developing health problems, including diabetes, arthritis, and stroke. Evidence is mixed regarding
functional limitations, even though vision seems to have been improved – the result of
developments in cataract surgery. Improvements have been reported from Finland, the
Netherlands, Japan, Sweden, and USA for mobility and for the ability to perform activities of
daily living; in Sweden, however, the positive trend seems to have been broken, and increases in

disability has been reported since the mid-1990s. Life years in good self-rated health have
generally been increasing; there is also some evidence (but weak) that life years without disability
has been increasing, at least in Europe.
Crimmins and Beltrán-Sanchez (2010) reviewed recent research (i.e. papers published since the
year 2000 mainly) on mortality and morbidity trends in the USA to evaluate whether there are
signs of a compression of morbidity. They found that in recent years mortality has still declined
even though the decline has slowed down, especially for women. They also found substantial
evidence that prevalence of disease and functioning loss has increased. As a few examples, they
mention that the incidence of a first heart attach has been relatively stable since the 1960s and
that the incidence of the most common cancers has been increasing until recently. In addition,
there has been substantial increases in the incidence of diabetes during the last decades.
Treatment has improved, so the consequences of disease have become less serious. Diseases are
now both less lethal and less disabling; they extend over a longer period of time and may also be
less progressive. Calculations of life expectancy with and without health problems at ages 20 and
65 indicated an increase in life expectancy with disease and with functioning loss between 1998
and 2006 and a decrease in the years without disease and functioning loss. On the other hand, the
authors found substantial evidence that disability has decreased. There was a decrease in the rates
of onset of disability and an increase in the expected proportion of disability-free life years.
International original studies
Freedman et al. (2012) analyzed five national US surveys to determine whether the prevalence of
activity limitations among the older US population continued to decline in the first decade of the
21st century. The authors found no evidence of continued downward trends in ADL or IADL
limitations taken together for the 65-and-older population as a whole. Personal care and domestic
activity limitations seem to have continued to decline for ages 85 and older (and a lower rate were
institutionalized) but were roughly constant for the 65-84 ones. One should observe that modest
increases (about one percent higher than the same age group born 10 years earlier) were observed
for the 55-64 years old, which would probably increase the future prevalence of activity
limitations for the 65-and-older population. That activity limitations have increased in the US
population over the last decade among those nearing late life has also been observed by, e.g.,
Martin et al. (2010) and Seeman et al. (2010). Lakdawalla et al. (2004) reported on increasing rates
of disability among people ages 18-59, especially in ages 30-49. Obesity in particular seems to be
associated with these trends. The authors conclude that rising disability among the younger US
populations could have adverse consequences for future financing of public programmes such as
disability insurance, Medicare and Medicaid. The future nursing home population might be 10-25
percent larger and Medicare expenditure 10-15 percent higher than they would have been in the
absence of the expansion in disability among young people.
Cutler et al. (2014) used data from the annual Medicare Beneficiary Survey, a representative
sample (more than 10,000 individuals annually) of the entire elderly US population between 1991
and 2009, to examine the issue of compression of morbidity. They found that measures of
capacity to perform daily activities like ADL and IADL were improving but that diseases rates
were relatively constant. They concluded that there was strong evidence for compression of
morbidity based on measured disability but less clear evidence based on disease-free survival.
Badley et al. (2015) analyzed Canada’s longitudinal National Population Health Survey, a
nationally representative sample of Canadians (n = 8570 at baseline) assessed every 2 years. Using
data from 1994 to 2010, they estimated the age trajectories of self-rated health for four birth
cohorts: the World War II cohort (born between 1935 and 1944), older baby-boomers (born
between 1945 and 1954), younger baby boomers (born between 1955 and 1964) and generation

X (born between 1965 and 1974). They found, not surprisingly, that self-rated health decreased
with age in all cohorts. Differences among cohorts were modest, but there was a significant
period effect. There were marked positive effects on self-rated health from increasing education,
increasing income and decreasing smoking but negative due to increases in body-mass index
(BMI). As a matter of fact, the increasing prevalence of over-weight and obesity seems to have
almost totally counterbalanced the positive effects of better education, higher income, and less
smoking in Canada. The authors conclude that they found no evidence to support the
expectation that baby boomers will age healthier than previous generations. They emphasize the
implications of the increasing BMI for the future need for health care.
Chatterji et al. (2015) analyzed data on ADL and IADL limitations taken from three longitudinal
data bases: SHARE (Survey of Health, Ageing, and Retirement in Europe), HRS (Health and
Retirement Study), and ELSA (English Longitudinal Study of Ageing). Thus, data covered in total
14 countries; two waves (2004 and 2006) of SHARE, four of ELSA (2002, 2004, 2006 and 2008),
and seven of HRS (1995, 1998, 2000, 2002, 2004, 2006 and 2008). In the European SHARE data,
the proportion of respondents with ADL or IADL limitations stayed fairly constant between
2004 and 2006 in most countries. The proportion of respondents with ADL limitations decreased
over time in England but increased in the USA; the proportion of respondents with IADL
limitations increased over time in England but decreased in the USA. The authors also reviewed
previous studies, which confirmed the earlier findings that the prevalence of disease is increasing,
while the prevalence of disability (ADL and IADL limitations) is decreasing.
Swedish original studies
The longitudinal data used in published Swedish studies come either from one of two nationally
representative surveys – the Swedish Survey of Living Conditions and the SWEOLD – or from
local data bases. The annual, nationally representative, sample of the Swedish Surveys of Living
Conditions (ULF, Undersökningar om Levnadsförhållanden), includes about 7000 people aged
18-84; the subsample of 65-84 years old accounts for roughly 20 percent; for further information,
see Statistics Sweden website www.scb.se. The ULF survey normally does not include people
older than 84. So SWEOLD was created to complement those existing data bases, hence
including ages 77+ (no upper limit). For information on the Swedish Panel Study of the Living
Conditions of the Oldest Old (SWEOLD I & II), see Lennartsson et al. (2014).
Using the Swedish H70 studies, Steen (2002) presents cohort differences in health status among
70-year-olds born in five different years: 1901/02, 1906/07, 1911/12, 1922, and 1930. The H70
is a set of large and representative gerontological and geriatric population studies in Gothenburg,
the second largest city in Sweden. The H70 covers a wide range of aspects of health; for
information, see e.g., Steen and Djurfeldt (1993). Among the many results could be mentioned
that mean body mass index (BMI) had increased over years, cognitive function increased, no
change in hearing ability, oral health had become markedly better, whereas smoking had
decreased among men but increased among women.
Wilhelmson et al. (2002) used data from the 1901/02, 1906/07, and 1911/12 birth cohorts of the
H70 studies to analyze differences in morbidity in three different cohorts of 70-year-olds.
Functional capacity and self-reported health were found to be higher in the later birth cohorts,
but the prevalence of disease was also higher. These are findings consistent with the results of
many other Swedish and international studies, i.e. less limitations in functional capacity over time,
but the presence of chronic disease has increased.
Also using the H70 data, Eiben et al. (2005) reported on changes in BMI, overweight (BMI 2529.9 kg/m2), and obesity (BMI ≥ 30). Significant trends were found for all outcomes. In 2000, 20

percent of the 70-year-old men were obese, and the largest increase (almost a 100 percent)
occurred between the early 1980s and early 1990s. The prevalence of obesity among women was
24 percent in 2000, an increase of about 50 percent since 1992. The authors conclude that the
elderly population is very much part of the obesity epidemic and that the implications of these
secular trends should be in focus of future gerontological research.
Rosén and Haglund (2005) analysed annual data 1980-2002 from the Swedish Survey of Living
Conditions (ULF) to examine health trends in the 65-84 years old population. They found that
self-rated health and functional capacity increased for all the relevant age groups. There were
steady increases over the 23 years for longstanding illness, however. Between 1980 and 2002, the
percentage reporting at least one longstanding illness increased from 74 to 77 among men and
from 78 to 80 among women. The percentage reporting at least three longstanding illnesses
increased from 19 to 23 among men and from 25 to 30 among women. There were clear
increases in the prevalence of diabetes among both women and men; also increases in the
prevalence of hypertension and heart disease for men but roughly constant for women. An
interesting finding was that even people with longstanding illness perceived their general health
and functional capacity to have improved over the 23 years. The authors conclude that their
results fit well in with the development of a number of breakthroughs in medicine; results were
also in accord with slower or no changes towards healthier lifestyles in recent years in
comparison with earlier decades.
Using two nationally representative interview surveys, SWEOLD I & II, Parker et al. (2005)
examined changes in the health of the 77+ Swedish population between 1992 and 2002. Samples
consisted of 537 and 563 elderly, respectively, and included both community-based and
institutionalized individuals; response rates were 94 and 89 percent, respectively. States of health
and function were self-reported, but there were also objective tests of cognition, lung function,
vision and physical capacity. Self-reported items included presence of disease or symptoms,
hearing, mobility, ADL and instrumental ADL. The results showed an increased prevalence of
both severe and mild problems, markedly so in genital problems, depression, fatigue and joint
pain. Increases in health problems were also seen in hearing ability and mobility but not in mild
instrumental ADL impairments.
In a follow-up, the two first surveys of SWEOLD were accompanied by a third in 2011; this time
the above 85 ages were completed by a larger than proportional sample. Results were reported by
Fors et al. (2013). Generally, the same trends were observed as in their previous study. However,
mobility increased since 2002, and fewer ADL problems were reported, in fact, even fewer than
in 1992. The authors concluded that the elderly got more health problems between 1992 and
2011, but they seemed to cope with daily activities better than before.
Parker et al. (2008) analysed annual data 1980-2005 from the Swedish Survey of Living
Conditions (ULF) to examine trends in functional capacity in the 65-84 years old population.
They found improvements for ability to take a short walk and to run a short distance (if in a
hurry), seen over the entire time period. The improvements took place mainly during the 1980s
and early 1990s, however. For ability to run, the trend then reversed; for ability to walk, the trend
seemed to cease or at least became slower. Vision improved with no significant difference before
and after 1996/97. Hearing got worse, even though the negative trend seemed to weaken after
1996/97. ADL (ability to perform activities of daily living) improved, seen over the entire period,
but there were signs of worsening since the mid-1990s. Finally, there was a consistently positive
trend in all IADL items (cleaning, shopping, preparing food).
Conclusions

There is strong evidence, both from Sweden and internationally, that the prevalence of chronic
disease among the elderly has increased over time. There is apparently also fairly strong evidence
that the consequences of disease have become less problematic due to medical progress:
decreased mortality risk, milder and slower development over time, making the time with disease
(and health-care treatment) longer than before but less troublesome for the individual. However,
most evidence also suggests the postponement of functional limitations (vision is probably the
best example) and disability. Some of the reduction in disability may certainly be attributed to
improvements in treatments of chronic diseases. But they are apparently also due to the increased
use of assistive technology, public transport (“kneeling buses”, for instance), accessibility of
buildings, etc. The results, hence, indicate that the ageing individual is expected to need health
care for a longer (and not necessarily postponed) period of time than previous generations but
elderly care for a shorter (and certainly postponed) period of time. The threat of present trends in
obesity and overweight is real, both for health, disability, health care, social care, possibly also for
longevity. One additional lesson, which can be drawn from the above studies, is that one should
be extremely cautious when interpreting findings based on only two observational years. The
reliability may be low, due to random fluctuations.

5. AGEING, HEALTH, AND THE DEMAND FOR HEALTH- AND ELDERLY
CARE
Projections of future health-care and elderly-care expenditures in the past were based on
expected demographic changes and age-specific costs per capita alone. It is a method, which has
been questioned, e.g., by Evans (1985), Getzen (1992), and Chernichovsky and Markowitz
(2004), but still widely used by governments. In general, predictions of rapid growth in
expenditures based on such projections have not been reflected in observed data; see, for
instance, the overview by Payne et al. (2007). Age per se does not adequately reflect the health
status of an elderly population, and it seems to be a particularly poor basis for predicting the
future. Thus, other indicators of health have been suggested, as time until death (Fuchs, 1984;
Lubitz and Prihoba, 1984), the rationale being that expenditures during the last years of life,
independent of age, had been found to constitute a very large proportion of total health-care
expenditures (Piro and Lutins, 1973; Gibbs and Newman, 1982; Helbing, 1983; Lubitz and
Prihoba, 1984; McCall, 1984). More recent studies seem to confirm these findings; see, e.g.,
Lubitz and Riley (1993); Zweifel et al. (1999); Felder et al. (2000); Hogan et al. (2001); and
Werblow et al. (2007). Results have been questioned, though, on methodological grounds, inter
alia, for the potential endogeneity of time to death. There seems to be no consensus yet in the
literature (Payne et al., 2007).
Studies using time to death as an indirect indicator of health
While there are several retrospective studies, estimating the impact on health-care expenditures of
actual time to death, there are but a few studies using time to death as a health status indicator,
when predicting future health-care expenditures. One exception is Spillman and Lubitz (2000),
who used time until death as a measure of health status and data from Medicare, the National
Mortality Followback Survey, and the National Medical Expenditure Survey, when estimating the
effect of longevity on spending for acute (inpatient and outpatient) care and long-term (nursing)
care, respectively. They found increasing cumulative health-care expenditures per patient, but at a
decreasing rate, from the age of 65 until death for acute care but sharply increasing expenditures
for nursing-home care. Characteristics of the two cohorts of persons turning 65 in 2000 and in
2015, respectively, were simulated. According to the simulations, mean cumulative expenditures

per person would increase with less than one percent for acute care but with 6 percent for
nursing-home care. The authors emphasize that their simulations do not account for possible
medical advances or for changes in patterns of utilization, disease, or disability or in the Medicare
and Medicaid programmes.
Miller (2001) used a similar method in order to analyze the effect of increasing longevity on
Medicare expenditures. His simulations indicate that the future is characterized by postponement
to later in life rather than an expansion or a compression of the high costs for care of the elderly.
Some savings due to delay in morbidity might occur but small in comparison with the increase in
total expenditures because of the increasing numbers of persons 65 years old and more.
Stearns and Norton (2004) analyzed data from the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey Cost and
Use Files for 1992-1998 with a total of 12000 respondents. In their final analysis, there were
215385 observations at the person-quarter level, representing 22101 unique individuals. People
were followed for up to 20 quarters. Based on this data, they made a number of simulations, with
and without time to death as an explanatory variable. The authors found that predictions from
the simple model that excludes time to death and uses current life tables were 9 percent higher
than from an expanded model controlling for time to death. The difference increased to 15
percent when using projected life tables for 2020.
Studies using individual health-status data
Shang and Goldman (2008) used demographic and individual health-status data (major disease
conditions, functional status, and health-risk factors) as well as health-care expenditures from the
1992-1999 Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey (total sample size 83412) to predict both
remaining life expectancy and health-care expenditures. The authors found that age had little
additional predictive power on health-care expenditures after controlling for life expectancy.
They also found that the predictive power of life expectancy itself diminished after introduction
of individual health variables. This should not come to much surprise, since health status has
been shown to strongly predict mortality; see section 4 above.
Lubitz et al. (2003) revised previous estimations by using more refined measures of health, i.e.
self-reported health and disability, respectively. Using the 1992-1998 Cost and Use files of the US
Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey, they estimated the relation of health status at 70 years of
age to life expectancy and to cumulative health-care expenditures from the age of 70 until death.
The results showed that elderly persons in better health had a longer life expectancy (by nearly
three years) but similar cumulative health-care expenditures until death as those in poorer health.
This means that the health-care cost per elderly would be the same, irrespective of health status,
but the cost would be allocated over a larger number of life-years. The authors conclude that they
found no evidence for the idea that better health among the elderly would moderate expected
increases in health-care spending.
Using Dutch survey- and register data, Wong et al. (2012) estimated age-specific time trends from
1980 to 2010 for eight different health-care sectors: general practitioner, alternative-medicine
practitioner, prescribed pharmaceuticals, over-the-counter pharmaceuticals, dental care,
physiotherapy, medical-specialist care, and hospital inpatient care. The authors also examined the
influence of medical innovations on the difference in time trends for hospital inpatient care.
According to their results, the 65+ age group had the highest proportion of general-practitioner
care, prescribed pharmaceuticals, and medical-specialist care during the whole period but by far
the lowest of dental care. Significantly higher time trends for the 65+ than for all younger agegroups were observed for prescribed pharmaceuticals, physiotherapy, medical-specialist care, and
hospital inpatient care. For dental care, only the age-group 45-64 had a higher growth rate than

the 65+. As for the impact of changes in the rate of medical innovations, the authors found an
age-dependent correlation with changes in the probability of age-specific hospital-care utilization.
Thus, the benefits of new medical technology increases with age, and the age curve of health-care
expenditures becomes steeper over time. The authors fear that future marked changes in the age
distribution of health-care expenditures might exert pressure on the solidarity between
generations in countries with mainly publicly financed welfare systems.
Time to death does not seem to be used very much in recent models for forecasting future
health-care expenditures among the elderly. Instead, the same kind of more direct measures of
health as in studies reporting on the development of health over time are being used. That makes
it easier to connect the observations from both that literature and this one.
An American microsimulation model
A number of analyses of health and health-care expenditures of the future elderly in the USA
have been performed using the Future Elderly Model (FEM), developed by Dana Goldman and
associates at RAND Health. The authors developed a microsimulation model that tracks elderly,
Medicare-eligible people over time, starting in 2000, to project their health conditions, their
functional status, and their Medicare and total health-care spending. Demographics include age,
gender, ethnicity, education, and geographical area of living. Measures of health status include
self-assessed health, ADL, and chronic diseases. Risk factors include smoking and BMI. Details
are described in Goldman et al. (2004)
Using the FEM microsimulation model, Goldman et al. (2005) analyzed the consequences of
present health trends among younger populations in the USA and recent innovations in
biomedicine for the development of the elderly’s health and health-care spending over the next
30 years. In their preferred scenario, health trends were based on the recent reports on increasing
disability rates among the younger US populations; see, e.g., Lakdawalla et al. (2004); Martin et al.
(2010); and Seeman et al. (2010). Alternative scenarios assumed either that entering cohorts to
Medicare disability would resemble recent entrants or that there would be a continual
improvement in disability among all elderly. Per beneficiary, the preferred scenario would imply
an 8 percent increase in health-care expenditures between 2000 and 2030 compared to the most
optimistic scenario. The three scenarios assumed that no medical innovations would take place
that might change medical practice. However, through systematic literature search and panels of
distinguished experts the authors identified 34 health technologies most likely to affect the health
of the future elderly and expected to be introduced in the near future; all 34 technologies and the
process used to identify them are described in detail in Goldman et al. (2004) and in Shekelle et
al. (2005). Ten of these technologies were analyzed regarding future health and health-care
spending: three addressing cardiovascular disease (intraventricular cardioverter defibrillators, left
ventricular assist devices, and pacemakers to control atrial fibrillation); three addressing cancer
(telomerase inhibitors, cancer vaccines, and anti-angiogenesis); two addressing neurological
disease (treatment of acute stroke and prevention of Alzheimer´s); one addressing diabetes
(prevention of diabetes by insulin sensitization drugs); and one related to general ageing (a
compound that extends life span). The impact would be dramatic. Thus, their conclusion was
that society faces its greatest risk as far as health-care spending is concerned not from
demographic and health trends but rather from medical technologies.
The impact of technological advances in cancer treatment on future spending by the elderly was
further analyzed by Bhattacharya et al. (2005). Five scenarios were examined, ranging from a
base-line scenario, in which technology stays frozen as it was in 2000, to the most optimistic
scenarios, in which an inexpensive cure, a vaccine that prevents cancer, and vastly improved
screening techniques are included. Applying the Future Elderly Model (FEM), the authors find

that no technological advance in the treatment of cancer alone would change the cost projections
for Medicare between 2005 and 2030 very much. True, some savings would be possible but small
in comparison with the total budget of Medicare. One reason is that those saved from cancer will
die of other (expensive) diseases. A number of life years will be saved, nevertheless, between
three and 15 million life years, depending on scenario.
A Dutch latent Markov simulation model
Woutersee et al. (2013) used a Markov model and Dutch survey and linked register data to
simulate the development of health and spending for hospital and long-term care over remaining
life-years for individuals of different initial health states at age 65. Several indicators of health –
chronic diseases, functional capacity, self-perceived health, depressive symptoms, and cognitive
impairments – were summarized into a single measure, using latent class analysis. Individuals in
good current health and low current expenditures were compared to individuals in poor current
health and high current expenditures with respect to expenditures over remaining lifetime. For
the first group, expenditures tend to be postponed to later ages. As a result, accumulated hospital
expenditures over remaining lifetime would be somewhat lower for the first group; but
accumulated long-term care expenditures over remaining lifetime would be considerably higher
for this group. The authors conclude that the expectations of costs savings effects due to
improvements in health should not be too high; investing in the improvement of health of the
elderly should be motivated for its own sake.
In an earlier paper, Wouterse et al. (2011) reached the same conclusion, estimating the
longitudinal relationship between each of four different health indicators (self-perceived health,
long-term impairments, ADL and comorbidity) and costs of hospital use in the Netherlands over
a period of eight years. At relatively young ages, baseline good health was associated with low
expected costs; at higher ages, though, the initial lowering effect of good health seemed to be
counteracted over time by lower mortality. The general patterns were the same for the four
indicators.
Wouterse et al. (2015) uses the latent Markov model, introduced in Woutersee (2013) to simulate
three main scenarios of future health and health-care use over the years 2010-2050 for the 65+
Dutch population, based on the “expansion of morbidity”, “compression of morbidity” and
“dynamic equilibrium” hypotheses, respectively. In some sub-scenarios, the impact of differences
in longevity is analyzed. In the scenarios with a moderate increase in life expectancy, the highest
total hospital expenditures were found in the expansion of morbidity scenario as well as in the
dynamic equilibrium scenario. Hospital expenditures would decrease or stabilize after 2040 in all
three scenarios, though. In contrast, home-care and institutional long-term-care expenditures rose
over the whole time interval in all scenarios. Home-care expenditures were highest in the
dynamic-equilibrium scenario with “extreme” life expectancy, followed by the expansion-ofmorbidity scenario with moderate life expectance. Institutional long-term-care expenditures were
highest in the expansion-of-morbidity scenario with moderate life expectancy, but the differences
among the three main scenarios were smaller than for hospital expenditures. Additional lifeexpectancy gains led to higher total expenditures for all three types of care in the expansion-ofmorbidity and dynamic-equilibrium scenarios. One should maybe be reminded about the
assumptions behind the three hypotheses (and scenarios); see section 2 above.
The rising prevalence of obesity and overweight has arisen much interest among researchers (see,
e.g., Goldman et al., 2005; Lakdawalla et al., 2005; Olshansky, 2005; Borg et al., 2005; Ödegaard
et al., 2008; Persson and Ödegaard, 2011; Swinburn et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2011). Excess
bodyweight increases the risk of several diseases, most notably type II diabetes, coronary heart
disease, stroke, several forms of cancer, and osteoarthritis. Using a microsimulation model,

Lakdawalla et al. (2005) estimated that obese 70-year-olds will live about as long as those with
normal BMI but will spend more than USD 39,000 more on health care. In addition, they will
enjoy fewer disability-free life-years and experience higher rates of diabetes, hypertension, and
heart disease, all according to simulation results. Wang et al. (2011) used a microsimulation model
to estimate the morbidity, mortality, and cost implications of projected obesity trends in two
ageing populations – the USA and the UK – between 2010 and 2030. According to these
simulations, there would be 65 million more obese adults in the USA and 11 million more obese
adults in the UK by 2030, accruing an additional 6-8 million cases of diabetes, 6-7 million cases
of heart disease and stroke, 500-700 thousand additional cases of cancer, and 25-55 million
quality-adjusted life-years forgone for USA and UK together. The extra health-care cost would be
USD 48-66 billion per year in the USA and GBP 1.9-2.0 billion per year in the UK by 2030.
According to the simulations, there would be an increase during the two decades in the annual
costs of obesity-related diseases by 13-16 percent in the USA (4 percent of which from
population ageing) and by 24-25 percent in the UK (10 percent from ageing).
A Swedish dynamic micro-simulation model
There is a Swedish micro-simulation model, which includes modules for health, health care and
social care, available (Klevmarken and Lindgren, 2008). The modules were added to an already
existing dynamic micro-simulation model, SESIM of the Swedish Ministry of Finance; for a
presentation of the model, see Flood (2008). The new modules were based on a number of
empirical studies.
Health status is simulated in the model. The indicator of health is an index, suggested by Statistics
Sweden (1992), and it has four dimensions: self-assessed health, mobility, long-standing illness,
and working capacity; for a detailed description, see Bolin et al. (2008). Model equations were
estimated, using data of the Swedish Survey of Living Conditions (ULF). In the model, the
probability for a better health status is higher for being male, having higher relative income,
having longer education, being married or cohabiting, being born in Sweden, and having children.
Divorced are less likely to be healthy than those who never have been married or cohabiting, and
health is decreasing by age. The health status in the previous year is the most important factor of
the current health of the individual. The model simulates decreasing health status for the elderly
population over the years. This reflects observations made that the trend towards ever-healthier
elderly seems to have been broken. The share of young and middle-aged Swedish men and
women, reporting very good or good health status to the Swedish Survey of Living Conditions
started to decline already in the early 1990s. As the cohorts are graying, the share of elderly
people in good health has started to decline, too (Klevmarken and Lindgren, 2008).
In Klevmarken and Lindgren (2008), the only indicator of the need or demand for health care is
inpatient hospital care. In the model, health status, age, education, relative income, gender, civil
status (divorced), and foreign country of birth, determine the probability that the individual will
have an inpatient stay at hospital and, if so, the length of the stay. The effect of health status is
negative, i.e. people in bad health utilize more inpatient days. Being a man, being borne in
Sweden, and being divorced all increase the expected number of days of inpatient care. Finally,
the more inpatient care that was utilized in the previous year, the more inpatient care will be used
in the current year.
Three scenarios were simulated. The base-case scenario includes results following the
assumptions and predictions directly produced by the model. The expected life span was
supposed to increase between 2000 and 2040 from 78 to 83 years for a newborn boy and from 82
to 86 years for a newborn girl, in accordance with the main projections of Statistics Sweden. In
the alternative scenarios, improved health was assumed, either accompanied by longer life
expectancies or remaining the same as in the base-case. In the alternative scenarios, the healthstatus index for those aged 40-90 was adjusted proportionally to their age minus 40 and the

calendar year minus 2000 in such a way that a 90-year old person in 2040 would have the same
health as an 80-year old in the base-case scenario. Since improved health status should also lead
to decreased death risks and longer life expectancies, an alternative simulation scenario let each
individual after year 2010 and after the age of 35-40 have the death risks of a five year younger
person in the b ase-case scenario.
In the base-case scenario, the number of days of inpatient care increases by 80 percent for the
75+, by 70 percent for the 65+. Improved health per se should imply that the demand for health
care decreases in comparison to the base-case scenario, and so it does, but only marginally for the
65+. On the other hand, if the improvement in health also led to more people surviving as
above, the number of hospital days would increase by 150 percent for the 65+, due to the fact
that there would be more elderly and the average age of the elderly would be higher.
Increased utilization implies higher costs for inpatient care. Costs would obviously increase even
more than utilization, if the unit cost of care also increases, as it has in the past. If the cost for a
hospital day would increase by the same rates as the average wage and the CPI in Sweden, and if
people also would live longer as above, total cost in 2040 would become six times that in 2000. In
the two scenarios without increases in life expectancy, total inpatient hospital costs would
increase by a factor 3.6-3.7.
To simulate the demand for old-age care, the model first uses the simulated health of the
individual as above together with age and sex to impute the individual’s degree of ADL (activities
of daily living) limitations. In the next step, level of assistance or mode of old-age care were
imputed. The final step encompasses estimations of annual transitions between states. The basecase scenario suggests that the number of individuals in institutionalized care (all-day surveillance)
would almost triple from 2000 to 2040, the number of individuals with home help by 50 percent,
and the number of individuals 65+ increase by 85 percent. In the scenario with improved health
and decreasing mortality risks, the number of individuals in all-day surveillance would increase
even more.
Calculations of the total cost for inpatient care and old-age care taken together for the 65+
population show an estimated increase between 2000 and 2040 by a factor of 3.7 in the base-case
scenario, 3.6 in the scenario with improved health, and 6.1 in the scenario with improved health
and reduced mortality rates. In all scenarios, the cost of all-day surveillance increases its share of
the total cost, most markedly in the last scenario – from almost 40 to almost 50 percent.
For health care, the model has been partly extended to include not only inpatient care but also
hospital-based specialist health care, primary care, and pharmaceuticals. Main results are
presented in Ministry of Health and Social Affairs (2010).
Conclusion
Few studies separate social services to the elderly from health care, when reporting on the impact
of the elderly on expenditures. The general conclusion of the empirical literature, mainly from the
USA and the Netherlands, seems to be that expenditures will not be lower over remaining lifeyears but they will be distributed over a longer period of time. Several authors warn against the
potential negative impact of an increasing prevalence of obesity on life expectancy, health, and
health- and elderly care. The role of technological advances within medicine is highlighted by
many authors and its consequences for the elderly analyzed. In the past, technology rather than
demography alone has been a driving force behind the increase in health-care expenditures for
the elderly. There are several medical innovations in pipeline. The impact on life expectancy, the
severity and progress process of disease, health, health care and social services to the elderly
could be quite different depending on the character of the innovation. People’s habits and health-

related behavior may also change over time. Thus, that current trends in health, life expectancy
and health- and social-care utilization will persist should not be taken for granted.
Microsimulation models can be used to make forecasts for alternative relevant future scenarios in
order to estimate the sensitivity of assumptions for sustainable health-care and social-care
finances in the future. Such models have been extensively used in the USA and in the
Netherlands. There is a Swedish dynamic microsimulation model available as part of a
comprehensive model for the Swedish economy, which might be used for the same purpose, but
it would really need a complete update.

6. CONCLUSIONS
The objective of this paper was to review the evidence on (a) ageing and health and (b) the
demand for health- and social services among the elderly. Issues were: does health status of the
elderly improve over time, and how do the trends in health status of the elderly affect the
demand for health- and social care? The review is based on some 90 published scientific papers.
While it is not a complete review, it covers most recent empirical studies of health trends and the
changing pattern of demand for health- and social care.
While mortality is fairly easy do define, health is a multidimensional concept. It includes selfassessed health, absence or presence of disease, functional status, and capacity to perform
everyday activities (ADL limitations). There are certainly elderly who have no problems in any of
these dimensions. But health among elderly varies and to a much larger extent than among
younger people. Many elderly have one or more chronic diseases; if the disease is well controlled,
there may be no problems in other dimensions of health. If not, other health problems may
follow, lowering self-assessed health, creating ADL limitations etc. When analyzing health trends,
it is important to cover all four dimensions of health, since the impact on health care and social
services differ, depending on which dimension shows improved health. It is obviously not
possible to talk seriously about health without defining or clarifying which aspect(s) are meant.
The reviewed literature provides strong evidence that the prevalence of chronic disease among
the elderly has increased over time. There is also fairly strong evidence that the consequences of
disease have become less problematic due to medical progress: decreased mortality risk, milder
and slower development over time, making the time with disease (and health-care treatment)
longer but less troublesome than before. Evidence also suggests the postponement of functional
limitations (vision is probably the best example) and disability. Some of the reduction in disability
may certainly be attributed to improvements in treatments of chronic diseases. But they are
apparently also due to the increased use of assistive technology, public transport (“kneeling
buses”, for instance), accessibility of buildings, etc. The results, hence, indicate that the ageing
individual is expected to need health care for a longer (and not necessarily postponed) period of
time than previous generations but elderly care for a shorter (and certainly postponed) period of
time. Thus, one might say that the development overall has been in accordance with the
“dynamic-equilibrium” scenario.
Few studies separate social services from health care, when reporting on the impact of the elderly
on expenditures. The general conclusion of the empirical literature, mainly from the USA and the
Netherlands, seems to be that expenditures will not be lower over remaining life-years but they
will be distributed over a longer period of time. Several authors warn against the potential
negative impact of an increasing prevalence of obesity on life expectancy, health, and health- and

social care. The role of technological advances within medicine is highlighted by many authors
and its consequences for the elderly analyzed. In the past, technology rather than demography
alone has been a driving force behind the increase in health-care expenditures for the elderly.
Projecting the future demand for health- and social services among the elderly over several
decades is a serious and quite demanding task. Current trends in health, life expectancy and
health- and social-care utilization cannot be taken for granted. There are several medical
innovations in pipeline, and the impact on life expectancy, the severity and progress process of
disease, health, health care and social care would be quite different depending on the character of
the innovation. Furthermore, people’s habits and health-related behavior may also change over
time, e.g., as a result of changes in public-health policy. Immigration is also a factor which might
influence future levels of health and the demand for health- and social care. It has been shown,
for instance, that individuals not born in Sweden have lower levels of health but also larger
consumption of inpatient care in addition to the effect of having a lower level of health
(Klevmarken and Lindgren, 2008).
Microsimulation models might be used to make forecasts for alternative relevant future scenarios
in order to estimate the sensitivity of assumptions for sustainable health-care and social-care
finances. Such models have been extensively used in the USA and in the Netherlands, less so in
Sweden, even though there is a Swedish dynamic microsimulation model available.

REFERENCES
Akushevich I, Kravchenko JS, Manton KG. Health-based population forecasting: effects of
smoking on mortality and fertiliy. Risk Analysis 2007;27:467-482.
Badley EM, Canizares M, Perruccio AV, Hogg-Johnson S, Gignac MAM. Benefits gained,
benefits lost: comparing baby boomers to other generations in a longitudinal cohort study of selfrated health. Milbank Quarterly 2015;93:40-72.
Baron-Epel O, Shemy G, Carmel S. Prediction of survival: a comparison between two subjective
health measures in an elderly population. Social Science & Medicine 2004;58:2035-2043.
Benjamins MR, Hummer RA, Eberstein IW, Nam CB. Self-reported health and adult mortality
risk: an analysis of cause-specific mortality. Social Science & Medicine 2004;59:1297-1306.
Benyamini Y, Idler EL. Community studies reporting association between self-rated health and
mortality: Additional studies, 1995-1998. Research on Aging 1999;21:468-491.
Bhattacharya J, Shang B, Su CK, Goldman DP. Technological advances in cancer and future
spending by the elderly. Health Affairs 2005:doi:10.1377/hlthaff.w5.r53.
Bloom DE, Chatterji S, Kowal P, Lloyd-Sherlock P, McKee M, Rechel B, Rosenberg L, Smith JP.
Macroeconomic implications of population ageing and selected policy responses. Lancet
2015;385:649-657.
Bolin K, Eklöf M, Höjgård S, Lindgren B. Changes in the health status of the population. In
Klevmarken A, Lindgren B (eds). Simulating an Ageing Population. A Micro-simulation

Approach Applied to Sweden. Contributions to Economic Analysis 285. Bingley: Emerald,
2008:85-114.
Borg S, Persson U, Ödegaard K, Berglund G, Nilsson JÅ, Nilsson PM. Obesity, survival, and
hospital costs – findings from a sceening project in Sweden. Value in Health 2005;8:562-571.
Burch PRJ. The Biology of Cancer: A New Approach. Baltimore: University Park Press, 1976.
Chatterji S, Byles J, Cutler D, Seeman T, Verdes E. Health, functioning, and disability in older
adults – present status and future implications. Lancet 2015;385:563-575.
Chernichovsky D, Markowitz S. Aging and aggregate costs of medical care: conceptual and policy
issues. Health Economics 2004;13:543-562.
Christensen K, Doblhammer G, Rau R, Vaupel JW. Ageing populations: the challenges ahead.
Lancet 2009;374:1196-1208.
Comfort A. Ageing. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1964.
Crimmins EM, Beltrán-Sanchez H. Mortality and morbidity trends: Is there compression of
morbidity? Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences 2010;66B:75-86.
Cutler D, Ghosh K, Landrum MB. Evidence for significant compression of morbidity in the
elderly U.S. population. In Wise D (ed). Discoveries in the Economics of Aging. Chicago:
Chicago University Press, 2014:21-80.
van Doorslaer E, Gerdtham UG. Does inequality in self-assessed health predict inequality in
survival by income? Evidence from Swedish data. Social Science & Medicine 2003;57:1621-1629.
Dublin LI. Health and Wealth. New York: Harper, 1928.
Eiben G, Dey DK, Rothenberg E, Steen B, Björkelund C, Bengtsson C, Lissner L. Obesity in 70year-old Swedes: Secular changes over 30 years. International Journal of Obesity 2005;29:810817.
Evans RG. Illusion of necessity: evading responsibility for choice in health care. Journal of
Health Politics, Policy and Law 1985;10:439-467.
Felder S, Meier M, Schmitt H. Health care expenditures in the last months of life. Journal of
Health Economics 2000;19:679-695.
Flood L. SESIM – A Swedish micro-simulation model. In Klevmarken A, Lindgren B (eds).
Simulating an Ageing Population. A Micro-simulation Approach Applied to Sweden.
Contributions to Economic Analysis 285. Bingley: Emerald, 2008:55-83.
Fors S, Lennartsson C, Agahi N, Parker MP, Thorslund M. Äldre har fått fler hälsoproblem, men
klarar vardagen bättre ( ). Läkartidningen 2013;110:1403-1405.
Freedman VA, Martin LG, Schoeni RF. Recent trends in disability and functioning among older
adults in the United States. A systematic review. JAMA 2002;288:3137-3146.

Freedman VA, Spillman BC, Andreski PM, Cornman JC, Crimmins EM, Kramarow E, Lubitz J,
Martin LG, Merkin SS, Schoeni RF, Seeman TE, Waidmann TA. Trends in late-life activity
limitations in the United States: An update from five national surveys. Demography 2013;50:661671.
Fries JF. Aging, natural death, and the compression of morbidity. New England Journal of
Medicine 1980;303:130-135.
Fries JF. The compression of morbidity: near or far? Milbank Quarterly 1989;67:208-232.
Fries JF. Compression of morbidity in the elderly. Vaccine 2000;18:1584-1589.
Fries JF. Aging, cumulative disability, and the compression of morbidity. Comprehensive
Therapy 2001;27:322-329.
Fries JF. Reducing disability in older age. Journal of the American Medical Association
2002;288:3164-3166.
Fries JF. Measuring and monitoring success in compressing morbidity. Annals of Internal
Medicine 2003;139:455-459.
Fries JF, Crapo LM. Vitality and Aging. San Francisco, Calif, USA: WH Freeman and Company,
1981.
Fuchs V. “Though much is taken”: reflections on aging, health, and medical care. Milbank
Memorial Fund Quarterly. Health and Society 1984;62:142-166.
Getzen TE. Population aging and the growth of health expenditures. Journal of Gerontology:
Social Sciences 1992;47:S98-S104.
Gibbs J, Newman J. Study of health services used and costs imcurred during the last six months
of a terminal illness. Contract No. HEW-100-79-0110. Chicago, Ill: Blue Cross and Blue Shield
Association, November, 1982.
Goldman DP, Shekelle PG, Bhattacharya J, Hurd M, Joyce GF, Lakdawalla DN, Matsui DH,
Newberry SJ, Panis CWA, Shang B. Health status and medical treatment of the future elderly.
Final report. RAND Health Technical Report TR-169-CMS. Santa Monica, CA: RAND
Corporation, 2004.
Goldman DP, Shang B, Bhattacharya J, Garber AM, Hurd M, Joyce GF, Lakdawalla DN, Panis
CWA, Shekelle PG. Consequences of health trends and medical innovation for the future elderly.
Health Affairs 2005:doi:10.1377/hlthaff.w5.r.5.
Grossman M. On the concept of health capital and the demand for health. Journal of Political
Economy 1972;80:223-255.
Gruenberg EF. The failures of success. Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly/Health and Society
1977;55:3-24.

Gruenberg EF. The health status and utilization patterns of the elderly: implications for setting
Medicare payments to HMOs. Advances in Health Economics and Health Services Research
1989;10.
Hayflick L. Aging under glass. Experimental Gerontology 1970;5:291-303.
Helweg-Larsen M, Kjöller M, Thoning H. Do age and social relations moderate the relationship
between self-rated health and mortality among adult Danes? Social Science & Medicine
2003;57:1237-1247.
Helbing C. Medicare: use and reimbursement for aged persons by survival status, 1979. Health
Care Financing Notes. HCFA Pub. No. 03166. Office of Research and Demonstrations, Health
Care Financing Administration. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, November
1983.
Hogan C, Lunney J, Gabel J, Lynn J. Medicare beneficiaries’ costs of care in the last year of life.
Health Affairs 2001;20:188-195.
Hubert HH, Bloch DA, Oehlert JW, Fries JF. Lifestyle habits and compression of morbidity.
Journal of Gerontology: Medical Sciences 2002;57A:M347-M351.
Idler EL, Benyamini Y. Self-rated health and mortality: A review of twenty-seven community
studies. Journal of Health and Social Behaviour 1997;38:21-37.
Keyfitz N. Improving life expectancy: an uphill road ahead. American Journal of Public Health
1978;68:954-956.
Klevmarken A, Lindgren B (eds). Simulating an Ageing Population. A Micro-simulation
Approach Applied to Sweden. Contributions to Economic Analysis 285. Bingley: Emerald, 2008.
Lakdawalla DN, Bhattacharya J, Goldman DP. Are the young becoming more disabled? Health
Affairs 2004;23:168-176.
Lakdawalla DN, Goldman DP, Shang B. The health and cost consequences of obesity among the
future elderly. Health Affairs 2005:doi:10.1377/hlthaff.w5.r.30.
Lee R. Predicting human longevity. Science 2001;292:1654-1655.
Lee R, Carter L. Modeling and forecasting US mortality. Journal of the American Statistical
Association 1992;87:659-671.
Lennartsson C, Agahi N, Hols-Salén L, Kelfve S, Kåreholt I, Lundberg O, Parker MG,
Thorslund M. Data resource profile: the Swedish Panel Study of Living Conditions of the Oldest
Old (SWEOLD). International Journal of Epidemiology 214;43:731-738.
Lubitz J, Cai L, Kramarow E, Lentzner H. Health, life expectancy, and health care spending
among the elderly. New England Journal of Medicine 2003;349:1048-1055.
Lubitz J, Pihoba R. The use and costs of Medicare services in the last 2 years of life. Health Care
Financing Review 1984;5:117-

Lubitz J, Riley G. Trends in Medicare payments in the last year of life. New England Journal of
Medicine 1993;328:1092-1096.
131.
Manton KG. Changing concepts of morbidity and mortality in the elderly population. Milbank
Memorial Fund Quarterly/Health and Society 1982;60:183-244.
Manton KG. Recent declines in chronic disability in the elderly U.S. population: risk factors and
future dynamics. Annual Review of Public Health 2008;29:91-113.
Manton KG, Gu XiLiang, Lamb VL. Change in chronic disability from 1982 to 2004/2005 as
measured by long-term changes in function and health in the U.S. elderly population.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 2006;103:18374-18379.
Manton KG, Gu XiLiang, Lowrimore GR. Cohort changes in active life expectancy in the U.S.
elderly population: experience from the 1982-2004 national long-term care survey. Journal of
Gerontology: Social Sciences 2008;63B: S269-S281.
Manton KG, Gu XiLiang, Ullian A, Tolley HD, Headen AE Jr, Lowrimore GR. Long-term
economic growth stimulus of human capital preservation in the elderly. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Science 2009;106:21080-21085.
Manton KG, Land KC. Active life expectancy estimates for the U.S. elderly population: a
multidimensional continuous-mixture model of functional change applied to completed cohorts,
1982-1996. Demography 2000;37:253-265.
Manton KG, Lamb VL, Gu XiLiang. Medicare cost effects of recent U.S. disability trends in the
elderly. Journal of Aging and Health 2007;19:359-381.
Manton KG, Lowrimore GR, Ullian A, Gu XiLiang, Tolley HD. Labor force participation and
human capital increases in an aging population and implications for the U.S. research investment.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 2007;104;10802-10807.
Manton KG, Stallard E, Corder L. Changes in morbidity and chronic disability in the U.S. elderly
population: evidence from the 1982, 1984, and 1989 national long term care surveys. Journal of
Gerontology: Social Sciences 1995;50B:S194-S204.
Martin LG, Freedman VA, Schoeni RF, Andreski PM. Trends in disability and related chronic
conditions among people ages fifty to sixty-four. Health Affairs 2010;29:725-731.
McCall N. Utilization and costs of Medicare services by beneficiaries in their last year of life.
Miller T. Increasing longevity and medicare expenditures. Demography 2001;215-226.
Ministry of Health and Social Affairs. Den ljusnande framtid är vård. Stockholm:
Socialdepartementet, 2010.
Mossey JN, Shapiro E. Self-reported health: a predictor of mortality among the elderly. American
Journal of Public Health 1982;72:800-808.

Olshansky SJ, Carnes BA, Cassel C. In search of Methuselah; estimating the upper limits to
human longevity. Science 1990;250:634-640.
Olshansky SJ, Carnes BA, Désquelles A. Prospects for longevity. Science 2001;291:1491-1492.
Olshansky SJ, Passaro DJ, Hershow RC, Layden J, Carnes BA, Brody J, Hayflick L, Butler RN,
Allison DB, Ludwig DS. A potential decline in life expectancy in the United States in the 21st
century. New England Journal of Medicine 2005;352:1138-1144.
Olshansky SJ, Rudberg MA, Carnes BA, Cassel CK, Brody JA. Trading off longer life for
worsening health. The expansion of morbidity hypothesis. Journal of Aging and Health
1991;3:194-216.
Oeppen J, Vaupel JW. Broken limits to life expectancy. Science 2002;296:1029 and 1031.
Parker MG, Ahacic K, Thorslund M. Health changes among Swedish oldest old: prevalence rates
from 1992 and 2002 show increasing health problems. Journal of Gerontology: Medical Sciences
2005;60A:1351-1355.
Parker MG, Schön P, Lagergren M, Thorslund M. Functional ability in the elderly Swedish
population from 1980 to 2005. European Journal of Ageing 2008;5:299-309.
Parker MG, Thorslund M. Health trends in the elderly population: getting better and getting
worse. The Gerontologist 2007;47:150-158.
Payne, G., Laporte, A., Deber, R., Coyte, P.C. Counting backward to health care’s future: using
time-to-death modelling to identify changes in the end-of-life morbidity and the impact of ageing
on health care expenditures. Milbank Quarterly 2007 (85), 213-257.
Persson U, Ödegård K. Fetma ett ekonomiskt samhällsproblem – kostnader och möjliga åtgärder
i Sverige. Ekonomisk Debatt 2011;39:39-49.
Piro PA, Lutins T. Utilization and reimbursement under Medicare for persons who died in 1967
and 1968. Health Insurance Statistics, HI 51. DHEW Pub. No. (SSA) 74-11702. Office of
Research and Statistics, Social Security Administration. Washington DC: Government Printing
Office, October 1973.
Prince MJ, Wu F, Guo Y, Gutierrez Robledo LM, O’Donell M, Sullivan R, Yusuf S. The burden
of disease in older people and implications for health policy and practice. Lancet 2015;385:549562.
Rosén M, Haglund B. From healthy survivors to sick survivors – implications for the twenty-first
century. Scandinavian Journal of Public Health 2005;33:151-155.
Seeman TE, Merkin SS, Crimmins EM, Karlamagna AS. Disability trends among older
Americans: National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys, 1988-1994 and 1999-2004.
Milbank Quarterly 2008;86:47-89.
Seshamani M, Gray AM. A longitudinal study of the effects of age and time of death on hospital
costs. Journal of Health Economics 2004;23:217-235.

Shang B, Goldman D. Does age or life expectancy better predict health care expenditures?
Health Economics 2008;17:487-502.
Shekelle PG, Ortiz E, Newberry SJ, Rich MW, Rhodes SL, Brook RH, Goldman DP. Identifying
potential health care innovations for the future elderly. Health Affairs
2005:doi:10.1377/hlthaff.w5.r.67.
Shock NW. Mortality and measurement of aging. In: Strehler BL, Ebert JD, Glass HB, Shock
NW (eds.) The Biology of Aging. Washington DC: American Institute of Biological Sciences,
1960:14-29.
Singer BH, Manton KG. The effects of health changes on projections of health service needs for
the elderly population of the United States. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science
1998;95:15618-15622.
Spillman BC, Lubitz J. The effect of longevity on spending for acute and long-term care. New
England Journal of Medicine 2000;342:1409-1415.
Steen B. The elderly yesterday, today and tomorrow. Aspects on cohort differences from the
gerontological and geriatric population studies in Göteborg, Sweden (H70). Archives of
Gerontology and Geriatrics 2002;Supplement8:359-370.
Steen B, Djurfeldt H. The gerontological and geriatric population studies in Gothenburg,
Sweden. Zeitschrift für Gerontologie 1993;26:163-169.
Stearns SC, Norton EC. Time to include time to death? The future of health care expenditure
predictions. Health Economics 2004;13:315-327.
Swinburn BA, Sachs G, Hall KD, McPherson K, Finegood DT, Moodie ML, Gortmaker SL. The
global obesity pandemic: shaped by global drivers and local environments. Lancet 2011;378:804814.
Tuljapurkar S, Li N, Boe C. A universal pattern of mortality decline in the G7 countries. Nature
2000;405:789-792.
Upton AC. Pathology. In: Finch LE, Hayflick L (eds.) Handbook of the Biology of Aging. New
York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1977:513-535.
Viidik A. Åldrande med “komprimerad sjuklighet” ännu en hägring. Sjukligheten under
ålderdomen har snarare expanderat. Läkartidningen 2011;108:778-779.
Wang YC, McPherson K, Marsh T, Gortmaker SL, Brown M. Health and ecomomic burden of
the projected obesity trends in the USA and the UK. Lancet 2011:378:815-825.
Werblow A, Felder S, Zweifel P. Population ageing and health care expenditure: a school of “red
herrings”? Health Economics 2007;16:1109-1126.
Wilhelmson K, Allebeck P, Steen B. Improved health among 70-year olds: Comparison of health
indicators in three different birth cohorts. Aging, Clinical and Experimental Research
2002;14:361-370.

Wong A, Woutersee B, Slobbe LCJ, Boshuizen HC. Medical innovation and age-specific trends
in health care utilization: Findings and implications. Social Science & Medicine 2012;74:263-272.
Wouterse B, Huisman M, Meijboom BR, Deeg DJH, Polder JJ. Modeling the relationship
between health and health care expenditures using a latent Markov model. Journal of Health
Economics 2013;32:423-439.
Wouterse B, Huisman M, Meijboom BR, Deeg DJH, Polder JJ. The effects of trends in health
and longevity on health services use by older adults. BMC Health Services Research 2015;15:574.
Wouterse B, Meijboom BR, Polder JJ. The relationship between baseline health and longitudinal
costs of hospital use. Health Economics 2011;20:985-1008.
Zweifel P, Felder S, Meier M. Ageing of population and health care expenditure: a red herring?
Health Economics 1999;8:485-496.
Ödegaard K, Borg S, Persson U, Svensson M. The Swedish cost burden of overweight and
obesity – evaluated with the PAR and a statistical modelling approach. International Journal of
Pediatric Obesity 2008;3:51-57.

Table 2. Health trends among the elderly – a literature review
Author

Country
and years

Ages
Sample

Data

Health
indicator

Results

Badley et al
(2015)

Canada
1994-2010

20-75
Four birth
cohorts

Interview
surveys

Self-rated health

No difference in self-rated health
among birth cohorts; baby-boomers
were not healthier than previous
generations. Increase in BMI seems
to have counterbalanced the positive
effects of increases in education and
income and of the decrease in smoking

Steen
(2002)

Sweden
(Gothenburg)

5 cohorts of
70-year-olds

Interviews
Tests
(H70)

Functional capacity

Increased cognitive function
Constant hearing ability
Increased oral health
Increasing BMI
Increased smoking among women
Decreased smoking among men

Risk factors

Wilhemsen et al. Sweden
(2002)
(Gothenburg)

3 cohorts of
70.year-olds

Interviews
Tests
(H70)

Diseases
Functional capacity
Self-reported health

Increased prevalence
Increased
Increased

Eiben et al.
(2005)

Sweden
(Gothenburg)

3 cohorts of
70-year-olds

Interviews
Tests
(H70)

Risk factor – obesity

Increased prevalence of obesity,
more pronounced among women
than among men

Rosén et al
(2005)

Sweden
1980-2002

65-84

Interview
surveys
(ULF)

Perceived general health
Functional capacity
Long-standing illness

Self-rated health and
functional capacity improved
Long-standing illness
increased; especially the
proportion reporting three
long-standing illnesses or
more

Parker et al
(2005)

Sweden
1992, 2002

77+

Interview
surveys
Tests
(SWEOLD)

Diseases and symptoms
Functional capacity

Increased prevalence
Increases in hearing and
mobility impairments but
not in ADL or IADL

Comments

;

Tests

Increased impairments in
physical performance, lung
function, cognition,
and vision

Parker et al
(2008)

Sweden
1980-2005

65-84

Interview
surveys
(ULF)

Functional capacity

Mobility, vision, ADL, and IADL
improved, while hearing
worsened. Improvements mainly
occurred between 1980 and
1996/97; positive trends then
ceased or reversed

Fors et al
(2013)

Sweden
1992, 2002,
2011

77+

Interview
surveys
Tests
(SWEOLD)

Diseases and symptoms

Increased prevalence but
no significant change 20022011
Significant improvement in
ADL ability but not in other
functional limitations
Increased impairments in
lung function also 20022011; physical performance
improved 2002-2011

Functional capacity
Tests

For changes between 1992 and 2002,
see Parker et al (2005)

Freedman et al
(2012)

USA
2000-2010

55+

5 national
interview
surveys

Functional capacity

No continued downward trends
in ADL or IADL limitations for the
65+ as a whole. Personal care and
domestic activity limitations
continued to decline for the 85+.
Modest increases in ADL or IADL
limitations were found for the 55-64.

Cutler et al
(2014)

USA
1991-2009

65+

Interview
surveys
(Medicare
Benficiary
Survey)

Diseases
Functional capacity

Unchanged prevalence
Significant improvements in ADL and
IADL ability

Chatterji et al
(2015)

USA and 13
European
Countries
1995-2008

55+

Interview
surveys
(HRS, ELSA,
SHARE)

Diseases
Functional capacity

ABBREVIATIONS
ADL
IADL
BMI
ELSA
H70
HRS
SHARE
SWEOLD
ULF

Activities of Daily Living
Instrumental Activities of Daily Living
Body Mass Index
English Longitudinal Study of Ageing
Health of 70-year-olds in Gothenburg, Sweden
Health and Retirement Study (USA)
Survey of Health, Ageing, and Retirement in Europe
Swedish Panel Study of the Living Conditions of the Oldest Old
Undersökningar om Levnadsförhållanden (Swedish Survey of Living Conditions)

Increased prevalence
In Europe, ADL or IADL limitations
stayed relatively constant. In England,
ADL limitations decreased, whereas
IADL limitations increased. In the USA,
ADL limitations increased, whereas
IADL limitations decreased

