NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRICE OF LONG-RUN TEMPERATURE SHIFTS IN CAPITAL MARKETS
Ravi Bansal
Dana Kiku
Marcelo Ochoa
Working Paper 22529
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22529

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016

The analysis and conclusions set forth are those of the authors and do not indicate concurrence by
other members of the research staff or the Board of Governors. We would like to thank Lars
Hansen, Geoffrey Heal, Christian Traeger, Ricardo Colacito, Tony Smith, Thomas Maurer,
Juhani Linnainmaa, Holger Kraft, and seminar participants at Duke University, the Hong Kong
University of Science and Technology, the University of Hong Kong, the 2nd Macro Finance
Workshop, Developing the Next Generation of Economic Models of Climate Change Conference,
the 2015 AEA meeting, the 2015 MFA meeting, the 2015 WFA meeting, the Environmental
Energy Economics workshop at the 2015 NBER Summer Institute, the 2015 EFA meeting, and
the 2016 SED meeting for their helpful comments. The usual disclaimer applies. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Ravi Bansal, Dana Kiku, and Marcelo Ochoa. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Price of Long-Run Temperature Shifts in Capital Markets
Ravi Bansal, Dana Kiku, and Marcelo Ochoa
NBER Working Paper No. 22529
August 2016
JEL No. G0,G12,Q43,Q5
ABSTRACT
We use the forward-looking information from the US and global capital markets to estimate the
economic impact of global warming, specifically, long-run temperature shifts. We find that global
warming carries a positive risk premium that increases with the level of temperature and that has
almost doubled over the last 80 years. Consistent with our model, virtually all US equity
portfolios have negative exposure (beta) to long-run temperature fluctuations. The elasticity of
equity prices to temperature risks across global markets is significantly negative and has been
increasing in magnitude over time along with the rise in temperature. We use our empirical
evidence to calibrate a long-run risks model with temperature-induced disasters in distant output
growth to quantify the social cost of carbon emissions. The model simultaneously matches the
projected temperature path, the observed consumption growth dynamics, discount rates provided
by the risk-free rate and equity market returns, and the estimated temperature elasticity of equity
prices. We find that the long-run impact of temperature on growth implies a significant social
cost of carbon emissions.
Ravi Bansal
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
1 Towerview Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
ravi.bansal@duke.edu
Dana Kiku
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign IL 61820
dka@illinois.edu

Marcelo Ochoa
Federal Reserve Board
Division of Monetary Affairs
20th and C Streets, NW
Washington, DC 20551
marcelo.ochoa@frb.gov

Introduction
Global warming and its impact on the macro-economy is a matter of considerable importance (see
Stern (2007) and Nordhaus (2008)). However, measuring the economic costs of global warming
pose signiﬁcant empirical challenges. This article shows that forward-looking equity prices that are
determined by the discounted value of future growth rates provide important information about the
cost of long-horizon temperature ﬂuctuations. Using data from the US and global equity markets, we
document that persistent temperature shifts have a signiﬁcant negative eﬀect on aggregate wealth
and carry a positive risk premium in equity markets. We ﬁnd that the risk premium for low-frequency
(i.e, long-run) temperature ﬂuctuations has been increasing over time along with temperature. To
interpret our empirical evidence and to quantify the social cost of carbon, we provide a temperatureaugmented long-run risk model. Our model, calibrated to match ﬁnancial market data and our
empirical evidence, implies that the social cost of carbon is quite large.
Our temperature-augmented long-run risks (LRR-T) model builds on the long-run risks
framework of Bansal and Yaron (2004) and accounts for the interaction between climate change,
economic growth and risk. To account for the potentially severe consequences of global warming,
the model features temperature-induced natural disasters in future output and growth.1 Disasters
are triggered when temperature breaches a threshold level (tipping point) and capture the idea of
tail risk related to global warming as discussed in Pindyck (2012). Diﬀerent from the standard
integrated assessment (IAM) models, in which climate change is assumed to cause a deterministic
loss in output, in the LRR-T model, temperature is a source of economic risk — a persistent increase
in temperature rises the likelihood of breaching the temperature tipping point and causing economic
disasters. Temperature risks in our model aﬀect aggregate wealth and asset valuations through the
variation in expected growth rates and discount rates. In particular, a rise in temperature raises
the marginal utility and lowers the current wealth to consumption ratio. Thus, temperature risks
carry a positive premium, which is reﬂected in prices of forward-looking assets such as equities. The
LRR-T model makes several predictions that guide our empirical work. First, consistent with the
consensus view, in the model, the most signiﬁcant eﬀects of global warming unfold in the relatively
1
Earlier work on economic disasters includes Rietz (1988), Barro (2009), Gourio (2012), and Bansal, Kiku, and
Yaron (2010), among others.

1

distant future and, therefore, they are diﬃcult to assess from the current and historical output
data. However, temperature risks have a measurable impact on current equity valuations. We
exploit this implication in our empirical work and use capital market data to estimate the price of
temperature risks. Second, the model predicts that the price of low-frequency temperature risks
and their risk premia increase with temperature. We test this implication using a conditional factor
model speciﬁcation that allows for variation in the market price of long-run temperature risk.
Using a cross-section of 25 book-to-market and size sorted portfolios from the US capital markets,
we ﬁnd that controlling for market and consumption growth risks, with only few exceptions,
equities have negative exposure to temperature ﬂuctuations. That is, higher temperature lowers
equity valuations. Exploiting the cross-sectional relationship between average excess returns and
temperature betas, we ﬁnd that the market price of low-frequency temperature risks is signiﬁcantly
negative as predicted by our LRR-T model. In particular, the price of variations in ﬁve-year
temperature trend is estimated at −0.19 with the Shanken (1992)-corrected t-statistics of −2.08. The
negative price of temperature risks implies that a long-run increase in temperature is a bad economic
state. Given that equity temperature betas are also negative, temperature risks carry a positive
premium in equity markets. Our evidence is robust to the inclusion of industry portfolios. Further,
consistent with the model’s prediction, we document that the premium for long-run temperature
risks associated with global warming has increased signiﬁcantly along with the rise in temperature.
The premium for a one-standard deviation exposure to long-run temperature risks has doubled over
the past 80 years from about 0.2% to 0.4%.
We conﬁrm our US-based evidence using a panel of 39 countries over the 1970-2012 time period.
We ﬁnd that after controlling for global and local risk factors, temperature has a signiﬁcantly
negative impact on equity valuations. We also ﬁnd that temperature elasticity has become more
negative over time; for example, the elasticity of equity prices to temperature ﬂuctuations changes
from about −1.6% in the early pre-2000 sample to −7.6% over the entire sample period. This
evidence suggests that during the period over which temperature has risen, its impact on the
economy has ampliﬁed. Importantly, we show that the negative impact of temperature on equity
valuations is mostly driven by its low-frequency (i.e., trend) ﬂuctuations that most closely correspond
to global warming. Earlier empirical works by Dell, Jones, and Olken (2012), and Bansal and Ochoa

2

(2012) examine the eﬀect of temperature variations on gross domestic product. In contrast, we focus
on forward-looking equity valuations — this allows us to learn about both long-term growth and
risk eﬀects of temperature, which past income data do not provide.
We use our empirical estimates and the LRR-T model to quantify the social cost of carbon
(SCC) that has become an important concept in the economic analysis of global warming and
policy decision making. Intuitively, SCC measures the present value of damages due to a marginal
increase in carbon emissions and as such, it allows us to assess the incentive to curb industrial
emissions. To provide the estimate of SCC, we calibrate our model to match the projected trend
in global temperature, consumption dynamics, our estimates of temperature elasticity of equity
valuations and the observed discount rates from capital markets.2 The latter is important as the
social cost of carbon can be highly sensitive to discount rates as highlighted in Nordhaus (2008),
Gollier (2012) and Golosov, Hassler, Krusell, and Tsyvinski (2014). We ﬁnd that with a preference
for early resolution of uncertainty, the social cost of carbon is quite signiﬁcant. In our baseline LRRT model, SCC is measured at about 100 dollars of world consumption per metric ton of carbon,
which is equivalent to a tax of about 20 cent per gallon of gas. It declines to a still sizable $40 when
temperature is assumed to aﬀect only the level of output but not the long-term growth. Thus, when
distant risks matter, carbon emissions and rising temperature carry a signiﬁcant price. In sharp
contrast, we show that in a power-utility setting, long-run temperature is not perceived as suﬃciently
risky because its impact is deferred to the future. Consequently, the social cost of carbon under
power-utility preferences is very small, of merely 1 cent per metric ton of carbon. We also show that
a power-utility speciﬁcation, which is the standard assumption in the integrated assessment models,
fails to explain the empirical ﬁnding of negative elasticity of wealth valuations to temperature risks
— in contrast to the data, under power utility (with risk aversion above one), aggregate wealth
increases in states of high temperature and high likelihood of disasters. In all, this evidence shows
that the social cost of carbon emissions and, hence, the incentive to abate global warming depend
critically on the attitude towards long-run risks. The implications of risk preferences for the optimal
policy response to climate change are explored in a companion paper (see Bansal, Kiku, and Ochoa
(2015)).
2

We focus on the exchange economy to maintain tractability and ensure that the model is able to match the asset
market data. This is quantitatively diﬃcult to achieve in a production-based setting.

3

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we set up the LRR-T model.
Section 2 provides speciﬁcs of our calibration. In Section 3, we present the quantitative solution to
the model and discuss its implications. In Section 4 we provide empirical evidence of the impact of
temperature risks using the US data. In Section 5, we document the impact of long-run temperature
ﬂuctuations on equity prices using data from global capital markets. Section 6 concludes.

1

LRR–T Model

In this section, we set up a uniﬁed general equilibrium model of the world economy and global
climate. Our LRR-T model accounts for the interaction between current and future economic
growth and climate change in a framework that features elements of Epstein and Zin (1989),
Bansal and Yaron (2004), Hansen and Sargent (2006), Rietz (1988) and Barro (2009) models. A
unique dimension of our model is that it incorporates temperature-induced natural disasters that
are expected to have a long-run eﬀect on future well-being. This feature is consistent with by now
the consensus view that global warming will have a long-lasting negative eﬀect on ecological systems
and human society (IPCC (2007, 2013)).3

1.1

Climate-Change Dynamics

We assume that industrial carbon emissions are driven by technologies that are used to produce
consumption or output. Let Ct denote the total amount of consumption goods, then the level of
CO2 emissions is given by:
Et = Ctλt ,

(1)

where λt ≥ 0 is carbon intensity of consumption. The (log) growth rate of emissions is, therefore,
∆et+1 = λt+1 ∆ct+1 + ∆λt+1 ct ,

(2)

where et ≡ log Et , ct ≡ log Ct , and ∆ is the ﬁrst diﬀerence operator.
3

While climate change has a broader meaning, we use it to refer to anthropogenic global warming due to the
continuing buildup of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere caused by the combustion of fossil fuels, manufacturing of
cement and land use change.

4

Carbon intensity is assumed to be exogenous and we calibrate it to match the projected path
of CO2 emissions under the business-as-usual (BAU) scenario of Nordhaus (2010). We assume
that in the long-run limit, both intensity and emissions decline to zero to capture the eventual
replacement of current production technologies with carbon-free technologies as fossil fuel resources
become depleted. We will discuss our calibration in more details below.
The accumulation of greenhouse gasses, of which carbon dioxide is the most signiﬁcant
anthropogenic source, leads to global warming due to an increase in radiative forcing.

The

geophysical equation linking CO2 emissions and global temperature is a modiﬁed version of that in
Nordhaus (2008)’s DICE model.4 In particular, we assume that global temperature relative to its
pre-industrial level follows:
Tt = νt Tt−1 + χet ,

(3)

where Tt is temperature anomaly (i.e., temperature above the pre-industrial level), et is the log of
CO2 emissions, νt ∈ (0, 1) is the rate of carbon retention in the atmosphere and, hence, the degree
of persistence of temperature variations, and χ > 0 is temperature sensitivity to CO2 emissions.5
Note that, eﬀectively, Equation (3) describes a stock of man-made emissions in the atmosphere (i.e.,
CO2 concentration), and temperature anomaly is assumed to be proportional to the level of carbon
concentration. These dynamics are consistent with the conclusions of the Fifth Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) that establishes an unequivocal link
between the increase in the atmospheric concentration of greenhouse gasses and the rise in global
temperature (IPCC (2013)).
We assume that climate change due to global warming has a damaging eﬀect on the economy.
Once temperature crosses a tipping point, Tt ≥ T ∗ , the economy becomes subject to natural disasters
that result in a signiﬁcant reduction of economic growth. The probability of natural disasters and
the loss function are described next.
4
Nordhaus (2008) models carbon-cycle dynamics using a three-reservoir system that accounts for interactions
between the atmosphere, the upper and the lower levels of the ocean. The dynamics of temperature that we use is
qualitatively consistent with the implications of his structural speciﬁcation. Also, quantitatively, our calibration is
designed to match temperature dynamics under the BAU policy as predicted by Nordhaus (2010).
5
We assume that νt is increasing in carbon intensity. This feature implies a more persistent eﬀect of emissions at
high levels of CO2 concentration and temperature and is designed to capture re-inforcing feedbacks of global warming
due to melting ice and show that increases absorbtion of sunlight, an increase in water vapor that causes temperature
to climb further, a more intensive release of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases from soils as temperature rises,
a reduced absorbtion of carbon by warmer oceans, etc.

5

1.2

Consumption Growth Dynamics

Consumption growth follows the dynamics as in Bansal and Yaron (2004) augmented by the impact
of natural disasters caused by global warming. The log growth rate of consumption is given by:
∆ct+1 = µ + xt + σηt+1 − Dt+1 ,
xt+1 = ρx xt + φx σϵt+1 − ϕx Dt+1 ,

(4)
(5)

where µ is the unconditional mean of gross consumption growth; xt is the expected growth
component; ηt+1 and ϵt+1 are standard Gaussian innovations that capture short-run and longrun risks, respectively; and −Dt+1 is a decline in consumption growth due to temperature-induced
disasters.
We assume that natural disasters are triggered when temperature reaches a tipping point T ∗
and model their impact using a compensated compound Poisson process,
∑

Nt+1

Dt+1 =

ζi,t+1 − dt πt ,

(6)

i=1

where Nt+1 is a Poisson random variable with time-varying intensity πt , and ζi,t+1 ∼ Γ(1, dt ) are
gamma distributed jumps with a time-varying mean of dt . We assume that both occurrence of
natural disasters and their damages are increasing in temperature. In particular, the expected size
of disasters is given by:


 q1 Tt + q2 T 2 , if Tt ≥ T ∗
t
dt =
 0,
otherwise

(7)

and disaster intensity follows:

 l0 + l1 Tt , if Tt ≥ T ∗
πt ≡ Et [Nt+1 ] =
 0,
otherwise,

(8)

where parameters q1 , q2 , l0 and l1 are greater than zero. Quadratic loss functions are commonly
used in the climate-change literature, e.g., Nordhaus (2008), Weitzman (2010), Lemoine and Traeger
(2012), Golosov, Hassler, Krusell, and Tsyvinski (2014), and Heutel (2012).

6

Note that in our speciﬁcation, climate-change disasters aﬀect consumption growth rate and,
therefore, have a permanent eﬀect on the economy.

We focus on potentially catastrophic

consequences of climate change that might not be possible to reverse or easily adapt to, and as
such they are expected to have a long-lasting impact on human well-being. These include but not
limited to rising sea levels and drowning of currently populated coastlines and islands, intensiﬁed
heat waves, severe droughts, storms and ﬂoods, destruction of ecosystems and wildlife, spreading
of contagious tropical diseases, shortages of food and fresh water supply, signiﬁcant destruction
of property and human losses. To incorporate these types of large-scale and permanent eﬀects
we assume that disasters aﬀect the growth rate of the economy instead of just the current level of
output as is typically assumed in the integrated assessment models.6 A permanent impact of climate
change and its implications for policy decisions are also analyzed in Pindyck (2012). We consider
a more general speciﬁcation in which global warming may aﬀect not only current but also future
consumption growth. While uncertainty over adaptation to global warming is well recognized, the
assumption that rising temperature will have a negative eﬀect on human welfare and global economy
is standard in the climate-change literature (eg., Nordhaus (2010), Weitzman (2010), Anthoﬀ and
Tol (2012), Pindyck (2012)).7

1.3

Preferences

Following the long-run risk literature, we deﬁne preferences recursively as in Kreps and Porteus
(1978), Epstein and Zin (1989), and Weil (1990). We use Ut to denote the continuation utility at
time t, which is given by:
1
{
( [
]) 1− ψ } 1−1 1
1
1− ψ
1−γ
1−γ
ψ
Ut = (1 − δ)Ct
+ δ Et Ut+1
,

(9)

where δ is the time-discount rate, γ is the coeﬃcient of risk aversion, and ψ is the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution (IES). When γ =

1
ψ,

than preferences collapse to the power utility

speciﬁcation, in which the timing of the resolution of uncertainty is irrelevant. When risk aversion
6

For example, the DICE/RICE models of Nordhaus (2008, 2010), the FUND model of Tol (2002a, 2002b) and
Anthoﬀ and Tol (2013), and the PAGE model of Hope (2011).
7
The implications of tail risks in the presence of uncertainty about climate-change impact are analyzed in Weitzman
(2009).

7

exceeds the reciprocal of IES, γ ≥

1
ψ,

early resolution of uncertainty about future consumption

path is preferred. Power utility is the standard assumption in the integrated assessment models
of climate change. Preferences for early resolution of uncertainty are the benchmark in the longrun risks literature and, as emphasized in Bansal and Yaron (2004), are critical for explaining the
dynamics of ﬁnancial markets. We consider both speciﬁcations and highlight the importance of
preferences to risks and to temporal resolution of risks for the welfare analysis of global warming.
Note that the maximized life-time utility is proportional to the wealth to consumption ratio and
as such it is determined by the present value of expected consumption growth from now to inﬁnity.
Speciﬁcally, the value function normalized by current consumption is given by:
[
] ψ
Ut
= (1 − δ)Zt ψ−1 ,
Ct
where Zt ≡

Wt
Ct

(10)

is the aggregate wealth-consumption ratio. Aggregate wealth can be represented by

a portfolio of consumption strips:
Wt =

∞
∑

(j)

Pt

,

(11)

j=0
(j)

where Pt

is the price of the consumption strip that matures at time t + j (i.e., the price of the

asset that pays aggregate consumption at time t + j). Consequently, the wealth-consumption ratio
can be expressed as:

]
[
∞
∑
Et Ct+j /Ct
Zt =
,
Et Rj,t+j

(12)

j=0

where Et Rj,t+j ≡

Et Ct+j
(j)

Pt

is the discount rate of the consumption strip with j-periods to maturity.

The prices (hence, discount rates) of consumption strips are determined by the standard Euler
equation:
(j)

Pt

]
[
= Et Mt+j Ct+j ,

(13)

where the j-period stochastic discount factor (SDF) is given by:

Mt+j =

j
∏

−θ/ψ

θ−1
δ θ Gt+i Rt+i
,

(14)

i=1

where Gt+i ≡

Ct+i
Ct+i−1 ,

Rt+i is the endogenous return on wealth, and θ =
8

1−γ
1
1− ψ

.

Equation (12) highlights the forward-looking nature of aggregate wealth and asset prices — the
current price of the consumption claim carries information about agents’ expectations about future
economic growth (Ct+j /Ct ) and risk (Et Rj,t+j ). If climate change is expected to have a signiﬁcant
impact of either future growth or risk, it will be reﬂected in current wealth and asset prices. Also,
as Equation (10) shows, the agent’s utility is aﬀected by climate change through the impact of
temperature risk on the wealth-consumption ratio. Hence, the elasticity of aggregate wealth and
asset prices to temperature risk determines the economic impact of climate change on the life-time
utility.

1.4

Social Cost of Carbon

The social cost of carbon (SCC) has become an important concept in the cost-beneﬁt analysis of
global warming. SCC measures the present value of damages due to a marginal increase in carbon
emissions. Formally, it is deﬁned as marginal utility of carbon emissions:
SCCt = −

∂Ut / ∂Ut
∂Et ∂Ct

(15)

The scaling by marginal utility of consumption allows us to express the cost in units of consumption
goods (time-t dollars), which makes SCC easy to interpret. Using Equation (10), we can express
the social cost of carbon at time 0 as:
SCC0 =

ψ −∂Z0 /∂E0
C0 .
ψ−1
Z0

(16)

That is, SCC is equal to the (appropriately scaled) monetized value of a percentage change in wealth
due to an additional unit of emissions. Intuitively, the social cost of carbon measures an increase in
current consumption that is required to compensate for damages caused by a marginal increase in
date-0 emissions.
As Equation (16) shows, the social cost of carbon emissions is determined by the elasticity of the
valuation ratio to carbon emissions. An increase in current emissions leads to higher temperature
and aﬀects asset prices through two channels — the cash-ﬂow channel that carries the impact of
temperature variations on future consumption, and the discount-rate channel that carries the impact
9

of temperature on future risk. Note that while the cash-ﬂow eﬀect depends on the temperatureinduced damages and is invariant to agents’ preferences, the discount rate eﬀect is determined
importantly by risk preferences. For example, in an economy, where agents do not care about
distant risks including climate risks that are expected to unfold in the future, the discount rate
eﬀect and, therefore, the social cost of carbon might be quite small. In contrast, in an economy,
where agents are concerned about future risks, the discount-rate eﬀect of rising temperature on asset
prices might be quite signiﬁcant and carbon emissions might carry sizable risk premia.8 Equation
(16) implies that discount rates from capital markets provide very useful information about the
magnitude of the social cost of carbon and the economic importance of temperature risks.

2

Calibration and Model Implications for Temperature Risk

We calibrate the path of carbon intensity (λt ) and temperature (Tt ) to match the business-as-usual
forecasts of CO2 emissions and global warming in Nordhaus (2010) and IPCC (2007, 2013). Time
in the model is measured in decades and we assume that the steady state in the BAU case will
be reached in 60 periods or 600 years from now. The steady state corresponds to the state in
which anthropogenic emissions decline to zero and the temperature anomaly disappears due to the
ultimate de-carbonization of the economy. The ﬁrst two panels of Figure 1 show the calibrated
path of carbon intensity and the amount of emissions along the transitional path. Under the BAU
policy, carbon intensity is expected to remain relatively high over the next two centuries and carbon
emissions are expected to accelerate.
As more and more CO2 emissions are released, the concentration of carbon in the atmosphere
increases and temperature anomaly escalates. The projected BAU path of temperature is shown in
Panel (c) of Figure 1. Calibration of global warming dynamics and the impact of climate change on
consumption growth are presented in Table I.9 To capture re-enforcing feedback eﬀects of emissions,
we allow the retention of carbon in the atmosphere, νt , to increase in carbon intensity. We assume
that about 80% of current CO2 emissions will remain in the atmosphere for another century, their
8

Hansen and Scheinkman (2012), and Borovička and Hansen (2014) develop a rigorous analysis of how price
elasticities relate to growth and discount-rate elasticities to exogenous shocks.
9
To facilitate interpretation of the calibrated parameters, we report and discuss them in annualized terms.

10

decay will increase as the rate of emissions slows down. The average value of the retention rate under
the BAU scenario is equal to 0.962, which implies that about 70% of CO2 molecules emitted along
the transitional path are removed from the atmosphere within a century. The precise atmospheric
life of carbon dioxide is yet unknown but our calibration is designed to roughly match the available
estimates in the geophysical literature (Jacobson (2005), and Archer (eg., 2005, 2009)).
We set the tipping point of global warming disasters to 2◦ C that according to the Copenhagen
accord is internationally recognized as a likely trigger of dangerous changes in the climate system.
If the current trend in emissions continues, temperature is expected to cross the disaster threshold
in about 30-35 years from now (see Figure 1c). This assumption is fairly consistent with the most
recent forecast of the IPCC. As reported in the Fifth Assessment Report, the global mean surface
temperature anomaly is expected to exceed 2◦ C in three to four decades from now (IPCC (2013)).
Once the 2◦ C tipping point is crossed, the global economy faces the risk of natural cataclysms.
Both intensity and size of climate-induced disasters are increasing with temperature and their
expected paths are presented in Figure 2. Time-varying intensity dynamics are motivated by the
evidence in Raddatz (2009) that, worldwide, the number of climatic disasters (such as droughts,
ﬂoods, and extreme temperature) has increased over the last four decades — the period that has
experienced a steep increase in temperature. The initial impact of global warming is assumed to
be relatively moderate but it is intensiﬁed as temperature keeps rising. In particular, we assume
that upon the crossing of the 2◦ C threshold, the annual probability of disasters is about 1.2% and
their average size is −0.7%. As temperature reaches its peak, the disaster probability rises to 2.8%
per annum and average losses increase to −6.0%. Note that our calibration of disaster distribution
is very conservative relative to the rare disaster asset pricing literature (Barro (2009), Barro and
Ursua (2012), and Wachter (2013)).
Table II summarizes our calibration of preferences and consumption dynamics. Our LRR-T
model features preferences for early resolution of uncertainty and incorporates a negative eﬀect of
global warming on current and future consumption growth. We choose preference parameters so
that the model is able to match key moments of ﬁnancial data. In particular, we set risk aversion
at 5, the intertemporal elasticity of substitution at 1.5, and the subjective time-discount factor at
0.99. We set the unconditional mean of consumption growth at 1.8% and assume that the standard

11

deviation of i.i.d. gaussian shocks is 1.6% per annum. We calibrate the dynamics of the long-run risk
component to match persistence of consumption growth in normal times. Consistent with the US
consumption data, in our speciﬁcation the ﬁrst-order autocorrelation of consumption growth absent
climate disasters is equal to 0.44. Exposure of the expected consumption growth to disaster risks is
set at 0.05. Note that while the average size of climate disasters in the expected growth component
is assumed to be quite modest, their eﬀect on consumption is propagated due to persistence of
long-run risks. That is, upon a disaster, consumption growth does not immediately bounce back to
its normal level but is expected to remain low for a relatively long while.
The dynamics of future climate changes and their economic consequences are highly uncertain
and not yet well-understood. Pindyck (2007), and Heal and Millner (2014) provide a comprehensive
discussion of various sources of uncertainty in environmental economics. While some empirical
evidence on the impact of rising temperature and climatic disasters does exist (for example, Tol
(2002a, 2002b)), it is based on human experiences that have not yet been subjected to catastrophic
climate changes that we consider. Therefore, we can use it only as a guidance rather than a target.
Whenever possible, we calibrate the model parameters to be broadly consistent with assumptions
of the standard integrated assessment models and consensus forecasts outlined by the IPCC. With
this in mind, we do not intend to claim that our calibrated dynamics represent the future better
than others. We consider plausible dynamics and focus on highlighting the channels through which
beliefs about climate-change risks and risk preferences aﬀect aggregate wealth. To discriminate
across the LRR-T model and alternative speciﬁcations, we confront each with ﬁnancial market data
and empirical evidence on the impact of rising temperature on equity prices.
We solve the model numerically using value function iterations. We start at the “terminal” date
at which temperature anomaly disappears and the solution becomes stationary, and work backwards
in time. We discretize the state space and use Chebyshev polynomial approximation of the value
policy function.

12

3

Asset Pricing Implications of Temperature Risks

Diﬀerent from the standard integrated assessment models, in which climate change is assumed to
cause a deterministic loss in future output or consumption, in our model, global warming aﬀects
the economy through a risk channel. That is, climate change is a source of economic risk. Figure 3
displays the implications of global warming for the distribution of consumption growth. Notice that
because temperature-induced disasters are compensated, they have no eﬀect on the ex-ante mean
of log consumption growth. This is similar to gaussian i.i.d. and long-run risks — ex-ante, global
warming does not aﬀect the log level of future consumption path but does aﬀect its variation, i.e.,
risk. As Panel (a) shows, climate-change driven disasters increase the ex-ante variation of future
growth. In our calibration, at the peak of temperature anomaly, the ex-ante annualized volatility
of cumulative consumption growth is about 0.18% higher compared with a no-disaster economy
(in relative terms this corresponds to more than ten percent increase in volatility). Also, because
global-warming disasters represent tail risks, the distribution of future consumption growth is both
negatively skewed and fat-tailed. Panel (b) of Figure 3 presents a side-by-side comparison of the
distribution of the normalized consumption growth at the peak of climate-driven disasters and the
corresponding distribution in the economy with no disasters.
Given the preference parameters and the dynamics of consumption in Section 2, we solve
the model numerically to account for the intrinsic non-linearities. To understand intuitively the
pricing implications of carbon emissions and temperature risks, it is useful to consider a log-linear
approximation of the stochastic discount factor stated in Equation (14). Similar to the LRR model,
the innovation in the log of the SDF that determines risk prices can be approximately written as:
(
)
mt+1 − Et [mt+1 ] ≈ − λη ηt+1 − λϵ ϵt+1 − λD (Tt ) − Dt+1 ,

(17)

where ηt+1 and ϵt+1 are short- and long-run consumption risks, respectively, and −Dt+1 is a
temperature-induced disaster. Consider the impact of a marginal increase in current emissions.
An increase in emissions leads to higher temperature. A positive shock to temperature rises the
likelihood of future disasters and, therefore, the marginal utility. Thus, temperature risks carry a
negative price: λD (Tt ) < 0. Further, because both the frequency and the size of potential damages

13

depend on the level of temperature, so does the magnitude of the price of temperature risks. That
is, the price of temperature risk rises as temperature climbs up:

∂λD (Tt )
∂Tt

< 0. Panel (a) of Figure 4

shows the elasticity of the stochastic discount factor to a one-percent increase in time-0 emissions.
As the ﬁgure shows, the marginal utility increases in response to higher emissions, and the increase
in marginal utility is ampliﬁed with temperature — the higher the temperature, the larger the
response of the marginal utility, i.e., the larger the price of temperature risks.
The premium for temperature risks is determined by their price and an asset exposure to
temperature ﬂuctuations. Consider the return on aggregate wealth. Using log-linearization, we
can write the innovation in the log return, rt+1 , as a sum of innovations in consumption growth and
the wealth to consumption ratio, i.e.,
rt+1 − Et [rt+1 ] ≈

(
)
(
)
∆ct+1 − Et [∆ct+1 ] + zt+1 − Et [zt+1 ] ,

(18)

where zt+1 ≡ log(Zt ) is the log of the aggregate wealth-consumption ratio.10 As Equation (18) shows,
exposure of wealth return to temperature risks depends on the impact of temperature ﬂuctuations
on consumption growth and aggregate wealth. In our model, climate change is assumed to cause
disasters in consumption that become more severe as temperature keeps rising (see Equation (4)).
Under a preference for early resolution of uncertainty, that is, when risk aversion is larger than
the reciprocal of intertemporal elasticity of substitution, the impact of temperature ﬂuctuations on
aggregate wealth is also negative. The elasticity of the wealth-consumption ratio to a marginal
increase in current emissions and and temperature is presented in Panel (b) of Figure 4. As the
ﬁgure shows, the wealth-consumption ratio falls in response to an increase in temperature. Thus, the
temperature beta of the aggregate wealth return (i.e., the projection coeﬃcient of the asset return
on temperature shock) is negative and is increasing in magnitude with temperature. Recall that
temperature risk has a negative market price; hence, the product of the temperature beta and its
price that determines the temperature risk premium is positive. Higher emissions and temperature
raise temperature risk premia and future discount rates and lead to a decline in the wealth to
consumption ratio and asset valuations.
10

This is similar to the innovation in an equity return, which is approximately equal to a sum of innovations in
dividend growth and the price to dividend ratio.

14

To explore the implications of risk preferences for the joint dynamics of asset prices and
temperature, we consider two alternative speciﬁcations: (1) preferences for early resolution of
uncertainty, which we refer to as “Pref for ERU”, and (2) constant relative risk aversion preferences
that we refer to as “Power Utility”. To facilitate the comparison, we simplify consumption dynamics
by shutting oﬀ the long-run risk component and assuming that global warming aﬀects only realized
consumption growth. Under these dynamics, climate risks continue to have a permanent negative
impact on consumption level but are assumed to have no eﬀect on future economic growth. The
calibration of the two alternative speciﬁcations is summarized in Table II.
Figure 5 shows the response of aggregate wealth-consumption ratio to a one-percent increase in
current emissions under the two preference speciﬁcations. Similar to our baseline LRR-T model,
under preferences for early resolution of uncertainty, higher emissions lead to an increase in discount
rates and a fall in asset valuations. In contrast, in the power-utility economy with risk aversion larger
than one, discount rates decline in response to higher emissions and higher temperature (due to a
signiﬁcant decline in risk-free rates) and asset prices feature a positive elasticity to temperature risks.
That is, under power utility, the wealth-consumption ratio rises when disasters are expected to be
more frequent and economic losses are expected to be larger.11 The implications of temperature
for the wealth to consumption ratio and equity valuations (price-dividend ratios) are important in
identifying the role of temperature risks.
The response of asset prices to temperature ﬂuctuations in our baseline LRR-T model and
under the two alternative speciﬁcations is summarized in Table III. For each speciﬁcation, we
simulate 50,000 paths of emissions, temperature and consumption and solve for the price of the
consumption claim. Temperature elasticities of asset prices are estimated by regressing the log of
the price-consumption ratio on temperature controlling for the relevant state variables. As the table
shows, under recursive preferences, asset valuations fall in response to an increase in temperature. In
particular, in the LRR-T model, a 0.5◦ C increase in temperature (which corresponds to one standard
deviation of the empirical distribution) lowers the price of the consumption claim by about 0.87%. If
we account for market leverage of around three, the response of equity prices to temperature shocks
11

The power-utility agents are still worse oﬀ since their utility is inversely related to wealth, but because the elasticity
of utility to wealth is quite low, the decline in utility is very tiny, more than three orders of magnitude smaller than
the corresponding decline under recursive preferences.

15

implied by our LRR-T model is about −2.6%, which as we show below is quantitatively similar to
our empirical estimates. Also, as shown in Figure 4, the sensitivity of asset prices to temperature
risks increases with temperature (as the economy gets closer to the disaster threshold). For example,
ten and twenty years from now, the price response rises in magnitude from the current −0.0174 to
−0.019 and −0.021, respectively.
As Table III further shows, the power-utility implied response of prices to temperature risks is
very diﬀerent compared with recursive preferences. In the power-utility case, asset prices rise with
temperature. Quantitatively, the price-consumption ratio increases by about 0.024% in response
to a 0.53◦ C increase in temperature. This is the discount-rate or, more precisely, the risk-free rate
eﬀect that we discussed above. In the power-utility setting, an increase in temperature leads to a
signiﬁcant decline in discount rates and, consequently, an increase in asset prices.
Risk preferences have also important implications for the marginal cost of carbon emissions,
which we present in Table IV. In our LRR-T model, SCC is estimated at about $104 per ton of
carbon.12 In the presence of risks that aﬀect long-term growth, agents’ utility is highly sensitive
to emissions due to both high potential damages and late resolution of temperature risks. The two
channels combined lead to the high price of carbon emissions. Further, even when the long-run
risk channel is shut oﬀ, under preferences for early resolution of uncertainty, distant climate risks
continue to carry a signiﬁcant weight and the social cost of carbon remains signiﬁcant, of about
$40. In contrast, in the power-utility setting, SCC is quite small as temperature risks under power
utility are eﬀectively discounted out as they are expected to realize in a relatively distant future.
Note that Nordhaus (2014), and Golosov, Hassler, Krusell, and Tsyvinski (2014) report signiﬁcant
estimates of the social cost of carbon under power utility preferences because they assume that
climate change causes a sizable reduction in the current and near-future output. Diﬀerently, we
assume that signiﬁcant consequences of temperature risks will be realized in the future rather than
today and, therefore, ﬁnd that the power-utility agent assigns a small price to carbon emissions.
It is important to note that weather the impact of climate change is realized now or in the future,
under power utility with risk aversion above one, asset prices always feature a positive elasticity
to temperature risks, which is inconsistent with the robustly negative response of asset prices to
12

The social cost of carbon is measured in 2012 dollars of world household ﬁnal consumption expenditure per metric
ton of carbon.

16

temperature ﬂuctuations in the data that we document and discuss below.
Temperature risks aside, our LRR-T model corresponds to the long-run risks model of Bansal
and Yaron (2004). As they show, with preferences for early resolution of uncertainty, risks that
matter for the long run carry high risk premia and are able to account for the dynamics of equity
prices and asset returns. Our calibration of the gaussian part of consumption dynamics is similar
to theirs and, therefore, is consistent with ﬁnancial market data. As Table IV shows, the average
risk-free rate in the LRR-T speciﬁcation is 0.9%, and the risk premium on consumption claim is
about 1.7%. Hence, the implied equity premium, assuming leverage of 3, is about 5% per annum. It
is important to emphasize that most of the risk premium is the compensation for long-run gaussian
risks, and only a relatively modest fraction of the overall premium is due to temperature risks.

4

Temperature and Asset Prices: Evidence from the US Markets

In our model, rising temperature increases economic risk and thus has a negative eﬀect on the
macro-economy. Further, with a preference for early resolution of uncertainty, higher temperature
leads to a decline in aggregate wealth and asset prices. The empirical research on the impact of
global warming on the macro-economy has primarily focused on the eﬀect of temperature on growth.
For example, Dell, Jones, and Olken (2012) analyze the impact of rising temperature on output and
ﬁnd evidence that current output and short-term future growth tend to decrease with temperature,
although the negative eﬀect seems to be entirely concentrated in low-income countries. Motivated
by our model, we take a diﬀerent approach and measure the impact of temperature on the macroeconomy using forward-looking equity prices rather than past growth rates. Long-horizon equity
prices reﬂect information about future expected growth rates and future risks. If temperature is
expected to aﬀect future growth and/or risk, these expectations ought to be reﬂected in capital
markets provided that agents care about the future. Note that if past and current growths have not
yet been exposed to catastrophic temperature risks, it would not be possible to detect the impact of
temperature from the available output data. In contrast to backward-looking output growth rates,
equity prices reveal agents’ expectations about the future and, thus, contain information about a
potential impact of temperature on the economy. This is the idea that we pursue in our empirical

17

analysis of equity prices and temperature ﬂuctuations.
Although, for simplicity, in the theory section we consider the economy in aggregate without
explicitly modeling its sectors or markets, the cross-sectional implications of our model are
straightforward. Assets that are highly exposed to temperature risks should carry higher risk
premia relative to assets with lower sensitivity. We exploit this prediction to measure the impact of
temperature ﬂuctuations on equity prices and to estimate the price of temperature risks.

4.1

US Data

We use two data sets from the US equity markets: the standard set of 25 portfolios sorted by market
capitalization and book-to-market ratio and a set of industry portfolios.13 Following the classiﬁcation
of the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) and Graﬀ Zivin and Neidell
(2014), we construct ten industry portfolios that represent high and low heat-exposed sectors of the
US economy. The ﬁrst group comprises mining, oil and gas extraction, construction, transportation,
and utilities — industries that operate in hot and humid environments. The remaining sectors:
manufacturing, wholesale, retail trade, services, and communications, are classiﬁed as sectors with
low exposure to heat.14 To control for market and consumption risks, we use the CRSP valueweighted portfolio of all stocks traded on the NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ and per-capita series
of real consumption expenditure on non-durables and services from the NIPA tables available from
the Bureau of Economic Analysis. Excess returns are constructed by subtracting the CRSP riskfree rate series from portfolio returns. Temperature data for the contiguous US are measured in
degrees Fahrenheit and come from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration of the
US Department of Commerce. The data are sampled at the annual frequency and span the period
from 1934 to 2014.
13

Book-to-market and size sorted portfolio data are obtained from Kenneth French’s online data library.
We are unable to consider the agricultural sector because a portfolio of public agricultural ﬁrms is extremely thin
— on average, it contains about 9 ﬁrms and in the ﬁrst part of the sample it comprises only 1-2 ﬁrms. Firms in the
ﬁnancial section are excluded.
14

18

4.2

Temperature Betas

We measure equity exposure to temperature risks by regressing portfolio excess returns on
temperature variations controlling for market and economic growth risks, speciﬁcally:
K

e
e
ri,t
= r̄i + β∆T,i ∆T t + βM,i rM,t
+ βC,i ξC,t + ui,t ,

(19)

K

e is the excess return of portfolio i, ∆T
where ri,t
t is the (de-meaned) change in K-year movinge
average trend in temperature, rM,t
is the excess return of the market portfolio, and ξC,t is the

innovation in a smoothed aggregate consumption growth that proxies for variations in macroeconomic growth (as in Parker and Julliard (2005), Bansal, Dittmar, and Lundblad (2005)).
Our controls for market and consumption risks are motivated by our theoretical model, and the
equilibrium CAPM and consumption-based CAPM frameworks of Sharpe (1964), Lucas (1978), and
Breeden (1979).
To diﬀerentiate between low-frequency temperature shocks that contribute to global warming
and short-term ﬂuctuations in temperature that correspond to variations in weather and to
understand the impact of both, we consider diﬀerent horizons K’s ranging from one to ten years.
K

Note that when K = 1, ∆T t ≡ ∆T , which corresponds to annual (short-run) ﬂuctuations in
K

weather. When K ≫ 1, ∆T t represents long-run temperature risks that are associated with
global warming. In essence, by averaging temperature variations over time, we ﬁlter out short-run
weather ﬂuctuations and isolate shocks to the low-frequency component (i.e., temperature trend).
Our empirical evidence is similar if, instead, we construct temperature trend using the Hodrick
and Prescott (1997) ﬁlter.15 Also, our evidence remains virtually the same if we use innovations in
the trailing moving-average of temperature instead of ﬁrst diﬀerences. The advantage of using ﬁrst
diﬀerences is that they are observable and, thus, are not subject to estimation errors.
Figure 6 presents a scatter plot of average excess returns and equity exposure to annual change
in temperature (Panel (a)) and variation in the ﬁve-year moving average trend (Panel (b)). Note
that with only few exceptions, equity portfolios have negative elasticity to temperature ﬂuctuations.
15

Note that the Hodrick and Prescott (1997) ﬁlter is a two-sided ﬁlter and, hence, it is constructed using future
temperature data. The one-sided trailing moving-average that we use is not subject to look-ahead biases because it
uses only the already available, current and past, temperature data.

19

That is, equity prices tend to decline in response to an increase in temperature. Notice also that
portfolios that carry high premia feature high sensitivity to low-frequency temperature risks, which
suggests that temperature risks carry a negative price.
The magnitudes of long-run temperature betas corresponding to the ﬁve-year horizon are
reported Table V. As Panel A shows, while almost all book-to-market and size sorted portfolios
feature a negative response to long-run temperature risks, their exposure is not homogenous. In
particular, high book-to-market ﬁrms tend to have much higher (i.e., more negative) exposure
to temperature ﬂuctuations relative to low book-to-market ﬁrms. Empirical evidence in Bansal,
Dittmar, and Lundblad (2005), Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008), and Bansal, Kiku, Shaliastovich,
and Yaron (2014) shows that high book-to-market ﬁrms are much more sensitive to persistent growth
risks compared with low book-to-market ﬁrms, which accounts for the cross-sectional diﬀerences
in temperature exposure that we document.

According to our LRR-T model, an increase in

temperature trend raises the likelihood of growth diasters in the long run; therefore, assets that
are highly exposed to persistent growth risks also feature high sensitivity to long-run temperature
risks.
The variation in temperature betas across industry portfolios, presented in Panel B of Table V,
is fairly consistent with NIOSH classiﬁcation. Only with the exception of wholesale, industries that
are classiﬁed as low heat-exposure sectors have small positive sensitivity to temperature variation,
whereas ﬁrms in high heat-exposure sectors have negative elasticity to temperature risks.

In

unreported results, we conﬁrm that the diﬀerences between the two groups are strongly signiﬁcant
particularly when temperature risks are measured at low frequencies (i.e., beyond one-year horizon).
In the next section, we test if temperature exposure carries a risk premium as predicted by our model.

4.3

Price of Temperature Risk

To estimate the price of temperature risks, we run a cross-sectional regression of average excess
returns on temperature beta, controlling for market and consumption risk exposure. We present
estimates based on two sets of portfolios: 25 book-to-market and size sorted portfolios, and
an extended set augmented by the industry portfolios.

Tables VI and VII report the cross-

sectional estimates and their signiﬁcance based on standard errors computed using the Fama and
20

MacBeth (1973) regression procedure, and Shanken (1992)-corrected standard errors that account
for estimation errors in betas. Consistent with our model, we ﬁnd that the estimate of the price of
temperature risks, λ̂∆T , is signiﬁcantly negative, especially when temperature risks are measured by
low-frequency variations. For example, in the cross-section of 25 portfolios, risk prices of variations
in ﬁve- and ten-year temperature trends are estimated at −0.193 and −0.126 with the corrected
t-statistics of −2.08 and −2.01, respectively.
It is important to note that temperature ﬂuctuations are exogenous relative to a long list of
reduced-form return-based factors that are popular in empirical asset pricing. Therefore, while we
control for market and economic growth risks (as motivated by the model), we do not include any
ad-hoc empirical factors in our regression speciﬁcations. Further, to ensure that our evidence is not
simply due to a lucky draw, we run the following simulation experiment. We generate temperature
series of the sample size that matches the data and replace the observed temperature with the
simulated draw. We then estimate equity exposure to simulated temperature and run a crosssectional regression of average excess returns on the estimated betas as we do in the actual data.
We repeat this simulation exercise 10,000 times and construct a Monte Carlo distribution of tstatistics under the null that temperature variations have no eﬀect on equity prices. The “p-value*”
row for λ̂∆T in Tables VI and VII reports the fraction of Monte Carlo samples with Shanken (1992)corrected t-statistics lower than the corresponding statistics in the data.16 As the tables show, for
both sets of portfolios, sample t-statistics for the estimate of the price of low-frequency temperature
risks are in the bottom ﬁfth percentile of the null distribution. That is, if temperature risks had no
eﬀect on equity prices, it would be highly unlikely to observe the evidence that we document.

4.4

Time-Varying Price of Temperature Risk

In this section we test if the price of temperature risks has risen over time along with the rise in
temperature. As discussed in Section 3, our model predicts that the risk premium for temperature
ﬂuctuations increases with temperature as the impact of climate change on the economy intensiﬁes.
Motivated by the model’s implications, we take into account potential variation in the conditional
16
Because market and consumption risks should carry positive prices, p-value* for λ̂M and λ̂C corresponds to the
fraction of Monte Carlo samples with a corrected t-statistic greater than the corresponding sample counterpart.

21

risk premium and parameterize the dynamics of the risk price to be a function of the temperature
level. We consider a simple linear speciﬁcation:
λt = λ∆T + λT ·∆T Tt ,

(20)

and evaluate the unconditional implications of the conditional factor model as in Jagannathan and
Wang (1996), Lettau and Ludvigson (2001), and Lustig and Verdelhan (2007). In particular, we
ﬁrst estimate risk exposure of each portfolio i by running a time-series regression:
(
)
K
K
K
e
e
ri,t
= r̄i + β∆T,i ∆T t + βT ·∆T,i T t−1 · ∆T t + βM,i rM,t
+ βC,i ξC,t + ui,t ,
K

(21)

K

where the scaled temperature factor, T t−1·∆T t , captures time-variation in the conditional moments.
{
}N
Then, we run a cross-sectional regression of average excess returns on β∆T,i , βT ·∆T,i , βM,i , βC,i i=1
to estimate risk prices.
The cross-sectional estimates based on 25 book-to-market and size sorted portfolios are presented
Table VIII. Our evidence reveals that long-horizon temperature ﬂuctuations that contribute to global
warming are signiﬁcantly priced in equity markets. As the table shows, the estimates of the constant
and the time-varying components of the price of temperature risks, λ̂∆T and λ̂T ·∆T , are both negative
and strongly signiﬁcant at long horizons. For example, at the 10-year horizon, λ̂∆T and λ̂T ·∆T are
−0.151 and −0.178 with the corrected t-statistics of −1.94 and −2.08, respectively. Our Monte
Carlo simulations show that if the temperature factor were constructed randomly it would be very
unlikely to ﬁnd that it carried a signiﬁcant price as all p-values for horizons beyond one year are
less than ﬁve percent. The estimates and inference based on the extended asset menu, presented in
Table IX, are very similar.
The negative coeﬃcient on the scaled temperature factor indicates that the price of temperature
risks has risen with temperature as predicted by our model. The overall magnitude and the dynamics
of the risk premium for low-frequency temperature ﬂuctuations are presented in Figure 7. The ﬁgure
shows the premium for a (negative) one-standard deviation shock to temperature trend based on
the cross-sectional estimates reported in Table IX that correspond to the 10-year horizon. A onestandard deviation exposure to low-frequency temperature risks carries a premium of around 0.24%,

22

on average. As the ﬁgure shows, by the end of sample, the premium has increased by a factor of
four relative to its level in mid-80’s — from about 0.13% to almost 0.40%.

5

Temperature and Asset Prices: Evidence from Global Markets

In this section, we evaluate the impact of temperature risks on equity valuations using panel data
from global ﬁnancial markets. Because the span of the available international data is relatively
short, we measure the impact of temperature ﬂuctuations by pooling the data and simultaneously
exploiting time-series and cross-sectional variation in country-level temperature and equity prices.
Also, because historically international markets are not fully integrated and diﬀerent countries
feature diﬀerent degrees of segmentation and frictions, we limit our attention on understanding the
overall impact of temperature ﬂuctuations on asset valuations.

5.1

Data

We use country-level panel data that cover 39 countries and span the time period from 1970 and
2012. Country-level and global temperature that correspond to land-surface temperature anomaly
are taken from the Berkeley Earth open database. Temperature anomaly is measured in degrees
Celsius and is deﬁned relative to the 1951-1980 average. The price-dividend data come from the
Global Financial Data and provide a market proxy for the wealth-to-consumption ratio. We also
collect market equity returns for each country in our sample. Country-speciﬁc macro data (such
as gross domestic product, inﬂation, unemployment, real interest rates) are taken from the World
Bank database and are available for the 1980-2009 period. The list of 39 countries is provided in
Table X. This is the most exhaustive set with reliable capital market data that we could ﬁnd, as
such, it is tilted towards developed economies as they are more likely to have a history of equity
markets.
In our sample, 38 out of 39 countries have experienced a signiﬁcant increase in temperature
over the sample period. The median temperature anomaly across countries is about 0.38◦ C and
over the last decade, between 2003 and 2012, the anomaly averages 0.73◦ C . Figure 8 shows the
histogram of the temperature anomaly in the most recent decade in our sample. We ﬁnd that
23

local temperature series have a strong common component that is highly correlated with variation
in global temperature. Using the cross-section of countries we carry out a principal component
analysis on the country-level temperature data. We ﬁnd that the ﬁrst principal component of annual
temperature series accounts for about 53% of the total variation in temperature across countries
and has a 71% correlation with global temperature anomaly. At low frequencies, the co-movement
in local temperature becomes much stronger. For example, using ﬁve-year moving-averages of local
temperature, we ﬁnd that the ﬁrst principal component explains about 81% of the overall variation
in local temperature trends. This evidence suggests that systematic climate risk is most likely
driven by low-frequency temperature risks (i.e., risks associated with global warming) rather than
by weather or short-run temperature ﬂuctuations.
Our analysis of equity prices reveals a strong low dimensional factor structure also in pricedividend ratios. We ﬁnd that the ﬁrst principal component extracted from the cross-section of
price-dividend ratios accounts for about 69% of the total variation in prices across countries and
the second component explains an additional 10%. This suggests that the cross-country variation
in equity valuations is inﬂuenced by common global macro-economic factors. Jagannathan and
Marakani (2015) show that the ﬁrst two price-dividend ratio factors provide robust proxies for
future economic growth and variation in macro-economic uncertainty. Guided by their evidence, we
use the ﬁrst two principal components to control for global macro-economic risks in our regression
analysis. Our empirical approach is conservative as we ask if, after controlling for global and local
macro-risk factors, long-run ﬂuctuations in temperature have any eﬀect on equity valuations.

5.2

Impact of Temperature on Equity Valuations

To estimate the impact of temperature on asset prices, we run the following dynamic panel regression:
vi,t = v̄i + ϕK T i,t + αx′ Xi,t + αv vi,t−1 + εi,t
K

(22)

where vi,t is the log of the equity price-dividend ratio of country i at date t, v̄i is the country-speciﬁc
K

ﬁxed eﬀect, T i,t is a K-year moving-average of local temperature, and Xi,t is a set of controls
that captures the eﬀect of global and local risks on asset prices, i.e., macro-economic risks that

24

are distinct from temperature. We vary K between one and ﬁve years and do not consider longer
horizons because of a relatively short span of panel data.17 We control for common global macroeconomic variations using two price-dividend ratio factors.18 The set of local controls comprises
country-speciﬁc inﬂation, unemployment, real interest rate, and growth in gross domestic product
(gdp). The remaining persistence in asset prices is absorbed by the lagged country-speciﬁc pricedividend ratio. We estimate the parameters using the Arellano and Bond (1991)’s GMM estimator
applied to the ﬁrst-diﬀerenced data and use the White (1980)’s robust estimator of the variancecovariance matrix.
Our focus is on parameter ϕK that measures sensitivity of equity prices to local temperature
variations. The estimates of temperature elasticities for the full sample are reported in “1980-2009”
rows of Table XI. We ﬁnd that at both short and long horizons, temperature risks have a signiﬁcant
negative eﬀect on equity valuations. The estimated elasticities vary between −0.076 (t-stat = −4.41)
at the short horizon and −0.105 (t-stat = −3.33) at the long horizon. To interpret the magnitude
of the estimates, note that ϕK measures semi-elasticity of asset prices to temperature ﬂuctuations.
Hence, a one standard-deviation increase in annual temperature anomaly of around 0.5◦ C leads to
about 3.8% decline in equity valuations. The impact of low-frequency temperature risks is similar;
for example, a one standard-deviation increase in the ﬁve-year temperature trend lowers equity
valuations by about 3.4%.
In Table XI we also explore if the eﬀect of temperature on the economy has changed across time.
Ideally, to uncover such changes, we would want to compare temperature elasticities measured over
earlier and more recent sample periods. This, however, is not entirely feasible given the fairly short
span of the available data. Therefore, to explore time-variation in elasticities we estimate them using
overlapping samples. We start with the early 1980-2000 sample and then progressively increase the
sample end to 2005 and 2009 by adding more recent data. Our estimates show that the eﬀect of
temperature on equity valuations has risen considerably over time. At the one-year horizon, the
point estimates change from −0.016 in the early sample to −0.076 in the full sample. Similarly, the
17
Given the limited availability of the country-speciﬁc controls, the panel regression is estimated on a subsample of
34 countries over the 1980-2009 period.
18
To allow global macro risks have diﬀerential eﬀect across countries, we also include the interaction of the two
principal components with country-income dummies. While the estimates on the interaction terms are mostly
signiﬁcant, their inclusion has virtually no eﬀect on the estimated elasticity of equity prices to temperature risks
and its signiﬁcance. Therefore, for parsimony, we report evidence based on the speciﬁcation with no interaction terms.

25

price impact of temperature risks measured at lower frequencies (i.e., for K > 1) more than doubles
when more recent data are incorporated in estimation. This evidence suggests that as temperature
rises, global warming imposes higher risks on the economy and, therefore, leads to a larger decline
in wealth. As discussed above, our model is consistent with this evidence — in the model, rising
temperature increases the size and the probability of disasters over time, leading to a steeper decline
in aggregate wealth.
In our panel regression setting we measure the economic impact of temperature risks by exploiting
both time-series and cross-sectional variation in temperature. Local temperature series, especially
their low-frequency ﬂuctuations, feature a strong common (global) component. Replacing local
temperature series in regression speciﬁcation in Equation (22) with global temperature, we ﬁnd
that global temperature risks have also a strongly signiﬁcant negative eﬀect of equity prices. This
evidence (which is available upon request) suggests that the negative elasticity of equity valuations
to local temperature risks is largely due to common time-series variation in temperature across
countries.

5.3

Long-Run vs. Short-Run Temperature Risks

To better understand which risks, short-run (i.e., weather-type) risks or long-run temperature
variations associated with global warming, matter more we consider the following panel regression:
K
vi,t = v̄i + ϕLR LRi,t
+ ϕSR SRi,t + αx′ Xi,t + αv vi,t−1 + εi,t ,

(23)

K proxies for low-frequency temperature risks and is measured by the K-year movingwhere LRi,t

average of local temperature, for K = {3, 5}, and SRi,t is annual temperature orthogonalized with
respect to long-run ﬂuctuations. We orthogonalize short- and long-run temperature variations in
order to identify their separate eﬀects. The estimates of long- and short-run elasticities, ϕ̂LR and
ϕ̂SR , are presented in Table XII.
Consistent with the evidence discussed above, we ﬁnd a negative and statistically signiﬁcant
response of equity valuations to low-frequency variations in temperature. We also ﬁnd that once
we control for long-run ﬂuctuations in temperature, short-run temperature risks tend to also have a

26

negative eﬀect on equity prices, however, its magnitude is generally small and not as signiﬁcant. In
unreported results, we also estimate exposure of equity returns to long- and short-run temperature
risks and similarly ﬁnd statistically negative betas with respect to low-frequency risks and generally
insigniﬁcant exposure to short-run variations in temperature. Our evidence thus suggests that the
negative impact of temperature on the economy is mostly driven by its low-frequency (i.e., trend)
risks that correspond to global warming.
To further examine the impact of long- and short-run temperature risks on equity prices, we
estimate their joint dynamics using a ﬁrst-order vector-autoregression (VAR). Speciﬁcally, we exploit
the following panel VAR speciﬁcation:
Yi,t = āi + A Yi,t−1 + b Xt + ui,t

(24)

8

where Yi,t = (T i,t , Ti,t , vi,t )′ is a vector of the eight-year moving-average of local temperature,
the annual temperature series and the price-dividend ratio of country i. We include country ﬁxed
eﬀects (āi ) and use the two price-dividend ratio factors to control for global risks (Xt denotes the
vector of global controls). We estimate the VAR using the full sample of panel data from 1970
until 2012 and, therefore, we able to consider a relatively long horizon of eight years to measure
low-frequency temperature risks. The VAR-regression output is reported in Table XIII, and in
Figure 9 we plot the implied impulse responses of equity prices to a one-standard deviation shock in
8

temperature trend (T i,t ) and a one-standard deviation innovation in annual temperature (Ti,t ). The
shaded area around the estimated responses represents the two standard-error band. As Panel (a)
shows, the VAR-based response of equity prices to low-frequency temperature risks is signiﬁcantly
negative. Notice also that the eﬀect of trend shocks is quite persistent — an increase in temperature
trend leads to a decline in equity prices on impact and in the long run. Similar to the evidence
presented above, short-run temperature ﬂuctuations do not seem to have a sizable eﬀect. In all, our
empirical evidence suggests that climate change measured by a long-term increase in temperature
has a signiﬁcant negative impact on the world economies.

27

6

Conclusion

Using capital market data, we show that temperature risks have a signiﬁcant negative eﬀect on
wealth. An increase in temperature, especially at low frequencies, lowers equity valuations around
the globe and in the US markets. To understand the implications of persistent temperature risks and
to guide our empirical analysis, we model the dynamic interaction between economic growth and
climate change. We show that even if the real eﬀect of rising temperature is deferred into the future,
its wealth eﬀect is realized today. That is, even if global warming increases uncertainty or lowers
expectations about growth in a relatively distant future, under preferences for early resolution of
uncertainty, it leads to an immediate decline in wealth and equity valuations. Hence, forward-looking
capital markets might provide valuable information about the economic impact of temperature risks
— information that might not be possible to learn from the past (backward-looking) income growth
data. We explore this idea in our empirical work. Consistent with our model’s predications, we
ﬁnd that low-frequency temperature risks have a signiﬁcant negative eﬀect on equity valuations and
carry a positive premium in equity markets. We also show that the premium for low-frequency
temperature risks that contribute to global warming has been increasing over time along with the
rise in temperature.

28

References
Anthoﬀ, David, and Richard S.J. Tol, 2012, The Climate Framework for Uncertainty, Negotiation
and Distribution (FUND), Working paper, Technical Description, Version 3.6.
Anthoﬀ, David, and Richard S.J. Tol, 2013, The Uncertainty about the Social Cost of Carbon: A
Decomposition Analysis using FUND, Climatic Change 117, 515–530.
Archer, David, 2005, Fate of Fossil Fuel CO2 in Geologic Time, Journal of Geophysical Research:
Oceans 110, C09S05.
Archer, David, 2009, Atmospheric Lifetime of Fossil Fuel Carbon Dioxide, Annual Review of Earth
and Planetary Sciences 37, 117–134.
Arellano, Manuel, and Stephen Bond, 1991, Some Tests of Speciﬁcation for Panel Data: Monte
Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations, Review of Economic Studies 58,
277–297.
Bansal, Ravi, Robert Dittmar, and Christian Lundblad, 2005, Consumption, Dividends, and the
Cross-Section of Equity Returns, Journal of Finance 60, 1639–1672.
Bansal, Ravi, Dana Kiku, and Marcelo Ochoa, 2015, Climate Change and Growth Risks, Working
paper, Duke University.
Bansal, Ravi, Dana Kiku, Ivan Shaliastovich, and Amir Yaron, 2014, Volatility, the Macroeconomy
and Asset Prices, Journal of Finance 69, 2471–2511.
Bansal, Ravi, Dana Kiku, and Amir Yaron, 2010, Long-Run Risks, the Macroeconomy, and Asset
Prices, American Economic Review: Paper & Proceedings 100, 542–546.
Bansal, Ravi, and Marcelo Ochoa, 2012, Temperature, Aggregate Risk, and Expected Returns,
Working paper, Duke University.
Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron, 2004, Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset
Pricing Puzzles, Journal of Finance 59, 1481–1509.

29

Barro, Robert J., 2009, Rare Disasters, Asset Prices, and Welfare Costs, American Economic Review
99, 243–264.
Barro, Robert J., and José F. Ursua, 2012, Rare Macroeconomic Disasters, Annual Review of
Economics 4, 83–109.
Borovička, Jaroslav, and Lars P. Hansen, 2014, Examining Macroeconomic Models through the Lens
of Asset Pricing, Journal of Econometrics 183, 67–90.
Breeden, Douglas T., 1979, An intertemporal asset pricing model with stochastic consumption and
investment opportunities, Journal of Financial Economics 7, 265–296.
Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken, 2012, Temperature Shocks and Economic
Growth: Evidence from the Last Half Century, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics
4(3), 66–95.
Epstein, Larry G., and Stanley E. Zin, 1989, Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Intertemporal
Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework, Econometrica 57, 937–
969.
Fama, Eugene F., and James D. MacBeth, 1973, Risk, Return and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests,
Journal of Political Economy.
Gollier, Christian, 2012, Pricing the Planet’s Future: The Economics of Discounting in an Uncertain
World. (Princeton University Press).
Golosov, Mikhail, John Hassler, Per Krusell, and Aleh Tsyvinski, 2014, Optimal Taxes on Fossil
Fuel in General Equilibrium, Econometrica 82, 41–88.
Gourio, François, 2012, Disaster Risk and Business Cycles, American Economic Review 106, 2734–
2766.
Graﬀ Zivin, Joshua, and Matthew Neidell, 2014, Temperature and the Allocation of Time:
Implications for Climate Change, Journal of Labor Economics 32, 126.
Hansen, Lars Peter, John C. Heaton, and Nan Li, 2008, Consumption Strikes Back? Measuring
Long-Run Risk, Journal of Political Economy 116, 260–302.
30

Hansen, Lars P., and Thomas J. Sargent, 2006, Robust Control and Model Misspeciﬁcation, Journal
of Economic Theory 128, 45–90.
Hansen, Lars P., and José A. Scheinkman, 2012, Pricing Growth-Rate Risk, Finance and Stochastics
16, 1–15.
Heal, Geoﬀrey, and Antony Millner, 2014, Uncertainty and Decision Making in Climate Change
Economics, Review of Environmental Economics and Policy.
Heutel, Garth, 2012, How Should Environmental Policy Respond to Business Cycles? Optimal
Policy Under Persistent Productivity Shocks, Review of Economic Dynamics 15, 244–264.
Hodrick, Robert J., and Edward C. Prescott, 1997, Postwar U.S. Business Cycles: An Empirical
Investigation Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 29,
1–16.
Hope, Chris, 2011, The PAGE09 Integrated Assessment Model: A Technical Description, Working
paper, Cambridge Judge Business School.
IPCC, 2007, Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report. (Geneva, Switzerland).
IPCC, 2013, Working Group I Contribution to the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report. Climate Change
2013: The Physical Science Basis. (Geneva, Switzerland).
Jacobson, Mark Z., 2005, Correction to “Control of Fossil-Fuel Particulate Black Carbon and
Organic Matter, Possibly the Most Eﬀective Method of Slowing Global Warming”, Journal of
Geophysical Research: Atmospheres 110, D14105.
Jagannathan, Ravi, and Srikant Marakani, 2015, Price Dividend Ratio Factor Proxies for Long Run
Risks, Review of Asset Pricing Studies, forthcoming.
Jagannathan, Ravi, and Zhenyu Wang, 1996, The Conditional CAPM and the Cross-Section of
Expected Returns, Journal of Finance 51, 3–54.
Kreps, David M., and Evon L. Porteus, 1978, Temporal Resolution of Uncertainty and Dynamic
Choice, Econometrica 46, 185–200.

31

Lemoine, Derek M., and Christian Traeger, 2012, Tipping Points and Ambiguity in the Integrated
Assessment of Climate Change, Working paper, National Bureau of Economic Research, #18230.
Lettau, Martin, and Sydney Ludvigson, 2001, Resurrecting the (C)CAPM: A Cross-Sectional Test
when Risk Premia are Time-Varying, Journal of Political Economy 109, 1238–1287.
Lucas, Robert, 1978, Asset prices in an exchange economy, Econometrica 46, 1429–1446.
Lustig, Hanno, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2007, The Cross Section of Foreign Currency Risk Premia
and Consumption Growth Risk, American Economic Review 97, 89–117.
Nordhaus, William, 2014, Estimates of the Social Cost of Carbon: Concepts and Results from the
DICE-2013R model and Alternative Approaches, Journal of the Association of Environmental
and Resource Economists.
Nordhaus, William D., 2008, A Question of Balance: Weighing the Options on Global Warming
Policies. (Yale University Press).
Nordhaus, William D., 2010, Economic Aspects of Global Warming in a Post-Copenhagen
Environment, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107, 11721–11726.
Parker, Jonathan A., and Christian Julliard, 2005, Consumption risk and the cross-section of
expected returns, Journal of Political Economy 113, 185–222.
Pindyck, Robert S., 2007, Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, Uncertainty in
Environmental Economics 1, 45–65.
Pindyck, Robert S., 2012, Uncertain Outcomes and Climate Change Policy, Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 63, 289–303.
Raddatz, Claudio, 2009, The Wrath of God: Macroeconomic Costs of Natural Disasters, Working
paper, World Bank Policy Research.
Rietz, Thomas A., 1988, The Equity Risk Premium: A Solution, Journal of Monetary Economics
22, 117131.
Shanken, Jay, 1992, On the Estimation of Beta-Pricing Models, Review of Financial Studies.
32

Sharpe, William, 1964, Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions of
risk, Journal of Finance 19, 425–442.
Stern, Nicholas H., 2007, The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review. (Cambridge
University Press.).
Tol, Richard S.J., 2002a, New Estimates of the Damage Costs of Climate Change, Part I: Benchmark
Estimates, Environmental and Resource Economics 21, 47–73.
Tol, Richard S.J., 2002b, New Estimates of the Damage Costs of Climate Change, Part II: Dynamic
Estimates, Environmental and Resource Economics 21, 135–160.
Wachter, Jessica A., 2013, Can Time-Varying Risk of Rare Disasters Explain Aggregate Stock
Market Volatility?, Journal of Finance 68, 987–1035.
Weil, Philippe, 1990, Nonexpected Utility in Macroeconomics, Quarterly Journal of Economics 105,
29–42.
Weitzman, Martin L., 2009, On Modeling and Interpreting the Economics of Catastrophic Climate
Change, Review of Economics and Statistics 91, 1–19.
Weitzman, Martin L., 2010, What is the “Damages Function” for Global Warming – And What
Diﬀerence Might It Make?, Climate Change Economics 1, 57–69.
White, Halbert, 1980, A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix and a Direct Test for
Heteroskedasticity, Econometrica 48, 817838.

33

Table I

Calibration of Global Warming
Parameter

Description

Value

Climate Dynamics
ν̄
Atmospheric retention of carbon
χ
Temperature sensitivity to emissions

0.962
0.0045

Natural Disasters
T∗
Tipping point
ℓ0
Disaster intensity parameters
ℓ1
Disaster intensity parameters
q1
Damage function parameter
q2
Damage function parameter

2.0◦ C
0.0050
0.0033
0.0011
0.0011

Table I presents calibration of global warming under the business-as-usual scenario.
annualized.

34

The parameter values are

Table II

Calibration of Preferences and Consumption Dynamics

LRR-T

Preferences
β
γ
ψ
Consumption
µ
σ
ρx
φx
ϕx

Alternative Specifications

Model

Pref for ERU

Power Utility

0.99
5
1.5

0.99
5
1.5

0.99
5
0.2

0.018
0.016
0.96
0.25
0.05

0.018
0.016

0.018
0.016

Table II presents calibration of preferences and consumption dynamics under the business-as-usual scenario. Our LRRT model features preference for early resolution of uncertainty and incorporates a negative impact of global warming
on consumption level and expected consumption growth. Under Alternative Speciﬁcations, the conditional mean of
consumption growth is constant and climate change is assumed to only aﬀect the level of consumption. We consider
two speciﬁcations of preferences under the alternative dynamics: preferences for early resolution of uncertainty (Pref
for ERU) and CRRA preferences (Power Utility). Empty entries in the table correspond to zeros. The parameter
values are annualized.

35

Table III

Model-Implied Response of Equity Prices to Temperature Risks

Response
−0.0174

LRR-T Model
Alternatives:
Pref for ERU

−0.0063

Power Utility

0.0002

Table III reports the response of the price-consumption ratio to temperature risks for the LRR-T model that features
the long-run risk component and preferences for early resolution of uncertainty, and alternative speciﬁcations with
constant expected growth and two types of risk preferences: preferences for early resolution of uncertainty (Pref for
ERU) and CRRA preferences (Power Utility). For each speciﬁcation, we simulate the data and compute the modelimplied response by regressing the price-consumption ratio on temperature controlling for the relevant state variables.
The simulated data consist of 50,000 draws.

36

Table IV

Capital Market Implications

LRR-T

Alternative Specifications

Model

Pref for ERU

Power Utility

SCC

103.6

39.01

0.01

Risk-Free Rate
Risk Premia
Discount Rates:
10yr Strip
100yr Strip

0.91
1.70

2.11
0.16

10.08
0.17

1.51
2.41

2.28
2.29

10.33
10.31

Table IV presents the social cost of carbon (SCC) and asset pricing implications of the LRR-T Model that features
the long-run risk component and preferences for early resolution of uncertainty, and alternative speciﬁcations with
constant expected growth and two types of risk preferences: preferences for early resolution of uncertainty (Pref for
ERU) and CRRA preferences (Power Utility). SCC is measured in 2012 dollars of world consumption per metric ton
of carbon. The risk-free rate and risk premia on consumption claim are averaged over the transitional path, discount
rates represent expected rates of returns on consumption strips with 10- and 100-year maturities. Returns and premia
are expressed in annualized percentage terms.

37

Table V

Temperature Exposure

Panel A: 25 BM/Size Sorted Portfolios
Small

2

3

4

−0.129

−0.074

0.074

0.035

0.112

2

−0.087

−0.048

−0.061

−0.011

−0.011

3

−0.053

−0.064

−0.060

−0.024

−0.071

4

−0.065

−0.106

−0.095

−0.127

−0.025

−0.172

−0.199

−0.277

−0.092

−0.047

Growth

Value

Large

Panel B: Industry Portfolios
High Heat-Exposed

Low Heat-Exposed

MINE

−0.051

MANU

0.031

OILG

−0.101

WHOS

−0.055

CNST

−0.173

RETS

0.008

TRAN

−0.124

SERV

0.067

UTIL

−0.130

COMM

0.039

Table V shows exposure of returns of 25 book-to-market and size sorted portfolios (Panel A) and 10 industry portfolios
(Panel B) to long-run temperature risks estimated by regressing portfolio excess returns on the change in ﬁve-year
moving average of temperature controlling for market and consumption growth risks. Industry classiﬁcation of high
and low heat-exposed sectors is according to the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. The data are
annual and cover the 1934-2014 period.

38

Table VI

Price of Temperature Risk:
25 BM/Size Sorted Portfolios

Horizon
1-year

5-year

10-year

λ̂∆T

−1.528

−0.193

−0.126

(t-stat)

(−4.00)

(−3.14)

(−3.84)

[t-stat*]

[−1.87]

[−2.08]

[−2.01]

p-value*

0.03

0.02

0.02

λ̂M

0.003

−0.011

0.027

(t-stat)

(0.05)

(−0.24)

(0.51)

[t-stat*]

[0.11]

[−0.54]

[1.20]

p-value*

0.47

0.67

0.14

λ̂C

0.002

0.003

0.005

(t-stat)

(0.82)

(1.53)

(2.30)

[t-stat*]

[0.60]

[1.38]

[1.80]

p-value*

0.32

0.11

0.04

R̄2

0.56

0.52

0.63

Table VI presents the estimates of the cross-sectional regression of average excess returns of 25 book-to-market and size
sorted portfolios on their exposure to temperature risks. Temperature exposure is estimated by regressing portfolio
excess returns on the change in one-, ﬁve- or ten-year moving average of temperature controlling for market and
consumption growth risks. The upper panel shows the estimates of the price of temperature risk (λ̂∆T ), the Fama
and MacBeth (1973)-based t-statistics (t-stat in parentheses), and the Shanken (1992)-corrected t-statistics (t-stat*
in brackets). P-value* is the fraction of Monte Carlo samples generated under the null that temperature risks have
no eﬀect on equity prices with a corrected t-statistic lower than the sample statistics. Similar statistics are reported
for the cross-sectional estimates of the market and consumption risk prices (λ̂M and λ̂C , respectively). For market
and consumption risks, p-value* is the fraction of Monte Carlo samples with a corrected t-statistic greater than the
sample counterpart. The bottom line reports the adjusted R-squared. The data are annual and cover the 1934-2014
period.

39

Table VII

Price of Temperature Risk:
25 BM/Size Sorted Portfolios and 10 Industry Portfolios

Horizon
1-year

5-year

10-year

λ̂∆T

−0.990

−0.138

−0.096

(t-stat)

(−3.06)

(−2.10)

(−3.26)

[t-stat*]

[−1.89]

[−1.69]

[−1.90]

p-value*

0.03

0.05

0.03

λ̂M

0.046

0.035

0.035

(t-stat)

(1.07)

(0.87)

(0.84)

[t-stat*]

[2.11]

[1.66]

[1.60]

p-value*

0.01

0.06

0.07

λ̂C

0.002

0.004

0.006

(t-stat)

(1.19)

(2.00)

(3.14)

[t-stat*]

[1.00]

[1.75]

[2.23]

p-value*

0.20

0.04

0.01

R̄2

0.49

0.47

0.58

Table VII presents the estimates of the cross-sectional regression of average excess returns of 25 book-to-market and size
sorted portfolios and 10 industry portfolios on their exposure to temperature risks. Temperature exposure is estimated
by regressing portfolio excess returns on the change in one-, ﬁve- or ten-year moving average of temperature controlling
for market and consumption growth risks. The upper panel shows the estimates of the price of temperature risk (λ̂∆T ),
the Fama and MacBeth (1973)-based t-statistics (t-stat in parentheses), and the Shanken (1992)-corrected t-statistics
(t-stat* in brackets). P-value* is the fraction of Monte Carlo samples generated under the null that temperature
risks have no eﬀect on equity prices with a corrected t-statistic lower than the sample statistics. Similar statistics are
reported for the cross-sectional estimates of the market and consumption risk prices (λ̂M and λ̂C , respectively). For
market and consumption risks, p-value* is the fraction of Monte Carlo samples with a corrected t-statistic greater
than the sample counterpart. The bottom line reports the adjusted R-squared. The data are annual and cover the
1934-2014 period.

40

Table VIII

Time-Varying Price of Temperature Risk:
25 BM/Size Sorted Portfolios
Horizon
1-year

5-year

10-year

λ̂∆T

−0.887

−0.183

−0.151

(t-stat)

(−3.22)

(−2.90)

(−4.90)

[t-stat*]

[−1.15]

[−1.82]

[−1.94]

p-value*

0.15

0.03

0.02

λ̂T ·∆T

−0.174

−0.241

−0.178

(t-stat)

(−0.32)

(−5.09)

(−5.79)

[t-stat*]

[−0.11]

[−2.26]

[−2.08]

p-value*

0.47

0.01

0.01

λ̂M

−0.053

0.004

0.026

(t-stat)

(−1.04)

(0.09)

(0.49)

[t-stat*]

[−2.34]

[0.20]

[1.10]

p-value*

1.00

0.44

0.16

λ̂C

0.006

0.003

0.004

(t-stat)

(2.93)

(1.43)

(2.04)

[t-stat*]

[1.46]

[1.17]

[1.32]

p-value*

0.08

0.14

0.11

R̄2

0.70

0.54

0.67

Table VIII presents the estimates of the cross-sectional regression of average excess returns of 25 book-to-market and
size sorted portfolios on their exposure to temperature risks and temperature risks scaled by the level of temperature.
Temperature exposure is estimated by regressing portfolio excess returns on the change in one-, ﬁve- or ten-year moving
average of temperature (∆Tt+1 ) and the (de-meaned) change scaled by the level of temperature (Tt ·∆Tt+1 ) controlling
for market and consumption growth risks. The upper panels show the estimates of the prices of temperature risks
(λ̂∆T and λ̂T ·∆T ), the Fama and MacBeth (1973)-based t-statistics (t-stat in parentheses), and the Shanken (1992)corrected t-statistics (t-stat* in brackets). P-value* is the fraction of Monte Carlo samples generated under the null
that temperature risks have no eﬀect on equity prices with a corrected t-statistic lower than the sample statistics.
Similar statistics are reported for the cross-sectional estimates of the market and consumption risk prices (λ̂M and
λ̂C , respectively). For market and consumption risks, p-value* is the fraction of Monte Carlo samples with a corrected
t-statistic greater than the sample counterpart. The bottom line reports the adjusted R-squared. The data are annual
and cover the 1934-2014 period.

41

Table IX

Time-Varying Price of Temperature Risk:
25 BM/Size Sorted Portfolios and 10 Industry Portfolios
Horizon
1-year

5-year

10-year

λ̂∆T

−0.871

−0.138

−0.099

(t-stat)

(−3.02)

(−2.12)

(−3.67)

[t-stat*]

[−1.73]

[−1.70]

[−1.98]

p-value*

0.04

0.05

0.02

λ̂T ·∆T

−0.175

−0.119

−0.096

(t-stat)

(−2.25)

(−2.95)

(−3.59)

[t-stat*]

[−1.16]

[−1.55]

[−1.78]

p-value*

0.15

0.06

0.04

λ̂M

0.042

0.034

0.034

(t-stat)

(1.00)

(0.96)

(0.80)

[t-stat*]

[1.95]

[1.65]

[1.54]

p-value*

0.02

0.06

0.07

λ̂C

0.003

0.004

0.005

(t-stat)

(1.68)

(2.03)

(2.95)

[t-stat*]

[1.25]

[1.73]

[2.16]

p-value*

0.12

0.04

0.01

R̄2

0.52

0.45

0.57

Table IX presents the estimates of the cross-sectional regression of average excess returns of 25 book-to-market and size
sorted portfolios and 10 industry portfolios on their exposure to temperature risks and temperature risks scaled by the
level of temperature. Temperature exposure is estimated by regressing portfolio excess returns on the change in one-,
ﬁve- or ten-year moving average of temperature (∆Tt+1 ) and the (de-meaned) change scaled by the level of temperature
(Tt ·∆Tt+1 ) controlling for market and consumption growth risks. The upper panels show the estimates of the prices of
temperature risks (λ̂∆T and λ̂T ·∆T ), the Fama and MacBeth (1973)-based t-statistics (t-stat in parentheses), and the
Shanken (1992)-corrected t-statistics (t-stat* in brackets). P-value* is the fraction of Monte Carlo samples generated
under the null that temperature risks have no eﬀect on equity prices with a corrected t-statistic lower than the sample
statistics. Similar statistics are reported for the cross-sectional estimates of the market and consumption risk prices
(λ̂M and λ̂C , respectively). For market and consumption risks, p-value* is the fraction of Monte Carlo samples with a
corrected t-statistic greater than the sample counterpart. The bottom line reports the adjusted R-squared. The data
are annual and cover the 1934-2014 period.

42

Table X

List of Countries

Argentina
Australia
Austria*
Belgium
Brazil
Canada
Switzerland
Chile*
China
Colombia
Germany
Denmark
Egypt

Spain
Finland
France
U.K.
Greece
Indonesia
India
Italy
Japan
Korea, rep.
Sri Lanka
Mexico
Malaysia

Netherlands
Norway
New Zealand
Peru
Philippines
Portugal
Russia
Sweden
Turkey*
Taiwan*
U.S.A.
Venezuela*
South Africa

Table X provides a list of countries in our data set. Due to missing country-speciﬁc controls, countries with asterisk
are excluded from the panel regressions reported in Tables XI and XII.

43

Table XI

Elasticity of Equity Prices to Temperature Variations

Horizon

K = 1yr

K = 3yr

K = 5yr

Sample

ϕ̂K

t-stat

1980−2000

−0.016

−1.51

1980−2005

−0.043

−3.21

1980−2009

−0.076

−4.41

1980−2000

−0.040

−1.48

1980−2005

−0.094

−3.40

1980−2009

−0.138

−5.59

1980−2000

0.058

1.79

1980−2005

−0.023

−0.56

1980−2009

−0.105

−3.33

Table XI reports the response of equity prices to temperature risks estimated in the following panel regression:
vi,t = v̄i + ϕK T i,t + α′x Xi,t + αv vi,t−1 + εi,t ,
K

K

where vi,t is the log of the price-dividend ratio of country i, v̄i is the country-speciﬁc ﬁxed eﬀect, T i,t is a K-year
moving-average of local temperature, and Xi,t is a set of global and local controls. The set of controls includes two
common price-dividend ratio-based factors and country-speciﬁc inﬂation, unemployment, real interest rate, and gdp
growth. The parameters are estimated using the Arellano and Bond (1991)’s GMM estimator applied to the ﬁrstdiﬀerenced data. The table presents the estimates of the slope coeﬃcient, ϕK , and the corresponding t-statistics based
on the White (1980)’s robust estimator of the variance-covariance matrix. The panel comprises 34 countries over the
1980-2009 period.

44

Table XII

Equity Response to Long- and Short-Run Temperature Risks

Estimate

t-stat

ϕLR

−0.138

−4.78

ϕSR

−0.026

−1.00

ϕLR

−0.135

−3.37

ϕSR

−0.028

−1.05

K = 3yr

K = 5yr

Table XII reports the response of equity valuations to long- and short-run temperature risks estimated in the following
panel regression:
K
vi,t = v̄i + ϕLR LRi,t
+ ϕSR SRi,t + αx′ Xi,t + αv vi,t−1 + εi,t ,
K
where vi,t is the log of the price-dividend ratio of country i, v̄i is the country-speciﬁc ﬁxed eﬀect, LRi,t
proxies

for low-frequency temperature risks and is measured by the three- or ﬁve-year moving-average of local temperature,
SRi,t is annual temperature orthogonalized with respect to long-run ﬂuctuations, and Xi,t is a set of global and local
controls. The set of controls includes two common price-dividend ratio-based factors and country-speciﬁc inﬂation,
unemployment, real interest rate, and gdp growth. The parameters are estimated using the Arellano and Bond (1991)’s
GMM estimator applied to the ﬁrst-diﬀerenced data. The table presents the estimates of the slope coeﬃcients, ϕLR
and ϕSR , and the corresponding t-statistics based on the White (1980)’s robust estimator of the variance-covariance
matrix. The panel comprises 34 countries over the 1980-2009 period.

45

Table XIII

VAR Dynamics of Equity Prices and Temperature

8

8

T i,t−1
Ti,t−1
vi,t−1

R̄2

T i,t

Ti,t

vi,t

0.921

0.385

−0.093

[ 107.1 ]

[ 7.06 ]

[ −2.29 ]

0.026

0.158

−0.017

[ 5.44 ]

[ 5.19 ]

[ −0.73 ]

0.014

0.076

0.520

[ 3.15 ]

[ 2.65 ]

[ 24.41 ]

0.96

0.31

0.67
8

Table XIII shows the estimates of the ﬁrst-order panel VAR for equity prices and temperature. T i,t denotes the eightyear moving-average of local temperature, Ti,t is annual temperature series, and vi,t is the log of the price-dividend
ratio of country i. The exogenous variables included in the VAR comprise two price-dividend ratio factors that control
for common macro-economic risks and country-speciﬁc ﬁxed eﬀects. T-statistics are reported in brackets. The panel
consists of 39 countries over the 1970-2012 period.

46

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

500

600

(a) Carbon Intensity

30,000

25,000

20,000

15,000

10,000

5,000

0

100

200

300

400

(b) Expected Path of Carbon Emissions

7
6
5
4
3
T*=2
1
0

100

200

300

400

500

600

(c) Expected Path of Temperature Anomaly

Figure 1. Dynamics under the BAU Scenario
Figure 1 illustrates the business-as-usual scenario. Panel (a) shows the evolution of carbon intensity; Panel (b) presents
the projected path of carbon emissions; Panel (c) shows the projected path of temperature anomaly (temperature
relative to its pre-industrial level). Emissions are measured in millions of metric ton of carbon per annum, and
temperature is in degrees Celsius. The dotted line in Panel (c) represents the tipping point of global warming. The
horizontal axis is the time-line measured in years from today.

47

0.030

0.025

0.020

0.015

0.010

0.005

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

500

600

(a) Disaster Intensity

0
−0.01
−0.02
−0.03
−0.04
−0.05
−0.06
−0.07

100

200

300

400

(b) Disaster Size

Figure 2. Global Warming Disasters under the BAU policy
Figure 2 shows the consequences of global warming in the business-as-usual case. Panel (a) plots the expected intensity
of climate change disasters per annum; Panel (b) shows the average annual size of disasters (−dt ). The horizontal axis
is the time-line measured in years from today.

48

0.20

0.16

0.12

0.08

0.04

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

(a) Change in Ex-Ante Volatility

0.12

t = 0 (current)
0.1

t = 210 (disaster peak)

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0
−40

−35

−30

−25

−20

−15

−10

−5

0

5

(b) Distribution of Consumption Growth

Figure 3. Implications of Global Warming for Consumption Growth
Figure 3 shows the implications of global-warming disasters for consumption growth. Panel (a) plots the diﬀerence
between ex-ante volatility of cumulative log consumption growth under the business-as-usual scenario and the
conditional volatility absent temperature disasters. Volatility is annualized and expressed in percentage terms. The
horizontal axis is the time-line measured in years from today. Panel (b) presents the distribution of normalized
consumption growth at time-0 (when disasters are absent) and 210 years from now (at the peak of global-warming
disasters).

49

0.003

0.002

0.001

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

500

600

(a) Elasticity of SDF

0

−0.0001

−0.0002

−0.0003

−0.0004

100

200

300

400

(b) Elasticity of W/C

Figure 4. Elasticity of the SDF and Wealth-Consumption Ratio to Emissions
Panel (a) of Figure 4 presents the elasticity of the stochastic discount factor (SDF) to a one-percent increase in time-0
emissions implied by the LRR-T model. Panel (b) presents the corresponding elasticity of the wealth-consumption
ratio (W/C). The horizontal axis is the time-line measured in years from today.

50

Pref for ERU
Power Utility

0.00008
0.00006
0.00004
0.00002
0
−0.00002
−0.00004
−0.00006

100

200

300

400

500

600

Figure 5. Sensitivity to Emissions
Figure 5 shows the elasticity of the wealth-consumption ratio to a one-percent increase in time-0 emissions for two
alternative speciﬁcations of preferences: preferences for early resolution of uncertainty (Pref for ERU) and CRRA
preferences (Power Utility). The horizontal axis is the time-line measured in years from today.

51

0.18

Average Excess Returns

0.16

0.14

0.12

0.1

0.08

−0.04

−0.03

−0.02

−0.01

0

0.01

0.02

Temperature Betas

(a) Exposure to Variation in Annual Temperature

0.18

Average Excess Returns

0.16

0.14

0.12

0.1

0.08

−0.3

−0.25

−0.2

−0.15

−0.1

−0.05

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

Temperature Betas

(b) Exposure to Variation in 5-year MA of Temperature

Figure 6. Exposure to Temperature
Figure 6 presents scatter plots of average excess returns and exposure to temperature variations of 25 book-to-market
and size sorted portfolios and 10 industry portfolios. Panel (a) shows exposure to the annual change in temperature;
Panel (b) presents exposure to the change in the ﬁve-year moving-average (MA) of temperature. Circles represent
BM/size sorted portfolios; squares and asterisks correspond to high and low heat-exposed industries, respectively.
Temperature betas are computed controlling for market and consumption growth risks; the data are annual and cover
the 1934-2014 period.

52

0.005

0.004

0.003

0.002

0.001

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Figure 7. Temperature Premia
Figure 7 plots the premium for a (negative) one-standard deviation shock to temperature trend based on the crosssectional estimates reported in Table IX that correspond to the 10-year horizon.

53

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

Figure 8. Histogram of the Trend in Local Temperature
Figure 8 shows the histogram of the trend in local temperature measured by the change in average temperature over
the 2003-2012 period relative to the 1951-1980 average. The cross-sectional data comprise 39 countries; temperature
is measured in degrees Celsius.

54

0.02

0.01

0

−0.01

−0.02

−0.03

−0.04

−0.05
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

9

10

(a) Response to Long-Run Shock

0.02

0.01

0

−0.01

−0.02

−0.03

−0.04

−0.05
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

(b) Response to Short-Run Shock

Figure 9. Impulse Responses of Equity Prices to Long- and Short-Run Temperature Risks
Figure 9 presents impulse responses of the price-dividend ratio to long- and short-run temperature risks implied
by a ﬁrst-order VAR. The estimated responses are represented by the solid lines, the shaded areas show the two
standard-error bands. Time-horizon on the horizontal axes is measured in years.

55

