                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     CAN NATURAL GAS SAVE LIVES? EVIDENCE FROM THE DEPLOYMENT OF
           A FUEL DELIVERY SYSTEM IN A DEVELOPING COUNTRY

                                         Resul Cesur
                                         Erdal Tekin
                                        Aydogan Ulker

                                      Working Paper 22522
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22522


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2016




Erdal Tekin gratefully acknowledges support from the Gary and Stacey Jacobs Fellowship. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Resul Cesur, Erdal Tekin, and Aydogan Ulker. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Can Natural Gas Save Lives? Evidence from the Deployment of a Fuel Delivery System in
a Developing Country
Resul Cesur, Erdal Tekin, and Aydogan Ulker
NBER Working Paper No. 22522
August 2016
JEL No. I10,I15,I18,O13,O18,Q42,Q48,Q53

                                          ABSTRACT

There has been a widespread displacement of coal by natural gas as space heating and cooking
technology in Turkey in the last two decades, triggered by the deployment of natural gas
networks. In this paper, we examine the impact of this development on mortality among adults
and the elderly. Our research design exploits the variation in the timing of the deployment and
the intensity of expansion of natural gas networks at the provincial level using data from 2001 to
2014. The results indicate that the expansion of natural gas services has caused significant
reductions in both the adult and the elderly mortality rates. According to our point estimates, a
one-percentage point increase in the rate of subscriptions to natural gas services would lower the
overall mortality rate by 1.4 percent, the adult mortality rate by 1.9 percent, and the elderly
mortality rate by 1.2 percent. These findings are supported by our auxiliary analysis, which
demonstrates that the expansion of natural gas networks has indeed led to a significant
improvement in air quality. Furthermore, we show that the mortality gains for both the adult and
the elderly populations are primarily driven by reductions in cardio-respiratory deaths, which
are more likely to be due to conditions caused or exacerbated by air pollution. Finally, our
analysis does not reveal any important gender differences in the estimated relationship between
the deployment of natural gas networks and mortality.


Resul Cesur                                           Aydogan Ulker
Department of Finance                                 Department of Economics
University of Connecticut                             Deakin University
2100 Hillside Road Unit 1041                          221 Burwood Highway
Storrs, CT 06269-1041                                 Burwood VIC, 3125
cesur@business.uconn.edu                              Australia
                                                      ulker@deakin.edu.au
Erdal Tekin
School of Public Affairs
American University
4400 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20016-8070
and IZA
and also NBER
tekin@american.edu
I. Introduction

         The recent emergence of natural gas as an abundant, efficient, and relatively inexpensive

source of fuel has been transforming the world energy landscape. The new discoveries of large

gas fields and technological innovations in drilling, such as hydraulic fracturing (aka fracking),

are unlocking massive reserves of natural gas and threatening the position of coal as the

dominant source of energy in many parts of the world. Natural gas is now the fastest-growing

fossil fuel, with an annual growth rate of 1.9 percent, while coal is the slowest-growing fuel and

is projected to be surpassed by natural gas by 2030 (U.S. Energy Information Administration,

2016). As a result of these developments, the average carbon intensity (CO2 per unit of energy)

of the global energy supply has started to decline as CO2 emissions from the combustion of

natural gas are about half as much as those from the burning of coal. 1 In fact, the combustion of

natural gas results in much lower emissions of nearly all types of pollutants (Knittel et al.,

2015). 2 Furthermore, natural gas requires limited processing to prepare it for end use, which

makes it ideal for the purposes of domestic and commercial space heating. As a result of these

qualities, some experts view the ongoing replacement of coal by natural gas as a positive

development, which could be leveraged as a common sense approach to address the problem of

global carbon emissions in the near- to mid-term, even if it cannot be the sole basis for efforts to

achieving a completely renewable future long-term energy landscape (Brown et al., 2009; Center

for Climate and Energy Solutions, 2013; Levi, 2013; Moniz et al., 2011).




1
  It is important to note that total CO2 emissions continue to rise despite the decrease in carbon intensity. But it is
projected that the share of coal in overall fuel consumption would fall from 28 percent in 2012 to 22 percent in
2040, while that of natural gas would rise from 23 percent to 26 percent (U.S. Energy Information Administration,
2016).
2
  For example, natural gas virtually emits no sulfur oxides and particulates, and it releases about one-fifth of the
nitrogen oxides released by coal. See http://www.c2es.org/energy/source/natural-gas.
           While many developed countries have enacted environmental policies and regulations,

and established effective monitoring systems to reduce carbon emissions, the progress in the

developing world has been relatively stagnant because there are barriers to effective enforcement

of regulations due to weak governance and corruption (Cesur et al., 2016; Greenstone and

Hanna, 2014; Jayachandran, 2009). Environmental concerns are also overshadowed by the

pressure that governments in these countries are facing in order to maintain robust economic

growth. As a result, heavy reliance on coal continues and a full-scale transition to cost-effective,

carbon-free energy alternatives are unlikely to develop in the near-term. Therefore, the potential

for natural gas to mitigate climate change and reduce air pollution could particularly be a

promising prospect for the developing countries.

           Against this backdrop, an important question to consider is whether a technological

development that led to a displacement of coal by natural gas would have an influence on public

health. If natural gas indeed possesses the aforementioned qualities, then it is plausible to ask

whether policies facilitating the expansion of natural gas infrastructure for commercial and

residential applications translate into subsequent improvements in public health. This is a

critically important question because ambient air pollution caused by carbon emissions is

recognized as the most serious environmental risk to public health causing 3.7 million deaths

worldwide – 6.7 percent of all deaths – annually. 3 It is estimated that about 16 percent of the

lung cancer deaths, 11 percent of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease deaths, more than 20

percent of ischemic heart disease and stroke deaths, and about 13 percent of respiratory infection

deaths are caused by air pollution. Therefore, it is important to understand whether the expanded

use of natural gas as a replacement to coal could save some of these lives, at least until carbon-

3
    See http://www.who.int/gho/phe/outdoor_air_pollution/burden_text/en/.


                                                         2
free energy alternatives become widely available. This paper seeks to inform this question by

assessing the impact of a large scale deployment of natural gas networks on public health in the

context of a developing country, namely Turkey. Turkey has begun investing in the development

of a natural gas infrastructure in 1980s by expanding a grid of pipelines originating in its

neighbours, including Azerbaijan, Iran, and Russia. These investments have led to a widespread

displacement of coal by natural gas for residential and commercial space heating and cooking

purposes. Today, 71 of the 81 Turkish provinces has a natural gas infrastructure in place. By

exploiting the variation in the deployment of natural gas networks across Turkish provinces and

over time, this study provides insights into the impact of displacement of coal by natural gas on

adult and elderly mortality.

       Despite all the attention paid to the natural gas revolution and its potentially profound

implications for air pollution, the influence of a nationwide adoption of natural gas as the

primary source of fuel on public health, particularly from the perspective of adults and the

elderly is largely unknown. The only other investigation on this topic, Cesur et al. (2016),

demonstrates that a widespread displacement of coal by natural gas had a significant reduction in

infant mortality in Turkey. In the present study, we take the analysis in Cesur et al. (2016) a step

further by examining the efficacy of the deployment of natural gas networks on mortality rates

among adults and the elderly. This analysis is important because the potential role for

governments to enhance social welfare by either funding the construction of pipelines or

inducing household demand via subsidies requires a cost-benefit analysis that quantifies the

public health benefits associated with displacing coal by natural gas for all age groups, not only

infants. In this paper, we also assess whether any of the relationship between natural gas and

mortality is gender or cause specific. There is epidemiological evidence to suggest that the health



                                                 3
risks posed by air pollution might differ by gender (e.g., Abbey et al.,1999; Chen et al., 2012;

Clougherty, 2010; Dockery et al., 1993; Englert, 2004). Studies typically find effects that are

stronger for females than males, although there is no consensus in the literature. It is also unclear

to what extent these differing associations are attributable to socially-driven gender-specific

differences (e.g., activity patterns, smoking prevalence, and exposure) versus biological

differences (e.g., hormonal composition, reproductive organs, body size) (Clougherty, 2010;

Krieger, 2003).

         This paper also contributes to a small but growing literature on the impact of fuel

transitions and adoption of new fuel technologies. Most of the existing evidence pertaining to the

effects of natural gas related technology adoption comes from studies that consider the potential

impact of fracking on public health outcomes of populations living near drilling sites (e.g.,

Adgate et al., 2014; Blamberger and Oswald, 2012; Colborn et al., 2012; Finkel and Hays, 2015;

Finkel and Law, 2011; Hill, 2012; Howarth et al., 2011; Osborn et al., 2011; Tuller, 2015). 4

However, this effect is likely to be quite different from that of the displacement of coal by

natural gas. First and foremost, studies on fracking raise concerns over the technique of

extraction of natural gas and not over the choice between the combustion of natural gas versus

coal. To the extent that any fracking-induced decrease in the price of natural gas might

potentially cause a reduction in coal consumption and concurrently improve overall air quality,

the net health effect associated with fracking could actually be positive. Until these positive

externalities are fully considered, the debate over the net merit of fracking will not be settled.

Second, natural gas considered in the current context does not pose the same environmental risks

4
  Evidence from these studies raise the possibility of a potentially negative health impact of fracking in relation to
the chemicals used during the process, including seismic events, methane leaks, and underground water
contamination. However, no consensus exists in the literature and there is a lack of credible evidence from well-
designed investigations that properly account for confounding factors.


                                                           4
as in fracking because it is transmitted through pipelines that originate in wells located outside

Turkey and drilled by the conventional vertical technique, which has a much smaller carbon

print.

         One exception to the fracking studies that is also relevant for the present paper is a recent

analysis by Barreca et al. (2014), who examine the effects of bituminous coal consumption for

home heating on infant and all age mortality rates in the United States during the mid-twentieth

century. The authors show that the reductions in the consumption of coal between 1945 and 1960

significantly decreased both infant and all age mortality. The time frame considered in their

analysis was also a period that coincides with a rapid switch away from coal towards oil and

natural gas. This is important in terms of illustrating the potential role that a widespread

displacement of coal by cleaner sources of fuel might have played on public health in the United

States. 5 While the United States and many developed countries have made inroads towards

cleaner fuels, the developing world continues to rely primarily on coal to meet its energy

requirements. 6 We believe that it is important to identify and highlight the impact of socially

desirable and economically viable public and market based approaches that would help natural

gas gain traction as an alternative to coal in developing countries.

         This papers also extends the literature on the impact of air pollution on the health

outcomes of adults and the elderly. Research in economics and epidemiology has shown that

exposure to air pollution has adverse effects on health by causing conditions such as pulmonary




5
  In particular, while the share of coal as a fuel for heating purposes declined from 55 to 35 percent, the share of
natural gas increased by over 400 percent (see page 10 in Barreca et al., 2014).
6
  See for example, http://instituteforenergyresearch.org/analysis/coal-is-still-integral-to-many-countries-and-regions-
in-the-world/.


                                                          5
and systemic inflammation, accelerated atherosclerosis, heart arrhythmias, and pneumonia. 7 One

of the most notable contribution of economists in this field has been the improvement of

empirical strategies to obtain causal estimates of the impact of exposure to air pollution, which is

arguably endogenous. To highlight a few recent and notable examples, Chen et al. (2013) exploit

the Huai River policy experiment in China to examine the impact of long-term exposure to air

pollution on adult mortality. The authors first demonstrate that the policy, which provided free

coal to citizens living to the north of the Huai River but not to the south, caused a substantial rise

in total particulate matter (TSP) in the north relative to the south. They then show that the

increase in TSP was accompanied with a significant increase in adult mortality in the affected

regions due to the elevated rates of cardio-respiratory deaths. Anderson (2015) examines the

impact of long-term exposure to air pollution on mortality by exploiting quasi-random variation

in pollution levels generated by wind patterns near major highways in Los Angeles. He finds

statistically and economically significant effects of downwind exposure to near-roadway

pollution on mortality amongst the elderly. Finally, Schlenker and Walker (2015) exploit the

variation in air pollution caused by runway traffic congestion in California airports to show that

increased pollution levels in areas surrounding airports are associated with asthma, respiratory,

and heart related hospitalizations among infants, adults, and elderly population. 8 It is important

to note that all these three papers provide estimates for the health impact of a rise in air pollution,

while the current paper considers the health effect of a development that results in a decrease in

air pollution. This distinction is important because the relationship between air pollution and


7
  For example, see Anderson (2015), Barreca et al. (2014), Chen et al. (2013), DelFino et al. (2005), Dockery et al.,
1993; Lockwood (2012), Pope et al. (2004), and Schlenker and Walker (2015).
8
  Both Chen et al. (2013) and Anderson (2015) focus on the health impact of long-term exposure to air pollution,
Schlenker and Walker (2015) consider day-to-day fluctuations, which results in estimates for the short-run effect of
air pollution on health rather than the long-run cumulative impact.


                                                          6
mortality needs not be symmetrical. This is especially likely to be true for an outcome like

mortality that is irreversible. Furthermore, health problems caused by air pollution usually

become chronic (e.g., heart and lung disease) and chronic conditions are not easily reversible

when air quality is improved. Additionally, any health benefits attributable to improved air

quality may be felt over time rather than being realized immediately, especially for adults and the

elderly for whom most deaths are likely due to chronic conditions. In this paper, we recognize

this issue by specifying a treatment variable that captures a dose-effect relationship rather a

binary treatment approach adopted in most of the extant literature.

       The research design in our study exploits the variation in the intensity of natural gas

consumption, as measured by the number of subscribers to natural gas services per 100 persons,

across Turkish provinces and over time. Our results indicate that the displacement of coal by

natural gas induced by the deployment of natural gas networks has resulted in a significant

improvement in air quality, which then caused mortality rate among adults and the elderly to

decrease significantly. According to our point estimates, a one-percentage point increase in the

intensity of natural gas consumption results in 1.9 and 1.2 percent decrease in the rates of

mortality among adults and the elderly, respectively. Furthermore, these mortality gains appear

to be almost exclusively driven by decreases in deaths due to cardio-respiratory conditions. This

is not surprising since adult and elderly deaths are closely related to chronic disease conditions,

which are likely to be exacerbated by air pollution. Finally, we find no evidence of meaningful

differential effects between males and females.



II. Background




                                                  7
        The developments that have led to the deployment of a natural gas infrastructure in

Turkey have been discussed in detail in Cesur et al. (2016). Essentially, the rationale behind the

country’s decision to make massive investments on a network of natural gas pipelines was to

diversify its energy portfolio and thereby reduce its vulnerability to global supply shortages in

oil. Natural gas was identified as the most economically and technologically feasible candidate

to add to its energy mix, given Turkey’s close proximity to some of the world’s largest natural

gas producers such as Azerbaijan, Iran, and Russia. Importantly for the purpose of the present

study, there is no evidence that improving public health was among the factors that played a role

in the decision to deploy natural gas networks. First deployed in Ankara in 1988, natural gas

networks spread gradually across Turkey over time and reached to 71 of the 81 provinces by

2014. Natural gas is imported from Azerbaijan, Iran, and Russia through pipelines that are

operated by a state owned company called Botas. 9 The gas is then transmitted to individual

provinces by privately owned distribution companies that are responsible for providing the

public with clean burning natural gas by establishing and operating all infrastructural facilities

for the utilization of natural gas. 10

        The deployment of natural gas networks has led to a rapid increase in the consumption of

natural gas for domestic heating and cooking purposes, while the pace of increase in coal

consumption has been much slower. For example, between the years of 2000 and 2010, the total

consumption of coal and peat increased from 11 million tons of oil equivalent (Mtoe) to 14

9
  Over 60 percent of the natural gas used in Turkey is exported from Russia, which arrives in Turkey via two routes,
first one coming through the Blue Stream pipeline that crosses the Black Sea and the other one traveling via the
West Gas Pipeline through Bulgaria. The capacity of these two pipelines is about 30 billion cubic meters (bcm).
Another pipeline with a capacity of 8.8 bcm is with Azerbaijan that travels through Georgia via the Baku-Tbilisi-
Erzurum pipeline that was launched in 2007. The third connection is to Iran with a capacity of 10 bcm of natural
gas. About 79 percent of natural gas imports are transmitted through pipelines, while the remaining 21 percent
comes in liquefied form, mainly from Azerbaijan, Algeria, and Nigeria (International Energy Agency, 2011).
10
   For example, the companies in charge of distribution in the three largest provinces, Istanbul, Ankara, and Izmir
are Igdas, Baskentgaz, and Izmirgaz, respectively.


                                                         8
Mtoe, while the natural gas consumption has nearly tripled from 4.9 Mtoe to 13.1 Mtoe. During

the same period, the share of natural gas in electricity production increased from 37 percent to 46

percent, while the share of coal decreased from 31 percent to 26 percent.

        Since both the construction and operation of natural gas infrastructure at the provincial

level is handled by the private sector, the factors determining the timing and the rate of

expansion of natural gas networks are typically associated with the economic viability of costly

investments that are required to service provinces with natural gas. For example, the proximity to

the main ports operated under the jurisdiction of the central government, the potential size of the

market (i.e., the number of housing and commercial units or the population size), weather

conditions such as the average duration of the heating season, and the conditions of the

geographical terrain appear to be important factors (Aras and Aras, 2005; Cesur et al., 2016).

Accordingly, it is no surprise that provinces such as Istanbul, Ankara, Bursa, and Eskisehir, that

are either highly populated, located within close proximity to main pipelines, or with long and

cold winters are among the early adopters, and provinces in remote regions with difficult access

(e.g., Hakkari and Sirnak) or mild climates (e.g., Antalya, Aydin, and Mersin) are either late

adopters or with no natural gas access yet. 11



III. Data

Measures of Natural Gas




11
  Once a province is connected to a natural gas network, the decision about whether to switch from coal to natural
gas depends on the type of housing unit occupied by the household. For example, the decision is voluntary for single
family residential units. For residential buildings with multiple housing units, in which over 80 percent of all
households reside, a simple majority decision among the residential units is required to make the change from coal
to natural gas.


                                                         9
         Data on natural gas have been obtained from the Turkish Natural Gas Journal (for the

period 2001 to 2012) and the Turkish Energy Market Regulatory Authority (for years 2013 and

2014). 12 We construct measures that capture the deployment of natural gas networks both in the

intensive and extensive margins. For the extensive margin, we create an indicator variable for

whether natural gas networks are present and functioning in a province in each year between

2001 and 2014, and for the intensive margin we create an intensity measure representing the

utilization rate of natural gas as measured by the number of individual subscribers per 100

persons. 13

         There is considerable variation in both extensive and intensive dimensions of deployment

of natural gas. For example, only 5 of the 81 Turkish provinces had access to a natural gas

network in 2001, but this figure has grown to 71 in 2014. 14 During the period of our analysis, the

natural gas intensity has grown from 3.8 to 14.1 percent. However, the rate of expansion varies

widely across provinces. For example, the subscription rate for natural gas services is over 30

percent in Ankara, Eskisehir, and Istanbul, suggesting that the coverage is near universal if one

assumes between three to four individuals living per household. 15 But then Antalya – a province

located on the Mediterranean coast with a warm climate – has a natural gas intensity of only 0.75

percent despite having a network in place since 2009.

12
   The Natural Gas Journal is published in Turkish under the name “Dogal Gaz Dergisi” and available at
http://www.dogalgaz.com.tr/. It provides data on natural gas on an annual basis until the end of 2012. Note that for
the period after 2012 the same data are also available from the Turkish Energy Market Regulatory Authority at
http://www.epdk.org.tr/tr/anasayfa.
13
   An alternative approach could be to create the utilization rate per households instead of per persons. However, it is
not possible to generate this figure for every year since province level household numbers are only available for
2000 and 2011. Following Cesur et al. (2016), we constructed an approximation to the number of households per
province assuming a linear growth rate. Results from the analysis using this variable as the treatment measure did
not change any of the implications of the results presented in this paper.
14
   Appendix Table 1 presents the list of provinces with natural gas infrastructure by 2014 along with the year of
adoption and natural gas intensity in that year.
15
   The average household size in Turkey is 3.8 according to statistics from the Turkish Statistical Institute. See
http://www.tuik.gov.tr/PreHaberBultenleri.do?id=15843.


                                                          10
Measures of Mortality

         The data on mortality were obtained from the Turkish Statistical Institute (TurkStat) for

the period between 2001-2014. We created age and gender specific mortality rates defined as the

number of deaths per 1,000 persons present in each category. We consider mortality rates for

males and females between ages 25 to 54 and ages 55 and older that represent the non-elderly

adult and the elderly mortality rates, respectively. 16 As shown in Table 1A, the mortality rate

averages about one per 1,000 persons among those aged 25-54 and jumps to about 18 per 1,000

for those aged 55 and older. Furthermore, the mortality rate is higher among males than females

for both adults and the elderly. Figures in columns 2 to 5 of Table 1A reveal that mortality rates

differ considerably between provinces with and without a natural gas network. For example,

province-year observations with a natural gas network (column 3) has almost twice as high a

mortality rate as those without one (column 2) regardless of age category and gender. A similar

picture is drawn by columns 4 and 5, which show the means of mortality rates for provinces

which did not gain access to a natural gas network at any time during the period of our analysis

and those which did gain access to a network during the same period, respectively. The

information illustrated in Table 1A may lead one to conclude that mortality rates may be directly

related to natural gas. However, this would be misleading since it fails to account for potentially

important factors that may be correlated with both the deployment of gas networks and public

health at the provincial level. Below we elaborate more on some of the differences between

provinces with and without natural gas network.
16
  Using alternative age cut-offs to define adult (e.g. 25 to 64) and elderly mortality rates (e.g., 65 and older) did not
cause any appreciable changes to our main findings. Although the focus of this paper is adult and the elderly
mortality, we also estimated models for infant mortality. The results from the analysis of infant mortality presented
in Appendix Table 2, basically provides a reassurance of the findings in Cesur et al. (2016), which performed the
same analysis using data for the period between 2001-2011. The results shown in Appendix Table 2 also reveal that
there is no difference in the estimated relationship between natural gas and infant mortality between males and
females.


                                                           11
Time-variant Provincial Characteristics

         In our analysis, we account for a set of time-variant characteristics at the provincial level.

These characteristics include number of hospitals and hospital beds per 100,000 persons, number

of automobiles per 1,000 persons, number of physicians per 100,000 persons, an indicator

variable for whether the province has a Family Physician Program in place, and an indicator

variable for whether the elected mayor of the central district of the associated province has the

same political affiliation with the political party governing Turkey. 17 We also account for

differences in income per capita, unemployment rate, percentage of population holding a high

school degree, percentage of population holding a college degree, and number of pupils per

teacher in secondary schools at the sub-regional level. 18 The information pertaining to presence

of the Family Physician Program comes from the Ministry of Health, while all other control

variables are obtained from the TurkStat. 19 We also construct dummy variables that equal unity

for observations with missing data on the explanatory variables.

         Table 1B displays the means and standard deviations for these characteristics for the full

sample as well as by breakdowns of the presence of a natural gas network. As shown in the table,

provinces with and without a natural gas network differ from each other in a number of

dimensions. For example, provinces with access to a natural gas network also have more

17
   Data on province populations are obtained from the TurkStat for years 2000 and 2007-2014 and from the Turkish
Ministry of Health between 2001 and 2006. Since no Census was conducted between years 2001 and 2006, the
province populations for the period of 2001-2006 are based on extrapolations implemented by the Ministry of
Health. Alternatively, we imputed the population figures between 2001 and 2006 using province-specific growth
rates. Using these values produce results that are nearly identical to those presented in this paper. These results are
available from the authors upon request.
18
   These variables are only available at the sub-regional level. According to the TurkStat, Turkey is classified into 12
regions, 26 sub-regions, and 81 provinces. These regions and sub-regions are made up of clusters of provinces that
are grouped together based on geographical proximity to each other and for statistical purposes.
19
   The Family Physician Program in Turkey, which was introduced in 2005, has extended basic healthcare services
to the entire Turkish population under a free-of-charge and single-payer system that is fully financed and
administered by the central government. Cesur et al. (2015) show that the program led to significant improvements
in public health.


                                                          12
automobiles, higher income, a larger number of hospital beds and physicians, better educated

populations, and a higher likelihood of having a Family Physician Program in place. These

differences suggest that natural gas expansion is more likely in provinces that are wealthier,

more urban, and with more educated populations. This is not surprising because the timing and

intensity of deployment of a natural gas network may be positively associated with demand for

natural gas services, which, in turn, is likely to be positively influenced by all these factors.

Finally, provinces with natural gas are more likely to have a central district mayor who is

affiliated with the ruling party. Again, this should not come as a surprise in a country where the

decisions over resource allocation for local investment projects are controlled by the central

government.



IV. Econometric Approach

Natural Gas and Air Pollution

        In order for the deployment of natural gas networks to influence mortality, the

displacement of natural gas by coal induced by these networks should lead to an improvement in

air quality. There is already evidence, albeit descriptive, in support of a negative relationship

between the expansion of the natural gas infrastructure and air pollution (Kaygusuz, 2007). In

order to fortify this assumption with more concrete evidence and also to set the stage for our

main analysis, we obtained data on province level yearly averages of particulate matter (PM10)

and sulfur dioxide (SO2) from the Turkish Ministry of Health. 20 Then, we run regressions for

each of these measures on natural gas intensity controlling for a vector of province

characteristics along with province fixed effects, and region specific year dummies. The point

20
  Air pollution is measured by the provincial meteorology centres. The measurements are taken for a minimum of
21 days for each month for at least nine months.


                                                      13
estimates on the measure of natural gas intensity from these regressions are -0.057 for PM10 (p-

value< 0.05) and -0.022 for SO2 (p-value<0.01) suggesting that a one-percentage point increase

in the intensity of natural gas results in 5.7 and 2.2 percent decreases in these two pollutants,

respectively. 21 Furthermore, as indicated by p-values in parentheses the estimates are

statistically significant at the 5- and 1-percent levels despite the significantly reduced sample

sizes. 22

Natural Gas and Mortality

            In order to investigate the impact of natural gas networks on adult and the elderly

mortality, we follow the strategy in Cesur et al. (2016) and begin with estimating models of the

form:



            log(MRpt) = Xpt βo + β1NGpt + ωp + λrt + τp t+ τpt2 + εpt,                     (1)



where MRpt represents one of the mortality outcomes for province p in year t. Xpt is a set of

exogenous determinants of mortality described above. The NGpt is either a binary indicator for

whether the province p has a natural gas network in place or the intensity of natural gas as

measured by the number of subscribers to natural gas services per 100 persons in year t. The

number of subscribers is the total number of household and business units with access to natural

gas. 23


21
   Note that data on SO2 the PM10 is available only for a subset of the observations between 2001 and 2014 and for
an unbalanced panel, which results in sample sizes of 772 and 766 year-province observations for SO2 and PM10,
respectively. The coefficients on air pollution measures from a specification with province specific linear trends are
imprecisely estimated likely due to reduced sample size.
22
   In the interest of space, we only mention the point estimates on natural gas intensity here, but full results are
available from the authors upon request.
23
   Since our unit of analysis is at the provincial level, we are not able to separately identify the private and public
health benefits associated with natural gas networks. However, by conducting the analysis at the provincial level, we


                                                          14
         The causal interpretation of the coefficient β1 is complicated due to confounding variables

that are likely to be correlated with both the deployment of natural gas networks and mortality.

In order to control for the impact of these factors, we rely on the longitudinal nature of our data

and incorporate a series of fixed effects into equation (1). Specifically, the ωp represents province

fixed effects accounting for differences across provinces such as poverty, geographic terrain, and

climate conditions, which are likely to remain time-invariant during our analysis period.

Similarly, the λrt is a set of region-by-year fixed effects that would capture annual shocks to

mortality at the regional level. 24 The region-by-year fixed effects would also account for time

trends that are common across all provinces within a region. 25 The specification in equation (1)

additionally allows for the trends in mortality rates to differ across provinces by accounting for

province-specific linear and quadratic trends. These trends, denoted by the terms, τpt and τpt2,

would capture the influence of difficult-to-measure time-varying differences or pre-existing

trends across provinces as well as the differences in the rate of growth in natural gas intensity

subsequent to the deployment of a natural gas network (Cesur et al., 2016). 26 They would


are also able to avoid the difficulty of dealing with the endogeneity of individual decisions to switch from coal to
natural gas. In that sense, our estimates should be interpreted as the combined effect of natural gas on those who
benefit from improved air quality both privately and publicly (Cesur et al., 2016).
24
   As mentioned previously, regions in Turkey are clusters of provinces grouped together based on considerations of
geographical proximity to each other and statistical purposes. There are 12 such regions. Since the province of
Istanbul constitutes a region by itself, it is merged with the neighboring West Marmara region for computational
simplicity when we constructed the region-by-year fixed effects. However, treating Istanbul as a separate region or
dropping it from the sample produces nearly identical results. Note that year fixed effects are redundant once region-
by-year fixed effects are included. Therefore, the latter would also gauge nationwide shocks to mortality.
25
   Regions have clusters of provinces, which share common characteristics that are likely to be correlated with
mortality. Region-by-year fixed effects would account for these common factors. For example, East Marmara is a
region with major urban and industrial provinces like Bursa, and Kocaeli. Furthermore, the heavier industrial
activity in these provinces may have spillover effects on all the other provinces within the region that are not
necessarily as industrial. For example, Bursa and Kocaeli are linked to each other through highly congested routes of
transportation that have to pass through Yalova, a smaller and less urban province within the same region.
Therefore, any air pollution, for example caused by the traffic congestion between Bursa and Kocaeli, may also
affect the air quality in Yalova. Controlling for region-by-year fixed effects would also mitigate concerns about the
aggregate impact of these factors.
26
   This application is similar to the one in Wolfers (2006), who examines the impact of unilateral divorce laws on
divorce rates.


                                                         15
address the concern that changes in the access to natural gas over time might be correlated with

broader changes in public-health conditions or convergence across provinces as well (Barreca et

al., 2014). Finally, εpt represents a random error term. Standard errors are robust to any form of

heteroscedasticity and serial correlation as they are clustered at the province level to allow for

correlation within a province (Bertrand et al., 2004).

         As mentioned above, equation (1) can be estimated by using either a binary treatment

variable for the presence of a natural gas network or a continuous intensity measure, which

captures the extent to which natural gas networks are utilized by the public within a province. In

the former approach, the coefficient β1 would measure any permanent shift in the rate of

mortality associated with the deployment of a natural gas network averaged over the period in

which a province has the network in place. This would be a measure independent of the actual

level of the intensity of natural gas utilization in a province. However, the deployment of a

natural gas network in a province and the adoption of natural gas by the residents of a province

for space heating and cooking purposes are two separate processes. The latter is a process that

evolves over time and one that depends on a number of factors including the relative price of

coal to natural gas. In the end, it is the actual displacement of coal by natural gas that would

have any bearing in terms of influencing public health. Unless the displacement rate of coal by

natural gas reaches a critical level that would have an effect on air pollution, a binary treatment

model would fail to register any impact on mortality even if all of the provinces have a natural

gas network deployed, leading to the misleading conclusion that there is no association between

natural gas and mortality. 27 This problem may be particularly severe in the current context,


27
   For instance, consider the extreme case where a province has natural gas available for its citizens as an alternative
source of fuel, but nobody utilizes it. In this case, the effect of natural gas utilization on mortality should be zero, but
a specification with a binary treatment measure would fail to reveal that.


                                                            16
where there is considerable variation in the intensity of treatment exposure across provinces and

over time.

        To see this more clearly, in Appendix Table 3 we present estimates of the impact of a

binary indicator of natural gas on the rate of mortality using the specification expressed in

equation (1). The first column presents the raw correlations between the natural gas indicator

and the all age mortality rate (Panel A), mortality rate for those aged 25-54 (Panel B), and

mortality rate for those aged 55 and older (Panel C), all in natural logarithms. As shown in the

table, all of these correlations are positive and significant, and remain so even after controlling

for region-by-year fixed effects. Only after accounting for permanent differences across

provinces in column 3 do these estimates become negative as consistent with the notion that the

displacement of coal by natural gas triggered by the deployment of natural gas networks had a

mortality reducing influence. Moreover, the estimates change little in response to controlling for

province specific linear and quadratic trends and time-varying characteristics of provinces. They

are also small in size and statistically insignificant in these specifications.

        In order to properly capture the dynamic nature of the treatment, we estimate equation (1)

using the intensity measure of natural gas utilization. This specification recognizes the fact that

the displacement of coal by natural gas is a process that occurs gradually and one that cannot be

captured using a binary treatment model. The intensity specification is also more relevant from a

public policy perspective when it comes to formulating policies to accomplish targeted levels of

utilization of natural gas services. By employing a treatment measure that captures the extent to

which natural gas services are deployed in a province, we essentially estimate a dose-effect

relationship between natural gas networks and mortality. In this framework, the coefficient β1 in




                                                   17
equation (1) using the continuous treatment measure would be interpreted as the impact of the

rate of natural gas intensity on mortality.

Identification

       There is no evidence to suggest that the rationale for the deployment of natural gas

networks was to improve public health by reducing air pollution. Nevertheless, the descriptive

statistics highlighted in Tables 1A and 1B clearly indicate that the pattern in which these

networks have expanded over time and across provinces has not followed a random pattern

either. As mentioned before, the provinces with natural gas networks are more likely to be urban,

industrial, and with more motor vehicles per capita. Therefore, these provinces may also have

higher mortality despite gaining access to a natural gas network. This can be further

demonstrated by a simple analysis in which time-varying characteristics of provinces are

regressed on a binary indicator for whether a province has a natural gas network in place. The

results from this analysis are shown in Appendix Table 4. As shown in column 1, there are

strong correlations between observable province characteristics and the natural gas indicator – a

pattern that has already been established in Table 1B. As displayed in column 3 of Appendix

Table 4, this pattern persists when we use the intensity measure instead. However, accounting for

permanent differences across provinces via fixed effects also causes these differences to become

much less nuanced, both in terms of size and statistical significance. Once we further control for

confounding factors through province-specific linear and quadratic time trends as well as region-

by-year fixed effects, none of the characteristics considered in this analysis are related to either

of the natural gas measures (see columns 2 and 4). Importantly, none of the estimates reported in

Appendix Table 4 are significant statistically or economically.




                                                 18
       To gain further insights about the association between the deployment of natural gas

networks and province characteristics, we next run regressions of the measures of natural gas on

jointly specified time-varying factors listed in Table 1B. As shown in Appendix Table 5, the

estimates from this analysis lend further support to the notion that any of the association between

province characteristics and the pattern in which natural gas networks rolled out over time

appears to be exogenous to public health, once we control for year and province fixed effects

along with province-specific linear and quadratic trends, and region-by-year fixed effects. This

conclusion is also supported by the F-statistics and the corresponding p-values reported at the

bottom of columns 2 and 4 of Appendix Table 5, which clearly confirm the joint in-significance

of all these characteristics. Taken together, the evidence from Appendix Tables 4 and 5 lends

support to the notion that the provincial factors that might be associated with the pattern in which

the natural gas networks are deployed become inconsequential once unobserved heterogeneity is

accounted for. We interpret this as strong evidence that any remaining variation in the expansion

of natural gas networks is plausibly exogenous to mortality outcomes (Cesur et al., 2016).

       A relevant question to consider is whether there could be other province level policy

developments that might be correlated with the deployment of natural gas networks.

Alternatively, the deployment of natural gas networks could be part of a larger basket of

investments or development projects implemented at the provincial level. We could not identify

any such policy decisions that have been rolled out in conjunction with the deployment of natural

gas networks. It is important to remember that the authority to enact laws and execute policies

concerning energy and health are under the jurisdiction of the central government in Turkey.

Consequently, many of these law changes or policies are implemented in all provinces




                                                19
concurrently, and thus are accounted for by year fixed effects. 28 Furthermore, any differential

investments by the central government at the provincial level should be captured by province-

specific linear and quadratic time trends alongside with the indicator variable for whether the

district mayor of the province is affiliated with the governing political party. Finally, region-by-

year fixed effects would account for region specific unobserved heterogeneity such as any

regional investments carried out by the central government in an effort to reduce economic and

health disparities among regions.

        If our identification strategy is valid, then natural gas networks should not have any

impact on mortality in provinces prior to the deployment of these networks. A violation of this

condition would suggest that any estimate of the relationship between natural gas networks and

mortality may at least partially be spuriously driven by pre-existing differences between

provinces with and without a natural gas network. A formal testing of this assumption can be

performed by using an event-history analysis, which would enable us to trace out the trends in

mortality rates year-by-year for the periods leading up to and following the deployment of a

natural gas network (Cesur et al., 2016). In practice, we implement this analysis by augmenting

equation (1) to include interactions between each of the year indicators with the binary indicator

for the presence of a natural gas network. The event-history estimates from a specification that

controls for province and region-by-year fixed effects are displayed in Figure 1 along with 95

percent confidence intervals. As shown in the figure, none of the interaction terms are

28
   It can also be argued that natural gas adoption and intensity may influence migration decisions of households
between provinces with and without a natural gas infrastructure. The internal migration decisions are primarily
determined by economic factors in Turkey and the flow of migration has been from rural to urban provinces in
recent decades. To the extent that families migrating into provinces with natural gas are from low socio-economic
status, our estimates would be a lower bound. Data on the proportion of migrants by province are available from the
TurkStat only for the period 2008-2014. We estimated models of migration as a function of natural gas adoption and
expansion along with other control variables. The coefficients on the two natural gas variables were both small and
imprecisely estimated, suggesting that migration decisions are unrelated to natural gas. These results are available
from the authors upon request.


                                                        20
statistically significantly different from zero in the years prior to deployment of a natural gas

network in a province. It is assuring that there is no evidence of any systematic relationship

between the treatment and mortality measures in those years. As also illustrated in Figure 1,

there is a clear departure towards reduced mortality beginning with one year after the

deployment of a natural gas network. Furthermore, the estimates on the interaction terms

gradually become more negative over time, which is a pattern consistent with the notion that the

presence of a natural gas network makes a difference in mortality only after the utilization of

natural gas services becomes widespread enough to have an influence on air quality. In fact, the

estimates on the interaction terms reach statistical significance only in the fourth year of

deployment. Taken together, the evidence presented in Figure 1 supports the hypothesis that

natural gas networks in Turkey had a causal negative effect on mortality.



V. Results

        Table 2 presents the estimates of the impact of natural gas intensity from equation (1) on

measures of mortality. 29 Panel A shows estimates for all age mortality, while Panels B and C

show estimates for those aged 25-54 and 55 and older, respectively. In each panel, the first

column displays estimates from a specification with no controls, followed by specifications that

successively add region-by-year fixed effects, province fixed effects, linear and quadratic time

trends, and time-varying covariates.

        The estimates shown in the first column represent raw correlations between natural gas

intensity and mortality. As illustrated before, these correlations are positively signed reflecting

the non-random nature of the deployment of natural gas networks. Though less pronounced, the

29
   We also estimated weighted regressions using the mean population density and birth density as weights. These
estimations, shown in Appendix Table 6, did not cause any appreciable changes to the results presented here.


                                                      21
same pattern persists in column 2 of Table 2 when region-by-year fixed effects are added to the

specifications. This is also not surprising since region-by-year fixed effects only accounts for

time-varying unobservables that are at the national or regional level. It is the pre-existing

differences across provinces that are likely to be the source of endogeneity of natural gas

networks. Accordingly, when we account for permanent differences across provinces via

province fixed effects in column 3, the estimates switch sign and become negative as predicted.

In addition to permanent differences, specification in column 3 further accounts for any time-

varying differences across provinces that may be trending either linearly or quadratically. As

mentioned earlier, these trends are also likely to account for the differences in the rate of increase

in natural gas intensity in the post-deployment years of a natural gas network. Doing so causes

the estimates on the natural gas intensity to decrease by two to three folds. According to the

point estimates, a one-percentage point increase in the natural gas intensity as measured by the

number of subscribers to natural gas services per 100 persons would reduce the all age mortality

rate by 1.4 percent, the adult mortality rate by 1.9 percent and the elderly mortality rate by 1.2

percent.

       It is important to note that controlling observed time-variant characteristics of provinces

should not cause any appreciable changes to our estimates if our identification strategy is valid

(i.e., the remaining variation in natural gas intensity is exogenous to health outcomes once the

unobserved heterogeneity is captured by province fixed effects and province-specific time

trends). As displayed in column 5 of Table 2, all three estimates on natural gas intensity remain

unchanged. In particular, controlling for the eleven time-varying covariates listed in Table 1B

causes no change in the estimates of the impact of natural gas intensity on mortality.




                                                 22
       To put these point estimates into context, we next conduct several back of the envelope

calculations for the number of lives saved as a result of the displacement of coal by natural gas.

As illustrated in Table 1A, the average mortality rate for all ages in our province-year

observations with a natural gas network is 5.18 per 1,000 individuals. Then, a point estimate of -

0.014 translates into approximately 0.073 lives saved per every 1,000 persons in response to a

one percentage-point increase in the intensity of natural gas. The total number of deaths in

Turkey was about 391,000 in 2014. Therefore, approximately 5,460 lives might have been saved,

had the intensity of natural gas been one-percentage point higher. Similarly, the approximate

numbers of lives saved among the non-elderly adults and the elderly are 0.027 and 0.292 per

1,000 individuals in these age groups, respectively. Taking the total number of deaths in these

age groups in 2014 as a base, these figures translate into a total of 846 lives saved among non-

elderly adults and 3,851 lives saved among the elderly with respect to a one-percentage point

increase in the intensity of natural gas. It is important to recognize that the number of lives saved

among the elderly is much higher than that among the adults even though the percentage effect is

greater for the adults than the elderly. This is not surprising because individuals aged 55 and

older have a much higher baseline mortality and they are also more susceptible to health hazards

of air pollution. For example, preexisting cardio-respiratory disorders are more common among

the elderly than among the younger age groups.

       Our empirical analysis essentially exploits the variation in the rate of displacement of

coal by natural gas across provinces and over time. In other words, it is assumed that provinces

in which the displacement takes place at a faster pace than other provinces should have mortality

rates decreasing more rapidly in comparison to those of other provinces. In fact, this is the

reason we refrain from using a binary treatment model as it would fail to capture the true



                                                 23
variation in natural gas utilization. If our assumption is valid, then we should also observe the

impact of natural gas networks on mortality to increase over time as an increasing number of

households switch from coal to natural gas. To test this, we estimate the impact of dichotomous

indicators of the number of years since the adoption of natural gas network on measures of

mortality. These results shown in Appendix Table 7 support the notion of a gradual but

intensifying pattern in the hypothesized relationship between natural gas networks and mortality.

More specifically, the point estimates, which are usually statistically significant, follow an

increasing trend over time, i.e., the mortality gains associated with improved air quality are likely

to be increasing over time. This is consistent with the notion that chronic health problems

exacerbated by air pollution are not usually reversible easily. Another scenario that is consistent

with the pattern obtained in Appendix Table 7 is that air pollution needs to be reduced below

certain inflection points before significant mortality gains can be realized.

       Finally, we subject the results shown in Table 2 to additional scrutiny by performing two

robustness analyses. First, we test whether our results are sensitive to the exclusion of provinces

that never gained access to a natural gas network during our analysis period. As shown in

Appendix Table 8, estimating the model in equation (1) without these provinces produced

estimates that are nearly identical to those in Table 2. Second, we exclude provinces that always

had a natural gas network during the time period of our analysis. As presented in Appendix

Table 9, these results are also indistinguishable from our main estimates. These analyses confirm

that our main results are not driven by the possibility that there is something fundamentally

different about those provinces.




                                                 24
Gender-Specific Analysis

       To investigate the extent to which the relationship between natural gas intensity and

mortality is gender-specific, we estimate equation (1) separately for males and females. As

shown in Table 3, the evidence from this analysis yields no evidence of a clear distinction in the

impact of natural gas intensity on mortality by gender. Focusing on the most comprehensive

specification, the estimates are fairly close between males and females for all three age

categories. This finding is similar to Chen et al. (2013) which examines the mortality and life

expectancy consequences of air pollution using a policy experiment from China. Note that a

failure to detect any gender differences in the relationship between natural gas intensity and

mortality does not necessarily mean that the number of lives saved as a result of the deployment

of natural gas networks is identical between males and females since mortality rates are higher

for males than females regardless of age. For example, the point estimates from the analysis of

all age mortality indicate that a one-percentage point increase in the intensity of natural gas

results in 0.080 male lives saved per 1,000 males and 0.060 females lives saved per 1,000

females. The corresponding figures are 0.036 males and 0.002 females among those aged 25-54,

and 0.607 males and 0.396 for females among those aged 55 and older.

Cause-Specific Analysis

       Finally, we examine whether mortality effects of natural gas networks differ between

deaths linked to cardio-respiratory causes and those linked to non-cardio-respiratory causes. The

cause-specific analysis is useful because it is important to understand which health conditions are

more responsive to improvements in air quality associated with the displacement of coal by

natural gas. This knowledge is particularly helpful for the purpose of an accurate cost-benefit

analysis associated with any public policies designed to increase the usage of natural gas



                                                 25
networks such as a subsidy because the cost of end-of-life care differs greatly across various

health conditions. A cause-specific examination would also serve as a valuable specification

analysis if the results reveal that estimates are stronger for the type of conditions that are more

directly linked to ambient air pollution. A failure to find such a pattern would then cast serious

doubts on our identification strategy, suggesting that the deployment of natural networks is

correlated with other factors or developments associated with public health.

         To answer these questions, we follow Chen et al. (2013) and classify deaths into two

groups: cardio-respiratory deaths and non-cardio-respiratory deaths. The information used to

categorize deaths into these two groups is obtained from the Causes of Death Statistics Database

published by the TurkStat. 30 These statistics are based on underlying causes of deaths. We use

the International Classification of Disease (ICD-10) codes for the evaluation of main cause of

each death. The cardio-respiratory deaths are those that are linked to ambient air pollution and

include heart disease, stroke, lung cancer, and respiratory illnesses. The non-cardio-respiratory

deaths include those causes that are unlikely to be related, at least directly, to air pollution and

include other cancers, accidental or violent deaths, various stomach ailments.

         The results from this analysis are presented in Table 4. Focusing on the last column in

Panel A of the table, the estimate on the impact of natural gas intensity on mortality is negative

and statistically significant, suggesting that a one-percent increase in the intensity of natural gas

results in a 0.9 percent decrease in cardio-respiratory mortality rate. 31 The point estimate is

statistically significant at the five percent level despite likely measurement error in cause-specific

30
  See http://www.tuik.gov.tr/PreTablo.do?alt_id=1083.
31
  The Causes of Death Statistics Database covers all identifiable death cases detected by physicians from all
localities including provinces and sub-district centers. In comparison with the all age mortality data used in previous
estimations, it is less comprehensive particularly in years prior to 2009 and likely to suffer from measurement error
to a larger degree. The smaller magnitude of the estimated effect of natural gas is likely to be due to such
measurement error.


                                                          26
death classifications. Furthermore, as expected, the estimates for non-respiratory mortality

shown in Panel B fail to reveal any impact of natural gas intensity on these deaths. In particular,

the estimate from the most comprehensive specification is -0.004 and statistically

indistinguishable from zero. In summary, these findings lend further support to our main

hypothesis that the mortality gains caused by natural gas networks are attributable to reduced air

pollution.



VI. Conclusions

       In this paper, we examine the casual impact of the expansion of natural gas services for

residential and commercial use on adult and elderly mortality in Turkey. The roll-out of natural

gas networks has led to a widespread displacement of coal by natural gas as the primary source

of fuel in Turkey. Given that natural gas is a much cleaner source of fossil fuel than coal,

especially when it comes to concentrations of particulate matter, we assess whether any potential

reductions in the carbon intensity in the atmosphere led to improvements in adult and elderly

health as measured by their respective rates of mortality. To identify these impacts, we utilize the

variation in the timing of deployment and intensity of expansion of natural gas networks across

Turkish provinces between 2001 and 2014. Our results indicate that the expansion of natural gas

services has led to a significant reduction in the rate of overall mortality as well as both adult and

elderly mortality rates. The estimates from our most comprehensive specification indicate that a

one-percentage point increase in the rate of subscriptions to natural gas services would cause the

mortality rate to decrease by 1.4 percent (5,460 fewer deaths) among all age groups, 1.9 percent

(848 fewer deaths) among adults, and 1.2 percent (3,851 fewer deaths) among the elderly.

Furthermore, our analysis indicates that the mortality gains for both age groups are primarily



                                                 27
driven by cardio-respiratory deaths, which are more likely to be due to conditions caused or

exacerbated by air pollution, such as pulmonary and systemic inflammation, accelerated

atherosclerosis, heart arrhythmias, and pneumonia. Finally, our analysis does not reveal any

important gender differences in the estimated relationship between the deployment of natural gas

networks and mortality.

       Taken together, our results highlight the health benefits of a nationwide transition

towards a type of fuel that is gaining popularity due to its abundance, relatively lower cost, and

higher efficiency. Due to challenges to getting developing countries to commit to legal

obligations and the ineffectiveness of regulations due to poor governance and corruption, any

meaningful reductions to carbon consumption in that part of the world, at least in the short-run,

would likely come from actions or developments that are voluntary and, more importantly, in the

economic interest of these countries. The findings of this paper suggest that the availability of

large reserves of natural gas coupled with technological innovations in extraction and

transmission in recent years has the potential to cause a real improvement in air quality and result

in nontrivial improvements in public health.




                                                 28
                                            References

Adgate, J.L., Goldstein, B.D. and McKenzie, L.M., 2014. Potential public health hazards,
exposures and health effects from unconventional natural gas development. Environmental
Science & Technology, 48(15), pp.8307-8320.

Abbey, D.E., Nishino, N., McDonnell, W.F., Burchette, R.J., Knutsen, S.F., Lawrence Beeson,
W. and Yang, J.X., 1999. Long-term inhalable particles and other air pollutants related to
mortality in nonsmokers. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 159(2),
pp. 373-382.

Anderson, M.L., 2015. As the wind blows: The effects of long-term exposure to air pollution on
mortality. NBER Working Paper No. 21578.

Aras, H. and Aras, N., 2005. Eskişehir’de konutsal doğal gaz talebine ekonomik göstergelerin ve
dış ortam sıcaklığının etkileri. Mühendis ve Makine Dergisi, 46(540), pp. 20-27.

Barreca, A., Clay, K. and Tarr, J., 2014. Coal, smoke, and death: Bituminous coal and American
home heating. NBER Working Paper No. 19881.

Bertrand, M., Duflo, E.and Mullainathan, S., 2004. How much should we trust differences-in-
differences estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1), pp. 249-275.

Blamberger, M. and Oswald, R., 2012.Impacts of gas drilling on animal and human health. New
Solutions: A Journal of Environmental and Occupational Health, 22(1), pp. 51-77.

Brown, S.P.A., Krupnick, A. and Walls, M.A., 2009. Natural gas: a bridge to a low-carbon
future? RFF Issue Brief 09-11, Resources for the Future, Washington, DC.

Center for Climate and Energy Solutions, 2013. Leveraging natural gas to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions. http://www.c2es.org/publications/leveraging-natural-gas-reduce-greenhouse-gas-
emissions.

Cesur, R., Güneş, P.M., Tekin, E. and Ulker, A., 2015. The value of socialized medicine: the
impact of universal primary healthcare provision on birth and mortality rates in Turkey. NBER
Working Paper No. 21510.

Cesur, R., Tekin, E. and Ulker, A., 2016. Air pollution and infant mortality: Evidence from the
expansion of natural gas infrastructure. Economic Journal, doi: 10.1111/ecoj.12285

Chen, R., Kan, H., Chen, B., Huang, W., Bai, Z., Song, G. and Pan, G., 2012. Association of
particulate air pollution with daily mortality the China air pollution and health effects study.
American Journal of Epidemiology, 175(11), pp. 1173-1181.




                                                 29
Chen, Y., Ebenstein, A., Greenstone, M. and Li, H., 2013. Evidence on the impact of sustained
exposure to air pollution on life expectancy from China’s Huai River policy. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 110(32), pp.12936-12941.

Clougherty, J.E., 2010. A growing role for gender analysis in air pollution epidemiology.
Environmental Health Perspectives, 118(2), p.167.

Colborn, T., Kwiatkowski, C., Schultz, K. and Bachran, M., 2012. Natural gas operations from a
public health perspective, Human and Ecological Risk Assessment: an International Journal,
17(5), pp. 1039-1056.

Delfino, R.J., Constantinos, S. and Malik, S., 2005. Potential role of ultrafine particles in
associations between airborne particle mass and cardiovascular health. Environmental Health
Perspectives, 113, pp. 934-946.

Dockery, D.W., Pope, A. and Xu, X., et al., 1993. An association between air pollution and
mortality in six US cities. New England Journal of Medicine, 329, pp. 1753-1759.

Englert, N., 2004. Fine particles and human health - a review of epidemiological studies.
Toxicology Letters, 149(1), pp.235-242.

Finkel, M.L. and Hays, J., 2015. Environmental and health impacts of ‘fracking’: why
epidemiological studies are necessary. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health,
doi:10.1136/jech-2015-205487.

Finkel, M.L. and Law, A., 2011. The rush to drill for natural gas: a public health cautionary tale.
American Journal of Public Health, 101(5), pp.784-785.

Greenstone, M. and Hanna, R., 2014. Environmental regulations, air and water pollution, and
infant mortality in India. American Economic Review, 104(10), pp. 3038-72.

Hill, E.L., 2012. Unconventional natural gas development and infant health: evidence from
Pennsylvania. Charles H. Dyson School of Applied Economics and Management Working Paper,
12, p.2013.

Howarth, R.W., Ingraffea, A. and Engelder, T., 2011. Natural gas: should fracking stop? Nature,
477(7364), pp. 271-275.

International Energy Agency. 2015. Global coal demand stalls after more than a decade of
relentless growth. http://www.iea.org/newsroomandevents/pressreleases/2015/december/global-
coal-demand-stalls-after-more-than-a-decade-of-relentless-growth.html.

Jayachandran, S., 2009. Air quality and early-life mortality: evidence from Indonesia's wildfires.
Journal of Human Resources, 44(4), pp. 916-954.




                                                30
Kaygusuz, K., 2007. Energy use and air pollution issues in Turkey. CLEAN–Soil, Air, Water,
35(6), pp. 539-547.

Knittel, C.R., Metaxoglou, K. and Trindade, A., 2015. Natural gas prices and coal displacement:
Evidence from electricity markets. NBER Working Paper No. 21627.

Krieger N., 2003. Genders, sexes, and health: what are the differences, and why does it matter?
International Journal of Epidemiology, 32, pp. 652–657.

Levi, M., 2013. Climate consequences of natural gas as a bridge fuel. Climatic Change, 118(3-
4), pp. 609-623.

Lockwood, A. H., 2012. The Silent Epidemic: Coal and the Hidden Threat to Health. Cambridge:
MIT Press.

Moniz, E.J., Jacoby, H.D. and Meggs, A.J.M., et al., 2011. The future of natural gas. Cambridge,
MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Pope, C.A. III, Burnett., R.T. and Thurston, G.D., et al., 2004. Cardiovascular mortality and
long-term exposure to particulate air pollution: epidemiological evidence of general
pathophysiological pathways of disease. Circulation, 109, pp. 71–77.

Osborn, S.G., Vengosh, A. and Warner, R. and Jackson, R.B., 2011. Methane contamination of
drinking water accompanying gas-well drilling and hydraulic fracturing. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 108, pp. 8172-8176.

Schlenker, W. and Walker, W.R., 2015. Airports, air pollution, and contemporaneous health. The
Review of Economic Studies, p.rdv043.

Tuller, D., 2015. As fracking booms, dearth of health risk data remains. Health Affairs, 34(6), pp.
903-906.

U.S. Energy Information Administration. 2016. International Energy Outlook – 2016.
http://www.eia.gov/forecasts/ieo/exec_summ.cfm.

Wolfers, J., 2006. Did unilateral divorce laws raise divorce rates? A reconciliation and new
results. American Economic Review, 96(5), pp. 1802-1820.




                                                31
                                 Figure 1
Event-History Estimates of the Impact of Any Natural Gas on Mortality Rate




Notes: The figures display coefficients and 95% confidence intervals. The reference category is one year
prior to the deployment of a natural gas network.




                                               32
                                     Table 1A
 Means of Natural Gas Variables and Mortality Indicators by “Any” and “Ever” Natural
                                     Gas Status
  Variable                                        All          Any       Any       Ever     Ever
                                                             Natural   Natural   Natural   Natural
                                                             Gas = 0   Gas = 1   Gas = 0   Gas = 1
  Any Natural Gas                                  0.44         --        --        --       0.51
                                                  (0.50)        --        --        --     (0.50)
  Natural Gas Intensity                            3.90         --       8.89       --       4.52
                                                  (7.07)        --     (8.33)       --     (7.42)
  All Age Mortality Rate                           3.62        2.40      5.18      2.74      3.76
                                                  (2.21)     (1.72)    (1.74)     (2.57)   (2.12)
  All Age Male Mortality Rate                      3.95        2.59      5.68      2.91      4.12
                                                  (2.45)     (1.89)    (1.93)     (2.80)   (2.35)
  All Age Female Mortality Rate                    3.29        2.21      4.68      2.58      3.40
                                                  (1.99)     (1.56)    (1.57)     (2.36)   (1.90)
  Ages 25 to 54 Mortality Rate                     1.05        0.76      1.43      0.90      1.08
                                                  (0.58)     (0.53)    (0.39)     (0.73)   (0.55)
  Ages 25 to 54 Male 54 Mortality Rate             1.38        0.97      1.90      1.07      1.42
                                                  (0.77)     (0.67)    (0.55)     (0.87)   (0.75)
  Ages 25 to 54 Female Mortality Rate              0.72        0.55      0.94      0.71      0.72
                                                  (0.42)     (0.43)    (0.28)     (0.64)   (0.37)
  Ages 55 and Older Mortality Rate                17.90       12.88     24.32     14.80     18.39
                                                  (8.86)     (7.66)    (5.54)    (10.95)   (8.39)
  Ages 55 and Older Male Mortality Rate           20.48       14.76     27.80     17.02     21.03
                                                 (10.17)     (8.80)    (6.44)    (12.37)   (9.68)
  Ages 55 and Older Female Mortality Rate         15.69       11.29     21.32     12.94     16.12
                                                  (7.79)     (6.77)    (4.84)     (9.84)   (7.33)
  Infant Mortality Rate                            8.59        6.85     10.78      7.01      8.83
                                                  (5.37)     (5.66)    (4.05)     (6.32)   (5.18)
  Infant Boy Mortality Rate                        9.32        7.51     11.57      7.30      9.63
                                                  (5.86)     (6.16)    (4.55)     (6.45)   (5.70)
  Infant Girl Mortality Rate                       8.07        6.47     10.02      7.18      8.20
                                                  (5.06)     (5.34)    (3.90)     (6.57)   (4.79)
  Observations                                     1134        636       498       154       980
Notes: Standard deviations are in parentheses.




                                                        33
                                            Table 1B
               Means of Control Variables by “Any” and “Ever” Natural Gas Status
Variable                                    All       Any Natural   Any Natural   Ever Natural   Ever Natural
                                                        Gas = 0        Gas =1       Gas = 0        Gas = 1
Hospitals Per 100K Population                2.18          2.11          2.26          2.42           2.14
                                            (0.97)        (1.04)        (0.86)        (1.36)         (0.89)
Hospital Beds Per 100K Population          224.17        194.43        262.17        167.85         233.03
                                           (91.16)       (84.34)       (85.30)       (74.28)        (90.43)
Physicians Per 100K Population             122.68        100.53        150.97         84.64         128.66
                                           (50.97)       (38.60)       (50.88)       (31.78)        (50.85)
Family Medicine Program                      0.43          0.19          0.75          0.41           0.44
                                            (0.50)        (0.39)        (0.44)        (0.49)         (0.50)
Unemployment Rate                            9.82         10.21          9.49         10.14           9.76
                                            (3.92)        (4.37)        (3.47)        (4.57)         (3.81)
GDP Per Capita                            8,996.01      7,032.44     1,1576.70      6,121.22       9,447.76
                                         (4,092.08)    (2,861.38)    (4,036.41)    (2,576.44)     (4,103.98)
Number of Vehicles Per Capita                0.16          0.12          0.21          0.08           0.17
                                            (0.09)        (0.07)        (0.07)        (0.05)         (0.08)
Percent High School                         16.97         15.81         17.95         15.38          17.22
                                            (4.13)        (3.35)        (4.46)        (3.74)         (4.13)
Percent College                              7.62          5.92          9.05          5.82           7.90
                                            (3.19)        (2.26)        (3.17)        (2.74)         (3.17)
Students Per Teacher                        16.39         17.33         15.33         19.06          15.97
                                            (4.22)        (4.90)        (2.95)        (6.44)         (3.59)
Governing Party Mayor                        0.56          0.48          0.67          0.36           0.60
                                            (0.50)        (0.50)        (0.47)        (0.48)         (0.49)
Observations                                 1134          636           498           154            980
  Notes: Standard deviations are in parentheses.




                                                         34
                                              Table 2
                       The Effect of Natural Gas Intensity on Adult Mortality
                                                      (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)

  Panel A: Log of All Age Mortality Rate
  Natural Gas Intensity                            0.049***     0.010**    -0.038***     -0.014**     -0.014***
                                                    (0.008)     (0.005)      (0.007)      (0.006)       (0.005)

  Observations                                       1134        1134         1134         1134          1134

  Panel B: Log of 25 to 54 Mortality Rate
  Natural Gas Intensity                            0.041***    0.013***    -0.041***     -0.019***    -0.019***
                                                    (0.005)     (0.004)      (0.008)       (0.007)      (0.006)

  Observations                                       1134        1134         1134         1134          1134

  Panel C: Log of 55 and Older Mortality Rate
  Natural Gas Intensity                            0.040***    0.013***    -0.036***     -0.012**      -0.012**
                                                    (0.005)     (0.002)      (0.006)      (0.005)       (0.005)

   Observations                                        1134          1134        1134          1134           1134
   Controls For
     Region by Year Fixed Effects                       No           Yes         Yes            Yes           Yes
     Province Fixed Effects                             No            No         Yes            Yes           Yes
     Province-specific Linear Trends                    No            No          No            Yes           Yes
     Province-specific Quadratic Trends                 No            No          No            Yes           Yes
     Time-varying Covariates                            No            No          No            No            Yes
Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered at the province level, are in parentheses. A *, **, or *** indicates
significance at the 90%, 95%, or 99% levels, respectively. Time varying covariates include Hospitals Per 100K
Population, Hospital Beds Per 100K Population, Physicians Per 100K Population, Family Medicine Program,
Governing Party Mayor, and Number of Vehicles Per Capita at the province level, as well as Unemployment Rate,
GDP Per Capita, Percent High School, Percent College, and Students Per Teacher at the sub-regional level.




                                                        35
                                             Table 3
                The Effect of Natural Gas Intensity on Adult Mortality by Gender
                                                         (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)

 Panel A: Log of All Age Mortality Rate
                                                                                Males
 Natural Gas Intensity                               0.050***     0.011**   -0.038*** -0.015**        -0.014***
                                                      (0.008)     (0.005)     (0.007)  (0.006)          (0.005)
                                                                               Females
 Natural Gas Intensity                               0.048***     0.009*    -0.039*** -0.014**         -0.013**
                                                      (0.007)     (0.004)     (0.007)  (0.006)          (0.005)

 Observations                                           1134       1134        1134        1134          1134

 Panel B: Log of 25 to 54 Mortality Rate
                                                                           Males
 Natural Gas Intensity                               0.044*** 0.013*** -0.041*** -0.019***            -0.019***
                                                      (0.006)  (0.004)   (0.008)   (0.007)              (0.006)
                                                                          Females
 Natural Gas Intensity                               0.038*** 0.014*** -0.043*** -0.019**              -0.019**
                                                      (0.005)  (0.004)   (0.009)   (0.008)              (0.007)

 Observations                                           1134       1134        1134        1134          1134

 Panel C: Log of 55 and Older Mortality Rate
                                                                           Males
 Natural Gas Intensity                               0.040*** 0.013*** -0.035*** -0.013**             -0.013***
                                                      (0.005)  (0.002)   (0.006)  (0.005)               (0.005)
                                                                          Females
 Natural Gas Intensity                               0.041*** 0.013*** -0.036*** -0.011**              -0.011**
                                                      (0.005)  (0.002)   (0.006)  (0.005)               (0.005)

  Observations                                            1134         1134       1134         1134           1134
  Controls For
    Region-by-year Fixed Effects                           No          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
    Province Fixed Effects                                 No           No         Yes          Yes           Yes
    Province-specific Linear Trends                        No           No         No           Yes           Yes
    Province-specific Quadratic Trends                     No           No         No           Yes           Yes
    Time-varying Covariates                                No           No         No            No            No
Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered at the province level, are in parentheses. A *, **, or *** indicates
significance at the 90%, 95%, or 99% levels, respectively. Time varying covariates include Hospitals Per 100K
Population, Hospital Beds Per 100K Population, Physicians Per 100K Population, Family Medicine Program,
Governing Party Mayor, and Number of Vehicles Per Capita at the province level, as well as Unemployment Rate,
GDP Per Capita, Percent High School, Percent College, and Students Per Teacher at the sub-regional level.




                                                        36
                                              Table 4
                 The Effect of Natural Gas Intensity on Mortality by Cause of Death
                                                              (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)
Panel A: Log of Cardio-respiratory Death Rate
Natural Gas Intensity                                     0.044***      0.010*     -0.030***    -0.009**    -0.009**
                                                           (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.005)     (0.004)

Observations                                                  1134       1134        1134         1134        1134

Panel B: Log of Non-Cardio-respiratory Death Rate
Natural Gas Intensity                                     0.073***     0.019***    -0.021***     -0.005      -0.004
                                                           (0.010)      (0.005)      (0.005)    (0.004)     (0.004)

Observations                                                  1134          1134         1134         1134     1134
Controls For
 Region by Year Fixed Effects                                  No            Yes          Yes          Yes     Yes
 Province Fixed Effects                                        No            No           Yes          Yes     Yes
 Province-specific Linear Trends                               No            No            No          Yes     Yes
 Province-specific Quadratic Trends                            No            No            No          Yes     Yes
 Time-varying Covariates                                       No            No            No          No      Yes
 Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered at the province level, are in parentheses. A *, **, or *** indicates
 significance at the 90%, 95%, or 99% levels, respectively. Time varying covariates include Hospitals Per 100K
 Population, Hospital Beds Per 100K Population, Physicians Per 100K Population, Family Medicine Program,
 Governing Party Mayor, and Number of Vehicles Per Capita at the province level, as well as Unemployment Rate,
 GDP Per Capita, Percent High School, Percent College, and Students Per Teacher at the sub-regional level.




                                                         37
                                 Appendix Table 1
 Natural Gas Adoption Year and Natural Gas Intensity in 2014 for Provinces with Natural
                                 Gas Infrastructure
                          Adoption          Natural Gas                         Adoption       Natural Gas
     Province                Year        Intensity in 2014      Province           Year     Intensity in 2014
     Adana                  2010                2.03            Karabuk            2009           17.18
     Adiyaman               2010                7.07            Karaman            2009           12.76
     Afyonkarahisar         2008                5.59            Kars               2009            4.62
     Aksaray                2006               11.47            Kastamonu          2009            7.70
     Amasya                 2008               13.24            Kayseri            2005           18.80
     Ankara                 1988               30.94            Kilis              2013            2.95
     Antalya                2009                0.75            Kirikkale          2007           20.26
     Ardahan                2014                0.83            Kirklareli         2009           16.27
     Aydin                  2012                0.83            Kirsehir           2007           17.69
     Balikesir              2005               11.33            Kocaeli            1996           25.03
     Bartin                 2014                1.81            Konya              2005           12.48
     Batman                 2012                4.02            Kutahya            2005           14.28
     Bayburt                2009               10.97            Malatya            2007           14.56
     Bilecik                2007               19.66            Manisa             2007            5.78
     Bolu                   2010               12.65            Mardin             2014            0.00
     Burdur                 2009                8.71            Mersin             2010            1.87
     Bursa                  1992               25.49            Mugla              2014            0.02
     Canakkale              2007               12.37            Nevsehir           2009           10.88
     Cankiri                2009               11.14            Nigde              2007           10.74
     Corum                  2005               15.24            Ordu               2009            4.81
     Denizli                2007               13.15            Osmaniye           2011            2.47
     Diyarbakir             2009                6.97            Rize               2009            8.13
     Duzce                  2006               12.44            Sakarya            2005           14.88
     Edirne                 2009                9.26            Samsun             2006           12.01
     Elazig                 2009               14.85            Sanliurfa          2008            2.58
     Erzincan               2009               12.32            Siirt              2012            3.86
     Erzurum                2005               11.72            Sivas              2006           14.65
     Eskisehir              1996               30.55            Tekirdag           2005           18.79
     Gaziantep              2008                6.09            Tokat              2009            9.33
     Giresun                2013                0.97            Trabzon            2010            3.42
     Gumushane              2012                3.17            Usak               2006           12.36
     Hatay                  2010                1.57            Van                2008            2.91
     Isparta                2009               11.72            Yalova             2006           26.71
     Istanbul               1992               30.14            Yozgat             2007            9.09
     Izmir                  2007                8.42            Zonguldak          2006            6.69
     Kahramanmaras          2007                6.39
Notes: Provinces without natural gas infrastructure in 2014 are Agri, Artvin, Bingol, Bitlis, Hakkari, Igdir, Mus,
Sinop Sirnak, and Tunceli. In Ankara, Bursa, Eskisehir, Istanbul, and Kocaeli natural gas infrastructure was
developed prior to 2001. Natural gas intensity is expressed in per hundred populations.




                                                       38
                                       Appendix Table 2
                     The Effect of Natural Gas Intensity on Infant Mortality
                                                 (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)
      Panel A: Total Sample
        Natural Gas Intensity                 0.037***      0.021***   -0.060***   -0.029***   -0.029***
                                               (0.005)       (0.006)     (0.014)     (0.011)     (0.010)

      Observations                              1122         1122        1122        1122        1122

      Panel B: Males
        Natural Gas Intensity                 0.035***      0.021***   -0.061***   -0.027**    -0.028***
                                               (0.005)       (0.005)     (0.014)    (0.011)      (0.010)
      Observations                              1114          1114        1114       1114         1114
      Panel C: Females
        Natural Gas Intensity                 0.035***      0.022***   -0.065***   -0.028**    -0.027**
                                               (0.005)       (0.006)     (0.013)    (0.012)     (0.012)

       Observations                                 1096         1096         1096         1096          1096
       Controls For
         Region by Year Fixed Effects                No           Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes
         Province Fixed Effects                      No           No          Yes           Yes           Yes
         Province-specific Linear Trends             No           No           No           Yes           Yes
         Province-specific Quadratic Trends          No           No           No           Yes           Yes
         Time-varying Province Characteristics       No           No           No            No           Yes
Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered at the province level, are in parentheses. A *, **, or *** indicates
significance at the 90%, 95%, or 99% levels, respectively. Time varying covariates include Hospitals Per 100K
Population, Hospital Beds Per 100K Population, Physicians Per 100K Population, Family Medicine Program,
Governing Party Mayor, and Number of Vehicles Per Capita at the province level, as well as Unemployment Rate,
GDP Per Capita, Percent High School, Percent College, and Students Per Teacher at the sub-regional level.




                                                       39
                                         Appendix Table 3
                         The Effect of Any Natural Gas on Adult Mortality
                                                      (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)

   Panel A: Log of All Age Mortality Rate
   Any Natural Gas                                0.943*** 0.215***        -0.086       -0.064        -0.069
                                                   (0.056)  (0.062)       (0.075)      (0.051)       (0.047)

   Panel B: Log of 25 to 54 Mortality Rate
   Any Natural Gas                                0.812*** 0.253***        -0.048       -0.046        -0.052
                                                   (0.047)  (0.066)       (0.082)      (0.059)       (0.056)

   Panel C: Log of 55 and Older Mortality Rate
   Any Natural Gas                                0.777*** 0.238***        -0.083       -0.065        -0.068
                                                   (0.040)  (0.051)       (0.069)      (0.049)       (0.046)

   Observations                                        1134         1134        1134          1134          1134
   Controls For
     Region-by-year Fixed Effects                       No           Yes        Yes           Yes            Yes
     Province Fixed Effects                             No           No         Yes           Yes            Yes
     Province-specific Linear Trends                    No           No          No           Yes            Yes
     Province-specific Quadratic Trends                 No           No          No           Yes            Yes
     Time-varying Province Characteristics              No           No          No            No            Yes
Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered at the province level, are in parentheses. A *, **, or *** indicates
significance at the 90%, 95%, or 99% levels, respectively. Time varying covariates include Hospitals Per 100K
Population, Hospital Beds Per 100K Population, Physicians Per 100K Population, Family Medicine Program,
Governing Party Mayor, and Number of Vehicles Per Capita at the province level, as well as Unemployment Rate,
GDP Per Capita, Percent High School, Percent College, and Students Per Teacher at the sub-regional level.




                                                       40
                                  Appendix Table 4
 Estimates of Time Varying Observable Province Characteristics on Natural Gas Indicators
                                                    (1)           (2)                (3)            (4)
                                                    Any Natural Gas                Natural Gas Intensity
 Dependent Variables
  Hospitals Per 100K Population                     0.146         -0.023             0.003         -0.009
                                                  (0.116)        (0.061)           (0.009)        (0.009)
                                                  [1134]          [1134]            [1134]        [1134]
  Hospital Beds Per 100K Population             67.740***         -1.997          4.183***         -0.312
                                                  (9.291)        (3.878)           (0.915)        (0.506)
                                                  [1134]          [1134]            [1134]        [1134]
  Physicians Per 100K Population                50.448***          1.494          3.810***         -0.374
                                                  (6.542)        (2.127)           (0.776)        (0.287)
                                                  [1134]          [1134]            [1134]        [1134]
  Family Medicine Program                       0.553***          -0.031          0.029***         0.000
                                                  (0.037)        (0.048)           (0.006)        (0.005)
                                                  [1134]          [1134]            [1134]        [1134]
  Unemployment Rate                                -0.721          0.495            -0.045         -0.036
                                                  (0.452)        (0.411)           (0.034)        (0.029)
                                                    [891]          [891]             [891]          [891]
  GDP Per Capita                               4544.263***       -15.484         365.388***        -8.099
                                                (470.835)       (57.376)          (34.721)       (12.956)
                                                    [648]          [648]             [648]          [648]
  Number of Vehicles Per Capita                 0.090***           0.001          0.005***         -0.000
                                                  (0.008)        (0.002)           (0.001)        (0.000)
                                                  [1134]          [1134]            [1134]        [1134]
  Percent High School                           2.147***           0.135          0.207***         -0.124
                                                  (0.454)        (0.221)           (0.031)        (0.080)
                                                    [891]          [891]             [891]          [891]
  Percent College                               3.129***           0.090          0.249***         -0.017
                                                  (0.330)        (0.104)           (0.036)        (0.022)
                                                    [891]          [891]             [891]          [891]
  Students Per Teacher                          -1.994***          0.121          -0.109**         0.025
                                                  (0.569)        (0.257)           (0.043)        (0.026)
                                                  [1053]          [1053]            [1053]        [1053]
  Governing Party Mayor                         0.182***          -0.009           0.012**         -0.009
                                                  (0.054)        (0.080)           (0.005)        (0.006)
                                                  [1134]          [1134]            [1134]        [1134]
 Controls for
    Region by Year Fixed Effects                      No              Yes                 No       Yes
    Province Fixed Effects                            No              Yes                 No       Yes
    Province Linear and Quadratic Trends              No              Yes                 No       Yes
Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered at the province level, are in parentheses. A *, **, or *** indicates
significance at the 90%, 95%, or 99% levels, respectively. Number of observations is in brackets. Each coefficient,
standard error, and number of observations trio pertains to a separate regression equation.




                                                        41
                                     Appendix Table 5
      Estimates of Natural Gas Indicators on Jointly Specified Time Varying Observable
                                  Province Characteristics
                                                          (1)        (2)                (3)           (4)
                                                         Any Natural Gas              Natural Gas Intensity
     Independent Variables
       Hospitals Per 100K Population                     -0.033       -0.007           -0.260        -0.181
                                                        (0.024)      (0.024)          (0.450)       (0.230)
       Hospital Beds Per 100K Population                 0.000        -0.000           -0.005        0.001
                                                        (0.000)      (0.001)          (0.009)       (0.003)
       Physicians Per 100K Population                   0.001**        0.001         0.042***        -0.009
                                                        (0.001)      (0.001)          (0.016)       (0.007)
       Family Medicine Program                         0.149***       -0.041            0.055        0.070
                                                        (0.049)      (0.061)          (0.780)       (0.373)
       Unemployment Rate                                 -0.004        0.003         -0.159**        -0.054
                                                        (0.006)      (0.009)          (0.064)       (0.038)
       GDP Per Capita                                  0.000***        0.000         0.001***        -0.000
                                                        (0.000)      (0.000)          (0.000)       (0.000)
       Number of Vehicles Per Capita                    0.852**        0.943           -3.426       -10.658
                                                        (0.422)      (1.739)          (5.668)      (10.961)
       Percent High School                               -0.005        0.002            0.044        -0.049
                                                        (0.004)      (0.003)          (0.089)       (0.047)
       Percent College                                   0.003         0.004         0.720***        0.011
                                                        (0.009)      (0.008)          (0.193)       (0.064)
       Students Per Teacher                             0.012**        0.005          0.240**        0.008
                                                        (0.006)      (0.006)          (0.100)       (0.036)
       Governing Party Mayor                           0.130***       -0.002          2.259**        -0.291
                                                        (0.043)      (0.046)          (0.913)       (0.206)

       Observations                                         1,134      1,134              1,134         1,134
       R-squared                                             0.51       0.88               0.48          0.97
       F-test                                               36.65       0.53               7.90          0.87
       F-test P-value                                        0.00       0.88               0.00          0.57
       Controls for
         Region by Year Fixed Effects                         No        Yes                 No           Yes
         Province Fixed Effects                               No        Yes                 No           Yes
         Province Linear and Quadratic Trends                 No        Yes                 No           Yes
Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered at the province level, are in parentheses. A *, **, or *** indicates
significance at the 90%, 95%, or 99% levels, respectively. Each column pertains to a separate regression equation.




                                                        42
                                     Appendix Table 6
       The Effect of Natural Gas Intensity on Mortality, Population Density Weighted
                                        Regressions
                                                       (1)        (2)         (3)                (4)
                                                      Log        Log          Log               Log
                                                     Infant       All        Ages               Ages
                                                    Mortality    Age        25 to 54           55 and
                                                      Rate      Mortality   Mortality          Older
                                                                 Rate        Rate             Mortality
                                                                                                Rate

 Natural Gas Intensity                              -0.028*** -0.014*** -0.018***             -0.012**
                                                      (0.010)   (0.005)   (0.006)              (0.005)

  Observations                                             1,122        1,134        1,134              1,134
  Controls For                                              Yes          Yes          Yes                Yes
  Region-by-year Fixed Effects                              Yes          Yes          Yes                Yes
  Province Fixed Effects                                    Yes          Yes          Yes                Yes
  Province-specific Linear Trends                           Yes          Yes          Yes                Yes
  Province-specific Quadratic Trends                        Yes          Yes          Yes                Yes
  Time-varying Province Characteristics                     Yes          Yes          Yes                Yes
Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered at the province level, are in parentheses. A *, **, or *** indicates
significance at the 90%, 95%, or 99% levels, respectively. Time varying covariates include Hospitals Per 100K
Population, Hospital Beds Per 100K Population, Physicians Per 100K Population, Family Medicine Program,
Governing Party Mayor, and Number of Vehicles Per Capita at the province level, as well as Unemployment Rate,
GDP Per Capita, Percent High School, Percent College, and Students Per Teacher at the sub-regional level.




                                                      43
                                      Appendix Table 7
         The Effect of Years Since Natural Gas Infrastructure Adoption on Mortality
                                                           (1)        (2)          (3)             (4)
                                                          Log       Log All     Log Ages       Log Ages
                                                         Infant      Age         25 to 54     55 and Older
                                                        Mortality   Mortality   Mortality      Mortality
                                                          Rate       Rate         Rate            Rate

    Natural Gas Adoption Year                            -0.183*    -0.083**       -0.071       -0.081**
                                                         (0.106)     (0.041)      (0.048)        (0.041)
    Natural Gas Year 2                                   -0.241*     -0.118*       -0.117        -0.119*
                                                         (0.123)     (0.060)      (0.073)        (0.063)
    Natural Gas Year 3                                   -0.288*     -0.156*      -0.188*        -0.150*
                                                         (0.162)     (0.082)      (0.099)        (0.084)
    Natural Gas Year 4                                  -0.377**     -0.180*     -0.234**        -0.174*
                                                         (0.185)     (0.097)      (0.117)        (0.099)
    Natural Gas Year 5+                                 -0.542**     -0.231*     -0.285**        -0.227*
                                                         (0.246)     (0.120)      (0.143)        (0.119)

     Observations                                             1,122        1,134         1,134           1,134
     Controls For                                              Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes
     Region-by-year Fixed Effects                              Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes
     Province Fixed Effects                                    Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes
     Province-specific Linear Trends                           Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes
     Province-specific Quadratic Trends                        Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes
     Time-varying Covariates                                   Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes
Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered at the province level, are in parentheses. A *, **, or *** indicates
significance at the 90%, 95%, or 99% levels, respectively. Time varying covariates include Hospitals Per 100K
Population, Hospital Beds Per 100K Population, Physicians Per 100K Population, Family Medicine Program,
Governing Party Mayor, and Number of Vehicles Per Capita at the province level, as well as Unemployment Rate,
GDP Per Capita, Percent High School, Percent College, and Students Per Teacher at the sub-regional level.




                                                      44
                                       Appendix Table 8
                     The Effect of Natural Gas Intensity on Adult Mortality,
                 Excluding Provinces that Never Had Natural Gas Infrastructure
                                                      (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)
  Panel A: Log of All Age Mortality Rate
  Natural Gas Intensity                           0.044***      0.009*     -0.027***    -0.010**      -0.010**
                                                   (0.007)      (0.005)      (0.006)     (0.005)       (0.005)

  Observations                                       980         980          980          980           980

  Panel B: Log of 25 to 54 Mortality Rate
  Natural Gas Intensity                           0.038***     0.014***    -0.029***    -0.014**      -0.013**
                                                   (0.005)      (0.004)      (0.008)     (0.006)       (0.005)

  Observations                                       980         980          980          980           980

  Panel B: Log of 55 and Older Mortality Rate
  Natural Gas Intensity                           0.038***     0.014***    -0.025***     -0.009*       -0.008*
                                                   (0.005)      (0.002)      (0.006)     (0.004)       (0.004)

   Observations                                        980           980         980            980           980
   Controls For
     Region by Year Fixed Effects                       No           Yes         Yes            Yes           Yes
     Province Fixed Effects                             No            No         Yes            Yes           Yes
     Province-specific Linear Trends                    No            No          No            Yes           Yes
     Province-specific Quadratic Trends                 No            No          No            Yes           Yes
     Time-varying Covariates                            No            No          No            No            Yes
Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered at the province level, are in parentheses. A *, **, or *** indicates
significance at the 90%, 95%, or 99% levels, respectively. Time varying covariates include Hospitals Per 100K
Population, Hospital Beds Per 100K Population, Physicians Per 100K Population, Family Medicine Program,
Governing Party Mayor, and Number of Vehicles Per Capita at the province level, as well as Unemployment Rate,
GDP Per Capita, Percent High School, Percent College, and Students Per Teacher at the sub-regional level.




                                                        45
                                        Appendix Table 9
                      The Effect of Natural Gas Intensity on Adult Mortality,
                 Excluding Provinces that Always Had Natural Gas Infrastructure
                                                      (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)
  Panel A: Log of All Age Mortality Rate
  Natural Gas Intensity                            0.078***     0.008**    -0.039***     -0.013**      -0.013**
                                                    (0.009)     (0.004)      (0.008)      (0.006)       (0.005)

  Observations                                       1064        1064         1064         1064          1064

  Panel B: Log of 25 to 54 Mortality Rate
  Natural Gas Intensity                            0.061***      0.001     -0.040***     -0.018**     -0.018***
                                                    (0.007)     (0.002)      (0.009)      (0.007)       (0.007)

  Observations                                       1064        1064         1064         1064          1064

  Panel B: Log of 55 and Older Mortality Rate
  Natural Gas Intensity                            0.061***    0.006***    -0.035***     -0.013**      -0.012**
                                                    (0.006)     (0.002)      (0.007)      (0.005)       (0.005)

   Observations                                        1064          1064        1064          1064           1064
   Controls For
     Region by Year Fixed Effects                       No           Yes         Yes            Yes           Yes
     Province Fixed Effects                             No            No         Yes            Yes           Yes
     Province-specific Linear Trends                    No            No          No            Yes           Yes
     Province-specific Quadratic Trends                 No            No          No            Yes           Yes
     Time-varying Province Characteristics              No            No          No            No            Yes
Notes: Robust standard errors, clustered at the province level, are in parentheses. A *, **, or *** indicates
significance at the 90%, 95%, or 99% levels, respectively. Time varying covariates include Hospitals Per 100K
Population, Hospital Beds Per 100K Population, Physicians Per 100K Population, Family Medicine Program,
Governing Party Mayor, and Number of Vehicles Per Capita at the province level, as well as Unemployment Rate,
GDP Per Capita, Percent High School, Percent College, and Students Per Teacher at the sub-regional level.




                                                        46
