                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




COLLECTIVE INTERTEMPORAL CHOICE: THE POSSIBILITY OF TIME CONSISTENCY

                                       Antony Millner
                                       Geoffrey Heal

                                     Working Paper 22524
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22524


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2016




We are grateful to Geir Asheim, Marc Fleurbaey, and Itzhak Gilboa for very helpful comments
and discussions. AM acknowledges support from the Centre for Climate Change Economics and
Policy, funded by the UK Economic and Social Research Council. GH acknowldeges support
from Columbia Business School. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Antony Millner and Geoffrey Heal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Collective Intertemporal Choice: the Possibility of ¸˛Time Consistency
Antony Millner and Geoffrey Heal
NBER Working Paper No. 22524
August 2016
JEL No. D60,D71,D90

                                          ABSTRACT

Recent work on collective intertemporal choice suggests that non-dictatorial social preferences
are generically time inconsistent. We argue that this claim conflates time consistency with two
distinct properties of preferences: stationarity and time invariance. While the conjunction of time
invariance and stationarity implies time consistency, the converse does not hold. Although social
preferences cannot be stationary, they may be time consistent if time invariance is abandoned. If
individuals are discounted utilitarians, revealed preference provides no guidance on whether
social preferences should be time consistent or time invariant. Nevertheless, we argue that time
invariant social preferences are often normatively and descriptively problematic.


Antony Millner
Grantham Research Institute
London School of Economics and Political Science
Houghton St
London, WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
A.Millner@lse.ac.uk

Geoffrey Heal
Graduate School of Business
516 Uris Hall
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
gmh1@columbia.edu
                  Collective Intertemporal Choice:
                 The Possibility of Time Consistency
                          Antony Millner1 and Geoffrey Heal∗2
                      1
                          London School of Economics and Political Science
                                  2 Columbia   University & NBER


                                         July 21, 2016



                                               Abstract

         Recent work on collective intertemporal choice suggests that non-dictatorial so-
      cial preferences are generically time inconsistent. We argue that this claim conflates
      time consistency with two distinct properties of preferences: stationarity and time
      invariance. While the conjunction of time invariance and stationarity implies time
      consistency, the converse does not hold. Although social preferences cannot be sta-
      tionary, they may be time consistent if time invariance is abandoned. If individuals
      are discounted utilitarians revealed preference provides no guidance on whether social
      preferences should be time consistent or time invariant. Nevertheless, we argue that
      time invariant social preferences are often normatively and descriptively problematic.
      JEL codes: D60, D71, D90
      Keywords: Collective decisions, intertemporal choice, time consistency

   Many important decisions in economic life require groups of people with heterogeneous
time preferences to implement a collective consumption plan. Examples abound: families
must decide on savings and intra-household resource allocation, partners in a firm must
  ∗
   Millner: London School of Economics and Political Science, Houghton St, London, WC2A 2AE, UK
(email: a.millner@lse.ac.uk). Heal: Columbia University, 3022 Broadway, New York, NY 10027, USA
(email: gmh1@columbia.edu). AM acknowledges support from the Centre for Climate Change Economics
and Policy, funded by the UK Economic and Social Research Council. We are grateful to Geir Asheim,
Marc Fleurbaey, and Itzhak Gilboa for very helpful comments and discussions.


                                                  1
decide how to distribute profits between payouts to themselves and capital investments,
communities with property rights over a natural resource must decide on an extraction
plan, and resource rich countries must decide how to consume the proceeds from their
sovereign wealth funds. In each of these examples an asset is held in common and is
consumed dynamically over time, and the stake-holders in the decision very often have
heterogeneous time preferences (Frederick et al., 2002). How should such decisions be
evaluated and made, given people’s different attitudes to time?
    Recent theoretical and applied work (Jackson and Yariv, 2014, 2015; Adams et al., 2014)
suggests that any attempt to make such collective intertemporal choices in a non-dictatorial
fashion is doomed to confront a time inconsistency problem (see also earlier observations
by Marglin (1963), Feldstein (1964), and Zuber (2011)). This note argues that this finding
is due to a conflation of time consistency with two a priori distinct properties of prefer-
ences: Stationarity and Time Invariance. Stationarity, introduced by Koopmans (1960),
is an independence property of preferences, while time invariance requires preferences over
future consumption streams to be the same in each evaluation period (this does not rule out
preference reversals – quasi-hyperbolic time preferences, for example, are time invariant).
Jackson and Yariv (2014, 2015) show a necessary conflict between collective intertempo-
ral choice and stationarity, but implicitly assume that social preferences must be time
invariant. Yet time invariance is not a necessary requirement for time consistency. If the
differences between these three properties of intertemporal preferences are made explicit it
becomes clear that time consistent collective intertemporal choice is possible.
    The differences between time consistent and time invariant social preferences are par-
ticularly subtle when individuals’ preferences are discounted utilitarian, as assumed by
Jackson and Yariv (2014, 2015). In this case, time consistency and time invariance are
equivalent properties of individuals’ preferences (Halevy, 2015), but not of social prefer-
ences. We show that if individuals have heterogeneous discount factors, and social pref-
erences are utilitarian and non-dictatorial, these preferences may be time consistent or
time invariant, but not both. Since these properties are indistinguishable for discounted
utilitarian individuals, but not for social preferences, the choice to impose one or the other
property at the social level is ultimately a normative one – neither choice is more or less
consistent with individuals’ preferences. We argue however that time invariance is likely
to be a problematic feature of social preferences – both normatively and descriptively – for
within-group intertemporal choice. Time invariance may however be more descriptively
plausible for between-group choice, as might occur in intergenerational decision-making.


                                              2
We relate these observations to the empirical literature that seeks to test the time consis-
tency of household behaviour, suggesting that the definition of time consistency it employs
is too restrictive.


1     Time consistency, time invariance, and stationarity
To make our argument we begin by providing definitions of three distinct properties of
intertemporal preferences: time consistency, time invariance, and stationarity. Once we
have defined these properties, it will immediately be clear that any two of them implies
the third, as observed in a simplified setting by Halevy (2015). We then show that the
notion of time consistency used by Jackson and Yariv (2014, 2015); Adams et al. (2014) is in
fact the conjunction of time invariance and stationarity. Time invariance and stationarity
imply time consistency, but the converse does not hold.
    We consider infinite consumption streams x = (xτ )τ ∈N , where N is the set of non-
negative integers, and xτ takes values in some set A. The set of all such streams is denoted
C ∞ . Let hτ be a history of consumption at evaluation period τ ≥ 0, and define Hτ to be the
set of all possible histories at τ . Thus hτ ∈ Hτ := {(x0 , . . . , xτ −1 )}, and we define H0 = ∅,
where ∅ is the empty history. The set of all possible histories is denoted by H = ∪∞         τ =0 Hτ ,
with generic element h. A future consumption stream c at a history hτ is an infinite stream
of future consumption values. Since the set of future consumption streams at any history
hτ is isomorphic to the set of initial consumption streams C ∞ , we abuse notation slightly,
and denote generic future consumption streams at any history hτ as c = (c0 , c1 , . . .) ∈ C ∞ ,
where ct denotes the consumption value realized t time steps in the future (i.e. at calendar
time τ + t).
    Preferences are defined over future consumption streams c at each history h ∈ H. We
assume a cardinal representation of preferences Vh (c), and distinguish the following three
properties of preferences:
Definition 1. (a) Time consistency: For all h ∈ H, a ∈ A, c, c0 ∈ C ∞ ,

                         Vh ((a, c)) ≥ Vh ((a, c0 )) ⇐⇒ V(h,a) (c) ≥ V(h,a) (c0 )                 (1)


(b) Time Invariance: For all h ∈ H, a ∈ A, c, c0 ∈ C ∞ ,

                              Vh (c) ≥ Vh (c0 ) ⇐⇒ V(h,a) (c) ≥ V(h,a) (c0 )                      (2)


                                                  3
(c) Stationarity: For all h ∈ H, a ∈ A, c, c0 ∈ C ∞ ,

                              Vh ((a, c)) ≥ Vh ((a, c0 )) ⇐⇒ Vh (c) ≥ Vh (c0 )                           (3)

    Time consistency is a consistency relationship between preferences at different histories.
It rules out preference reversals, and implies that if an optimal plan is implemented today,
it will remain optimal to follow it tomorrow. Time invariance also relates preferences at
different histories, but is an altogether different property from time consistency. It requires
that preferences be independent of translations of the time axis – shifting preferences for-
wards or backwards in time has no effect on rankings of future consumption streams. An
immediate consequence of time invariance is that preferences are history independent. Fi-
nally, stationarity is an independence property of preferences at each fixed history. This
property is at the heart of Koopmans’ (1960) axiomatization of discounted utilitarian time
preferences. Koopmans was clearly aware that stationarity is a separate property from time
invariance, and also has no necessary implications for the time consistency of preferences:

   “[Stationarity] does not imply that, after one period has elapsed, the ordering then
applicable to the ‘then’ future will be the same as that now applicable to the ‘present’
future. All postulates are concerned with only one ordering, namely that guiding decisions
to be taken in the present.” – Koopmans et al. (1964)

   Halevy (2015) has observed in a simplified setting that any two of the three properties
in Definition 1 implies the third. Inspection of the definitions shows that this observation
holds in general.
   To make a connection between these definitions and the definition of time consistency in
Jackson and Yariv (2014, 2015); Adams et al. (2014) in the simplest possible way, suppose
that preferences are time separable, i.e.
                                                      ∞
                                                      X
                                           Vh (c) =         Uth (ct )                                    (4)
                                                      t=0


where the sequence of utility functions {Uth (ct )} may be conditional on history h.1 Under
   1
    Separable preferences satisfy Koopmans’ independence axiom, an additional assumption in Jackson
and Yariv’s definition of time consistency which is not essential for our argument. Since the claim of
Jackson and Yariv (2015) is that non-dictatorial social preferences are necessarily time inconsistent, we
need only refute this claim for a subset of preferences to make our point. Hence we lose nothing by focussing



                                                      4
this restriction, the definition of time consistency employed by these authors reduces to
the conjunction of stationarity and time invariance.2
    The crux of the argument in Jackson and Yariv (2014, 2015) is a demonstration that
non-dicatotorial social preferences cannot be stationary if individuals have heterogeneous
discount factors. The proof of this finding does not require much more than an application
of the classic results of Koopmans (1960). Koopmans showed that stationarity requires
the following constraints on the sequences of utility functions {Uht (c)}:

                                          Uth (c) = U h (c)(βh )t                                        (5)

for some history dependent utility function U h (c) and some discount factors βh ∈ [0, 1).
Since only a single discount factor βh is permitted at each history h in this representation, it
is a simple matter to show that any unanimous, non-dictatorial, social preference cannot be
stationary if individuals have preferences of the form (5), but their discount factors βh are
heterogeneous.3 This follows since any such social preference must reflect the heterogeneity
in individuals’ preferences, which is not permitted by the stationary preferences (5).
    To see why non-stationarity leads to a conflict with time consistency according to
Jackson and Yariv (2014, 2015), note that we have already observed that:

                 (Time Consistency) AND (Time Invariance) ⇒ Stationarity.

Taking the converse of this implication,

          NOT Stationary ⇒ (NOT Time Invariant) OR (NOT Time Consistent)
on a separable preferences, which are the focus of the empirical work in Jackson and Yariv (2014); Adams
et al. (2014).
    2
      The statement of time consistency in Jackson and Yariv (2015) only makes explicit reference to sta-
tionarity; time invariance is implicit. Adams et al. (2014) make explicit reference to both stationarity and
time invariance in their definition. Jackson and Yariv (2015) go some way towards acknowledging the role
of time invariance in their definition of time consistency in footnote 18 of their paper: “There is a large
literature that...views an agent as [time] consistent whenever plans of action are not overturned over time.
Whenever consumption streams are evaluated in the same way in each period (so that agents do not have
dated utility functions), the concepts are similar.” What is not clear from this comment is how the main
conclusion, i.e. the necessity of time inconsistency of collective intertemporal choice, relies critically on
the time invariance property, and may be overturned if time invariance is abandoned. Moreover, even
if individuals’ preferences are not dated, as would occur if they are discounted utilitarians, identifying
time consistency with the conjunction of stationarity and time invariance leads to constraints on social
preferences that are very different to those that follow from the definition in (1).
    3
      See Proposition 1 in Jackson and Yariv (2015).




                                                     5
Since non-dictatorial social preferences are not stationary, and Jackson and Yariv (2014,
2015) assume time invariance, they find a conflict with time consistency. However, as is
clear from the above implication, an alternative possibility exists. If we abandon time
invariance of social preferences, the possibility of time consistency remains open.


2    Time Consistent Utilitarian Social Preferences
To demonstrate that non-dictatorial social preferences can indeed be time consistent, we
follow Jackson and Yariv (2014, 2015) and assume that each individual i in a group G has
discounted utilitarian time preferences:
                                               ∞
                                               X
                                   Vhi (c) =          U i (ct )(βi )t                     (6)
                                               t=0


These preferences are stationary and time invariant, and hence time consistent. It fol-
lows that revealed preference cannot disentangle time consistency and time invariance for
discounted utilitarian preferences.
    While time consistency and time invariance are inseparable for discounted utilitarian
agents, this is not the case for collective choices that are sensitive to the heterogeneity in
agents’ preferences, as we now demonstrate. We follow Jackson and Yariv (2014) and focus
on utilitarian social preferences, and assume (without loss of generality, for our purposes)
that consumption streams are common to all individuals. In addition, we assume that
social preferences, like individuals’ preferences, are time separable. This implies that the
only possible form of history dependence of social preferences is through the welfare weights
on individuals’ preferences, which may depend on calendar time τ , but not on the history
of consumption. Thus, we define social preferences at any history hτ as:
                                         X
                             Whτ (c) =         wi (τ )Vhiτ (c)
                                         i∈G
                                         X               ∞
                                                         X
                                     =         wi (τ )         U i (ct )(βi )t            (7)
                                         i∈G             t=0


where wi (τ ) is the weight assigned to individual i at calendar time τ , and we assume that
wi (τ ) ≥ 0, i∈G wi (τ ) = 1.
            P

    The following lemma gives conditions under which these preferences are non-dictatorial
and time consistent/time invariant:

                                                  6
Lemma 1. Assume that there exist indices i, j such that wi (τ ) > 0, wj (τ ) > 0 for all
τ ≥ 0, and βi 6= βj . Then
      1. Social preferences (7) are time consistent if and only if the welfare weights wi (τ )
         are of the form:
                                                   wi (βi )τ
                                        wi (τ ) = P 0 j        .                          (8)
                                                             τ
                                                   j w0 (βj )

         where w0i ≥ 0, i∈G w0i = 1.
                        P

      2. Social preferences (7) are time invariant if and only if the welfare weights wi (τ )
         are of the form:
                                            wi (τ ) = yi ,                               (9)
                       P
         where yi ≥ 0, i∈G yi = 1.
Proof. 1. The definition of time consistency in (1) requires

                          Whτ ((a, c)) ≥ Whτ ((a, c0 )) ⇐⇒ W(hτ ,a) (c) ≥ W(hτ ,a) (c0 )                                           (10)

for any hτ , a, c, c0 . Substituting (7) into the left hand side of (10), it becomes

X                               ∞
                               XX                                           X                          ∞
                                                                                                      XX
         i       i
       w (τ )U (a) +                           i   i
                                           w (τ )U (ct )(βi )    t+1
                                                                       ≥           i       i
                                                                                 w (τ )U (a) +                  wi (τ )U i (c0t )(βi )t+1
  i                            i     t=0                                     i                        i   t=0
              ∞
             XX                                              ∞
                                                            XX
 ⇐⇒                    [wi (τ )βi ]U i (ct )(βi )t ≥                   [wi (τ )βi ]U i (c0t )(βi )t
             i   t=0                                         i   t=0


The right hand side of (10) is equivalent to
                          ∞
                         XX                                                  ∞
                                                                            XX
                                           i           i
                                         w (τ + 1)U (ct )(βi ) ≥   t
                                                                                       wi (τ + 1)U i (c0t )(βi )t
                           i       t=0                                       i   t=0


Comparing the expressions for the left and right hand sides of (10), we see that time
consistency holds iff

                                                       wi (τ + 1) ∝ βi wi (τ )

which implies

                                                           wi (τ ) = Kw0i (βi )τ .

                                                                        7
for some constants w0i , K > 0. Imposing the constraint i∈G wi (τ ) = 1 yields the result.
                                                         P

    2. Since time invariance requires Whτ (c) to be independent of τ , the result follows.

    Unlike the single agent case, time consistency and time invariance are not indistinguish-
able for utilitarian social preferences. The welfare weights (8) violate time invariance since
with this choice preferences over future consumption streams vary with the evaluation date
τ . Although individual agents have time invariant preferences, social preferences behave
as if there is a fixed origin of the time axis at τ = 0. Similarly, time invariant social
preferences are not time consistent, as the welfare weights (9) are not of the form (8). In
this case social preferences can exhibit reversals with the passage of calender time, even
though individuals’ preferences cannot.
    Observing that the conjunction of time consistency and time invariance implies station-
arity, it is immediately clear from (5) that the only way it is possible to achieve both time
consistency and time invariance in social preferences is if all individuals’ utilities are dis-
counted with the the same discount factor β, and the welfare weights wi (τ ) are independent
of τ :                                      ∞ X
                                            X
                                 W̃hτ (c) =   [    w̃i U i (ct )]β t .                    (11)
                                           t=0       i

This is the constraint on preferences used by Adams et al. (2014) in their empirical tests
of the time consistency of observed choice behaviour. Lemma 1 shows that this is a sub-
stantially more stringent constraint than is required by time consistency. Time consistency
does not rule out the possibility of social preferences reflecting the heterogeneity in individ-
uals’ discount factors, provided that the welfare weights attached to individuals’ utilities
evolve appropriately with calendar time.
    We now make an observation that clarifies the possible interpretations of time consistent
social preferences when agents have heterogeneous discount factors.

Lemma 2. If utilitarian social preferences are time consistent and non-dictatorial the
following interpretations of (7) are equivalent:

   • Individuals have forward-looking preferences, and social preferences have τ -dependent
     welfare weights (8).

   • Individuals have preferences over ‘lifetime utility’ measured from τ = 0, and welfare
     weights are constant.




                                                 8
Proof. Suppose that individuals have preferences over lifetime utility measured from τ = 0,
and that the welfare weights wi (τ ) are constant and equal to w0i . Then social preferences
at any calendar time τ are given by:

                             X         τ −1
                                       X                         X           ∞
                                                                             X
                  Wτ (c) =       w0i          U (xt )(βi ) +t
                                                                       w0i         U (ct )(βi )t+τ   (12)
                             i         t=0                        i          t=0


where xt are values of consumption in the past, and ct are consumption values in the
future. Since the xt cannot be changed and have no influence on preferences over future
consumption streams, these preferences are equivalent to

                                              X                 ∞
                                                                X
                             Wτ (~c) =             w0i (βi )τ         U (ct )(βi )t                  (13)
                                               i                t=0


which are in turn equivalent to the time consistent social preferences with welfare weights
(8).


    The ambiguity in the interpretation of social preferences is a consequence of the fact
that we cannot tell whether individuals with discounted utilitarian preferences (6) evaluate
consumption streams by looking forward from the evaluation date τ , or whether they have
preferences over ‘lifetime utility’ from τ = 0 onwards. Both interpretations give rise to the
same individual rankings of future consumption streams, and are thus indistinguishable
based on revealed preference. This observation is a re-expression of the equivalence between
time invariance and time consistency for individuals with discounted utilitarian preferences.
The lifetime utility interpretation of time consistent utilitarian preferences suggests that
in any circumstance where cumulative outcomes over a period of time are seen as salient
for the purposes of social comparisons, time consistency will be a compelling property, and
time invariance may not.


3    Time Consistency or Time Invariance?
We have argued that there is no conflict between time consistency and non-dictatorial
collective intertemporal choice, provided that time invariance is abandoned. Should we
nevertheless insist that social preferences be time invariant, thus ruling out the possibility
of time consistency? Given that revealed preference cannot tell us which property to adopt


                                                        9
if individual preferences are discounted utilitarian, how should we make this choice? In
order to demonstrate what is at stake when choosing to model social preferences as time
invariant it is helpful to consider the following stylized scenario:
    Ada and Bertha are identical twins; both are childless, single, and have identical wealth.
On their 60th birthday they receive news that a distant cousin they’ve never met has died,
and they will inherit his fortune. Their cousin died intestate, so there is no will to specify
how the bequest should be divided between them. Ada is naturally impatient, while Bertha
is patient. How should a utilitarian social planner allocate the bequest between them?
    Suppose that the planner is time consistent. In this case first best intertemporal al-
locations can be decentralized by establishing property rights over the bequest, and then
allowing each sister to consume her share as she pleases. Suppose that the planner’s ethics
dictate that an equal share of the bequest be given to each sister. The planner makes
this allocation, and walks away happy in the knowledge that she need never revisit this
decision.
    Now consider a time invariant planner, and suppose that she also initially allocates
equal shares to the sisters, before departing on other business, never intending to return.
To her surprise however, the planner is asked to revisit the sisters 10 years later and
assess their well-being. Ada has led a wild life in the intervening decade, consuming her
inheritance much faster than Bertha. But the planner asks herself: what has changed
since the sisters were 60? Although Ada has had a better life than Bertha, this is in the
past and can’t be changed. Since the circumstances are the same, except that the sisters
happen to be 10 years older, the planner seizes some of Bertha’s carefully saved cash,
and reallocates it to Ada, so that their holdings of what remains of the bequest are again
equal. Ada immediately spends her new wealth on fast cars and fancy footwear, while
Bertha continues to put something away for a rainy day.
    We believe that most people would intuitively feel that Ada should be made to take
responsibility for her past excesses, and Bertha should not be penalized for her frugality in
this scenario. Thus, many would believe that social preferences should be time consistent,
not time invariant, in this case. A non-paternalistic reason for this could be that individuals
experience ‘memory utility’ from past consumption (see e.g. Strotz, 1955; Caplin and Leahy,
2004), as suggested by the lifetime utility interpretation of time consistent social preferences
in Lemma 2. Although individuals are not able to express this backward looking aspect of
preferences directly through their choices, a social planner would be doing them a disservice
if she neglected this for the purposes of social welfare computations. A purely normative


                                              10
reason for this could be that there is an evaluation date τ = 0 that is ethically salient, even
if individuals’ preferences are in fact exclusively forward looking. In our scenario, the date
of the initial bequest stands out as a natural ‘origin’ of the time axis. Many people would
feel that cumulative utility from the date of the bequest onwards is ethically relevant to
the task of apportioning the bequest.
     Are there situations where time invariance might seem a more appropriate assumption
than time consistency? We believe that modeling social preferences as time invariant might
be more plausible if we are attempting to describe conflicts between successive groups of
different people, as might occur in e.g. intergenerational decision-making. To illustrate,
consider the following example:
     A nation discovers an enormous oil deposit in its territorial waters. The deposit is large
enough to generate rents for generations to come, which will be invested in public goods
that benefit all citizens equally. Citizens are born in different time periods, and have finite
lives.4 Suppose that each citizen is either Avaricious (i.e. favours a high intergenerational
discount rate), or Benevolent (i.e. favours a low intergenerational discount rate). In each
period the currently living citizens must decide how much oil to extract. How is this likely
to be done?
     A ‘pure’ normative approach to this problem would require the construction of a social
welfare function that aggregates the lifetime utilities of all individuals born in any time
period, past, present, or future. To illustrate this procedure, define an indicator function:
                                (
                                    1 if indivdiual i born at time s is alive at time τ
                ∆i,s (τ ) =
                                    0 otherwise

Using this definition, and letting y i (s) > 0 be the welfare weight on individual i born in
period s, such a normative welfare function might take the following form:

            τ −1 X              ∞
                                                                               !       ∞ X                 ∞
                                                                                                                                                  !
            X                   X                                                      X                   X
Whτ (c) =             y i (s)             Ũ i (ct )(δi )t+τ −s ∆i,s (τ + t)       +             y i (s)         Ũ i (cs−τ +t )(δi )t ∆i,s (s + t)
            s=0 i∈G                 t=0                                                s=τ i∈G             t=0
                                                                                                                              (14)

The first term in this expression captures the remaining lifetime utilities of individuals
   4
    Technically, the properties of stationarity and time invariance are only defined for infinite consumption
streams, i.e. if agents are infinitely lived. Time consistency is however meaningful for finitely lived agents,
and all three properties are meaningful for the social preferences (14) we define below. See Calvo and
Obstfeld (1988) for a model in which agents have finite, but uncertain, lifetimes, which de facto induces
preferences over infinite consumption streams.


                                                              11
born at times s < τ who are still alive in the current evaluation period τ . The second
term captures the lifetime utilities of those who are born at times s ≥ τ . Agents’ views
on the appropriate degree of social altruism towards future generations are irrelevant for
the purposes of constructing the social welfare function (14), and may be discarded.5 The
discount factors δi that appear in this expression are agents’ private discount factors on
their own utilities Ũ i (c), and have no necessary relationship to the social welfare weights
y i (s), which are purely normative quantities. Social preferences constructed in this manner
will be time consistent, as follows from an adaptation of Lemmas 1 & 2 to this overlapping
lifetimes setting. While this procedure yields a normative social preference relation that
does not conflict with time consistency, from a descriptive perspective it makes strong
demands on current living agents. In particular, the current generation is required to
discard their own views on how much importance to give to future generations when
deciding on their extraction policy.
      What seems more likely to occur from a descriptive perspective is that the agents
currently alive will decide how much oil to extract through a collective decision-making
process that trades off the different degrees of altruism expressed by current individuals.
If this process is efficient the preferences of generation τ may be represented by a welfare
function of the form:                        ∞ X
                                             X
                                   Whτ (c) =        wi U i (ct )βit .                     (15)
                                                t=0 i∈G

where wi is the weight given to agent i’s opinion. The interpretation of the inputs to this
welfare function is entirely different to that in (14). Here the utility functions U i (c) reflect
i’s opinion about social utility, rather than her private utility, and the discount factors βi
reflect her opinion on the appropriate degree of intertemporal social impatience. Since the
decision-making process that determines current extraction will unfold in each generation,
time invariance seems a reasonable property to impose if we are attempting to model the
conflict between the preferences of successive groups of decision-makers.6
    The crucial difference between the ‘twins’ and ‘oil’ scenarios we have sketched is that
in the case of the twins we were concerned with intertemporal distribution within a fixed
group of people over time, whereas in the oil case we were concerned with intertemporal
distribution between different groups of people. In the former case all agents who are af-
   5
     Note however that this is a paternalistic move if individuals experience anticipatory utility from the
wellbeing they expect their descendants to achieve.
   6
     Note that the composition of successive groups must be stable if the preferences (15) are to be time
invariant.



                                                    12
fected by a decision are present at all points of time, whereas in the latter only a subset
of agents affected by a decision are present at each point in time. Time consistency seems
a much more plausible descriptive property of social preferences than time invariance in
the former case, since the ahistorical nature of time invariant preferences would be seen
as deeply unfair by current agents. In the case of between-group choice however, although
time invariance may do violence to the preferences of previous or successive groups, these
individuals have no voice in current decision processes. As a descriptive matter, it seems
more likely that the interests of past and future groups are only relevant insofar as cur-
rent decision-makers account for them. To our minds this makes time invariance a more
plausible descriptive modeling assumption in this case. Of course, this argument makes
no claims about the normative status of time invariance as a property of social welfare
criteria.


4    Implications for the empirical literature
While we find time invariance to be a not implausible descriptive property in between-group
choice, the empirical literature focusses exclusively on within-group choice. Our hypothesis
that time consistent, but non-invariant, social preferences are likely to prevail in this case
receives support from the innovative study of household consumption behaviour in Adams
et al. (2014). Although they strongly reject the hypothesis that household behaviour can
be described by time invariant and time consistent preferences of the form (11), they
find considerable support for the hypothesis that household consumption behaviour can
be rationalized by time consistent social preferences with time varying welfare weights
(8). Adams et al. (2014) refer to this as the ‘full efficiency’ model, and claim that this
identifies individual discount rate heterogeneity as a source of household time inconsistency.
Yet the appropriate interpretation of these findings is that collective choices can often be
rationalized by a time consistent utilitarian model, provided that household preferences
account for the cumulative lifetime utility experienced by each household member.
    In related work, Jackson and Yariv (2014) study a laboratory simulation of collective
intertemporal choice in which subjects are asked to choose between collective consumption
allocations on behalf of a group of individuals with heterogeneous, exogenously imposed,
discount factors. They elicit preferences over pairs of collective consumption streams such




                                             13
as
                                C = (105, 0, 0) C0 = (0, 160, 0)
                                C00 = (0, 105, 0) C000 = (0, 0, 160).
Stationarity requires the planner’s preferences to obey C  C0 ⇐⇒ C00  C000 . Jackson
and Yariv (2014) observe almost unanimous violation of this property, leading them to
conclude that their subjects’ collective preferences are time inconsistent. Yet these choice
tasks provide little information about the time consistency of planners’ preferences. As (1)
makes clear, a test of time consistency requires the construction of dynamic choice tasks, in
which subject planners choose between a pair of collective consumption streams, the group
is given the first period outcome of the planner’s preferred stream, and the planner is then
asked to choose between the continuations of the initial consumption streams.7 No such
dynamic choice tasks were considered in the Jackson and Yariv (2014) study – subjects
always made once-off choices between fixed consumption streams. All we can say for sure
is that the study provides strong evidence against stationarity, as should be expected when
planners attempt to account for the heterogeneous preferences of group members.


References
Adams, A., L. Cherchye, B. D. Rock, and E. Verriest (2014). Consume now or later?
 Time inconsistency, collective choice, and revealed preference. American Economic Re-
 view 104 (12), 4147–4183.

Calvo, G. A. and M. Obstfeld (1988). Optimal Time-Consistent Fiscal Policy with Finite
  Lifetimes. Econometrica 56 (2), 411–432.

Caplin, A. and J. Leahy (2004). The Social Discount Rate. Journal of Political Econ-
  omy 112 (6), 1257–1268.

Feldstein, M. S. (1964). The Social Time Preference Discount Rate in Cost Benefit Analysis.
  The Economic Journal 74 (294), 360.

Frederick, S., G. Loewenstein, and T. O’Donoghue (2002). Time Discounting and Time
  Preference: A Critical Review. Journal of Economic Literature 40 (2), 351–401.
     7
    See Halevy (2015) for an experimental design that allows time consistency, time invariance, and sta-
tionarity to be disentangled.




                                                  14
Halevy, Y. (2015). Time Consistency: Stationarity and Time Invariance. Economet-
  rica 83 (1), 335–352.

Jackson, M. O. and L. Yariv (2014). Present Bias and Collective Dynamic Choice in the
  Lab. American Economic Review 104 (12), 4184–4204.

Jackson, M. O. and L. Yariv (2015). Collective Dynamic Choice: The Necessity of Time
  Inconsistency. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 7 (4), 150–78.

Koopmans, T. C. (1960). Stationary Ordinal Utility and Impatience. Econometrica 28 (2),
 287–309.

Koopmans, T. C., P. A. Diamond, and R. E. Williamson (1964). Stationary Utility and
 Time Perspective. Econometrica 32 (1/2), 82–100.

Marglin, S. A. (1963). The Social Rate of Discount and The Optimal Rate of Investment.
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics 77 (1), 95–111.

Strotz, R. H. (1955). Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization. The
  Review of Economic Studies 23 (3), 165.

Zuber, S. (2011). The aggregation of preferences: can we ignore the past? Theory and
  Decision 70 (3), 367–384.




                                          15
