NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
THE PROS AND CONS OF SICK PAY SCHEMES:
TESTING FOR CONTAGIOUS PRESENTEEISM AND NONCONTAGIOUS ABSENTEEISM BEHAVIOR
Stefan Pichler
Nicolas R. Ziebarth
Working Paper 22530
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22530
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
We would like to thank David Bradford, Raj Chetty, Harald Dale-Olsen, Davide Dragone, Martin
Feldstein, Donna Gilleskie, Laszlo Goerke, John Gruber, Michael Hanselmann, Nathaniel
Hendren, Barry Hirsch, Jason Hockenberry, Caroline Hoxby, John Kolstad, Peter Kuhn, Martin
Karlsson, Don Kenkel, Bryant Kim, Wojciech Kopczuk, Emily Lawler, Dean Lillard, Neale
Mahoney, Wanda Mimra, Tom Mroz, Sean Nicholson, Zhuan Pei, Jim Poterba, Sarah Prenovitz,
Andreas Richter, Chris Ruhm, Daniel Sacks, Nick Sanders, Joerg Schiller, Joseph Shapiro, Justin
Sydnor, Rainer Winkelmann, Joachim Winter, and Peter Zweifel for excellent comments and
suggestions. In particular we would like to thank Itzik Fadlon, Dan Kreisman, and Andreas Peichl
for an outstanding discussion of this paper. We also thank participants in research seminars at the
2016 NBER Summer Institute Health Care Meeting in Boston, the 2016 NBER TAPES
Conference in Mannheim, the 2016 NBER Public Economics Spring Meeting in Boston, the 2016
EuHEA Conference in Hamburg, the 13th Southeastern Health Economics Study Group in
Atlanta, the 29th Annual Conference of the European Society for Population Economics (ESPE)
in Izmir, the 2015 World Risk and Insurance Economics Congress in Munich, the Nordic Health
Economics Study Group meeting (NHESG) in Uppsala, the Verein for Socialpolitik (VfS) in
Muenster, the Centre for Research in Active Labour Market Policy Effects (CAFE) Workshop at
Aarhus University, the Risk & Microeconomics Seminar at LMU Munich, the 2015 Young
Microeconometricians Workshop in Mannheim, the University of Linz (Economics Department),
the Bavarian Graduate Program in Economics (BGPE) in Nuremberg, the Berlin Network of
Labor Market Researchers (BeNA), and the Institute for Health Economics, Health Behaviors and
Disparities at Cornell University (PAM) for their helpful comments and suggestions. We also
thank Eric Maroney and Philip Susser for editing this paper and Sarah Prenovitz and Philip
Susser for excellent research assistance. Generous funding from the W.E. Upjohn Institute for
Employment Research in the form of an Early Career Research Awards (ECRA) #15-150-15, the
Cornell Population Center (Rapid Response Grant), the Cornell Institute for the Social Sciences
(Small Grant) and the Mario Einaudi Center for International Studies (Seed Grant) is gratefully
acknowledged. Neither we nor our employers have relevant or material financial interests that
relate to the research described in this paper. We take responsibility for all remaining errors in
and shortcomings of the paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Stefan Pichler and Nicolas R. Ziebarth. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Pros and Cons of Sick Pay Schemes: Testing for Contagious Presenteeism and Noncontagious
Absenteeism Behavior
Stefan Pichler and Nicolas R. Ziebarth
NBER Working Paper No. 22530
August 2016
JEL No. I12,I13,I18,J22,J28,J32
ABSTRACT
This paper provides an analytical framework and uses data from the US and Germany to test for
the existence of contagious presenteeism and negative externalities in sickness insurance schemes.
The first part exploits high-frequency Google Flu data and the staggered implementation of U.S.
sick leave reforms to show in a reduced-from framework that population-level influenza-like
disease rates decrease after employees gain access to paid sick leave. Next, a simple theoretical
framework provides evidence on the underlying behavioral mechanisms. The model theoretically
decomposes overall behavioral labor supply adjustments ('moral hazard') into contagious
presenteeism and noncontagious absenteeism behavior and derives testable conditions. The last
part illustrates how to implement the model exploiting German sick pay reforms and
administrative industry-level data on certified sick leave by diagnoses. It finds that the labor supply
elasticity for contagious diseases is significantly smaller than for noncontagious diseases. Under
the identifying assumptions of the model, in addition to the evidence from the U.S., this finding
provides indirect evidence for the existence of contagious presenteeism.

Stefan Pichler
ETH Zurich
Leonhardstrasse 21
Zurich 8093
Switzerland
pichler@kof.ethz.ch
Nicolas R. Ziebarth
Cornell University
Department of Policy Analysis and Management (PAM)
106 MVR,
Ithaca, 14853
nrz2@cornell.edu

The Pros and Cons of Sick Pay Schemes:
Testing for Contagious Presenteeism and Noncontagious
Absenteeism Behavior‡
Stefan Pichler

Nicolas R. Ziebarth

ETH Zurich, KOF Swiss Economic Institute∗

Cornell University†

August 6, 2016

Abstract
This paper provides an analytical framework and uses data from the US and Germany to test
for the existence of contagious presenteeism and negative externalities in sickness insurance
schemes. The first part exploits high-frequency Google Flu data and the staggered implementation of U.S. sick leave reforms to show in a reduced-from framework that population-level
influenza-like disease rates decrease after employees gain access to paid sick leave. Next, a simple theoretical framework provides evidence on the underlying behavioral mechanisms. The
model theoretically decomposes overall behavioral labor supply adjustments (’moral hazard’)
into contagious presenteeism and noncontagious absenteeism behavior and derives testable
conditions. The last part illustrates how to implement the model exploiting German sick pay
reforms and administrative industry-level data on certified sick leave by diagnoses. It finds
that the labor supply elasticity for contagious diseases is significantly smaller than for noncontagious diseases. Under the identifying assumptions of the model, in addition to the evidence
from the U.S., this finding provides indirect evidence for the existence of contagious presenteeism.
Keywords: Sickness Insurance, Paid Sick Leave, Presenteeism, Contagious Diseases, Infections, Negative Externalities, Absenteeism, U.S., Germany
JEL classification: I12, I13, I18, J22, J28, J32

∗ ETH

Zurich, KOF Swiss Economic Institute, Leonhardstrasse 21, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland, phone: +41-(44)6322507, fax: +41-(44)632-1218, e-mail: pichler@kof.ethz.ch
† Cornell University, Department of Policy Analysis and Management (PAM), IZA Research Fellow, 106 Martha Van
Rensselaer Hall, Ithaca, NY 14850, USA, phone: +1-(607)255-1180, fax: +1-(607)255-4071, e-mail: nrz2@cornell.edu

“Send me a bill that gives every worker in America the opportunity to earn seven days of paid
sick leave. It’s the right thing to do. It’s the right thing to do.”
Barack Obama
in his State of the Union Address (January 20, 2015)
“I think the Republicans would be smart to get behind it.”
Bill O’Reilly
in The O’Reilly Factor – Fox News (January 21, 2015)

1

Introduction

In addition to inequality and worker well-being concerns, one rationale for sick pay mandates is
public health promotion. When workers lack access to paid sick leave, they may go to work despite being sick. Although various definitions exist (Simpson 1998), going to work despite being
sick is commonly referred to as “presenteeism.” Particularly in professions with direct customer
contact, presenteeism in combination with contagious diseases leads to negative externalities and
infection spillovers for co-workers and customers. Given the low influenza vaccination rates of
around 40 percent in the U.S. and 10-30 percent in the EU (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2014; Blank et al. 2009), workplace presenteeism is one important channel through which
infectious diseases spread. After the first occurrence of flu sickness symptoms, humans are contagious for 5-7 days (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2016). Over-the-counter (OTC)
drugs that suppress symptoms, but not contagiousness, promote the spread of disease in cases
‡ We

would like to thank David Bradford, Raj Chetty, Harald Dale-Olsen, Davide Dragone, Martin
Feldstein, Donna Gilleskie, Laszlo Goerke, John Gruber, Michael Hanselmann, Nathaniel Hendren, Barry
Hirsch, Jason Hockenberry, Caroline Hoxby, John Kolstad, Peter Kuhn, Martin Karlsson, Don Kenkel,
Bryant Kim, Wojciech Kopczuk, Emily Lawler, Dean Lillard, Neale Mahoney, Wanda Mimra, Tom Mroz,
Sean Nicholson, Zhuan Pei, Jim Poterba, Sarah Prenovitz, Andreas Richter, Chris Ruhm, Daniel Sacks,
Nick Sanders, Jörg Schiller, Joseph Shapiro, Justin Sydnor, Rainer Winkelmann, Joachim Winter, and Peter
Zweifel for excellent comments and suggestions. In particular we would like to thank Itzik Fadlon, Dan
Kreisman, and Andreas Peichl for an outstanding discussion of this paper. We also thank participants in research seminars at the 2016 NBER Summer Institute Health Care Meeting in Boston, the 2016 NBER TAPES
Conference in Mannheim, the 2016 NBER Public Economics Spring Meeting in Boston, the 2016 EuHEA
Conference in Hamburg, the 13th Southeastern Health Economics Study Group in Atlanta, the 29th Annual
Conference of the European Society for Population Economics (ESPE) in Izmir, the 2015 World Risk and Insurance Economics Congress in Munich, the Nordic Health Economics Study Group meeting (NHESG) in
Uppsala, the Verein for Socialpolitik (VfS) in Münster, the Centre for Research in Active Labour Market Policy Effects (CAFE) Workshop at Aarhus University, the Risk & Microeconomics Seminar at LMU Munich,
the 2015 Young Microeconometricians Workshop in Mannheim, the University of Linz (Economics Department), the Bavarian Graduate Program in Economics (BGPE) in Nuremberg, the Berlin Network of Labor
Market Researchers (BeNA), and the Institute for Health Economics, Health Behaviors and Disparities at
Cornell University (PAM) for their helpful comments and suggestions. We also thank Eric Maroney and
Philip Susser for editing this paper and Sarah Prenovitz and Philip Susser for excellent research assistance.
Generous funding from the W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research in the form of an Early Career
Research Awards (ECRA) #15-150-15, the Cornell Population Center (Rapid Response Grant), the Cornell
Institute for the Social Sciences (Small Grant) and the Mario Einaudi Center for International Studies (Seed
Grant) is gratefully acknowledged. Neither we nor our employers have relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research described in this paper. We take responsibility for all remaining errors in and
shortcomings of the paper.

1

of presenteeism and noninsured workplace absenteeism (Earn et al. 2014). Worldwide, seasonal
influenza epidemics alone lead to 3-5 million severe illnesses and an estimated 250,000-500,000
deaths; in the U.S., flu-associated annual deaths range from 3,000 to 49,000 (World Health Organization 2014; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2016).
Historically, paid sick leave was actually one of the first social insurance pillars worldwide; this
policy was included in the first federal health insurance legislation. Under Otto van Bismarck, the
Sickness Insurance Law of 1883 introduced social health insurance in Germany, which included
13 weeks of paid sick leave along with coverage for medical bills. The costs associated with paid
sick leave initially made up more than half of all program costs, given the limited availability
of (expensive) medical treatments in the nineteenth century (Busse and Riesberg 2004). Today,
virtually every European country has some form of universal access to paid sick leave—with
varying degrees of generosity.
Opponents of universal paid sick leave point to the fact that such social insurance systems
would encourage shirking behavior and reduce labor supply. Moreover, forcing employers to
provide sick pay via mandates or new taxes would dampen job creation and hurt employment.
A final argument against government-mandated paid sick leave states that, when coverage is
optimal, the private market would ensure that employers voluntarily provide such benefits.
The U.S. is the only industrialized country worldwide without universal access to paid sick
leave (Heymann et al. 2009). Half of all American employees have no access to paid sick leave,
particularly low-income and service sector workers (Lovell 2003; Boots et al. 2009; Susser and
Ziebarth 2016). However, support for sick leave mandates in the U.S. has grown substantially in
the last decade. On the city level, sick leave schemes have been implemented in San Francisco,
Washington D.C., Seattle, Philadelphia, Portland, and New York City, among other cities. On the
state level, Connecticut was the first state to introduce a sick leave scheme in 2012 (for service
sector workers in non-small businesses). California, Massachusetts, and Oregon followed in 2015.
At the federal level, reintroduced in Congress in March 2013, the Healthy Families Act foresees
the introduction of universal paid sick leave for up to seven days per employee and year. The
epigraphs above demonstrate the support among Democrats and conservatives alike.
As discussed, one economic argument for paid sick leave hinges crucially on the existence
of negative externalities and presenteeism with regard to contagious diseases. Despite being of
tremendous relevance, empirically proving the existence of presenteeism with contagious diseases is extremely difficult, if not impossible, because contagiousness is generally unobservable.
Several empirical papers evaluate the causal effects of cuts in sick pay and find that employees

2

adjust their labor supply in response to such cuts (Johansson and Palme 1996, 2005; De Paola
et al. 2014; Ziebarth and Karlsson 2010, 2014; Dale-Olsen 2014; Fevang et al. 2014).1 Traditionally, behavioral adjustments to varying levels of insurance generosity is labeled ’moral hazard’ in
economics (Pauly 1974, 1983; Arnott and Stiglitz 1991; Nyman 1999; Newhouse 2006; Felder 2008;
Bhattacharya and Packalen 2012). However, in the case of sick leave, being able to disentangle
shirking behavior from presenteeism is crucial in order to derive valid policy conclusions.
One main objective of this paper is to provide an analytical framework that illustrates the
underlying behavioral mechanisms when sick pay generosity changes. It decomposes the overall
labor supply adjustments into what we call ’contagious presenteeism’ as well as ’noncontagious
absenteeism.’ The paper applies two different approaches to (indirectly) test for the existence of
contagious presenteeism, and associated negative externalities. To our knowledge, this paper is
the first in the economic literature to define and test for the existence of contagious presenteeism.
The empirical tests exploit variation in the generosity of sick pay for one of the most generous
sick leave systems in the world, Germany, and one of the least generous sick leave systems in
the world, the US. Although related and sometimes combined in laws, sick pay schemes differ
crucially from parental leave schemes (Gruber 1994; Ruhm 1998; Waldfogel 1998; Ruhm 2000;
Rossin-Slater et al. 2013; Lalive et al. 2014; Carneiro et al. 2015; Thomas 2015; Dahl et al. 2016) due
to the negative externalities induced by contagious presenteeism in combination with information
frictions about the type and extent of the disease. One key element of our proposed theoretical
mechanism is private information about the type of disease that workers contract. Supported by
intuition and empirical evidence (Pauly et al. 2008), employers have only incomplete information
about employees’ contagiousness and do not fully internalize the negative externalities induced
by the spread of contagious diseases to coworkers and customers. Sick pay schemes incentivize
contagious employees to stay at home but also induce noncontagious employees to engage in
absenteeism behavior.
The first part of this paper exploits high-frequency Google Flu data to evaluate the impact
of U.S. sick pay mandates on influenza-like disease rates at the population level. The staggered
implementation of several sick pay schemes at the regional level in the U.S. naturally leads to
the estimation of standard difference-in-differences (DD) models. Although the U.S. sick pay
schemes vary in their comprehensiveness, and some have exemptions reducing the effectiveness
1 Other

papers in the literature on sickness absence looked at and decomposed general determinants (Barmby et al.
1994; Markussen et al. 2011), investigated the impact of probation periods (Riphahn 2004; Ichino and Riphahn 2005),
culture (Ichino and Maggi 2000), gender (Ichino and Moretti 2009; Gilleskie 2010), income taxes (Dale-Olsen 2013), and
unemployment (Askildsen et al. 2005; Nordberg and Røed 2009; Pichler 2015). There is also research on the impact of
sickness on earnings (Sandy and Elliott 2005; Markussen 2012).

3

of lowering infection rates, we can show the following: When U.S. employees gain access to paid
sick leave, the general flu rate in the population decreases significantly. This finding yields strong
reduced-form evidence for the existence of contagious presenteeism. It suggests that a reduction
in contagious presenteeism occurs when sick pay coverage increases, resulting in fewer infections
and lower influenza activity. This paper is one of the first to study the introduction of sick pay
mandates in the U.S. (Ahn and Yelowitz 2015; Pichler and Ziebarth 2016, are two exceptions). It
is also one of the first economic papers to exploit high-frequency data from Google Flu Trends, a
rich data set that assesses influenza activity on a weekly basis starting in 2003.
The second part of the paper provides an analytical framework that illustrates the underlying
behavioral mechanisms when employees gain access to paid sick leave. The simple model decomposes traditional ’moral hazard’ into noncontagious absenteeism and contagious presenteeism.
The model allows us to provide a very concise definition of what we mean by contagious presenteeism: workplace attendance while having a contagious disease. Negative externalities can
then be identified by assessing changes in infections after changes in sick pay. The model predicts
that changes in sick pay generosity induce changes in the two (potentially undesired) behaviors
that work in opposite directions: noncontagious absenteeism and contagious presenteeism. We
explicitly refrain from a normative welfare analysis, which would require to weight these two
phenomena, depending on societal preferences. Rather, we provide a positive analysis and the
first approach to theoretically define and empirically identify these countervailing effects. Note
that the theory and empirical sections do not hinge on whether the sick pay scheme is mandated
by the government.
The final part of the paper serves as an illustration of how to estimate our model and the
proposed test for contagious presenteeism. It exploits two German policy reforms that varied
the level of sick pay. Using administrative data aggregated at the industry level and variation in
industry-specific sick pay regulations, sick pay cuts from 100 to 80% of foregone wages reduced
overall sickness rates by about 20%. This is in line with the standard predictions of our model and
the previous literature (Johansson and Palme 1996, 2005; Ziebarth and Karlsson 2010; De Paola
et al. 2014; Ziebarth and Karlsson 2014; Fevang et al. 2014). Next, and more importantly, we analyze the labor supply effects by certified disease categories. In line with the theoretical model
implications, we find disproportionately large labor supply adjustments for musculoskeletal diseases (’back pain’). Meanwhile, the labor supply adjustments in case of infectious diseases are
significantly smaller. Within the context of our model and under the assumption of similar labor
supply elasticities for contagious and noncontagious diseases, the differences between the small

4

labor supply effects for contagious diseases and the large labor supply effects for noncontagious
diseases are a function of additional infections due to contagious presenteeism. Additional infections increase sick leave rates of infectious diseases and countervail decreases due to lower
sick pay. Thus, when mandated sick pay is lowered, policymakers have to consider the tradeoff between the short-run effect of a reduction in noncontagious absenteeism vs. an increase in
contagious presenteeism leading to a higher infection rate and more relapses in the medium-run.
Obviously, this paper is close in spirit to papers that estimate causal labor supply effects of
changes in sick pay levels (Johansson and Palme 1996, 2002, 2005; Hesselius et al. 2009; Ziebarth
2013; Ziebarth and Karlsson 2010, 2014). However, none of these papers estimates labor supply
effects by disease groups or estimates effects on contagious disease rates. In particular, this paper
extends the small economic literature on presenteeism at the workplace (Aronsson et al. 2000;
Chatterji and Tilley 2002; Brown and Sessions 2004; Pauly et al. 2008; Barmby and Larguem 2009;
Johns 2010; Böckerman and Laukkanen 2010; Markussen et al. 2012; Pichler 2015; Hirsch et al.
2015; Ahn and Yelowitz 2016). With one exception, none of the empirical studies on presenteeism
just cited identifies or intends to identify causal effects of sick leave schemes on presenteeism.
The exception is Markussen et al. (2012) who study the impact of partial absence certificates on
what they label ’presenteeism.’ However, they define presenteeism very broadly—as a general
increase in labor supply when activation requirements become tighter. Pauly et al. (2008) ask
800 U.S. managers about their views on employee presenteeism with chronic and acute diseases.
Pichler (2015) provides evidence for the hypothesis that presenteeism is procyclical due to a higher
workload during economic booms. Barmby and Larguem (2009) exploit daily absence data from
a single employer and estimate absence determinants as well as transmission rates of contagious
diseases, linking the estimation approach nicely to an economic model of absence behavior.
This paper also adds to the literature on the determinants and consequences of infectious diseases, epidemics and vaccinations (Mullahy 1999; Bruine de Bruin et al. 2011; Uscher-Pines et al.
2011; Ahn and Trogdon 2015; Stoecker et al. 2016; Adda 2016). For example, Maurer (2009) models
supply and demand side factors of influenza immunization, whereas Karlsson et al. (2014) empirically assess the impact of the 1918 Spanish Flu on economic performance in Sweden. Stoecker
et al. (2016) find an 18 percent increase in influenza deaths for the elderly in counties whose team
participate in the Super Bowl. Their findings suggest that influenza transmissions at gatherings
related to large spectator events are the underlying mechanism. Adda (2016) shows that reductions in inter-personal contacts, e.g. through school closures or the closure of public transportation
networks, reduce transmission rates.

5

2

Evidence from U.S. Sick Leave Reforms

Whereas Germany has one of the most generous sick leave systems worldwide, the U.S. represents
one of the least generous systems. Using high-frequency data from Google Flu at the weekly level
over more than a decade, this section assesses the impact of U.S. sick pay mandates on influenzalike disease rates at the population level (Google 2015).

2.1

The U.S. Sick Leave Landscape

The U.S. is the only industrialized country without universal access to paid sick leave. About half
of the workforce lacks access to paid sick leave, particularly low-income employees in the service
sector (Heymann et al. 2009; Susser and Ziebarth 2016).
Appendix Table A1 provides a comprehensive summary of recent sick pay reform at the city
and state level. The details of the bills differ from city to city and state to state but, basically, all sick
pay schemes represent employer mandates. Mostly small firms are exempt or face less restrictions.
Employees “earn” paid sick pay credit (typically one hour per 40 hours worked) up to nine days
per year, and this credit rolls over to the next calendar year if unused. Because employees need to
accrue sick pay credit, most sick pay schemes explicitly state a 90 day accrual period. However,
the right to take unpaid sick leave is part of most sick pay schemes. Note that gaining the right
to take unpaid leave can be seen as a normalization and equals an increase in sick leave benefits
because the right to take unpaid leave decreases the likelihood of being fired when calling in sick.
As Table A1 shows, San Francisco was the first city to introduce paid sick leave on February 5,
2007. Washington, D.C., followed on November 13, 2008, and extended its sick pay in February 22,
2014 to temporary workers and tipped employees. Seattle (September 1, 2012), Portland (January
1, 2014), New York City (April 1, 2014), and Philadelphia (May 13, 2015) followed. Connecticut
(January 1, 2012) was the first US state to pass a sick leave mandate; however, it only applied to
service sector employees in non-small businesses and covered solely 20 percent of the workforce.
Very recent newly introduced schemes in California (July 1, 2015), Massachusetts (July 1, 2015),
and Oregon (Jan 1, 2016) are significantly more comprehensive (see Table A1).

2.2

Exploiting Google Flu Trends Data to Test for Changes in Infections: 2003–2015

We exploit weekly Google Flu Trends data at the city and state level from 2003 to 2015 to test for
changes in influenza rates following the introduction of sick pay schemes (Google 2015). Google
provides these data in processed form. The basic idea is that Google search queries can be used
6

to predict and replicate actual influenza infection rates. It has been shown that Google Flu Trends
accurately estimates weekly influenza activity in each region of the U.S. (Carneiro and Mylonakis
2009; Ginsberg et al. 2009).
We use two main Google Flu Trends samples. The first sample contains the weekly flu rates of
all major U.S. cities—97 in total—from 2003 to 2015, as listed in columns (1) and (2) of Appendix
Table A2. The specific start dates are also listed in Table A2.2 We include data for most cities
starting September 28, 2003. The end date for all cities is July 26, 2015. For our first sample of U.S.
metropolitan areas, this results in 49,560 city-week observations. The second sample contains all
U.S. states and counts 30,141 state-week observations.

Generated outcome variable.
We use the data that is provided by Google (2015), aggregated at the regional week level. Google
Flu recalculates search queries into influenza-like illnesses (ILI) per 100,000 doctor visits.3 The
mean for the city sample is 1,913 and for the state sample 1,703. We take the natural logarithm of
this variable as dependent variable.
Hence the dependent variable can be interpreted as “diagnosed influenza-like illnesses (ILI).”
Because—unlike in Germany—the U.S. sick pay mandates do not require a doctor’s note in order
to take sick pay, one would not expect that doctor visits increase due to the sick pay reforms.
However, even if that was the case, it still would not be a main threat to our estimates—our
estimate of the decrease in influenza-like activity would then represent a lower bound.

Treatment and control groups.
Appendix Table A1 provides the list of cities and states that implemented sick pay schemes between 2006 and 2015. When using our first sample of cities, all seven listed major cities and Washington, D.C., belong to the treatment group and all other cities to the control group. Analogously,
the five states that implemented sick pay schemes so far—District of Columbia, Connecticut, California, Massachusetts, and Oregon—belong to the treatment group in the second sample with
state-week observations.
In addition to Google Flu Trends data, we use data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS
2015) to control for monthly unemployment rates in our model. The unit of observation in the BLS
2 We omit the city of New Orleans, which was missing variables of interest due to Hurricane Katrina. In the first
sample, we also omit the cities that were not treated through a city mandate but through a state mandate and are
already included in the second sample.
3 The original purpose for recalculating this measure by Google was to be able to compare the search queries to a
meaningful measure.

7

data is equal to the unit of observation in the Google Flu Trends data. Accordingly, we merge in
BLS monthly unemployment rates at the level of the cities and states as reported in Table A2.

Assessing Google Flu Measurement Error.
Lazer et al. (2014) reports that Google Flu Trends would overestimate actual influenza rates. The
media eagerly picked up the story and googeling Google Flu, one finds reports about the “Epic
Google Flu Failure.” Appendix B assesses whether measurement error in the Google Flu data is a
serious threat to our main findings.
First of all, even if systematic over- or underestimation occurs, it should not be a threat to our
estimates as long as the bias is not correlated with the introduction of sick pay schemes at the
regional level. Our main model is a rich fixed effects specifications with region and 617 week-year
fixed effects that net out time-variant seasonal trends in influenza activities and time-invariant
region specifics. Also note that the original ambition of Google Flu was to predict epidemic outbreaks earlier and faster than the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Given Lazer
et al. (2014) and the media reports, Google obviously accepted that this may have been overly
ambitious. However, we exploit Google Trends retrospectively to test for regional changes in
infection rates and do not intend to make any predictions.
Appendix B reports the results of our testing procedure. First, we acquired CDC data on confirmed influenza-like cases. These data are available on the weekly level and the level of the 10
HHS regions (but not at the city or state level necessary to study the effects in this paper); the
data are normalized per 100,000 doctor visits. We aggregate and construct an equivalent dataset
with the Google Flu data. Figure B6a plots both two time series. The vertical lines represent the
implementation of sick pay mandates. As seen, one does not observe any trend in the measurement error but single spikes here and there, some of which represent an overestimation of the true
flu rate. Particular striking is the huge spike in the second half of 2012 that triggered the media
debates about the “Epic Google Flu failure.” However, as seen, this seems to have been a single
outlier that is not particularly worrisome in our model context with week fixed effects—-as long
as it is not correlated with the implementation of sick pay mandates.
Figure B6b plots the difference in residuals between both datasets (CDC vs. Google Flu) after
regressing each flu rate on 617 week and 9 region fixed effects. In other words, Figure B6b provides a visual assessment of the difference in the remaining variation by week and region after
netting out seasonal and regional effects. The thin sold black line represents HHS Region 1 that
includes the treatment states Connecticut and Massachusetts. The corresponding dashed vertical
8

line represents the date when the sick pay mandate was implemented in both states. Equally constructed are the thick black and gray colored lines and dots. As seen, there is no visual evidence
of any systematic correlation between week-region measurement errors and the implementation
of sick pay mandates. This visual assessment is confirmed when we regress the differences in
residuals on a treatment-time indicator: With 6,191 region-week observations, the point estimate
is 0.0247, positive and not statistically significant (standard deviation: 0.0697).

2.3

Parametric Difference-in-Differences Model

The staggered implementation of sick pay schemes across space and over time naturally leads to
the estimation of the following standard difference-in-differences (DD) model:

log(yit ) = φTreatedCityi × LawE f f ectivet + δt + γi + Unempit + µit

(1)

where log(yit ) is the logarithm of the reported Google (2015) Flu rate in city i in week of the
year t. γi are 83 city fixed effects and δt is a set of 617 week fixed effects over almost 12 years.
TreatedCityi is a treatment indicator which is one for cities that implemented a sick pay scheme
between 2003 and 2015, see Table A1. The interaction with the vector LawE f f ectivet yields the
binary variable of interest. The interaction is one for cities and time periods where a sick pay
scheme was legally implemented (see Table A1, column (3)). In addition to the rich set of city
and time fixed effects, we control for the monthly BLS provided unemployment rate at the city
level, Unempci . The standard errors are routinely clustered at the city level. Thus this empirical
specification allows us to estimate φt , i.e., the effect of the influenza-like disease rate through the
introduction of mandated sick pay as defined above.
State level estimation. Our second specification estimates the entire model at the state-week
level. The idea is to capture the effects of the sick pay mandates in the District of Columbia, Connecticut, California, and Massachusetts (see Table A1). Accordingly, we use our second Google
Flu Trends sample covering weekly state level data from 2003 to 2015; all i subscripts in Equation
(1) now represent states, not cities.
Event study. Lastly, to plot an event study graph, we replace the binary LawE f f ectivet time
indicator with one that continuously counts the number of days until (and from) a law became
effective—from -720 days to 0 and +720 days. This allows us to net out, normalize and graphically
plot changes in flu rates, relative to when the laws were implemented. Event studies also help as-

9

sessing whether there is any evidence for confounding factors or an endogenous implementation
of the laws as a reaction to pre-existing trends.

Changes in Influenza Activity When Employees Gain Sick Pay Coverage
Evidence from City Mandates. We begin by discussing the estimation results of the DD model in
Equation (1). Table 1 shows the findings for our first sample of U.S. cities from 2003 to 2015. Every
column represents one model where the first two columns represent the standard model. The only
difference between evenly and unevenly numbered columns is that the evenly numbered columns
additionally control for the monthly unemployment rate at the city level.
Comparing the TreatedCity ×LawEffective coefficient estimates in the first two columns, we
see that controlling for the monthly unemployment rate barely alters the results—a finding that
likewise holds up for columns (3) - (6). Importantly, the first two columns provide negative coefficient estimates that are significant at the 5 percent level. The literal interpretation would be that
influenza-like illnesses (ILI) per 100,000 doctor visits decrease by about 5.5 percent when employees gain access to paid (and unpaid) sick leave. It is also worthwhile to emphasize that this is a
weighted estimate over all seven U.S. cities that implemented sick pay mandates, and that these
are short- to medium-term estimates. For three cities (NYC, Portland, Newark), we cover more
than a year of post-reform influenza activity, and for three other cities (SF, DC, Seattle), we cover
at least three years of postreform influenza rates.
[Insert Table 1 about here]
The models in columns (3) and (4) now replace the city-specific dates indicating when the laws
became effective in LawEffective (Column (2), Table A1) with the city-specific dates indicating
when the laws were passed by the city legislature (LawPassed ). As column (3) of Table A1 shows,
the time span between when the laws were passed and when they became effective amounts up
to one year. It is at least imaginable that private firms voluntarily implemented sick pay schemes
ahead of the official date. However, as seen, columns (3) and (4) do not provide much evidence
that this was the case—the coefficients shrink in size to about 3 percent and are not statistically
significant any more.
Lastly, the models in columns (5) and (6) use time indicators that only become one after the
probation or accrual period has been passed (LawProbation). As discussed, all laws require employees to “earn” their sick pay. Employees accrue one hour of paid sick leave per 30 or 40 hours
of work, i.e., per full-time work week (Table A1). In addition, all laws specify a minimum accrual
10

period of typically 90 days that needs to elapse before employees can take paid sick leave for the
first time. Assuming that the first paid sick day can be taken after 12 full work weeks, each earning employees one hour of sick pay, then full-time employees can take 1.5 paid sick days after 90
days. Note that the option to take unpaid sick leave is typically part of these sick pay mandates.4
Letting the data speak, we can say that the decrease in flu rates increases by one percentage point
to -6.5 percent in columns (5) and (6), suggesting that paid sick leave coverage is more effective in
reducing contagious presenteeism than unpaid sick leave coverage.
Discussion of Effect Sizes. The models in Table 1 suggest reductions in population-level ILI
by between 5.5 and 6.5 percent when sick leave mandates are implemented. Our model in Section
3 provides evidence of the underlying mechanism: more employees with a contagious disease
will call in sick and stay at home when they gain access to sick leave insurance.
According to Susser and Ziebarth (2016), 35 percent of full-time employees and 45 percent of
all employees are not covered by firm-specific sick leave policies in the U.S. Given the current
population-employment ratios (BLS 2016), this means that roughly 20 percent of the population
gain access to sick leave coverage when cities pass such mandates. Per week and over the time
period considered in this paper, the CDC counted on average 1,655 ILI per 100,000 doctor visits
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2016). Taken together, the numbers suggest that U.S.
sick leave mandates provide coverage for about 20,000 employees per 100,000 population. Our
estimates suggest that the sick pay coverage for 20K employees helps preventing the transmission
of around (1655 × 0.06) 100 ILI per 100,000 population and week. Combined with estimates based
on self-reports, according to which about 1,000 employees per 100,000 population would work
sick every week (Susser and Ziebarth 2016), the effect sizes are very compatible and reasonable.
Event Study Graphs. Figure 1a shows the Event Study Graph for the model in Table 1. Here
we plot the coefficient estimates that replace the binary time indicators in LawEffective with continued time indicators counting the days before and after the laws became effective in each city.
Recall that the coefficient estimates are net of city fixed effects and week-year fixed effects, i.e.,
correct for common influenza seasonalities across all major U.S. metropolitan areas. Figure 1a
demonstrates very little trending in the two years before the sick pay schemes became effective.
4

The Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA) covers employees with 1,250 hours of work in the past year
and at locations with at least 50 employees with unpaid leave in case of pregnancy, own disease, or disease of a family
member (e.g. Tominey 2016). Jorgensen and Appelbaum (2014) find that 49 million US employees are ineligible for
FMLA, 44 percent of all private sector employees. The findings in Susser and Ziebarth (2016) also suggest that many
low-wage and service sector employees are either not aware of this right, or—more likely—not covered by it. The
majority of employees without access to firm-provided sick pay likely gained access to both paid and unpaid sick leave
through the mandates listed by Table A1.

11

The coefficient estimates are not statistically different from zero and fluctuate only slightly around
the zero line. In line with columns (3) and (4), there is not much evidence for anticipation effects.
Immediately after all employees gained access to paid and unpaid sick leave, the infection
rates decrease significantly by up to 20 percent. Note that the estimates past 480 days following
the law lack precision because they are solely based on the experiences in San Francisco (2007),
D.C. (2008), and Seattle (2012). New York City’s comprehensive bill became effective April 1,
2014—about one year and fours months before the end of our observation period at the end of
July 2015. Portland’s bill took effect in January 2014, and Newark’s bill at the end of May 2014.
Hence, the fact that one seems to observe a long-term rebound of infection rates to the zero line
is determined by a lack of precision and the early experiences in San Francisco (2007), DC (2008
and 2014), and Seattle (2012). More importantly, the rebound may be driven by the confounding
effect of the Great Recession for San Francisco (it is well documented that fear of unemployment
increases presenteeism). We test this hypothesis by excluding San Francisco from the sample and
re-running the city-level model. Appendix Figure A5 shows that, indeed, the observed rebound
effect in Figure 1a was very likely driven by the Great Recession in started in 2008.
Overall, the city event study graphs nicely illustrates the clear and significant decrease in ILI
rates at the population level after employees found sick leave coverage. These findings suggest
that sick and contagious employees stayed at home to recover instead of going to work, thereby
reducing contagious presenteeism and decreasing infection rates.
[Insert Figure 1 about here]
Evidence from State Mandates. The setup of Table 2 follows Table 1. The only difference is
that we now estimate the DD models at the state-week level. States in the treatment group are now
D.C. (2008 and 2014), Connecticut (2012), California (2015), and Massachusetts (2015). However,
unfortunately, the bills in California and Massachusetts only became effective July 1, 2015 and
our Google Flu Trends observation period ends at the end of July 2015. Hence estimates outside
the 26 day postreform window are exclusively driven by Connecticut and D.C. In addition, as a
reminder, Connecticut’s law only covers service sector employees in non-small businesses which
represent about 20% of the workforce. The first DC law was also quite lax. Because effectively
reducing infection rates requires comprehensive measures and preventing infections for as many
susceptibles as possible (Vynnycky and White 2010), and because two important states are only
briefly covered in the summer months following the law, we expect the state level estimates to be
less pronounced.
12

[Insert Table 2 about here]
In line with our expectations, we identify a marginally significant decrease in ILI rates of about
2.5 percent following the laws in D.C., Connecticut, California, and Massachusetts (Columns (1)
and (2)). Again, there is not much evidence that a significant amount of employers (who did not
provide paid sick leave previously) provided sick pay voluntarily between the passage of the law
and its implementation. The size of the coefficients in columns (3) and (4) are attenuated, only
around -1 percent, and not statistically significant. The same is true for the estimates in columns
(5) and (6) which are solely based on D.C. and Connecticut because the end of the official accrual
period (90 days) lies outside of our window of observation for California and Massachusetts.
The event study in Figure 1b provides a clearer picture. While the two-year period before the
reform implementation shows estimates that fluctuate consistently around the zero line and are
never significantly different from zero, the infection rates slightly trend downward in the postreform period. However, the estimates are partly noisy and lack statistical power. Again, recall that
only the first 26 days are based on evidence from four states, while all other postreform estimates
are exclusively based on the patchy Connecticut bill and the two step introduction in D.C.

3

Identifying Contagious Presenteeism and Negative Externalities

After having provided very reduced-form evidence that access to paid sick leave can reduce the
influenza-like disease rate at the population level, this section provides an analytical framework
that illustrates the underlying behavioral mechanisms.

3.1

Modeling Contagious Presenteeism and Noncontagious Absenteeism Behavior

We extend and build upon a mix of standard work-leisure models to theoretically study the absence behavior of workers (Brown 1994; Barmby et al. 1994; Brown and Sessions 1996; Gilleskie
1998). While additional arguments for or against the provision of sick pay exist, our model focuses on the trade-off between absenteeism and presenteeism behavior and negative externalities
in form of infections resulting from information asymmetries.5 Since we construct a model of individual behavior we omit the i subscript in order to simplify notation. We specify the individual
utility function as
5 In

particular, we abstain from modeling the employer’s side and effects on the firm level. This could include
employer signaling (or adverse selection) effects, peer effects, or discrimination against identifiable unhealthy workers
(e.g., obese workers). We also abstain from analyzing general equilibrium labor market effects.

13

ut (σt , ct , lt )

(2)

where ut represents the utility of a worker at time t, ct stands for consumption, and lt for leisure
and both consumption and leisure lead to a higher utility, i.e., we assume that utility is increasing
in consumption and leisure over the whole domain. The current sickness level is σt , with larger
values of σt representing a higher degree of sickness and thus decreasing utility over the whole
domain of sickness. Furthermore, we assume that the sickness level is private information of the
worker and unknown by the firm.
Moreover, in terms of the cross derivatives we assume
∂2 u t
∂2 u t
> 0 and
≤ 0.
∂σ∂l
∂σ∂c

(3)

The first expression implies that leisure or recuperation time becomes more valuable for higher
values of sickness and the opposite holds true for consumption. In time periods with high levels
of σt , i.e., when the worker is very sick, utility is mostly drawn from leisure or recuperation time
rather than consumption.
With h defining hours of contracted work and T the total amount of time available—and assuming that workers are not saving but consuming their entire income from work wt or sick pay
st —one can write the utility difference between working and (sickness) absence formally as

ut (σt , wt , T − h) − ut (σt , st , T ) = 0

(4)

In most countries sick pay is not a flat monetary amount but rather a replacement rate of the
current wage. Hence we substitute sick pay with st = αt wt in the equation above (with αt ∈ [0, 1]).6
Moreover, workers are paid based on their average productivity and, approximating reality, we
assume rigid wages and thus a time invariant wage level w.
From equation (4), we may then calculate the indifference point σ∗ (αt ) for a given replacement
rate αt .7 Hence if σt > σ∗ (αt ) workers will be absent, while they will be present if σt < σ∗ (αt ).
The latter can be thought of the “normal” state under which the great majority, 80-90 percent of all
workers, fall every day. The value of σ∗ (αt ) where workers are indifferent solely depends on (i)
6 Notice that the wage may also include nonmonetary benefits, such as more job security. For instance, Scoppa and
Vuri (2014) find that workers who are absent more frequently face higher risks of dismissal. Thus even in countries
with nominally full replacement, in our model, this might translate to a replacement rate smaller than one.
7 Notice that due to our assumption of a utility increasing in consumption and leisure and decreasing in the sickness
level over the whole domain there is a unique σ∗ (αt ), where the worker is indifferent between work and absence.

14

the amount of money workers lose while on sick leave, (1 − αt )w, and (ii) the contracted amount
of working hours h and total time available T.
Finally, applying the implicit function theorem to equation (4) the partial derivative of the
indifference sickness level σ∗ (αt ) with respect to the replacement rate reads:
∂σ∗ (αt )
=
∂α

∂ut (σt ,αt w,T ) ∂c
∂c
∂α
∂ut (σt ,w,T −h)
∂ut (σt ,αw,T )
−
∂σ
∂σ

< 0,

(5)

where the inequality follows directly from a positive numerator and a negative denominator due
to αt ∈ [0, 1], T − h < T and the assumption about cross derivatives given in equation (3).

Two Types of Diseases and Negative Externalities Due to Contagious Presenteeism
Next, let us assume that two types of (mutually exclusive) diseases exist: 1) contagious diseases
denoted by subscript c (e.g., flu) and 2) noncontagious diseases denoted by subscript n (e.g., back
pain).8 More precisely, we assume that there always exist three fractions of workers: a first share
of workers, 1 − q − pt , who are healthy; a second share , q, who have a noncontagious disease,
σt = σnt ; and a third share, pt , who have a contagious disease, σt = σct . In the latter two cases,
the disutility due to sickness σt is determined by the density function f (σ). Thus, whereas the
level of σt determines the decision of the worker to stay home or not, this additional characteristic
determines whether the disease is contagious.9
The share of workers being affected by a contagious disease, pt , changes over time depending
on infections in the previous period, as outlined below. On the other hand, the share of workers
affected by noncontagious diseases, q, is time invariant.10
Importantly, both the severity of the disease and the “disease type” drawn by the worker are
not perfectly observable by the employer. This is an important, yet realistic, assumption and
drives the main mechanism below. It allows us to abstract away from a hypothetical scenario
where employers can unambiguously and always identify workers with contagious diseases and
simply send them home to avoid infections. The information friction assumption is very reasonable given that diseases and contagiousness—especially at the beginning of a disease when humans are already contagious—are mostly unobservable for the employer (and also the employee)
8 In

principle, noncontagious diseases represent a special case of contagious diseases, where infections are equal to
zero. Moreover, (diseases with) relapses can also be considered as a special case of contagious diseases, where the level
of contagiousness is fairly low, as individuals “infect” only themselves.
9 We also assume that, conditional on being sick (σ > 0), the shares of disease types (p and q) are independent of
t
the density of the sickness level f (σ).
10 Note that we abstract away from competing risks. While substitution might take place, we assume it is of a small
enough margin not to be of major relevance.

15

and subject to very incomplete monitoring. Note that most infectious diseases are contagious for
several days before definite symptoms are observable. The availability and popularity of OTC
drugs suppressing disease symptoms reinforce the unobservability assumption (Earn et al. 2014).
Also note that, for our model to work, it is not necessary to assume that employees know their
disease type.
Given σ∗ (αt ) and assuming a worker population of size one, we can now define the sick leave
rate At as the share of individuals absent from work:

At = Act + Ant = ( pt + q)

Z1

σ∗ (α

f (σ)dσ;

(6)

t)

similarly, the share of workers present at work is given by

Pt = (1 − pt − q) + ( pt + q)

∗ (α )
σZ
t

f (σ)dσ.

(7)

0

Given the replacement rate αt , a share of workers

πt (αt ) = pt

∗ (α )
σZ
t

f (σ)dσ

(8)

0

is contagious but present at work. We define πt (αt ) as contagious presenteeism. One economic
purpose of providing paid sick leave is to provide financial incentives for sick workers to call in
sick, such that infections caused by contagious presenteeism are minimized.
As seen, the share of workers with contagious presenteeism behavior who transmit diseases
to their coworkers and customers equals πt (αt ). Following a standard SIS (susceptible-infectedsusceptible) endemic model (Ross 1916; Kermack and McKendrick 1927), the transmission of diseases via contagious presenteeism depends on three factors: 1) the share of contagious workers
working (the infected) πt , 2) the share of noncontagious individuals who can be infected (the susσ∗R(αt )
ceptibles) St = (1 − pt − q) + q
f (σ)dσ , and 3) the transmission rate of the disease which
0

we denote with r.11 Therefore the share of individuals with contagious diseases is an increasing
function of these three elements, formally pt (πt , St , r ). Thus contagious workers who show up at
the workplace trigger the negative externalities that sick pay schemes intend to minimize.
11 It is outside the scope of this paper to model the transmission rate of contagious diseases explicitly (Philipson 2000;

Barmby and Larguem 2009; Pichler 2015).

16

Severely Sick Workers and the Definition of ’Moral Hazard’
If σt > σ∗ (0), workers are too sick to work and would stay home—even under a replacement rate
of zero. This can be thought of as a state where people are either lying in bed with extremely high
fever and heavy, acute, flu symptoms (as an example for a contagious disease), or lying in bed
after chemotherapy because of cancer (as an example for a noncontagious disease). Empirically,
one can estimate that about 3-5 percent of all workers fall into this category on a given day. In
Germany, on a given workday, about 4 percent of the workforce is on sick leave. During the flu
season, each day 1.5 percent are on sick leave due to colds and flu (Techniker Krankenkasse 2015).
When employees gain access to sick pay (αt > 0), a share of marginal workers will call in sick
as a result of their sick pay (workers with σ∗ (αt ) < σt < σ∗ (0)). These individuals would work,
if there was no sick pay and it is rational for them to now be absent from work. In the domain
of noncontagious diseases, we refer to this behavior as noncontagious absenteeism. The share of
employees with noncontagious diseases who call in sick as a result of sick pay at any point in time
and for a given sick pay replacement level αt equals

ω (αt ) = q

σZ∗ (0)

f (σ)dσ.

(9)

σ∗ (αt )

As work productivity is difficult to measure, we do not model it explicitly. However, as for noncontagious diseases and from a welfare perspective, working—even if associated with lower productivity due to sickness—would be generally preferred to sickness absence and zero work output
under quite weak assumptions. Formally, denote with δ(σ∗ (0)) the sickness-related productivity
losses for workers that are just indifferent between going to work and staying at home at a replacement rate of zero, i.e., σ∗ (0). If worker utility and firm profits had similar weights, then as long
as σ∗ (0)αt w > δ(σ∗ (0)), working would dominate sickness absence. This condition compares the
consumption utility of sick leave benefits with the productivity losses of a noncontagious worker.
Abstracting away from time inconsistent behavior of employees, e.g. which could induce unintended long-term health damages, sickness absence would only be preferred if the productivity
losses or consumption utility losses due to sickness were very large. The ’Con’ of sick pay schemes
thus implies that σ∗ (0)αt w > δ(σ∗ (0)), and thus working would be preferred to sickness absence
for noncontagious diseases, as long as the disease is not too severe σt < σ∗ (0).

17

Finally, we define the overall behavioral effect [’moral hazard’] as the sum of noncontagious
absenteeism and contagious presenteeism behavior 12

ρ t ( α t ) = ω ( α t ) + π t ( α t ).

(10)

Proposition 1. Under a sick pay scheme and given the existence of contagious as well as noncontagious diseases, there exists a fraction of contagious workers πt who engage in presenteeism.
Contagious workers who go to work induce negative externalities because they infect coworkers and customers. Likewise, there exists a fraction of noncontagious workers who call in sick
due to sick leave benefits, ω. The overall behavioral labor supply adjustment, ρt , is the sum of
noncontagious absenteeism and contagious presenteeism behavior.
Contagious diseases lead to contagious presenteeism and infections. This negative externality
can be seen as one economic justification for sick pay mandates. The extent of the negative externality depends on the contagiousness of the disease. In the context of our model, presenteeism is
not harmful per se, but rather the negative externalities triggered by contagious presenteeism.

Changes in Sick Pay and Labor Supply: Graphical Representation
To simplify and simulate the German sick pay reform of 1996 in the next section, we assume
(without loss of generality) that sick pay is high in the base year (t = 0) and is exogenously cut
after one year in t = y1 . Equation (5) yields

∂σ∗ (α)
∂α

< 0. Hence, a decrease in the replacement rate

increases σ∗ and more workers work: the sick leave rate decreases.
But how do contagious presenteeism and noncontagious absenteeism behavior change? Noncontagious absenteeism decreases because σ∗ (αy1 ) > σ∗ (α0 ). Moreover, contagious presenteeism
increases for the same reason. Thus it remains ambiguous what happens to the overall behavioral effect ρt because the first component, contagious presenteeism, increases while the second
component, noncontagious absenteeism, decreases.
Proposition 2. Given the existence of contagious as well as noncontagious diseases, a sick pay
cut increases contagious presenteeism, which induces negative externalities through infections of
coworkers and customers. At the same time, a sick pay cut reduces noncontagious absenteeism.
A priori, the overall behavioral effect, defined as the sum of both behaviors, is ambiguous. Anal12 Similar to Einav et al. (2013), moral hazard is strictly speaking not a hidden action in our context, since it is perfectly

observable whether an employee is present or not. It is rather hidden information that employees have about their
personal sickness level and their type of sickness.

18

ogously, an increase in sick pay decreases contagious presenteeism and increases noncontagious
absenteeism behavior.
[Insert Figure 2 about here]
Figure 2 shows a graphical representation of Proposition 2. Panel A depicts the situation for noncontagious diseases. Initially, the share of employees who engage in noncontagious absenteeism—
indicated by the sum of the two dark gray areas—is quite large. As sick pay decreases, more
workers with noncontagious illnesses come to work and the absenteeism rate decreases.
Panel B depicts the situation for contagious diseases. As sick pay decreases, contagious presenteeism increases, meaning more workers with contagious illnesses come to work. Because of
additional infections, the share of individuals with a contagious disease, pt , increases, as represented by the outward shift of the density function.

Changes in Sick Pay and Moral Hazard: Analytical Derivation
An0 − Ant
An0

Noncontagious diseases.

= β nt denotes the percentage change in the sick leave rate of

noncontagious diseases, when sick pay decreases and after t time periods have passed. Thus β nt
represents the cumulative reform effect at time t, or formally

β nt =

1 
q
An0

Z1

σ∗ (α

f (σ)dσ − q

σ∗ (α

0)



Z1
t)



1 

f (σ)dσ =
q
An0

∗ (α )
σZ
t

σ∗ (α



f (σ)dσ .

(11)

0)

In the case of noncontagious disease, we can write

β nt =

Contagious diseases. Similarly

Ac0 − Act
Ac0

1
(ω (α0 ) − ω (αt )) .
An0

(12)

= β ct denotes the percentage change in the sick leave rate

of contagious diseases, when sick pay decreases and after t time periods.

β ct =

1 
 p0
Ac0

Z1
σ∗ (α

f (σ)dσ − pt

σ∗ (α

0)



Z1


f (σ)dσ .

(13)

t)

This expression can be rewritten as

β ct =



1 

(π0 (αt ) − π0 (α0 )) − ( pt − p0 )
Ac0

Z1

σ∗ (αt )

19



f (σ)dσ ,

(14)

where the first element corresponds to the increase in contagious presenteeism due to the sick pay
cut (and the corresponding decrease in the absence rate)—related to the initial share of workers
with a contagious disease, p0 . The second element corresponds to the increase in the absence rate
due to additional infections as a result of the increase in contagious presenteeism.
As described, additional infections increase the infection rate, pt . As seen in Proposition 2,
more contagious workers work after sick pay is cut. Furthermore, as more noncontagious workers work as well, the number of susceptibles increases. Both effects result in more infections.
Depending on the magnitude of newly infected individuals, the increase in sickness absence due
to infections offsets the decrease due to additional contagious presenteeism, at least partly. For
example, if—at the firm level—one additional worker exhibits contagious presenteeism due to a
sick pay cut, then the net effect of the sick pay cut on the overall sick leave rate would be zero if
this additional worker infected one additional co-worker who then called in sick.
Next, we contrast the two offsetting behavioral forces, where β ct and β nt can be rewritten as:

β ct = β nt −

1 
 ( p t − p0 )
Ac0

Z1



f (σ)dσ .

(15)

σ∗ (αt )

Being able to rewrite the percentage change in the sick leave rate of contagious diseases as an expression of the percentage change in the sick leave rate of noncontagious diseases is only possible
due to the assumption of equal densities f (σ) across the two disease groups. Section 2 already
provided some evidence for the existence of new infections through contagious presenteeism.
This assumption allows us to identify the magnitude of new infections by comparing differences
in sickness absence changes over different disease groups.
Accordingly, the behavioral adjustments of the two disease groups, β ct and β nt , only differ by
the share of newly infected individuals weighted by the share of workers on sick leave prior to
the sick pay cut. Thus, under the existence of contagious presenteeism, it holds that β nt > β ct .
Finally, note that by definition, β nt > 0. However—in case of contagious diseases—the sign of
β ct is ambiguous. For a very contagious disease, β ct might become negative. Therefore the sign of
β ct remains an empirical question which will be assessed below.
Hypothesis 1 After a sick pay cut, the noncontagious absenteeism rate decreases (β nt > 0).
The sign of the absence rate for contagious diseases, β ct , remains ambiguous because additional
absences due to new infections might outweigh the immediate decrease in the absence rate due to
the sick pay cut. The difference β nt − β ct indicates additional absences due to new infections.

20

Finally, we denote the overall percentage change in the absence rate with β t =

βt =



1 

(ω (α0 ) − ω (αt )) + (π0 (αt ) − π0 (α0 )) − ( pt − p0 )
A0

Z1

∆A
A0 :



f (σ)dσ .

(16)

σ∗ (αt )

The next subsection discusses how these effects can be empirically identified in order to quantify
the change in shirking and in new infections following a change in sick pay coverage.

Identifying Contagious Presenteeism and Negative Externalities Empirically
Using Population-Level Influenza Rates to Identify Contagious Presenteeism
Section 2 exploited the implementation of U.S. sick pay mandates across space and over time in
order to test for decreased contagious presenteeism and infections after the introduction of sick
pay. We use Google Flu Trends data at the weekly regional level from 2003 to 2015 to estimate the
effect of sick pay mandates. Providing employees with paid sick leave is equivalent to increasing
sick leave benefit levels which, according to our model and a rich literature (Johansson and Palme
1996, 2005; De Paola et al. 2014; Ziebarth and Karlsson 2010, 2014; Dale-Olsen 2014; Fevang et al.
2014), unambiguously increases sick leave utilization (

∂σ∗ (α)
∂α

< 0).

Our model would predict that access to sick pay coverage reduces contagious presenteeism
(Proposition 2 ). This leads to a reduction in the share of individuals infected by a contagious
disease. Assume there is no sick pay at time zero (t = 0), and that sick pay is introduced after one
year (t = y1 ). Then the reduction in contagious diseases at t, φt , can be defined as

φt = ( pt − p0 ) f (σ).

(17)

In Section 2 we empirically tested whether φt < 0; i.e., whether sick pay coverage reduces the
incidence rate of infectious diseases in the population. We found φt < 0 which yields empirical
evidence for a reduction in contagious workplace presenteeism because employees have been
covered by paid sick leave schemes.
Furthermore, access to paid sick leave increases noncontagious absenteeism and decreases
contagious presenteeism behavior (Hypothesis 1 ). The finding of a subsequent decrease in infection rates are thus a direct implication of our model and yields strong evidence for a decrease in
contagious workplace presenteeism.

21

Using Disease-Specific Sick Leave Rates to Identify Contagious Presenteeism
To directly implement the model, one needs data on sick leave behavior, an exogenous sick pay
reform and different groups of affected workers. Then one can empirically estimate the causal
effect of the change in sick pay on the share of workers who call in sick. In the notation above, we
thus empirically identify β t .
Moreover, if one can empirically identify two different disease categories, c and n, and the
share of workers who call in sick with certified sickness due to contagious and noncontagious
diseases, one could carry out a statistical test to check if β nt > β ct . In other words, one could test
if a sick-pay-cut induced decrease in sick leave is larger for disease categories, n as compared to
c, which would yield evidence for an increased spread of contagious diseases via an increase in
contagious presenteeism behavior.
Proposition 4a. Given the existence of a reform that exogenously varied sick pay and sick
leave data on differently affected employees, one can econometrically test if β t > 0, i.e., if the
labor supply adjustment with respect to a sick pay cut is positive and, if so, how large it is.
Proposition 4b. Given the availability of data for contagious and noncontagious sick leave
rates, one can estimate β nt and β ct . The size of β nt is informative for the relevance of noncontagious absenteeism behavior. β ct represents both the increase in contagious presenteeism and in
additional sick leave due to infections triggered by contagious presenteeism behavior.
Proposition 4c. Lastly, one can econometrically test if β nt > β ct (Hypothesis 1), i.e., whether
the labor supply adjustment is larger for noncontagious than for contagious diseases. The size
of the differential illustrates additional infections that lead to additional sick leave as a result of
contagious presenteeism. These represent negative externalities under lower sick pay.
The next section exploits German sick pay reforms and data on disease-specific sick leave rates to
illustrate how one can implement the second proposed test that, under the model assumptions,
empirically identifies noncontagious absenteeism and contagious presenteeism behavior.

4
4.1

Evidence from German Sick Leave Reforms
The German Employer Sick Pay Mandate

Germany has one of the most generous universal sick leave systems in the world. The system is
predominantly based on employer mandates. In Germany, employers are mandated to continue
22

wage payments for up to six weeks per sickness episode. In other words, employers have to
provide 100 percent sick pay from the first day of a period of sickness without benefit caps.13
In the case of illness, employees are obliged to inform their employer immediately about both
the sickness and the expected duration. From the fourth day of a sickness episode, a doctor’s
certificate is required. However, employers have the right to ask for a doctor’s note from day
one of a spell, and many employees voluntarily submit doctors’ notes from day one. Note that
the sickness itself remains confidential. Employees just have to inform their employer that they
are sick, not why, and the standardized form for the doctor’s note does not indicate the type of
disease, which is confidentially transmitted to the sickness fund. This is important because the
model assumes that the type of disease is unobservable to the employer.
If the sickness lasts more than six continuous weeks, the doctor needs to issue a different
certificate. From the seventh week onward, sick pay is disbursed by the health insurers (called
“sickness funds”) and lowered to 70 percent of foregone gross wages for those who are insured
under Statutory Health Insurance (SHI).14

4.2

The Policy Reforms of 1996 and 1999

Sick Pay Cut at the End of 1996
In 1996, the center-right government passed a Bill to Foster Growth and Employment, effective
October 1, 1996. Panel A of Table C1 in the appendix summarizes how the bill altered the federal
employer mandate. The most important provision of the bill reduced the minimum statutory sick
pay level from 100 percent to 80 percent of foregone wages.15 In addition to Table C1, Ziebarth
and Karlsson (2010, 2014) provide more details on the regulatory changes and affected employee
groups. This paper solely focuses on the implementation at the industry level among private
sector employees who were covered by collective agreements.
Ongoing union pressure made employer associations in various industries—through collective agreements—to voluntarily provide sick pay on top of the statutory regulations. Further, the
question of whether employees in specific industries were entitled to claim 100 percent or 80 per13 In

principle, there is no limit to the frequency of sick leave spells. However, if employees fall sick again due to
the same illness after an episode of six weeks, the law explicitly states that they are only again eligible for employerprovided sick pay if at least six months have been passed between the two spells or twelve month have been passed
since the beginning of the first spell. This paragraph intends to avoid substitution of long-term spells by short-term
spells.
14 Two additional benefit caps limit long-term sick pay. The first cap is 90 percent of the net wage, and the second
cap is the contribution ceiling up to which contribution rates have to be paid.
15 In addition to this bill, another bill cut SHI long-term sick pay from the seventh week onward from 80 percent to
70 percent of forgone gross wages. Ziebarth (2013) shows that this second bill did not induce significant behavioral
reactions among the long-term sick.

23

cent of their salary during sickness episodes was determined by existing collective agreements
and their legal interpretation. Some existing agreements explicitly, but probably coincidentally,
stated that sick pay would be 100 percent, while others did not mention sick pay at all. In the
former case, sick pay would remain 100 percent despite the decrease in the generosity of the employer mandate, whereas in the latter case, sick pay would decrease to 80 percent until a revised
agreement was negotiated.
Review of collective agreements. We reviewed all collective agreements that existed during
the time of the sick pay reforms and categorized industries (Hans Böckler Stiftung 2014). Overall, one can distinguish three different groups and industries: Panel B of Table C1 provides the
provisions at the industry level and our categorization.
Group I is composed of the construction sector, whose collective agreement covered about 1.1
million private sector workers. When the law was passed in 1996, the existing collective agreement did not include any explicit provision on sick pay, which is why the entire federal regulations
applied to the construction sector at the time of the bill’s implementation. A negotiated compromise between unions and employers resulted in a new agreement which became effective July 1,
1997. This new agreement specified that the cut in the replacement rate would only be applied
during the first three days of a sickness episode.16
Group II counts at least 4.4 million covered employees and is quantitatively the largest group.
It includes 11 industries as specified in the notes to Table C1, among them the steel, textile and
automobile industry. Union leaders in these industries managed to maintain the symbolically
important 100 percent sick pay level. However, in return, they agreed to exclude paid overtime
from the basis of calculation for sick pay, which effectively means that employees with a significant
amount of overtime hours experienced sick pay cuts.17
16 In 1997 a minimum wage in the construction sector was introduced. Theoretically a wage increase should also lead
to a reduction in sickness absence. Blien et al. (2009) and Rattenhuber (2011) find a positive impact of the law on wages
in East Germany. Whereas we cannot ultimately rule out an impact on sick leave rates, we consider it very unlikely that
over proportional wage increases for low-wage blue collar construction workers in East Germany are the major driver
of the large effects identified below. In any case, they are no threat to the illustration of the application of our testing
procedure.
17 There are several reasons why this type of sick pay cut may be of minor relevance: (a) Fraction of Employees
Effectively Affected. As representative SOEPGroup (2008) data show, among BKK insurees (which our main data set is
composed of), only 19% had paid overtime hours in 1998, the average being 4 hours per week. (b) Size of Cut. Whereas
a decrease in the base rate to 80% would reduce net sick pay by e 280 per month (in 1998 values), the exclusion of
paid overtime would only lead to a net cut of e 110 per month, conditional on working overtime and getting paid
for it. (c) Salience of Cut. While maintaining the 100% replacement level had a high symbolic meaning for unions, the
indirect reductions in sick pay were not communicated as openly, and it is questionable if every employee was aware of
them. (d) Affected individuals. One could suspect that employees with paid overtime hours might be highly motivated
employees in leading positions with a low number of sick days and a low propensity to shirk. However, as the SOEP
shows, employees with paid overtime had on average 10 sick days per year while those without paid overtime hours
had only 4.7 sick days.

24

Group III is composed of seven industries, all of which stated in their collective agreements
that they would maintain 100 percent sick pay. Moreover, in contrast to Group II, these industries
did not exclude overtime payments from the basis of calculation. Hence the 4 million employees
covered by these agreements serve as control group in the evaluation of the 1997 sick pay cut.

Reversal of Main Sick Pay Cut 1999 and Remaining Changes
After the federal election was won by the new center-left coalition in 1998, as a reaction to the
1996 bill, the Bill for Social Insurance Corrections and to Protect Employee Rights was passed
and became effective January 1, 1999. It increased federally mandated sick pay again from 80
percent to 100 percent. However, as Table C1 illustrates, while the main provision was reversed,
two minor—but potentially important—details made the new arrangements less generous than
sick pay coverage prior to October 1996. And in combination with the meanwhile negotiated
collective agreements, they affected the three groups in Table C1 differently.
First, the four week waiting period—introduced in October 1996—was maintained. This implies that new employees have not been eligible for paid sick leave during the first month of their
employment. However, to our knowledge no collective agreement had excluded the application
of this waiting period, meaning that none of the three groups was affected by this provision in
1999. Second, the 1999 bill explicitly stated that paid overtime would be excluded from the basis
of calculation. This provision was not part of the 1996 reform bill; it was probably a reaction to the
many collective agreements that had implemented such a provision at the industry level in 1997
and 1998. However, because no industry in Group I and III of Table C1 excluded paid overtime
voluntary in their 1997/1998 agreements, ironically, Group III’s sick pay became less generous as
a result of the 1999 center-left bill.

4.3

Exploiting Administrative Data on Disease-Specific Sickness Absence: 1994–2004

In Germany, information on certified sickness absence—including diagnoses—are collected by the
nonprofit SHI sickness funds covering 90 percent of the population (Gesetzliche Krankenversicherungen GKV). In 1995, before the first reform, switching between health plans was not possible and
employees were assigned to company-based health plans (Betriebskrankenkassen, BKKs) if their employer offered such plans (similar to the employer-sponsored health plans in the U.S. but with
mandatory enrollment). In 1995, a total of 960 SHI sickness funds existed, and 690 or 72 percent
of them were company-based health plans (German Federal Statistical Office 2014). Employees

25

covered by these health plans were likely also covered by binding collective agreements. (Eibich
et al. 2012; Schmitz and Ziebarth forthcoming).
The Federal Association of Company-Based Sickness Funds (BKK Dachverband) annually publishes sick leave statistics of their 4.8 million enrollees (19 percent of all private sector employees)
who are mandatorily SHI insured and gainfully employed (Bundesverband der Betriebskrankenkassen
(BKK) 2004).18 The Krankheitsartenstatistik reports both the incidence as well as the length of
sickness spells by gender, age group, diagnoses according to the International Classification of
Diseases (ICD), and industry. We collected and digitized information from annual reports between 1994 and 2004.19 Note that the data are only published by the main disease category as
defined by the ICD; we have no discretion on how to categorize the different disease groups. The
descriptive statistics are in the appendix, Table C2.
In total, we count 1,188 observations, where each observation represents one industry and year
as well as the diagnosed sickness category. More specifically, we count 11 years and 18 industries,
which adds up to 198 industry-year observations per diagnosis category.
Generated sick leave variables. Our outcome variable is the sick leave rate. This variable
counts the number of certified sickness episodes per 100 enrollees (sick cases per 100 enrollees).
We transform each dependent variable by taking the logarithm. The log-transformation is mainly
done because β nt in equation (11) as well as β ct in equation (13) are expressed in percent and we
would like to link the model to the empirical part as closely as possible.
Figure 3a shows the distribution of total sick cases per 100 enrollees and Figure 3b its logarithm. In both cases we observe relatively symmetric, close to normal, distributions. The untransformed plain variable has a mean of 125, implying 1.25 sick leave cases per year and enrollee
across all industries and years. However, the variation ranges from 90 to 163 (Figure 3a and Table
C2).
[Insert Figure 3 about here]
Looking at the disease categories and their incidence rates, one finds that the largest disease
group is respiratory diseases, ICD codes J00-J99, contributing 29 percent of all cases. Within this
18 Although, strictly speaking, BKKs are not legally obliged to contribute to the Krankheitsartenstatistik, the overwhelming majority does, probably simply out of tradition to contribute to this important statistic that has been existing
since 1976. In 2013, more than 90 percent of all mandatorily insured BKK enrollees were covered by the Krankheitsartenstatistik (BKK 2004; German Federal Statistical Office 2014). There is no evidence that this share systematically
varied due to the reforms.
19 We cannot use earlier data due to a lack of consistency that goes back to an earlier reform. Although the data
contain information on the duration of sickness spells by disease groups, we decided to not exploit this information as
the theoretical predictions of the reforms on the duration of spells are ambiguous.

26

group, a third of all cases are due to “bronchitis (J20)”, while a quarter is due to “influenza (J09).”
Moreover, another fifth are caused by “acute upper respiratory infections (J06).”
The second largest disease group with almost 20 percent of all cases is musculoskeletal diseases
(M00-M99), which have the reputation to be particularly prone to shirking behavior. The most
noteworthy subcategory in this group is “dorsalgia - back pain (M54)” making up 70 percent of
all musculoskeletal cases.
Next in terms of their incidence relevance are digestive diseases (K00-K93, 14 percent), injuries and poisoning (S00-T98, 11 percent), followed by infectious diseases (A00-B99, 6 percent).
The most common digestive disease is “noninfective gastroenteritis (K52, 45 percent)”. Infectious
diseases are mainly made up of “viral infections (B34)” and “infectious gastroenteritis (A09).”
Together over 80 percent of all cases coded as infectious diseases fall in these two subcategories.

4.4

Nonparametric Graphical Evidence

Figure 3 shows the “Development of Normalized Sick Leave Cases by Treatment Groups” over
time. Figure 4a shows the development for the overall Sick leave rate, Figure 4b looks at musculoskeletal diseases, and Figures 4c and d plot diseases of the respiratory system as well as infectious diseases. In addition to being normalized by the number of enrollees, these graphs are also
adjusted with respect to the reference year 1994, which is indexed as 100. The two black vertical
bars indicate the official implementation dates of the decrease and increase in sick pay generosity, respectively. The representation in Figure 4 serves two main purposes: 1) to examine the
plausibility of the common time assumption, and 2) to anticipate and visually illustrate the main
findings and help understand how they identify the model in the second section. Musculoskeletal
sick leave cases (e.g., back pain, Figure 4b) represent the category “non-infectious diseases” in our
model in the second section, whereas infectious sick leave cases (Figure 4d) represent the category
“infectious diseases” in our model. Respiratory sick leave cases (Figure 4c) is a mixed category.
[Insert Figure 4 about here]
Overall, Figure 4 shows us the following: First, in general the data support the common time
trend assumption. Despite some minor spikes here and there, it is obvious that all three groups
in the four graphs develop in a pretty parallel manner over the 11 years without reform. In the
graphs, this is the case for the time periods before 1997 and after 2000. In particular Figure 4d—
showing infectious diseases—illustrates a remarkably parallel development (and does not provide
any graphical evidence for a reform effect).
27

Second, with the exception of infectious diseases, the other three graphs provide strong evidence of a significant reform effect for Group I (see Table C1). Immediately after the reform
implementation, we observe a 20 percent decrease in the sick leave rate for the overall disease
category.20 As for musculoskeletal diseases—the noncontagious disease category—the decrease is
almost twice as large and around -40% for Group I, suggesting strong increases in shirking behavior. As for respiratory diseases—the mixed disease category that also includes flues and common
colds—the decrease is only around -10%. Finally, as for infectious disease—the contagious disease
category—we do not observe much evidence for any reform effect.
Third, the gap between the differently affected groups unambiguously, not but entirely, closes
after 2000. This suggests that the behavioral reaction after the reversal of the sick pay cut kicks in
delayed, probably due to the relatively low media coverage when the law was reversed. Moreover, there is evidence for time persistence or habit formation in sick leave behavior, since the
regulations were again identical for all three groups post-1999 (Table C1). However, we still observe significant differences in between the three groups, even as late as 2004.
Fourth, the reaction to the soft sick pay cut—excluding overtime from the basis of calculation—
was obviously asymmetric. Figure 4 does not provide much evidence that excluding overtime
affected Group II’s behavior in 1997 and 1998. However, the graphical evidence suggests that the
very same measure had a significant impact on Group III post 1999.21
Relating these findings to our model above, one can summarize that (i) there is clear evidence
for a significant and persistent decrease in the absence rate following a sick pay cut, β t > 0 (Proposition 4a). Similarly, sick leave rates increase when the system becomes more generous. (ii) the
labor supply adjustment of contagious diseases is smaller (and in fact close to zero) than the adjustment of noncontagious diseases and thus Proposition 4c, β nt > β ct , holds up. In addition, we
find a large decrease in shirking β nt > 0 whereas the increase in presenteeism outweighs additional infections β ct > 0 (Proposition 4b). Finally, because (iii) β nt − β ct > 0, the German sick pay
cut also led to an increase in infections (Proposition 4b).
20

This is in line with the two other existing studies evaluating this reform using SOEP data (Ziebarth and Karlsson
2010; Puhani and Sonderhof 2010)
21 There are two potential explanations for this finding. 1) Relevance of Relative Changes. The decrease in sick pay at
the end of 1996 was heatedly debated in German society and led to strikes. The main (media) focus was clearly on the
decrease in the overall sick pay level. It is plausible that Group II did not react since the main reference point mattered
here, which was the decrease in the default federal level. About 50 percent of all employees experienced a decrease in
the level to 80 percent (Ridinger 1997; Jahn 1998). Hence the exclusion of overtime pay was, relatively seen, negligible
for affected workers. It may not even have been noticed by the affected employees. After unions managed to negotiate
the general sick pay level to remain at 100 percent, they marketed and emphasized this success accordingly—but either
did not mention, or heavily down played the overtime cut. In 1999, by contrast, the exclusion of paid overtime was
the only regulatory change that made employees worse off. 2) LATE. Since the model identifies the Local Average
Treatment Effect (LATE), it could simply be that paid overtime was more relevant for Group III than for Group II.

28

4.5

Parametric Difference-in-Differences Model

We now estimate the following conventional parametric DiD model separately for different disease categories:

log(yit ) = γi + β 0 + β 1 GroupIi ×0 97 −0 98 + β 2 GroupIi ×0 99 −0 04+

(18)

β 3 GroupI Ii ×0 97 −0 98 + β 4 GroupI Ii ×0 99 −0 04+

+ δt + µit

where log(yit ) stands for one of our dependent sick leave measures for industry i at time t. γi
are 17 industry fixed effects and δt 10 year fixed effects. The standard errors are routinely clustered
at the industry level. We interact the treatment indicators as defined below with two time period
dummy variables ’97-’98 and ’99-’04. The reference period is the years 1994 to 1996.
GroupIi as well as GroupI Ii are binary treatment indicators. As for the 1996 reform, Group
I experienced a sick pay cut from 100 percent to 80 percent, while Group II underwent a soft
sick pay cut—with paid overtime excluded (Table C1). Group III was not affected, serving as the
control group. Thus β 1 identifies the effect of the sick pay cut for Group I relative to Group III and
the years 1997/1998 and relative to the time between 1994 and 1996. Moreover, β 3 identifies the
effect of excluding paid overtime for Group II in 1997/1998 relative to the pre-reform period.
As for the 1999 reform, the main pay level was increased again for Group I, but overtime
excluded from the basis of calculation. Group II was not affected and serves as control group.
Group III experienced a soft cut (Table C1). Thus, β 2 identifies the post-1999 level effect, relative
to pre-1997 levels, or the joint effect of the two reforms for Group I. Moreover, the difference
β 2 − β 1 identifies the effect of the increase in sick pay levels from 80 percent to 100 percent after
1999 relative to 1997/1998. In contrast, β 3 -β 4 identifies the effect of the overtime exclusion for
Group III in the post-1999 era relative to pre-1999. Recall that overtime was excluded for Group II
in 1997 while nothing happened to Group III, whereas in 1999, overtime was excluded for Group
III while nothing happened to Group II. Consequently, − β 4 + β 3 identifies the estimate of the
1999 overtime exclusion for Group III. Hence, we differentiate three different groups over three
different time periods but only need to estimate four relevant parameters. Since the outcome
measures are in logarithms, β 1 to β 4 directly provide the reform-related change of the outcome
variable in percent.

29

Disease-Specific Labor Supply Adjustments: Decomposing the Total Labor Supply Effects
Estimating β̂ t , β̂ nt , and β̂ ct . Table 3 shows the results of the DiD model in Equation (18) using
different outcome variables: the logarithm of sick cases per 100 enrollees by the disease categories
total, musculoskeletal, infectious, respiratory, and injuries & poisoning. Each column is one model
as in Equation (18). For illustrative purposes, we solely show the coefficients of β 1 to β 4 and
suppress the remaining ones. In the row below, we display the results of an F-test β 2 − β 1 = 0 to
test for the effect of the level increase for Group I relative to Group III in 1999. As discussed in
the previous section, the empirical models closely identify the theoretical model. For example, β 1
in the first row of the first column of Table 3 estimates β t in Equation (16) and tests Proposition
4a. The finding is then cross-checked by β 2 − β 1 = 0 which likewise test Proposition 4a using the
increase in sick pay as as an exogenous source of variation.
Note that the overtime exclusion, or “soft sick pay cut” as we call it, essentially also tests
Proposition 4a and the size and sign of β t in Equation (16) since any variant of making the sick
pay less generous could be interpreted as a decrease in sick pay. However, we believe that the
best suited coefficient estimates to test Propositions 4a–c are the ones resulting from GroupIi ×0
97 −0 98—the β 1 s for the different disease categories. These are the effects of the initial reduction
in the sick pay replacement rate from 100 percent to 80 percent in 1997/1998. However, we double
and cross-check the consistency and plausibility of these main β 1 findings using the effects of the
increase in the replacement rate from 80 percent to 100 percent in 1999 (β 2 − β 1 ), the exclusion
of overtime for Group II in 1997 (β 3 ) and Group III and 1999 (β 3 − β 4 ), as well as the overall
development of the sick leave rates from 1999 to 2004—when the system as a whole was more
restrictive—relative to 1994 to 1996 (β 2 ; β 4 ).
[Insert Table 3 about here]
One can summarize the following from Table 3: First, during the time when sick pay was cut
to 80 percent, in 1997 and 1998, we find overall decreases in the sickness rate by about 22 percent
(β 1 in column (1)).22 This reflects β̂ t in Equation (16), i.e., the total labor supply effect. As seen,
β 1 is highly significant and clearly larger than zero, which confirms Proposition 4a. Related to
the decrease in sick pay of 20 percent, one obtains a sickness rate elasticity with respect to the
replacement rate of about one. Decreases of about 20 percent are also found for the “mixed”
infectious and noninfectious category of respiratory diseases (column [3]).
22

This is just an approximation. The exact effect in percent is 100 · (exp( X )1), i.e., 24.6 percent.

30

Second, musculoskeletal diseases represent the noncontagious disease category n in our model
in the second section. Following the sick pay cut, the sick leave rate of musculoskeletal diseases
decreased overproportionally by 34 percent (column [4], β 1 ). The overproportional decrease for
musculoskeletal diseases, which is composed of 70 percent back pain cases, fits the common perception that the labor supply of this category is particularly elastic and prone to shirking behavior.
Equation (11) of our model illustrates the analytical derivation of β nt , β nt , which is represented by
β 1 in column (4) of Table 3, equals the decrease in noncontagious absenteeism as sick pay decreases.
Third, infectious diseases, ICD-10 codes A00-B99, represents the contagious disease category c
in our model. The estimate stands for the β ct in our model in Equation (13). As β 1 in column (2)
of Table 3 shows, the infectious disease rate fell underproportionally by an estimated 15 percent
as a response to the sick pay cut in 1997/1998. Note that this estimate is likely upward biased,
since the pre-1997 common time trend for infectious diseases is not 100 percent clean, as Figure 4d
nicely illustrates. The unbiased estimate likely tends toward zero. In any case, while the findings
suggest that β nt > β ct as formulated in Hypothesis 1 and Proposition 4c, it is also clear that β̂ t > 0
holds, meaning that the reform led to a decrease in overall sickness absence.
Further Results and Robustness Checks. The labor supply effect in column (5) of Table 3
serves as a robustness test since 50% of all injuries & poisoning absences are due to workplace accidents (BKK 2004). The first bill that cut sick pay, however, excluded sick leave due to workplace
accidents from the cuts (see Table C1). Indeed, as see by β 1 in column (5), the injuries & poisoning
absence rate decreased underproportionally by almost exactly half the rate than the overall rate,
namely by 11.2 percent instead of 22 percent.
Second, the β 2 estimate provides the change in sickness rates in the post-1999 era relative to
the pre-1997 era for Group I. Meanwhile, the F-test, β 2 - β 1 = 0, yields the effect of the increase
in the replacement rate to 100 percent in 1999. Thus β 2 reflects the long-term impact after a series
of reforms that made the overall system more restrictive and shows a decrease of 13.5 percent at
the 10 percent significance level for all diseases. β 2 - β 1 is highly significant for all but infectious
diseases. Column (1) suggests that the overall rate increased by 8.4 percent after the reversal.
Column (4) confirms the findings above and suggests that musculoskeletal diseases, i.e. back
pain, reacted overproportionally with an increase of 19.1 percent following the increase in sick
pay to 100 percent.
Third, all separate β 3 and β 4 estimates are imprecise and relatively small in size meaning that—
in a regression framework that employs industry and year fixed effects—we are unable to detect

31

significant sick leave rate changes in response to the mild sick leave cuts that excluded overtime
from the basis of calculation. However, this is at least partly a function of the statistical power that
our data offer. Note that all coefficients carry the expected sign and most magnitudes lie around 3
to 5%.

Does the Decrease in Noncontagious Absenteeism Outweigh the Externalities of Contagious
Presenteeism?
Estimating β nt - β ct . To directly test the model predictions, we now pool all disease categories
and estimate a triple difference model. Proposition 4c allows us to directly carry out the following
statistical tests β nt = β ct . The triple difference model is similar to the one in Equation (18) above
but pools all disease groups and adds additional triple interaction terms like λ1 GroupIi ×0 97 −0
98 × Disd , λ2 GroupIi ×0 99 −0 04 × Disd etc. to the model, where Disd represents a vector of disease
indicators. The estimates for λ then directly indicate how the reform effect for every disease
category differs from the baseline disease effect.
Table C4 shows the results of this triple difference model. Column (1) of Table C4 simply
replicates column (4) of Table 3 focusing on musculoskeletal diseases, our proxy for noncontagious
diseases.
Column (2) adds the main contagious disease category infectious diseases and has thus twice
as many observations (396 industry-year estimates). With musculoskeletal diseases as the baseline
category, the four triple DiD interaction terms 1) GroupIi ×0 97 −0 98 × In f ectious, 2) GroupIi ×0
99 −0 04 × In f ectious, 3) GroupI Ii ×0 97 −0 98 × In f ectious, and 4) GroupI Ii ×0 99 −0 04 × In f ectious
directly test Hypothesis 1 (β nt = β ct ). What Table 3 already suggested can now be tested with
statistical certainty in column (2) of Table C4: β̂ ct - β̂ nt = 19.3 percentage points, meaning that the
decrease in the contagious sick leave rate was a significant 19.3 percentage points smaller than
the decrease in the noncontagious sick leave rate (14.8 percent vs. 34.1 percent, see columns [2]
and [4] of Table 3). Again, this is likely an underestimate since we likely overestimate β ct . Figures
4b and 4d illustrate very nicely and even more clearly than Table C4 that there was basically no
behavioral reaction for infectious diseases while one observes substantial behavioral reactions for
musculoskeletal diseases.
Column (3) additionally adds respiratory diseases to the data set. While not all respiratory diseases are contagious, this category contains “influenza (J09)”, commonly referred to as the flu. As
above, the four triple interaction terms identify the differential effect relative to the baseline category musculoskeletal diseases. Although we lack statistical power, there is suggestive evidence
32

that the respiratory sick leave rate decreased by about 13 percent less than the noncontagious
baseline.

5

Conclusion

Empirically identifying presenteeism behavior is extremely challenging, yet crucial in order to test
for one major economic justification for publicly provided sick pay: the negative externalities associated with contagious presenteeism. Contagious presenteeism refers to the phenomenon when
employees with infectious diseases go to work sick and infect co-workers and customers. Such
behavior is a major public health issue and one driving force of the spread of contagious diseases.
If contagion is unobservable, which is usually the case at the beginning of sickness episodes, then
state regulation may reduce market inefficiencies by mandating employers to provide monetary
incentives for employees to stay home when sick. If such monetary incentives work, and economic
theory as well empirical studies strongly suggest that they do, then public sick pay schemes reduce contagious presenteeism and the spread of diseases.
To our knowledge, this study is the first that theoretically derives and empirically implements
two tests for the existence of contagious presenteeism and negative externalities in sickness insurance schemes.
First, using standard DD reduced-form methods, we analyze the staggered implementation
of employer sick pay mandates at the city and state level in the U.S.—the industrialized country
with the least generous sick pay coverage. Using Google Flu Trends data, we show that influenzalike disease rates decrease significantly when employees gain access to paid sick leave. Almost
half of all U.S. employees do not have access to sick leave insurance. Through the US sick pay
mandates, about 20K employees per 100K population gain sick leave coverage for themselves
and their children. Our estimates suggest that the relatively comprehensive laws at the level of
seven major U.S. cities helped preventing about 100 influenza-like infections per week and 100K
population. Infections rates may further decrease in the medium to long-run when employees
have accrued larger amounts of paid sick days.
The next part of the paper provides a theoretical framework illustrating the behavioral employee reactions to changes in sick pay coverage. The model defines different possible cases of
workplace absence behavior under contagious and noncontagious continuous sickness levels. As
such, we can also decompose classical ’moral hazard’ into noncontagious absenteeism and contagious presenteeism behavior. The former does not imply negative health spillovers, whereas case

33

the latter does. Marginal employees with contagious diseases call in sick instead of working sick
when provided with sick leave coverage. We also derive testable conditions for the overall labor
supply effect under sickness absence insurance and its decomposed elements.
Finally, we use two German sick pay reforms and administrative physician-certified sick leave
data at the industry-level to illustrate how one can implement our proposed empirical test for the
existence of contagious presenteeism. Under the identifying conditions, we indeed find indirect
evidence for the existence of contagious presenteeism. However, assuming that the identifying
assumptions hold up, we also show that—in Germany with one of the most generous sick leave
systems worldwide—the reduction in noncontagious absenteeism was larger than the increase in
the infectious disease rate (due to contagious presenteeism) when sick pay was cut from a baseline
level of 100 percent.
Researchers could exploit different settings and our proposed methods, or variants of it, to
test for the existence and the degree of contagious presenteeism, noncontagious absenteeism, and
the overall labor supply adjustments. Important fields of applications include contagious presenteeism by teachers or school kids, e.g., induced by teacher or parental sick pay schemes that may
or may not cover sickness of children. Schools are important sources for the spread of contagious
diseases. Another relevant setting would be the firm level to test for contagious presenteeism
behavior by employees with a high degree of customer contact. As a last example, contagious
presenteeism behavior by health care workers can be life-threatening for patients but potentially
minimized by optimized sick pay schemes. Note that our test can be carried out using many different types of data, including school-level, firm-level data, or hospital-level data. Ideally, one
would want to exogenously vary the generosity of the sick pay scheme under investigation, then
measure changes in noncontagious absenteeism and contagious presenteeism behavior, and then
readjust until both undesirable employee behaviors are minimized.
More research is also needed in order to better understand how exactly contagious presenteeism leads to infections of coworkers and customers and how it affects overall workplace productivity. Firm-level and employee-level compensation strategies to dampen sickness-related productivity losses are also fruitful and relevant research questions.

References
Adda, J. (2016). Economic activity and the spread of viral diseases: Evidence from high frequency
data. Quarterly Journal of Economics forthcoming, –.
Ahn, T. and J. G. Trogdon (2015). Geospatial patterns in influenza vaccination: Evidence from
uninsured and publicly insured children in North Carolina. American Journal of Infection Control 43(3), 234–240.

34

Ahn, T. and A. Yelowitz (2015). The short-run impacts of Connecticuts paid sick leave legislation.
Applied Economics Letters 22(15), 1267–1272.
Ahn, T. and A. Yelowitz (2016). Paid sick leave and absenteeism: The first evidence from the U.S.
mimeo. https://sites.google.com/site/tomsyahn/, last accessed on May 12, 2016.
Arnott, R. and J. Stiglitz (1991). The welfare economics of moral hazard. In H. Louberg (Ed.), Risk,
Information and Insurance, pp. 91–121. Springer Netherlands.
Aronsson, G., K. Gustafsson, and M. Dallner (2000). Sick but yet at work. An empirical study of
sickness presenteeism. Journal of Epidemiology & Community Health 54(7), 502–509.
Askildsen, J. E., E. Bratberg, and Ø. A. Nilsen (2005). Unemployment, labor force composition
and sickness absence: A panel study. Health Economics 14(11), 1087–1101.
Barmby, T. and M. Larguem (2009). Coughs and sneezes spread diseases: An empirical study of
absenteeism and infectious illness. Journal of Health Economics 28(5), 1012–1017.
Barmby, T., J. Sessions, and J. G. Treble (1994). Absenteeism, efficiency wages and shirking. Scandinavian Journal of Economics 96(4), 561–566.
Bhattacharya, J. and M. Packalen (2012). The other ex ante moral hazard in health. Journal of Health
Economics 31(1), 135–146.
BKK (1994-2004). Krankheitsartenstatistik. BKK Bundesverband.
Blank, P. R., M. M. Schwenkglenks, and T. D. Szucs (2009). Vaccination coverage rates in eleven
European countries during two consecutive influenza seasons. Journal of Infection 58(6), 446–458.
Blien, U., E. J. Jahn, G. Stephan, M. Knig, and J. Mller (2009). Impacts of minimum wages: a
microdata analysis for the German construction sector. International Journal of Manpower 30(7),
716–741.
BLS (2015). Monthly state and metropolitan unemployment rates. http://download.bls.
gov/pub/time.series/la/, last retrieved on September 1, 2015.
BLS (2016). Labor force statistics from the Current Population Survey: Employment-population
ratio. http://data.bls.gov/timeseries/LNS12300000, last retrieved on May 11, 2016.
Böckerman, P. and E. Laukkanen (2010). What makes you work while you are sick? Evidence
from a survey of workers. The European Journal of Public Health 20(1), 43–46.
Boots, S. W., K. Martinson, and A. Danziger (2009). Employers’ perspectives on San Francisco’s
paid sick leave policy. Technical report, The Urban Institute. http://www.urban.org/
publications/411868.html, last accessed on April 5, 2012.
Brown, S. (1994). Dynamic implications of absence behaviour. Applied Economics 26, 1163–1175.
Brown, S. and J. G. Sessions (1996). The economics of absence: Theory and evidence. Journal of
Economic Surveys 10(1), 23–53.
Brown, S. and J. G. Sessions (2004). Absenteeism, presenteeism, and shirking. Economic Issues 9(1),
15–23.
Bruine de Bruin, W., A. Parker, and J. Maurer (2011). Assessing small non-zero perceptions of
chance: The case of H1N1 (swine) flu risks. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 42(2), 145–159.
Bundesverband der Betriebskrankenkassen (BKK) (1994-2004). Krankheitsartenstatistik. BKK Bundesverband.
Busse, R. and A. Riesberg (2004). Health care systems in transition: Germany (1 ed.). WHO Regional
Office for Europe on behalf of the European Observatory on Health Systems and Policies.
Carneiro, H. A. and E. Mylonakis (2009). Google Trends: A web-based tool for real-time surveillance of disease outbreaks. Clinical Infectious Diseases 49(10), 1557–1564.
Carneiro, P., K. V. Loken, and K. G. Salvanes (2015). A flying start? Maternity leave benefits and
long run outcomes of children. Journal of Political Economy 123(2), 365–412.
35

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2014). Final state-level influenza vaccination coverage
estimates for the 2010-11 season – United States, National Immunization Survey and Behavioral Risk
Factor Surveillance System, August 2010 through May 2011. CDC. http://www.cdc.gov/flu/
fluvaxview/coverage_1011estimates.htm, last accessed on June 19, 2014.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2016). Seasonal Influenza (Flu). CDC. http://www.
cdc.gov/flu/about/disease/index.htm, last accessed on May 9, 2016.
Chatterji, M. and C. J. Tilley (2002). Sickness, absenteeism, presenteeism, and sick pay. Oxford
Economic Papers 54, 669–687.
Dahl, G. B., K. V. Loken, M. Mogstad, and K. V. Salvanes (2016). What is the case for paid maternity
leave? Review of Economics and Statistics forthcoming.
Dale-Olsen, H. (2013). Absenteeism, efficiency wages, and marginal taxes. Scandinavian Journal of
Economics 115(4), 1158–1185.
Dale-Olsen, H. (2014). Sickness absence, sick leave pay, and pay schemes. Labour 28(1), 40–63.
De Paola, M., V. Scoppa, and V. Pupo (2014). Absenteeism in the Italian public sector: The effects
of changes in sick leave policy. Journal of Labor Economics 32(2), 337–360.
Earn, D. J. D., P. W. Andrews, and B. M. Bolker (2014). Population-level effects of suppressing
fever. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 281(1778).
Eibich, P., H. Schmitz, and N. R. Ziebarth (2012). Add-on premiums increase price transparency:
More policy holders switch health plans. DIW Economic Bulletin 2(2), 15–24.
Einav, L., A. Finkelstein, S. P. Ryan, P. Schrimpf, and M. R. Cullen (2013). Selection on moral
hazard in health insurance. The American Economic Review 103(1), 178–219.
Felder, S. (2008). To wait or to pay for medical treatment? Restraining ex-post moral hazard in
health insurance. Journal of Health Economics 27(6), 1418–1422.
Fevang, E., S. Markussen, and K. Røed (2014). The sick pay trap. Journal of Labor Economics 32(2),
305–336.
German Federal Statistical Office (2014). Federal Health Monitoring. www.gbe-bund.de, last accessed on October 25, 2014.
Gilleskie, D. (2010). Work absences and doctor visits during an illness episode: The differential role
of preferences, production, and policies among men and women. Journal of Econometrics 156(1),
148–163.
Gilleskie, D. B. (1998). A dynamic stochastic model of medical care use and work absence. Econometrica 66(1), 1–45.
Ginsberg, J., M. H. Mohebbi, R. S. Patel, L. Brammer, M. S. Smolinski, and L. Brilliant (2009).
Detecting influenza epidemics using search engine query data. Nature 457(7232), 1012–1014.
Google (2015). Google Flu Trends. https://www.google.org/flutrends/about/data/
flu/us/data.txt, last retrieved on September 1, 2015.
Gruber, J. (1994). The incidence of mandated maternity benefits. American Economic Review 84(3),
622–641.
Hans Böckler Stiftung (2014). WSI Tarifarchiv. Deutscher Gewerkschaftsbund (DGB). http:
//www.boeckler.de/index_wsi_tarifarchiv.htm, last accessed on June 19, 2014.
Hesselius, P., P. Johansson, and P. Nilsson (2009). Sick of your colleagues’ absence? Journal of the
European Economic Association 7(2-3), 112.
Heymann, J., H. J. Rho, J. Schmitt, and A. Earle (2009). Contagion nation: a comparison of paid sick day policies in 22 countries. Technical Report 2009-19, Center for Economic and Policy Research (CEPR). http://www.cepr.net/documents/publications/
paid-sick-days-2009-05.pdf, last accessed on April 5, 2012.

36

Hirsch, B., D. S. J. Lechmann, and C. Schnabel (2015). Coming to work while sick: An economic
theory of presenteeism with an application to German data. IZA Discussion Papers 9015.
Ichino, A. and G. Maggi (2000). Work environment and individual background: Explaining regional shirking differentials in a large Italian firm. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(3),
1057–1090.
Ichino, A. and E. Moretti (2009). Biological gender differences, absenteeism, and the earnings gap.
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1(1), 183–218.
Ichino, A. and R. T. Riphahn (2005). The effect of employment protection on worker effort. A
comparison of absenteeism during and after probation. Journal of the European Economic Association 3(1), 120–143.
Jahn, J. (1998). Lohnfortzahlung: Gerichte stehen vor Herkulesaufgabe. Handelsblatt July, 2, 4.
Johansson, P. and M. Palme (1996). Do economic incentives affect work absence? Empirical evidence using Swedish micro data. Journal of Public Economics 59(1), 195–218.
Johansson, P. and M. Palme (2002). Assessing the effect of public policy on worker absenteeism.
Journal of Human Resources 37(2), 381–409.
Johansson, P. and M. Palme (2005). Moral hazard and sickness insurance. Journal of Public Economics 89(9-10), 1879–1890.
Johns, G. (2010). Presenteeism in the workplace: A review and research agenda. Journal of Organizational Behavior 31(4), 519–542.
Jorgensen, H. and E. Appelbaum (2014). Expanding federal family and medical leave coverage:
Who benefits from changes in eligibility requirements? CEPR Reports and Issue Briefs.
Karlsson, M., T. Nilsson, and S. Pichler (2014). The impact of the 1918 Spanish flu epidemic on
economic performance in Sweden. Journal of Health Economics 36(0), 1–19.
Kermack, W. and A. McKendrick (1927). A contribution to the mathematical theory of epidemics.
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A 115(772), 700–721.
Lalive, R., A. Schlosser, A. Steinhauer, and J. Zweimüller (2014). Parental leave and mothers’
careers: The relative importance of job protection and cash benefits. The Review of Economic
Studies 81(1), 219–265.
Lazer, D., R. Kennedy, G. King, and A. Vespignani (2014). Google Flu Trends still appears sick:
An evaluation of the 2013-2014 flu season. Working Paper 155056, Harvard University OpenScholar.
Lovell, V. (2003). No time to be sick: Why everyone suffers when workers don’t have paid
sick leave. Policy report, Institute for Womens Policy Research. http://www.iwpr.org/
publications/pubs/, last accessed at March 19, 2014.
Markussen, S. (2012). The individual cost of sick leave. Journal of Population Economics 25(4), 1287–
1306.
Markussen, S., A. Mykletun, and K. Røed (2012). The case for presenteeism: Evidence from Norway’s sickness insurance program. Journal of Public Economics 96(11), 959–972.
Markussen, S., K. Røed, O. J. Røgeberg, and S. Gaure (2011). The anatomy of absenteeism. Journal
of Health Economics 30(2), 277–292.
Maurer, J. (2009). Who has a clue to preventing the flu? Unravelling supply and demand effects
on the take-up of influenza vaccinations. Journal of Health Economics 28(3), 704–717.
Mullahy, J. (1999). It’ll only hurt a second? Microeconomic determinants of who gets flu shots.
Health Economics 8(1), 9–24.
Newhouse, J. P. (2006). Reconsidering the moral hazard-risk avoidance tradeoff. Journal of Health
Economics 25(5), 1005–1014.

37

Nordberg, M. and K. Røed (2009). Economic incentives, business cycles, and long-term sickness
absence. Industrial Relations 48(2), 203–230.
Nyman, J. A. (1999). The economics of moral hazard revisited. Journal of Health Economics 18(6),
811–824.
Pauly, M. (1983). More on moral hazard. Journal of Health Economics 2(1), 81–85.
Pauly, M. V. (1974). Overinsurance and public provision of insurance: The roles of moral hazard
and adverse selection. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 88(1), 44–62.
Pauly, M. V., S. Nicholson, D. Polsky, M. L. Berger, and C. Sharda (2008). Valuing reductions
in on-the-job illness: ’presenteeism’ from managerial and economic perspectives. Health Economics 17(4), 469–485.
Philipson, T. (2000). Economic epidemiology and infectious diseases. In A. J. Culyer and J. P.
Newhouse (Eds.), Handbook of Health Economics, Volume 1 of Handbook of Health Economics, Chapter 33, pp. 1761–1799. Elsevier.
Pichler, S. (2015). Sickness absence, moral hazard, and the business cycle. Health economics 24(6),
692–710.
Pichler, S. and N. R. Ziebarth (2016). Labor Market Effects of US Sick Pay Mandates. IZA Discussion Papers 9867.
Puhani, P. A. and K. Sonderhof (2010). The effects of a sick pay reform on absence and on healthrelated outcomes. The Journal of Health Economics 29(2), 285–302.
Rattenhuber, P. (2011). Building the minimum wage: Germany’s first sectoral minimum wage
and its impact on wages in the construction industry. Discussion papers, German Institute for
Economic Research (DIW Berlin) 1111.
Ridinger, R. (1997). Einfluss arbeitsrechtlicher Regelungen auf die Beschäftigungsentwicklung im
Handwerk–Ergebnisse von Befragungen von Handwerksbetrieben im 3. Quartal 1997. Technical report, Zentralverband des Deutschen Handwerks. http://www.zdh.de, last accessed on
June 19, 2009.
Riphahn, R. T. (2004). Employment protection and effort among German employees. Economics
Letters 85, 353–357.
Ross, R. (1916). An application of the theory of probabilities to the study of a priori pathometry.
Part I. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A 92(638), 204–230.
Rossin-Slater, M., C. J. Ruhm, and J. Waldfogel (2013). The effects of California’s Paid Family
Leave Program on mothers leave? Taking and subsequent labor market outcomes. Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management 32(2), 224–245.
Ruhm, C. J. (1998). The economic consequences of parental leave mandates: Lessons from Europe.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(1), 285–317.
Ruhm, C. J. (2000). Parental leave and child health. Journal of Health Economics 19(6), 931–960.
Sandy, R. and R. F. Elliott (2005). Long-term illness and wages: The impact of the risk of occupationally related long-term illness on earnings. Journal of Human Resources 40(3), 744–768.
Schmitz, H. and N. R. Ziebarth (2017). Does price framing affect the consumer price sensitivity of
health plan choice? Journal of Human Resources 52(1).
Scoppa, V. and D. Vuri (2014). Absenteeism, unemployment and employment protection legislation: evidence from Italy. IZA Journal of Labor Economics 3(1), 1–25.
Simpson, R. (1998). Presenteeism, power and organizational change: Long hours as a career barrier and the impact on the working lives of women managers. British Journal of Management 9,
37–50.
SOEPGroup (2008). German Socio-economic Panel Study (SOEP), data of the years 1984 2007. DOI:
10.5684/soep.v24.
38

Stoecker, C., N. J. Sanders, and A. Barreca (2016). Success Is something to sneeze at: Influenza
mortality in cities that participate in the Super Bowl. American Journal of Health Economics 2(1),
125143.
Susser, P. and N. R. Ziebarth (2016). Profiling the us sick leave landscape: Presenteeim among
females. Health Services Research. www.nicolasziebarth.com, retrieved March 13, 2016.
Techniker Krankenkasse (2015).
Gesundheitsreport 2015.
http://www.tk.de/tk/
broschueren-und-mehr/studien-und-auswertungen/gesundheitsreport-2015/
718618, retrieved November 5, 2015.
Thomas, M. (2015). The impact of mandated maternity benefits on the gender differential in promotions: Examining the role of adverse selection. Technical report. mimeo.
Tominey, E. (2016). Female labor supply and household employment shocks: Maternity leave as
an insurance mechanism. European Economic Review forthcoming.
Uscher-Pines, L., J. Maurer, and K. M. Harris (2011). Racial and ethnic disparities in uptake
and location of vaccination for 2009-H1N1 and seasonal influenza. American Journal of Public
Health 101(7), 1252–1255.
Vynnycky, E. and R. White (2010). An Introduction to Infectious Disease Modelling (1 ed.). Oxford
University Press.
Waldfogel, J. (1998). Understanding the “family gap” in pay for women with children. Journal of
Economic Perspectives 12(1), 137–156.
World Health Organization (2014). Influenza (Seasonal). WHO. http://www.who.int/
mediacentre/factsheets/fs211/en/, last accessed on June 19, 2014.
Ziebarth, N. R. (2013). Long-term absenteeism and moral hazard—Evidence from a natural experiment. Labour Economics 24, 277292.
Ziebarth, N. R. and M. Karlsson (2010). A natural experiment on sick pay cuts, sickness absence,
and labor costs. Journal of Public Economics 94(11-12), 1108–1122.
Ziebarth, N. R. and M. Karlsson (2014). The effects of expanding the generosity of the statutory
sickness insurance system. Journal of Applied Econometrics 29(2), 208–230.

39

Figures and Tables

Figure 1 Event Study—Effect of Sick Pay Mandates in

0
-.2
-.4
-.8

-.6

log(flu) (treatment=0)

.2

.4

Panel A: Cities

-720 -600 -480 -360 -240 -120

0

120

240

360

480

600

720

240

360

480

600

720

days to/since reform

.4
.2
0
-.2
-.4
-.6
-.8

log(flu) (treatment=0)

.6

.8

1

Panel B: States

-720 -600 -480 -360 -240 -120

0

120

days to/since reform

40

Figure 2 Graphical Representation and Classification of Shares of Employees Working and on Sick
Leave

Panel A: Noncontagious Diseases

Working
Absent for Working for
Noncontagious Absenteeism
Absent

σ∗ (

)

σ∗ (

)

σ

σ∗ (0)

Panel B: Contagious Diseases

Contagious Presenteeism
Presenteeism for
Absent for
Absent

σ∗ (

)

σ∗ (

)

σ∗ (0)

σ

Panel A shows the share of employees who draw a noncontagious disease. After the sick pay cut, shirking
decreases. Panel B depicts the same situation for contagious diseases. A sick pay cut increases contagious
presenteeism and pt , represented by the outward shift of the curve.

41

Figure 3 Distribution of (a) Sick Leave Cases and (b) Logarithm of Sick Leave Cases per 100 Employees

Figure 4 Development of Sick Leave Rates by Treatment Groups Over Time

b) Muscoloskeletal

-.5

-.25

-.2

-.4

-.15

Log(cases) (´94=0)
-.3
-.2

Log(cases) (´94=0)
-.1
-.05

0

-.1

.05

0

a) All diseases

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

1994

1996

1998

Year

2000

2002

2004

2002

2004

Year

Log(cases) (´94=0)
.4
0

-.3

-.2

.2

Log(cases) (´94=0)
-.1
0

.6

.1

.8

d) Infectious

.2

c) Respiratory

1994

1996

1998

2000

2002

2004

Year

1994

1996

1998

2000
Year

The solid line shows the development of industries in Group I. This group experienced a sick pay cut from 100% to
80% in 1997 and the reverse of this cut in 1999. The short dashed line represents Group II. This group witnessed a “soft
cut” in 1997 through the exclusion of overtime. Finally, the long dashed line depicts Group III, which had a soft cut in
1999. For more information about the sick pay reforms, see Table C1.

42

Table 1 Effect of Introduction of Sick Pay Mandates on Influenza Rate (Sample I: U.S. Cities 2003-2015)

TreatedCity×LawEffective

(1)

(2)

-0.0569**
(0.0238)

-0.0545**
(0.0229)

TreatedCity×LawPassed

(3)

(4)

-0.0244
(0.0252)

-0.0216
(0.0256)

TreatedCity×ProbationOver

N

49,560

49,560

49,560

49,560

(5)

(6)

-0.0644**
(0.0293)

-0.0623**
(0.0282)

49,560

49,560

NOTE: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01; standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the city level. The dependent
variable is always the logarithm of the number of influenza-like illnesses (ILI) per 100,000 doctor visits as reported
by Google (2015). All regressions contain week-of-year fixed effects and city fixed effects as in equation (1). Each
column represents one model, estimated by OLS. Even numbered columns additionally control for the local
monthly unemployment rate (BLS 2015). TreatedCity is a treatment indicator which is one for all cities listed in
Table A1. The entire sample of cities considered is in columns one and two of Table A2.
SOURCE: Google (2015), own calculation and illustration.

Table 2 Effect of Introduction of Sick Pay Mandates on Influenza Rate (Sample II: U.S. States 2003-2015)

TreatedState×LawEffective

(1)

(2)

-0.0223*
(0.0131)

-0.0264*
(0.0147)

TreatedState×LawPassed

(3)

(4)

-0.00889
(0.0179)

-0.0113
(0.0198)

TreatedState×ProbationOver

N

30,141

30,141

30,141

30,141

(5)

(6)

-0.0139
(0.0104)

-0.0185
(0.0112)

30,141

30,141

NOTE: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01; standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the state level. The dependent variable is always the logarithm of the number of influenza-like illnesses (ILI) per 100,000 doctor visits as
reported by Google (2015). All regressions contain week-of-year fixed effects and state fixed effects as in equation
(1). Each column represents one model, estimated by OLS. Even numbered columns additionally control for the
monthly unemployment rate in the state (BLS 2015). TreatedState is a treatment indicator which is one for all
states listed in Table A1. The entire sample of states considered is in column three of Table A2.
SOURCE: Google (2015), own calculation and illustration;

43

Table 3 Effect of Changes in Sick Pay on Normalized Cases of Sick Leave by Disease Groups
All diseases
(1)

Infectious
(2)

Respiratory
(3)

Musculosk.
(4)

Inj. & Pois.
(5)

Group I×’97-’98
(Effect of Cut ’97)

-0.220***
(0.057)

-0.148***
(0.047)

-0.208***
(0.054)

-0.341***
(0.076)

-0.112**
(0.045)

Group I×’99-’04
(Level post-’99 vs. pre-’97)

-0.135*
(0.070)

-0.075
(0.053)

-0.131***
(0.044)

-0.150
(0.157)

0.030
(0.087)

Group II×’97-’98
(Effect of Soft Cut ’97)

-0.029
(0.065)

-0.041
(0.073)

-0.022
(0.061)

-0.038
(0.086)

-0.006
(0.065)

Group II×’99-’04
(Level post-’99 vs. pre-’97)

0.053
(0.078)

0.053
(0.070)

0.017
(0.055)

0.131
(0.164)

0.107
(0.095)

[Group I×’99-’04] - [Group I×’97-’98]
pvalue
(Effect of Increase ’99)

0.084***
0.000

0.073
0.121

0.077***
0.000

0.191**
0.032

0.142***
0.004

R2
Observations
Number of industries

0.659
198
18

0.949
198
18

0.816
198
18

0.858
198
18

0.918
198
18

NOTE: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01; standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the industry-level. All regressions are
weighted by the annual number of industry-specific sickness fund enrollees. The descriptive statistics are in the Appendix (Table C2). Each column represents one model as in equation (18), estimated by OLS, i.e., all models include industry and year fixed
effects. The dependent variables are logarithms of the normalized sick leave cases per 100 employees. Column (1) employs the
total number of sick leave cases as dependent variable, column (2) solely uses certified infectious sick leave cases and so on. For
more information on how the variables were generated, see section 2.2. Treated is a treatment indicator with one for Group I and
zero for Group III, whereas PartlyTreated is one for Group II and zero for Group III. Group I experienced a sick pay cut from 100
to 80% in 1997 and a reversal in 1999. Group II experienced a soft cut in 1997 and Group III experienced a soft cut in 1999. For
more information about the sick pay reforms, see Table C1.

SOURCE: BKK (2004), own calculation and illustration;

Appendix A
Table A1 Overview of Employer Sick Pay Mandates in the U.S.
Region
(1)

Law Passed
(2)

Law Effective
(3)

Content
(4)

San Francisco, CA

Nov 7, 2006

Feb 5, 2007

all employees including part-time and temporary; 1 hour of paid sick leave for every 30 hours worked;
up to 5 to 9 days depending on firm size; for own sickness or family member; 90 days accrual period

Washington, DC

May 13, 2008

Nov 13, 2008

Dec 18, 2013
(extension pending funding)

Feb 22, 2014
(retrospective in Sep 2014)

’qualified employees’; 1 hour of paid sick leave for every 43 hours, 90 days accrual period;
up to 3 to 9 days depend. on firm size; own sickness or family; no health care or restaurant workers
extension to 20,000 temporary workers and tipped employees

Connecticut

July 1, 2011

Jan 1, 2012

full-time service sector employees in firms>49 employees (20% of workforce); 1 hour for every 40 hours;
up to 5 days; own sickness or family member, 680 hours accrual period (4 months)

Seattle, WA

Sep 12, 2011

Sep 1, 2012

all employees in firms with >4 full-time employees; 1 hour for every 30 or 40 hours worked;
up to 5 to 13 days depending on firm size, for own sickness or family member; 180 days accrual period

New York, NY

June 26, 2013
Jan 17, 2014 extended

April 1, 2014
(pending economy)

employees w >80 hours p.a in firms >4 employees or 1 domestic worker; 1 hour for every 30 hours;
up to 40 hours; own sickness or family member; 120 days accrual period

Portland, OR

March 13, 2013

Jan 1 2014

employees w >250 hours p.a. in firms >5 employees; 1 hour for every 30 hours;
up to 40 hours; own sickness or family member

Newark, NJ

Jan 29, 2014

May 29, 2014

all employees in private companies; 1 hour of for every 30 hours; 90 days accrual period;
up to 24 to 40 hours depending on size; own sickness or family

Philadelphia, PA

Feb 12, 2015

May 13, 2015

employees in firms >9 employees; 1 hour of paid sick leave for every 40 hours; 90 days accrual period;
up to 40 hours; own sickness or family member

California

September 19, 2014

July 1, 2015

all employees; 1 hour of paid sick leave for every 30 hours; 90 days accrual period;
minimum 24 hours; own sickness or family member

Massachusetts

Nov 4, 2014

July 1, 2015

employees in firms >10 employees; 1 hour of paid sick leave for every 40 hours; 90 days accrual period;
up to 40 hours; own sickness or family member

Oakland, CA

Nov 4, 2014

March 2, 2015

employees in firms >9 employees; 1 hour of paid sick leave for every 30 hours; 90 days accrual period;
up to 40 to 72 hours depending on firm size; own sickness or family member

Oregon

June 22, 2015

Jan 1, 2016

employees in firms >9 employees; 1 hour of paid sick leave for every 30 hours; 90 days accrual period;
up to 40 hours; own sickness or family member

SOURCE: several sources, own collection, own illustration.

0
-.2
-.4
-.6
-.8

log(flu) (treatment=0)

.2

.4

Figure A5 City Event Study without San Francisco

-720 -600 -480 -360 -240 -120

0

120

days to/since reform

46

240

360

480

600

720

Table A2 U.S. Cities and States (in alphabetical order) with Weekly Google Flu Data As Of
City

Month

Day

Year

City

Month

Day

Year

State

Month

Day

Year

Albany, NY
9
28 2003
Mesa, AZ
11
7 2004
Alabama
28
9 2003
Albuquerque, NM
10
12 2003
Miami, FL
9
28 2003
Alaska
12
12 2004
Anchorage, AK
10
17 2004
Milwaukee, WI
9
28 2003
Arizona
28
9 2003
Arlington, VA
9
28 2003
Nashville, TN
9
28 2003
Arkansas
7
11 2004
Atlanta, GA
9
28 2003
New York, NY
9
28 2003
California
28
9 2003
Newark, NJ
9
28 2003
Colorado
28
9 2003
Austin, TX
9
28 2003
Baltimore, MD
9
28 2003
Norfolk, VA
9
28 2003
Connecticut
28
9 2003
Oakland, CA
9
28 2003
Delaware
30
10 2005
Baton Rouge, LA
9
26 2004
Beaverton, OR
12
14 2003
Oklahoma City, OK
9
28 2003
District of Columbia
28
9 2003
Bellevue, WA
11
30 2003
Omaha, NE
9
28 2003
Florida
28
9 2003
Berkeley, CA
9
19 2004
Orlando, FL
9
28 2003
Georgia
28
9 2003
Philadelphia, PA
9
28 2003
Hawaii
2
11 2003
Birmingham, AL
9
28 2003
Boise, ID
10
3 2004
Phoenix, AZ
9
28 2003
Idaho
14
11 2004
Boston, MA
9
28 2003
Pittsburgh, PA
9
28 2003
Illinois
28
9 2003
Buffalo, NY
10
19 2003
Plano, TX
10
16 2005
Indiana
28
9 2003
Cary, NC
9
26 2004
Portland, OR
9
28 2003
Iowa
28
9 2003
Charlotte, NC
9
28 2003
Providence, RI
10
17 2004
Kansas
28
9 2003
Raleigh, NC
9
28 2003
Kentucky
28
9 2003
Chicago, IL
9
28 2003
Cleveland, OH
9
28 2003
Reno, NV
10
24 2004
Louisiana
28
9 2003
Colorado Springs, CO
9
19 2004
Reston, VA
11
28 2004
Maine
31
10 2004
Columbia, SC
10
10 2004
Richmond, VA
9
28 2003
Maryland
28
9 2003
Columbus, OH
9
28 2003
Rochester, NY
9
28 2003
Massachusetts
28
9 2003
Dallas, TX
9
28 2003
Roswell, GA
11
23 2003
Michigan
28
9 2003
Dayton, OH
11
23 2003
Sacramento, CA
9
28 2003
Minnesota
28
9 2003
Salt Lake City, UT
9
28 2003
Mississippi
28
11 2004
Denver, CO
9
28 2003
Des Moines, IA
10
17 2004
San Antonio, TX
9
28 2003
Missouri
28
9 2003
Durham, NC
9
28 2003
San Diego, CA
9
28 2003
Montana
27
11 2005
Eugene, OR
10
17 2004
San Francisco, CA
9
28 2003
Nebraska
9
11 2003
San Jose, CA
9
28 2003
Nevada
23
11 2003
Fresno, CA
12
7 2003
Ft Worth, TX
10
3 2004
Santa Clara, CA
9
28 2003
New Hampshire
30
11 2003
Gainesville, FL
10
12 2003
Scottsdale, AZ
10
24 2004
New Jersey
28
9 2003
Grand Rapids, MI
10
3 2004
Seattle, WA
9
28 2003
New Mexico
17
10 2004
Greensboro, NC
11
14 2004
Somerville, MA
9
28 2003
New York
28
9 2003
Greenville, SC
10
24 2004
Spokane, WA
1
16 2005
North Carolina
28
9 2003
Honolulu, HI
9
28 2003
Springfield, MO
10
30 2005
North Dakota
12
11 2006
Houston, TX
9
28 2003
St Louis, MO
9
28 2003
Ohio
28
9 2003
Indianapolis, IN
9
28 2003
St Paul, MN
9
28 2003
Oklahoma
28
9 2003
Irvine, CA
10
3 2004
State College, PA
9
5 2004
Oregon
28
9 2003
Irving, TX
9
28 2003
Sunnyvale, CA
9
28 2003
Pennsylvania
28
9 2003
Jackson, MS
11
14 2004
Tampa, FL
9
28 2003
Rhode Island
24
10 2004
Jacksonville, FL
10
3 2004
Tempe, AZ
9
28 2003
South Carolina
28
9 2003
Kansas City, MO
9
28 2003
Tucson, AZ
9
28 2003
South Dakota
5
11 2006
Knoxville, TN
10
3 2004
Tulsa, OK
9
28 2003
Tennessee
28
9 2003
Las Vegas, NV
9
28 2003
Washington, DC
9
28 2003
Texas
28
9 2003
Lexington, KY
9
26 2004
Wichita, KS
9
26 2004
Utah
9
11 2003
Lincoln, NE
10
31 2004
Vermont
30
10 2005
Little Rock, AR
10
3 2004
Virginia
28
9 2003
Los Angeles, CA
9
28 2003
Washington
28
9 2003
Lubbock, TX
10
17 2004
West Virginia
21
11 2004
Wisconsin
28
9 2003
Madison, WI
9
28 2003
Memphis, TN
10
24 2004
Wyoming
2
12 2007
NOTE: The table indicates the first observation period and all cities (Sample I) and states (Sample II) included. The last observation period
is July 26, 2015 for the whole sample. Treated cities and states are in bold. Cities in gray are not included in Sample I because they were
covered via a state, not a city, mandate which are evaluated using Sample II.
SOURCE: Google (2015), own collection, own illustration.

47

Appendix B

Figure B6 Google Flu Measurement Error Over Time

01jul2003

-2

-1

0

1

2

b) Difference in Residuals

-3

influenza like illness cases per 100,000 doctor visits
0
5000
10000

a) Raw Deviation CDC-Google Flu

01jul2003
01jul2006

01jul2009
(mean) date
Google Flu

01jul2012

01jul2015

CDC

01jul2006

01jul2009
date

HHS Region 1
HHS Region 3
HHS Region 10

01jul2012

01jul2015

HHS Region 2
HHS Region 9
other HHS regions

Figure B6a shows officially reported influenza-like illnesses per 100,000 doctor visits by the CDC as well as those reported by
Google Flu. CDC Data are available at the weekly level for 10 HHS Regions. Figure B6b plots the difference in residuals between
the two datasets. Residuals are calculated for both datasets separately by regressing the flu rate on a set of 617 week fixed effects
and 9 HHS region fixed effects. The differently colored lines and dots represent different HHS regions that include treatment
regions. The vertical lines represent the implementation of the sick pay mandates. HHS1 includes Connecticut and Massachusetts,
HHS2 New York City and Newark City, HHS3 Philadelphia and DC, HHS9 California and HHS10 Oregon and Seattle.

48

Appendix C
Table C1 Detailed Overview of Reductions and Increases in German Federal Employer Sick Pay Mandates and Industry-Specific Collective Agreements
Before 10/1996
(1)
Panel A: Federal Employer Mandate Regulations
100% sick pay
No waiting period for new employees
Paid overtime included in basis of calculation
Extra payments included in basis of calculation

Panel B: Industry-Specific Collective Bargaining Regulations
Group I

10/1996–12/1998
(2)

Since 1/1999
(3)

80% sick pay
Waiting period 4 weeks
Paid overtime included in basis of calculation
Extra payments can be contractually excluded
No cut if 1 day of paid vacation traded for 5 sick days

100% sick pay
Waiting period 4 weeks
Paid overtime excluded in basis of calculation
Extra payments can be contractually excluded

80% sick pay during first 3 days (eff. July 1, 1997)

Group II

100% sick pay
Paid overtime excluded in basis of calculation

Group III

100% sick pay

Panel C: Combined Effect for Different Industries
Group I
as in Panel A

80% sick pay, since 07/’97 during first 3 days
Waiting period 4 weeks

100% sick pay
Waiting period 4 weeks
Paid overtime excluded in basis of calculation

Group II

as in Panel A

100% sick pay
Waiting period 4 weeks
Paid overtime excluded in basis of calculation

100% sick pay
Waiting period 4 weeks
Paid overtime excluded in basis of calculation

Group III

as in Panel A

100% sick pay
Waiting period 4 weeks

100% sick pay
Waiting period 4 weeks
Paid overtime excluded in basis of calculation

NOTE: Group I is composed of the construction sector. Group II contains the following industries: steel, textile, mechanical engineering, automobile, ship and aerospace, electrical
engineering and optics, wood and paper, printing, food and hospitality, trade, banking and insurance. Group III represents the chemical, oil, glass, energy and water, postal and
transportation as well as public administration sector. Changes in regulation between time periods are in bold. The negotiated agreements cover 1.1M employees in Group I and at
least 4.5M in Group II and 4M in Group III (Jahn 1998; Hans Böckler Stiftung 2014).
SOURCE: Hans Böckler Stiftung (2014), own illustration.

Table C2 Descriptive Statistics of Sick Leave Measures

Variable

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min.

Max.

N

Total sick cases per 100 enrollees
Total log(cases)

122.3
4.80

11.5
0.1

90.3
4.50

162.8
5.09

198
198

Infectious sick cases per 100 enrollees
Infectious log(cases)

8.2
2.07

2.2
0.29

3.9
1.36

14.9
2.70

198
198

Respiratory sick cases per 100 enrollees
Respiratory log(cases)

35.4
3.56

4.3
0.12

25.2
3.23

50.0
3.91

198
198

Digestive sick cases per 100 enrollees
Digestive log(cases)

16.3
2.79

2.0
0.12

12.8
2.55

24.0
3.18

198
198

Musculoskeletal sick cases per 100 enrollees
Musculoskeletal log(cases)

22.7
3.10

4.9
0.24

9.8
2.28

34.4
3.54

198
198

Injury sick cases per 100 enrollees
Injury log(cases)

12.7
2.51

3.2
0.25

6.8
1.92

23.5
3.16

198
198

NOTE: Descriptives are weighted by the annual number of industry-specific sickness fund enrollees.
SOURCE: BKK (2004), own calculations and illustration.

50

Table C3 Number of Enrollees per Industry and Treatment Group

Industry and Classification

Mean

Std. Dev.

Group I
Construction

127,642

104,205

Group II
Steel
Textile
Mechanical Engineering
Automobile
Ship and Aerospace
Electrical engineering, optics
Wood and Paper
Printing
Food and Hospitality
Trade
Banking and Insurance

109,397
32,367
191,391
301,725
33,626
306,296
57,070
38,477
55,045
341,566
149,188

7,405
7,854
44,035
43,313
9,323
71,383
27,307
19,605
33,748
227,279
74,095

Group III
Chemical
Oil
Glass
Energy and Water
Postal and Transportation
Public Administration

230,382
15,586
34,097
50,702
478,490
732,958

46,215
5,074
5,480
13,149
104,031
476,804

SOURCE: Bundesverband der Betriebskrankenkassen (BKK) (2004), own
calculation and illustration.

51

Table C4 Effect of Changes in Sick Pay on Normalized Cases of Sick Leave—Pooled Regressions

Group I×’97-’98
Group I×’99-’04
Group II×’97-’98
Group II×’99-’04

(1)
Musculoskeletal

(2)
Musculoskeletal,
Infectious

(3)
Muscul., Infect.
Respiratory

-0.341***
(0.076)
-0.150
(0.157)
-0.038
(0.086)
0.131
(0.164)

-0.341***
(0.075)
-0.150
(0.155)
-0.038
(0.085)
0.131
(0.161)

-0.341***
(0.075)
-0.150
(0.154)
-0.038
(0.085)
0.131
(0.161)

0.193**
(0.088)
0.075
(0.164)
-0.003
(0.112)
-0.079
(0.176)

0.193**
(0.088)
0.075
(0.163)
-0.003
(0.111)
-0.079
(0.175)

Group I×’97-’98×Infectious
Group I×’99-’04×Infectious
Group II×’97-’98×Infectious
Group II×’99-’04×Infectious

Group I×’97-’98×Respiratory

0.133
(0.092)
0.019
(0.160)
0.016
(0.104)
-0.115
(0.170)
594
0.989

Group I×’99-’04×Respiratory
Group II×’97-’98×Respiratory
Group II×’99-’04×Respiratory

Observations
198
396
R2
0.858
0.982
NOTE: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01; standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the industry-diseaselevel. All regressions are weighted by the annual number of industry-specific sickness fund enrollees. The
descriptive statistics are in the Appendix (Table C2). The regressions are based on equation 1. The model
in the first column equals the fifth column of Table 3. The model in the second column pools the two categories musculoskeletal and infectious, where musculoskeletal form the reference group. The third column
additionally adds respiratory diseases. The fourth column adds all other diseases as a separate category.
All regressions are estimated by OLS and include industry, disease and year fixed effects. The dependent
variables are logarithms of the normalized sick leave cases per 100 employees. For more information on
how the variables were generated, see Section 4.3. Treated is a treatment indicator with one for Group I and
zero for Group III, whereas PartlyTreated is one for Group II and zero for Group III. Group I experienced
a sick pay cut from 100 to 80% in 1997 and a reversal in 1999. Group II experienced a soft cut in 1997 and
Group III experienced a soft cut in 1999. For more information about the sick pay reforms, see Table C1.
SOURCE: Bundesverband der Betriebskrankenkassen (BKK) (2004), own calculation and illustration;

52

