NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ESTIMATING PATH DEPENDENCE IN ENERGY TRANSITIONS
Kyle C. Meng
Working Paper 22536
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22536

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016, Revised January 2020

I thank Lint Barrage, Dan Benjamin, Javier Birchenall, Hoyt Bleakley, Chris Costello, Clément
de Chaisemartin, Melissa Dell, Jonathan Dingel, Walker Hanlon, Kelsey Jack, Akshaya Jha, Per
Krusell, David Lagakos, Derek Lemoine, Gary Libecap, Suresh Naidu, Trevor O'Grady, Ryan
Oprea, Maxim Pinkovskiy, Bernard Salanié, Steve Salant, Anna Thompsett, Inge van den
Bijgaart, Tom Vogl, Sevgi Yuksel and many seminar participants for helpful comments. I am
grateful to Sarah Anderson, Kira Fabrizio, Jessika Trancik, and Catherine Wolfram for sharing
data. Jason Benedict, Kayleigh Campbell Bierman, Danae Hernandez Cortes, and Simon Jean
provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Kyle C. Meng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Estimating Path Dependence in Energy Transitions
Kyle C. Meng
NBER Working Paper No. 22536
August 2016, Revised January 2020
JEL No. N51,N52,O41,Q35,Q43,Q54,Q58
ABSTRACT
What induces clean energy transitions? When transitional dynamics exhibit strong path
dependence, a temporary shock to input composition can trigger permanent structural change. I
examine whether such dynamics characterize the U.S. electricity sector's use of coal - the most
climate-damaging fuel - across the 20th century. Exploiting local coal supply shocks driven by
changing regional accessibility of subsurface coal, I find increasing imbalance in the coal
composition of electricity capital lasting ten decades following a shock. A structural change
model enables recovery of a key substitution parameter from reduced-form estimates and
explores conditions for triggering sustained future clean energy transitions.

Kyle C. Meng
Bren School of Environmental
Science and Management
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Barbara
4416 Bren Hall
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER
kmeng@bren.ucsb.edu

1

Introduction

Economies tend to consume more abundant resources first, turning to alternatives only after
sufficient depletion has set in (Herfindahl, 1967). However, if consumption of an abundant
resource generates substantial social costs, an earlier transition to alternative resources may be
required. Many environmental challenges are characterized by this problem, and none more so
than anthropogenic climate change. Carbon dioxide emissions arise, in part, because the most
abundant fossil fuel, coal, is also the most climate-damaging.1 As a consequence, it is widely
recognized that the global economy must permanently transition away from using coal in order
to address climate change.2
How can a sustained energy transition be induced? Economic theory offers two perspectives.
In the traditional view, where an economy’s composition of resources is determined primarily by
relative supply, a permanent intervention that lowers coal use (e.g., a Pigouvian tax) is needed
to offset coal’s supply advantage. If the policy were ever removed, the forces of relative supply
would return, enabling coal consumption and carbon emissions to resume upward trajectories.
This behavior appears in economies that exhibit either no or weak path dependence in energy
transitions. Unfortunately, permanent policy interventions are unrealistic when governments
have difficulty committing to long-term policies. Indeed, the short history of climate policies to
date is filled with examples of policy revisions, reversals, and withdrawals.3
In contrast, recent structural change models posit that in the presence of certain transitional
dynamics, a large but temporary intervention that exogenously lowers coal use can permanently
overcome coal’s abundant supply (Acemoglu et al., 2012, 2016; Lemoine, 2017; Fried, 2018;
Acemoglu et al., 2019). Under such circumstances, a sustained long-term transition towards
1

Coal contains over half of energy stored in global fossil fuel deposits (BP, 2017). It is also responsible for
over half of emitted anthropogenic carbon dioxide since the pre-industrial era (Boden and Andres, 2013).
2
Local pollution from coal inspired early papers on external costs (Pigou, 1920; Coase, 1960), and continues
to motivate an extensive valuation literature (e.g., Chay and Greenstone (2003, 2005); Barreca, Clay and Tarr
(2014); Clay, Lewis and Severnini (2016); Beach and Hanlon (2018); Hanlon (2016)).
3
For example, the U.S. recently withdrew from the U.N. Paris Agreement and announced plans to review
the Clean Power Plan, its domestic climate policy. In 2011, Canada withdrew from the Kyoto Protocol, the
preceding U.N. climate agreement, several years after the Protocol entered into force. Key details of the E.U.
and California carbon trading markets have been revised since their inceptions. See Acemoglu and Rafey (2018)
for other examples.

1

cleaner fuels could be achieved even after the intervention is lifted. Economies with this feature
are broadly characterized as having strong path dependence in energy transitions. Whether
such dynamics actually govern energy transitions, however, remains an open empirical question.
This paper estimates the transitional dynamics of the U.S. electricity sector. Changes in the
fuel composition of this sector are particularly hard to detect because power plants often operate
for multiple decades. Combining modern and historical power plant records, I construct a new
dataset of county-level, fuel-specific electricity capital for the U.S. midwest between 1890 to
1990, enabling an analysis of energy transitions over a much longer time horizon than previously
considered. I find evidence of strong path dependence for the U.S. electricity sector over the
20th century. This result sheds light on the historical circumstances that made the U.S. among
the most carbon-intensive economies in the world (discussed in Section 2) and informs upon
how future clean energy transitions can be achieved.
While strong path dependence in energy transitions can arise from various mechanisms, in a
reduced-form sense, it occurs whenever an exogenous and temporary shock to fuel composition
causes diverging fuel imbalance over time, as detailed in Section 3. To satisfy these identifying
assumptions, Section 4 constructs shocks to local coal transport distance driven by the changing regional accessibility of subsurface coal. The introduction of mechanized mining around the
early 20th century allowed extraction over previously inaccessible coal held in deep underground
deposits. Mechanized mining, together with the location and subsurface depth of coal resources,
altered coal transport distances and thus the spatial distribution of delivered coal prices. As
such, these local coal transport distance shocks are driven primarily by two remote regional
factors - the time-invariant spatial structure of subsurface coal geology and time-varying mining technology - and thus plausibly uncorrelated with unobserved local determinants of fuel
composition.
In Section 5, I examine the consequences of these shocks on the U.S. electricity sector using an
event study design with county-by-decade panel data. I find that shocks to local coal transport
distance before the switch to deep coal have increasing influence on the fuel composition of
electricity capital, with lagged effects detected up to ten decades later. Notably, these lagged
2

effects display discrete jumps at two and seven decades after the switching event, corresponding
to the expected timing of two subsequent vintages of electricity capital. In support of my parallel
trends assumption, I do not find pre-trends in key covariates or in the outcome variable. A series
of robustness checks addresses further identification, data construction, sample restriction, and
statistical modeling concerns.
Without knowing the relevant mechanism, reduced-form evidence of strong path dependence
in energy transitions alone can not directly inform climate policy. Path dependence emerges
from a combination of “push” and “pull” forces. Prior literature highlights increasing returns
to scale in electricity production as a mechanism that can amplify energy transitions (Nerlove,
1963; Christensen and Greene, 1976). The literature also suggests a dampening force against
runaway transitions: imperfect long-run substitutability between electricity from different fuels
(Acemoglu et al., 2012). In Section 6, I incorporate these elements into a model of structural
change for electricity production at the county level. Empirical tests using the structure of the
model verify that increasing returns to scale may be driving my reduced-form results. Additional tests fail to detect alternative explanations related to productivity effects, cost-of-service
electricity regulation, the U.S. Clean Air Act, coal procurement contracts, increasing returns in
coal transportation, and residential household sorting.
Having isolated the relevant mechanism, Section 7 proceeds with interpreting reduced-form
estimates through the lens of my model. A formal definition of strong path dependence in
energy transitions enables a mapping between my reduced-form estimates and the long-run
elasticity of substitution across fuels, a key parameter found across a broad class of structural
change models driven by supply-side forces, first posited by Baumol (1967).4 An estimate of this
parameter can help inform settings whereby energy transitions arise from another mechanism
besides scale effects. Indeed, this parameter features prominently in several recent models of
energy transition with directed technical change (Acemoglu et al., 2012; Lemoine, 2017; Fried,
2018; Acemoglu et al., 2019).5 Furthermore, the lack of reliable estimates for this parameter has
4
Prominent models in this class consider structural change driven by intermediate sector-level differences in
total factor productivity (Ngai and Pissarides, 2007), factor proportions and capital deepening (Acemoglu and
Guerrieri, 2008), and directed technical change (Acemoglu, 2002).
5
For example, in Acemoglu et al. (2012)’s macroeconomic model of optimal climate policy with directed

3

been a long standing concern within energy economics (Atkinson and Halvorsen, 1976; Griffin
and Gregory, 1976; Pindyck, 1979; Papageorgiou, Saam and Schulte, 2017; Fried, 2018; Casey,
2019). In particular, previous efforts to estimate this parameter have largely used annual or subannual variation in prices and capital (Lanzi and Wing, 2010; Aghion et al., 2016; Papageorgiou,
Saam and Schulte, 2017; Knittel, Metaxoglou and Trindade, 2019). Such high-frequency data
settings, however, may not adequately capture important long-run patterns of substitution given
the durability of energy infrastructure.
Finally, I calibrate my model using reduced-form estimates to draw lessons for future clean
energy transitions. Evidence of strong path dependence implies it is possible for a temporary
intervention to induce permanent fuel switching at the county-level. But under what conditions?
To answer this question, I simulate future electricity sector carbon emissions for the average
U.S. county following temporary relative coal price shocks of varying magnitude and duration.
For a better than 50% chance of achieving a permanent switch away from coal and thus weakly
declining carbon emissions, a temporary shock equal in magnitude to recent high relative coal
prices (e.g., due to natural gas hydraulic fracturing) must last at least five decades. Alternatively,
if the shock can only last one decade, it must then be six times higher than that of recent prices
to trigger sustained fuel switching. Further simulations explore how requirements for sustained
energy transitions change under other elasticity of substitution and scale parameter values that
may be relevant in more macroeconomic settings. Altogether, these simulations conclude that
in the absence of climate policy, recent economic conditions are insufficient for sustaining a
permanent energy transition away from coal.

2

Prima facie: Why is the U.S. so dependent on coal?

The United States has one of the most carbon-intensive economies in the world. Figure A.1 plots
carbon dioxide (CO2 ) emissions per capita against GDP per capita for non-OPEC countries in
2000 using data from Boden and Andres (2013) and World Bank (2014). U.S. emissions per
technical change, my recovered elasticity of 3.5 implies that a temporary policy intervention could prevent the
climate from deteriorating to a point beyond recovery.

4

capita is nearly 2 standard deviations higher than what income would predict. This reflects the
U.S. electricity sector’s heavy reliance on coal, the most carbon-intensive of energy fuels.6 Since
the 1960s, roughly 40% of U.S. electricity has been produced from coal (Energy Information
Administration, 2012). Why is the U.S. electricity sector so dependent on coal? Many observers
point to its world-leading coal resources. However, a casual exploration of historical patterns of
local coal use suggests that a supply-based explanation may be incomplete.
Before turning to these patterns, it is useful to first introduce how coal composition is
measured throughout this paper. In the electricity sector, capital size is usually denoted by the
capacity of a generating unit, or the maximum electricity it can produce in an hour. Thus, a
natural measure of coal composition is the ratio of the capacity of coal-fired generating units to
the capacity of generating units using other fuels. I call this relative coal capital.7
Figure 1 examines U.S. relative coal capital at the county-by-decade level (see Section 4.2 for
data construction details).8 It plots average log relative coal capital over 1890-1990 separately
for counties that are close to (between 0 and 50 miles) and further away (between 200 and
250 miles) from coal resources in the Illinois Coal Basin, the basin studied in this paper (for
reasons discussed in Section 4.1). Consistent with a coal supply argument, counties closer to
coal resources exhibit higher relative coal capital throughout the 20th century. However, the
gap between these two sets of counties widens dramatically over this period. Such a pattern
cannot be explained by coal supply alone, which predicts relative coal capital convergence, not
divergence, over time as locations closer to coal deplete their supplies more rapidly. Instead,
these divergent dynamics hint at the presence of path dependence, under which past relative
coal capital has a causal effect on future relative coal capital.
6

Bituminous coal, the most common type of coal for electricity, produces 206 lbs of CO2 per million British
Thermal Units (BTU). By contrast, oil and natural gas produces 157 and 117 lbs of CO2 per million BTU,
respectively.
7
Relative coal capital is preferred over coal capital share (i.e., the ratio of capacity of coal-fired generating
units to capacity of generating units across all fuels), as my main outcome variable. This is largely because
predictions from standard models of structural change (discussed further in Sections 6 and 7) are typically
expressed as factor input ratios. Note further that it is important to examine an outcome variable that is a
function of both coal and non-coal electricity capital. Because coal and non-coal capital are jointly determined,
simply examining each in isolation would not be informative of structural change.
8
Because electricity capital last multiple decades, I use a decade as the time-step for all empirical analyses.

5

Figure 1: Relative coal capital for counties close to and far from Illinois Coal Basin

0

Close to coal (miles ∈ [0, 50])

-3

log relative coal capital
-2
-1

Far from coal (miles ∈ [200, 250])

1890

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990
Decade
Notes: Plot shows log relative coal capital averaged across counties with centroids that are less than 50 miles
(solid black) and between 200 and 250 miles (dashed gray) from the nearest coal resource in the Illinois Coal
Basin for each decade from 1890 to 1990.

Unfortunately, Figure 1 does not provide causal evidence of path dependence in energy
transitions. Among other concerns, the dynamics displayed in Figure 1 may reflect the role of
unobserved time-invariant and varying characteristics with ongoing influence on relative coal
capital, rather than the direct influence of past relative coal capital. The next section details
this and other statistical considerations.

3

Empirical framework

This section begins by describing the empirical challenges to identifying path dependence in
energy transitions. I then discuss how shocks to local coal transport distance driven by the
changing regional accessibility of subsurface coal may overcome these challenges. To focus
for now on empirical issues, this section considers path dependence and its strength within a
reduced-form setting. Section 7 will offer formal definitions through the lens of a structural
change model.
6

3.1

Challenges to identifying path dependence

Statistically, path dependence is present when past outcomes have a causal effect on future
outcomes. Path dependence in structural change occurs when the outcome exhibiting such
dynamics is an economy’s composition of inputs. I begin with a simple empirical framework
to illustrate the challenges with estimating path dependence in energy transitions. There are
two decades, t ∈ {1, 2}, and two fuel-specific intermediate sectors of electricity production,
j ∈ {c, n}. Sector c produces electricity using coal; sector n produces electricity using other
e it =
fuels. The outcome of interest is relative coal capital in county i, K

Kcit
.
Knit

wcit is the delivered

coal price. Demand for relative coal capital for each period is
e i1 =π ln wci1 + ξi1
ln K

(1a)

e i2 =ρ ln K
e i1 + π ln wci2 + ξi2
ln K

(1b)

where π is the contemporaneous price effect. ρ is my reduced-form parameter for path dependence. The error term ξit contains unobserved time-varying and -invariant determinants of
relative coal capacity. The presence of the latter, in particular, implies that a component of
e i1 such that the autoregressive coefficient obtained by directly estimating
ξi2 also appears in K
equation (1b) may not distinguish path dependence following a transitory shock from the persistent effects of time-invariant determinants.9 To formalize this concern, insert equation (1a)
into (1b)
e i2 =ρπ ln wci1 + π ln wci2 + εi2
ln K

(1c)

where εi2 = ρξi1 +ξi2 . Two statistical assumptions are needed for the ratio of lagged to contemporaneous effects to identify ρ. The first is E[wci2 εi2 |wci1 ] = 0, which states that contemporaneous
coal prices must be exogenous. This exogeneity assumption would be violated if, for example,
relative coal capital and prices were simultaneously determined. The second identifying assumption is E[wci1 εi2 |wci2 ] = 0, which requires that past coal prices be uncorrelated with unobserved
contemporaneous determinants of relative coal capital. If this “exclusion restriction” assumption
9

See a related discussion in Bleakley and Lin (2012).

7

is satisfied, past prices affect current relative capital only through past relative capital. When
both assumptions are satisfied, effects that grow over time suggest strong path dependence in
energy transitions. Conversely, dissipating effects over time suggest weak path dependence.
In practice, another complication arises when estimating equation (1c), which implicitly
assumes that lagged effects can be detected within a single decade. Electricity capital decays
slowly over multiple decades. To detect effects on subsequent new capital investments (and
not just on depreciated existing capital), one needs county-level coal prices across much of the
20th century. Unfortunately, to the best of my knowledge, such historical data were either
never collected or, if collected, are no longer available today (see Appendix B for a summary of
historical data collection and availability).

3.2

Solution: regionally-driven local coal transport distances

To address these empirical challenges, I construct shocks to local coal transport distance that
rely on plausibly weaker identifying assumptions and span a 110-year period. The basic idea is
to construct local shocks using the changing regional accessibility of subsurface coal.

Mechanized mining and access to deep coal resources Prior to the 20th century, most
coal in the U.S. was manually mined which generally limited extraction to coal resources less
than 200 feet from the surface (Fisher, 1910; Speight, 1994). Mechanized mining was introduced
around the turn of the century and eventually came to dominate coal extraction. As shown in
Figure A.2, nearly the entire production increase in bituminous coal - the variety most used for
electricity - between 1890-1930 came from mechanized extraction (U.S. Census Bureau, 1975).
The main benefit of mechanization was the introduction of mechanized drills that allowed for the
excavation of previously inaccessible deep coal resources. The interaction between this aggregate
technology shock and the spatial distribution of deep coal resources altered local delivered coal
prices.

8

Using local coal transport distances To illustrate how changing regional coal accessibility
from the introduction of mechanized mining can be exploited, I return to the empirical framework in Section 3.1. Suppose only shallow coal resources below 200 feet could be extracted in
the first decade. In the second decade, technology enables deep coal mining. Denote the set of
operating mines in each period as Mt .
To construct local coal transport distance shocks in this setting, I enlist the Herfindahl
Principle (Herfindahl, 1967), a common result in models of spatial competition. The Herfindahl
Principle states that when a homogeneous resource is costly to transport across space, and
homogeneous suppliers are perfectly competitive, a consumer buys from the physically nearest
supplier at a price that is set, in part, by distance to that supplier.10 For county i in decade t,
distance to the nearest mine is

dit = min {||i − mt ||}
mt ∈Mt

where ||i − mt || is the Euclidean distance between county i and coal mine mt ∈ Mt . Delivered
coal price can then be decomposed into
ln wcit = ln dit + ζit

(2)

where ζit includes other supply-side factors. Inserting equation (2) into equation (1c)
e i2 = ρπ ln di1 + π ln di2 + µi2
ln K

(3)

where µi2 = ρπζi1 + πζi2 + εi2 . ln di2 is log distance to the nearest mine when mechanized
mining is available. ln di1 is log distance to the nearest mine before mechanized mining.11 To
ensure

e i2 /∂lndi1
∂lnK
e i2 /∂lndi2
∂lnK

has a path dependence interpretation, the updated exogeneity and exclusion

restriction assumptions for equation (3) are E[ln di2 µi2 | ln di1 ] = 0 and E[ln di1 µi2 | ln di2 ] = 0,
10

More specifically, the Herfindahl Principle states that under perfect competition, a consumer will buy
resources from the producer with the lowest cost of supplying to that consumer. When producers have homogeneous resource endowments and extraction costs, and transport costs scale with distance, the lowest cost
producer for a consumer is its physically nearest producer. See Gaudet, Moreaux and Salant (2001) for a generalized setting with multiple, spatially differentiated, consumers. Robustness checks in Section 5.3 considers
potential complications that arise when coal resources have heterogeneous quality and when coal mines have
market power.
11
In this setting, it need not be the case that ln di1 6= ln di2 for all counties. The introduction of mechanized
mining may not lead to the opening of a deep coal mine that is closer to a given county than an existing shallow
coal mine.

9

respectively. Observe that the coefficient on distance in equation (2) need not be one. As
long as this coefficient is time-invariant and the identifying assumptions for equation (3) are
satisfied,

e i2 /∂lndi1
∂lnK
e i2 /∂lndi2
∂lnK

would cancel out this coefficient and identify ρ. That is, to estimate path

dependence, one only needs the identifying variation - in this case local coal transport distances
- to drive relative coal capital. It need not directly capture coal prices, per se.
Compared with directly using coal prices in equation (1c), use of ln dit has two distinct
advantages. First, construction of ln dit requires only historical data on the location, coal depth,
and operating years of coal mines, which, unlike historical coal prices, is available across the
20th century. Second, observe that outside of county i’s location (addressed below), ln dit is
driven primarily by two regional determinants: (i) the time-invariant spatial distribution of the
depth of subsurface coal resources and (ii) the time-varying introduction of mechanized mining
which made deep coal accessible. As a consequence, use of ln dit is more likely to satisfying my
identifying assumptions.

3.3

Regression specification

Equation (3) from Section 3.1’s simple empirical framework is a cross-sectional regression. In
practice, I use a county-by-decade panel dataset to estimate an event study specification that
generalizes equation (3). This approach affords several additional advantages. First, identifying
assumptions are now in terms of parallel trends, with location-specific fixed effects removing
the potentially confounding influence of time-invariant factors such as geography and other
natural features. Namely, in the absence of shocks to local coal transport distance, relative coal
capital would have followed the same trends in all sample counties. Second, because each county
experiences the event of first switching to deep coal at different moments in time, lagged effects
of distance to the nearest shallow mine can be estimated in “event time” and are distinct from
secular time trends over the 20th century. Third, the presence of multiple decades of data for
each county enables estimation of lead effects and lagged effects over a long time horizon. Lead
effects provide an indirect test of parallel trends. Lagged effects across multiple decades allow
sufficient time for capturing new electricity capital decisions.
10

Denote h = −2, . . . , 10 as the event-time index. For each county, there are three distinct
periods, each occurring when the distance to its nearest coal mine changes. The focal event
occurs when a county’s nearest mine switches from a shallow to a deep coal mine for the first
time. h > 0 denotes the period after that switch. h = 0 marks the period before the switch
during which a county was closest to a shallow coal mine.12 ln d0i is distance to that shallow coal
mine and represents my local coal transport distance shock. h < 0 indicates an earlier period
when a county’s coal supplier was yet a different shallow coal mine. Using this event study
setting, I estimate for county i, in state s, during decade t
X

e it =
ln K

β τ [ln d0i × 1(τ = h)] + π ln dit +

−2≤τ ≤10
τ 6=0

X

γ τ 1(τ = h) + $i + φst + µist

(4)

−2≤τ ≤10
τ 6=0

where γ τ captures common event-time effects and µist is an error term. County fixed effects, $i ,
removes concerns that local coal transport distance shocks may be correlated with a county’s
time-invariant characteristics such as its geography. State-by-decade fixed effects, φst , removes
the presence of regional economic conditions that may jointly influence deep coal mine openings
and relative coal capital. In Section 5.1, I show pre-trend tests for key covariates that support
the inclusion of these controls. π is the contemporaneous effect of local coal transport distance.
β τ indicate lead and lagged effects. When τ > 0, β τ are lagged effects, with
βτ
π

βτ
π

> 1 and

< 1 implying strong and weak path dependence, respectively. When τ < 0, β τ are lead

effects and test for the presence of differential pre-trends in relative coal capital. Equation (4)
is my baseline specification. In Section 5.3, I also estimate variants of equation (4) to address
remaining identification concerns.

4

Data

This section first details how spatial data on coal resources and mines are used to construct
shocks to local coal transport distance. I then describe the construction of relative coal capital,
12

Note that h = 0 can span multiple decades if the shallow coal mine is a county’s nearest supplier for some
time.

11

my main outcome variable. For both variables, I present several tests to verify assumptions
used in each construction procedure.

4.1

Local coal transport distance

The USGS National Coal Resource Assessment (NCRA) recently amassed and digitized spatial
data on coal resources and mining that was previously held separately in the archives of state
geological agencies (East, 2012). As shown in Figure A.3, the NCRA provides GIS shape files
for coal resources of depths greater than and less than 200 ft from the surface for each of the
major U.S. coal basins.13 This paper makes several sample restrictions for data availability and
estimation reasons.
I focus on coal resources found in the Illinois coal basin.14 Of the major basins assessed by
the NCRA, only for the Illinois Basin is there data on the location, area, and opening and closing
years of coal mines.15 This data goes back to 1890. The Illinois Basin is also advantageous for
its geological properties. As Figure 2 shows, it has a dish-like shape with shallow coal resources
in the outer regions and deeper resources near the center.16 Coal across a single large deposit
is less likely to be heterogeneous in quality. Indeed, data from the FERC-423 coal procurement
forms displayed in Table A.1 show that of the five major coal basins, the Illinois Basin contains
coal with the second lowest standard deviation in heat and ash content.
Within the Illinois Basin, I consider only coal mines whose spatial area exceeds the 95%
percentile for that basin. This is done for identification reasons. First, larger coal resources are
more likely to be mined in response to regional, rather than local coal demand. Second, larger
coal resources have lower Hotelling, or scarcity rents, which may be an endogenous component
13
The NCRA does not provide shape files with finer intervals of coal depth. Fortunately, Fisher (1910) notes
200 ft from the surface as generally the depth limit for manual coal mining prior to the 20th century.
14
In the 1990s, the Illinois Coal Basin provided 20% of bituminous coal in the U.S. (Energy Information
Administration, 1994) That share is likely to have been higher earlier in the 20th century before the large scale
extraction of western U.S. coal.
15
Historical coal mine data for other basins are still held by state-level natural resource agencies. These
agencies typically possess a coal mine “final map” which dates a mine’s closing, but not opening year.
16
While the NCRA provides shape files of modern coal resources, much of the Illinois Basin has been characterized since the start of the 20th century such that one can interpret Figure 2 as indicating the location of coal
resources known across much of the 20th century. For example, the shape of the Illinois Basin shown in Figure
2 matches closely with that found in Campbell (1908).

12

Figure 2: Location of Illinois Basin coal resources and mines

Notes: Green (lighter) shaded area indicates shallow coal resources (<200 ft. underground). Black (darker)
shaded area indicates deep coal resources (>200 ft. underground). Yellow dots show all large coal mines that
operated at any point after 1890. County and state boundaries also shown.

of the delivered coal price (Hotelling, 1931). Figure 2 shows the location of these mines over the
Illinois Basin. On the demand side, I restrict my county sample to those whose distance from
centroid to nearest Illinois coal resource is (i) less than the distance to the nearest Appalachian
coal resource and (ii) less than 250 miles. The first restriction reduces the influence of coal from
nearby Appalachian Basin on delivered coal prices. The second restriction reduces the influence
from other coal basins. The resulting sample of counties is shown in Figure A.4. These coal
mine and county sample restrictions will be subjected to robustness checks.
Using the NCRA spatial data, I identify a county’s distance to its nearest coal mine for
each decade from 1890 to 1990 (see Appendix A for data construction details). Figure A.5
maps county distance to nearest mine from 1890-1950, showing how its spatial distribution has
changed over the 20th century. From this data, I can also determine the decade in which a
county’s nearest mine switches from a shallow to a deep coal mine for the first time. Figure A.6
13

shows the timing of this switch for each sample county, stacked according to the decade when
it occurs. Observe that the timing of the switching event differs across counties.
I turn to three pieces of auxiliary evidence to verify my construction of coal transport distances. First, the use of transport distance assumes that transport costs are an important
component of delivered coal prices. Figure A.7 shows that transport costs were between 40-60%
of national U.S. delivered coal prices over the first half of the 20th century. This is consistent
with previous research emphasizing the high costs of transporting coal, the heaviest fossil fuel
by heat content (Joskow, 1987; Busse and Keohane, 2007; McNerney, Farmer and Trancik, 2011;
Preonas, 2018).
Second, my construction procedure relies on the Herfindahl Principle, in which power plants
buy coal from its nearest mine. Using coal procurement data from 1990-1999 FERC-423 forms,
Figure A.8 shows how the share of coal purchased by a county varies according to the rank in
the transport distance to coal-supplying counties.17 Nearly 50% of purchased coal came from
the nearest coal supplying county. There is a steep and sustained drop in the share of coal
purchased from other counties.
As a final check, I regress observed county-level delivered coal prices obtained from the
FERC-423 forms during the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s against local coal transport distance for
sample counties. A perfect statistical fit is not expected nor desired as observed prices may
contain endogenous components in addition to transport costs. The correlations shown in
Table A.2 are statistically significant at the 5% level across all three decades and thus provide
confidence that my transport distance shocks is capturing variation in delivered coal prices.

4.2

Electricity capital

Fuel-specific electricity capital, or capacity, at or below the county level throughout the 20th
century is also not directly available (see Appendix B for details). Instead, I turn to modern
EIA-860 forms to construct a county-by-decade panel of relative coal capital from 1890 to 1990.
17

Unfortunately, FERC-423 forms provide the county of origin for delivered coal, and not mine. Because I am
unable to directly link power plants with coal mines, Figure A.8 provides a noisy test of the Herfindahl Principle.

14

Importantly, this construction of historical data is made possible because EIA-860 collects data
on capacity, operating years, and primary fuel input for both active and retired generating
units at power plants that were operating at the time of reporting. The availability of retired
generating units, in particular, enables one to observe historical electricity capital that is no
longer active today (see Appendix A for construction details).
Three assumptions must be satisfied for my constructed relative coal capital to match historical values. First, all power plants since 1890 must continue to have at least one active
generating unit today. If an entire power plant retires, their generating units would not appear
in modern EIA-860 forms. To test the degree in which my constructed data may be missing
retired power plants, I turn to historical data since 1920 which is only available at the national
level (U.S. Census Bureau, 1975). Panel A of Figure A.9 compares U.S. electricity capacity (in
gigawatt, GW) summed across generating units burning fossil fuels (i.e., coal, oil, and natural
gas) constructed from EIA-860 forms against observed values from the U.S. Historical Census
for the 1920-1970 period. Panel B of Figure A.9 provides a similar comparison but for annual
capacity changes. While my constructed data under reports fossil fuel capacity levels prior to
1955, the two national data series track closely in terms of annual changes throughout the 19201970 period. This suggests that my constructed data may be missing power plants that began
operation prior to 1920 but less likely those operating after 1920. Panels C and D of Figure A.9
draw a similar conclusion for electricity capital using hydro power.
My second and third assumptions are that a generating unit must not change its capacity and
primary fuel during its lifetime. Section 6.1 discusses engineering reasons for why these features
are likely to be stable over time. Nonetheless, such changes may occur. Table A.3 examines
the consistency of key generating unit characteristics across the 1990-2012 EIA-860 forms. For
each characteristic across columns of Table A.3, row values indicate the percentage of 1990-2011
EIA-860 forms with values that differed from that reported in the 2012 EIA-860 form. 75%,
94%, 97% and 80% of generating units consistently reported using the same capacity, primary
fuel, opening year, and retirement year in 1990-2011 as was reported in 2012.
To examine the consistency of generating unit characteristics over a longer time horizon, I
15

digitized the 1980 EIA “Inventory of Power Plants in the United States,” the earliest available
comprehensive generating-unit dataset, with data collected during the late 1970s. Figure A.10
plots generating unit capacity reported in 2012 against the capacity reported in the late 1970s,
showing a nearly one-for-one relationship. Table A.4 shows the distribution of reported primary
fuel in 2012 conditional on primary fuel reported in the late 1970s. There has been little fuel
switching since the late 1970s.

Imputing missing small power plants The EIA-860 forms have one additional limitation:
they exclude generating units on power plants with less than 1 megawatt (MW) of combined
electricity capacity. This omission can be consequential for relative coal capital and how it is
modeled. Suppose a county’s non-coal electricity only comes from less than 1 MW power plants.
Then my data would erroneously assigned a zero value to non-coal capital, leading to a missing
value for relative coal capital. Such data censoring would result in a smaller sample and a lower
sample mean for relative coal capital. Similarly, if a county’s coal-fired electricity is produced
only with missing small power plants, then both coal capital and relative coal capital would be
incorrectly assigned zero values. This form of censuring increases the skewness of relative coal
capital.
In the absence of historical data, one can try to predict the frequency of power plants below
the 1MW threshold using the observed power plant size distribution. Figure A.11 plots the size
distribution for all U.S. power plants appearing in the EIA-860 forms that were built during
the 1910s and 1950s.18 The solid and dashed lines show the fitted and predicted frequency of
power plants between 1 and 30 MW capacity using a flexible polynomial specification. Because
of the skewness of the size distribution, Figure A.11 predicts there are more power plants below
1 MW built each decade across the U.S. than power plants of any other size. In Appendix C, I
introduce an imputation procedure which takes the predicted national frequency of new missing
power plants for each decade, splits it by fuel according to the national coal share, and assigns
new power plant capital uniformly across electricity-producing counties.
18

Size distributions for plants built during other decades have similar shapes.

16

Column 1 of Table A.5 shows summary statistics for raw relative coal capital. Columns 2-4
provide statistics for relative coal capital following this imputation procedure with the national
power plant size distribution for each decade is fitted using 3rd, 4th, and 5th order polynomial
functions, respectively. As expected, my imputation procedure increases the sample size, raises
the mean, and reduces the skewness of relative coal capital. Column 5 displays statistics for
relative coal capital using an alternative imputation approach which simply adds 1 MW to new
coal and non-coal capital investment in each county-by-decade observation. Robustness checks
in Table A.5 examines all five measures of relative coal capital.
Finally, regardless of my imputation procedure, relative coal capital, remains right-skewed.
This skewness in my outcome variable can be mitigated by the log transformation applied in
equation (4). However, a log transformation is also sensitive to small values of the untransformed
variable, which may depend on my imputation procedure. To produce estimates that are less
sensitive to my imputation method, I estimate equation (4) using a Poisson model.19 I also
consider other models as robustness checks.

5

Reduced-form results

This section presents reduced-form evidence of path dependence in energy transitions. To guide
the specification of my baseline model, I first test for pre-trends in key county covariates across
models with different controls. I then present baseline reduced-form estimates and various
robustness checks.
19

Specifically, the 
Poisson version of equation (4) is

e it = exp 
K


X



β τ [ln d0i × 1(τ = h)] + π ln dit +

−2≤τ ≤10
τ 6=0

X
−2≤τ ≤10
τ 6=0


γ τ 1(τ = h) + $i + φst 
 + µist

(4’)

The Poisson model has the additional benefit of being a member of the linear exponential family such that even
if the density is misspecified, one can still obtain consistent point estimates through quasi-MLE provided that
the conditional mean function is correctly specified.

17

5.1

Examining pre-trends in county covariates

The baseline specification in equation (4) includes county and state-by-decade fixed effects.
Table 1 verifies the importance of these controls by examining whether a county’s distance to its
nearest shallow mine before its switch to deep coal (i.e., ln d0i ), correlates with contemporaneous
county characteristics that broadly capture coal demand. These covariates were obtained from
Haines (2010) and shown down the rows of Table 1. Total and urban population proxy for
residential coal demand. The number of establishments, employment, capital value, and output
value for the manufacturing sector are indicative of that sector’s coal demand.20
Each column of Table 1 estimates a model with different identifying assumptions. Column 1
shows the effect of ln d0i on log covariates in levels. Column 2 examines the effect of ln d0i on log
covariates in first-differences, analogous to a panel estimator with county fixed effects. Column
3 augments column 2 by further including state fixed effects, akin to a panel estimator with
county and state-by-decade fixed effects. Only in column 3 are pre-trends in these covariates
systematically unrelated to ln d0i . This confirms the importance of controlling for time-variant
county characteristics such as geography through county fixed effects, and time-varying statelevel conditions through state-by-decade fixed effects, both of which are in the baseline statistical
model shown in equation (4).

5.2

Baseline estimates of path dependence

The thick solid red line in Figure 3 shows my baseline point estimates of β τ from equation (4)
estimated using a Poisson model with relative coal capital, K̃it =

Kcit
,
Knit

as the outcome. These

estimates are also printed in column 1 of Table 2.
Standard Poisson models impose that the first and second moments of the outcome be
equal. Table A.5 shows that the variance of relative coal capital exceeds its mean. To address
this overdispersion issue, my baseline model has standard errors clustered at the county level.
20

A more precise test of pre-trends in manufacturing activity would isolate subsectors that are coal or electricity
intensive. Historically, such data would have been collected by the U.S. Census of Manufacturers (COM). For
our sample counties, pre-trend tests require data during 1880-1960. Unfortunately, as noted by Vickers and
Ziebarth (2018), most COM data from this period has either since been lost or was never collected.

18

Table 1: Pre-trends in county covariates
(1)
Levels

Outcome
Log population (1890-1990)
Number of counties
Log urban population (1890-1980)
Number of counties
log mgf establishments (1890-1990)
Number of counties
log mgf employment (1890-1990)
Number of counties
log mfg capital (1890-1900)
Number of counties
log mfg output (1890-1940)
Number of counties
State fixed effects

(2)
(3)
Changes

-0.13
(0.086)
261

-0.014
(0.0090)
261

-0.016
(0.013)
261

-0.085
(0.17)
183

-0.013
(0.017)
171

0.019
(0.022)
171

-0.20**
(0.098)
260

-0.052
(0.056)
260

0.046
(0.064)
260

-0.16
(0.20)
258

0.11**
(0.052)
255

0.00096
(0.068)
255

0.071
(0.24)
106

0.17**
(0.085)
105

0.093
(0.15)
105

-0.44
(0.35)
114

0.17**
(0.075)
113

0.044
(0.16)
113

No

No

Yes

ln d0i

Notes: Each coefficient comes from a separate regression of
on a contemporaneous county covariate as outcome. Time coverage for covariates indicated.
County sample shown in Figure A.4. Covariates in column 1 in log levels. Covariates in columns 2 and 3 in first log differences. Column 3 augments column
2 by including state fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the
county level in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

This adjustment relaxes the assumption of equal first and second moments by allowing arbitrary
forms of within-county heteroskedasticity and serial correlation in the error term. The darker
shaded area of Figure 3 shows baseline 95% point confidence intervals for β τ using county-level
clustered standard errors. It is possible that error terms are spatially correlated across counties.
To accommodate error correlation across a broader spatial scale, the lighter shaded area shows
the 95% point confidence interval when errors are clustered at the state-by-decade level, which

19

Table 2: Baseline reduced-form estimates of path dependence
(1)
(2)
relative coal
relative coal
capital
capital investment
ln d0i (β τ )
2 decades lead
1 decade lead

1 decade lag
2 decades lag
3 decades lag
4 decades lag
5 decades lag
6 decades lag
7 decades lag
8 decades lag
9 decades lag
10 decades lag
ln dit (π)

Observations
Counties

-1.38
(1.02)
-0.66
(0.67)
–
-0.68
(1.25)
-4.11***
(1.15)
-3.75***
(0.66)
-3.51***
(0.71)
-4.58***
(0.98)
-3.71***
(0.75)
-6.20***
(1.37)
-7.30***
(1.59)
-7.30***
(1.56)
-7.01***
(1.56)

0.60
(2.00)
-0.33
(2.32)
–
-4.47**
(1.89)
-3.46
(2.17)
-7.75**
(3.61)
-5.68
(5.21)
-4.46
(3.59)
-2.93
(3.89)
-10.1**
(4.20)
-6.42
(4.27)
-3.83
(4.55)
-2.77
(5.82)

-1.53***
(0.53)

-3.48***
(0.88)

2,371
261

2,371
261

Notes: Estimates of β τ and π from equation (4) using Poisson
model. Outcomes variables are at the county-by-decade level. Each
model includes event time, county, and state-by-decade fixed effects.
County sample shown in Figure A.4. Time period is 1890-1990. Outcome in column 1 is relative coal capital. Outcome in column 2 is
relative coal capital investment. Robust standard errors clustered at
the county level in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

20

allows arbitrary heteroskedasticity and spatial correlation across counties in the same state and
decade. These two confidence intervals cover similar ranges.
I do not detect lead effects (i.e., β τ : τ < 0). The absence of differential pre-trends in my
outcome variable is consistent with the lack of pre-trends in county covariates shown in column
3 of Table 1 and provides even stronger support for a parallel trends assumption.
Next, consistent with a reduced-form definition of strong path dependence, I detect statistically significant lagged effects (i.e, β τ : τ > 0) that become more negative over time. Several
observations suggest that past local coal distance shocks are leading to fuel imbalance in subsequent electricity capital investments. First, lagged effects that grow in magnitude cannot
be attributed solely to common depreciation across existing capital as that should generate
dissipating, not strengthening, lagged effects over time. Second, as Figure 3 shows, lagged effects display two distinct jumps after the switching event: a 1% increase in transport distance
discretely lowers relative coal capital by 4.11% and 6.20% two and seven decades later, respectively. These jumps coincide roughly with the expected construction of two subsequent vintages
of electricity capital.21 It is, however, still possible that the pattern shown in Figure 3 is due
to differential retirement of existing coal and non-coal electricity capital. Column 2 of Table 2
shows estimates of β τ when the outcome is relative coal capital investment, X̃it =

Xcit
,
Xnit

the ratio

of new coal to non-coal electricity capital built in each county i and decade t. Indeed, shocks
to local coal transport distance alter relative coal capital investment over many later decades.

5.3

Robustness checks

I turn now to a series of robustness checks designed to address further identification, data
construction, sample restriction, and statistical modeling concerns. Point estimates for all robustness checks are shown as thin non-solid blue lines in Figure 3.

Remaining identification concerns Table A.6 explores remaining identification concerns,
with column 1 replicating my baseline estimates.
21

The average generating unit in my sample lasts 4.7 decades.

21

−2
−6

−4

τ

Estimated effects (β )
on relative coal capital

0

2

Figure 3: Reduced-form estimates of path dependence in relative coal capital

Baseline point estimate (Tab. 1, Col. 1)

−8

Baseline confidence interval (Tab. 1, Col. 1)
Robustness: state−by−decade clustered errors

−10

Robustness: identification (Tab. A.6, Cols. 2−6)
Robustness: imputation (Tab. A.7, Cols. 2−5)

−12

Robustness: sample (Tab. A.8, Cols. 2−6)
Robustness: model (Tab. A.9, Cols. 2−5)

−2

0

2

4

6

8

10

Event time
Notes: Thick solid red line and darker shaded area show baseline point estimates and 95% confidence intervals
for β τ from equation (4) with county-level clustered standard errors. Outcome is relative coal capital at the
county-by-decade level. County sample shown in Figure A.4. Time period is 1890-1990. Estimates also shown
in column 2 of Table 2. Lighter shaded area shows the 95% confidence interval when estimating equation (4)
with state-by-decade clustered standard errors. Thinner non-solid blue lines show point estimates from various
robustness tests displayed in columns 2-6 of Table A.6, columns 2-5 of Table A.7, columns 2-6 of Table A.8,
and columns 2-5 of Table A.9.

Other components of the delivered coal price may be correlated with distance to the nearest
coal mine. One such component is the mill price set by the nearest mine which reflects its
marginal cost of coal extraction (Hotelling, 1929; C. d’Aspremont, 1979; Salop, 1979; Vogel,
2008) and the Hotelling rent associated with the size of its coal resource (Hotelling, 1931; Gaudet,
Moreaux and Salant, 2001). The mill price may also capture dimensions of heterogeneity in coal
quality, such as heat, ash, and sulfur content, that can alter the amount of coal needed to
produce a unit of electricity. To control for these and other forms of mine-specific heterogeneity,
column 1 augments my baseline model with a fixed effect for the nearest shallow mine right

22

before switching event.22 I find similar lagged effects up to five decades. Longer lags are smaller
in magnitude but within the 95% confidence of my baseline model.
It is possible that distance to the nearest shallow mine continues to directly influence relative
coal capital after the switching event. While this implies that lagged effects would not have a
clean path dependence interpretation, the resulting bias is likely towards zero, with lagged
coefficients understating the true strength of path dependence. This is because, on its own,
increasing mill prices from the ongoing depletion of the shallow mine would predict weakening,
not strengthening, lagged effects over time.
One particular channel through which a shallow mine may exert direct influence on relative
coal capital after the switching event is if the mine could price discriminate. For example, if
mine A, the initial nearest supplier to a county, becomes the second nearest supplier following
the opening of mine B, mine B could price-discriminate by setting a buyer’s coal price equal
to its distance to mine A (MacLeod, Norman and Thisse, 1988; Vogel, 2011). Under this form
of market power, distance to mine A would directly determine a county’s subsequent coal price
even if it were no longer supplying coal.23 To remove the possibility of price discrimination from
affecting my results, column 3 estimates my baseline model without the counties for which the
earlier supplying shallow mine becomes the second nearest mine at any point after the switching
event. My results are little affected.
I next examine the possibility that distance to the shallow mine may be correlated with trends
in other determinants of relative coal capital. Both the residential and manufacturing sectors
consume electricity, while the manufacturing sector also consumes coal. In column 4, I augment
the baseline model with three county-by-decade covariates available throughout the 20th century
that proxy for the economic activity in these linked sectors: residential and manufacturing
demand population, number of manufacturing establishments, and manufacturing employment,
all in logs. Similarly, column 5 accounts for trends in transport costs by adding interaction
22

There are 52 mines that served as the nearest supplier to sample counties right before the switching event.
There is evidence from recent years showing price discriminating behavior by railroad companies that sell
coal to power plants (Busse and Keohane, 2007; Preonas, 2018). Little is known, however, about whether such
mark-ups existed across the longer time period considered in this study.
23

23

terms between a linear time trend and two geographical features that affect transport costs: a
county’s distance to the nearest navigable waterway and its ruggedness, as approximated by its
variance in slope, both in logs (see Appendix A for data details). Coefficients in columns 4 and
5 are similar to those of my baseline results.
Finally, despite the absence of pre-trends, the timing of when a county initially switches to
deep coal may still be endogenous. Column 6 examines whether a subsample of counties that
experience the switching event prior to the 1960s exhibits different effects than all counties in
the baseline sample. They do not.
Imputing missing small power plants Table A.7 examines alternative imputations for
missing power plants with less than 1 MW capacity. Column 1 replicates my baseline result
which uses a 4th order flexible polynomial function to fit the national size distribution of new
power plants built each decade. Columns 2 and 3 employ the same imputation procedure but
uses 3rd and 5th order polynomial functions, respectively. Point estimates and standard errors
are little affected. In column 4, I use a simpler, though less informed, imputation procedure by
simply adding 1 MW capacity to coal and non-coal capital investment. The overall shape and
precision of lagged effects are unchanged. While the magnitude of all coefficients are smaller, the
ratio of lagged to contemporaneous effects is unaffected. Finally, column 5 estimates equation
(4) using unadjusted relative coal capital. Despite the much smaller sample, lagged effects up
to six decades have similar magnitudes to baseline results, with 3 to 5 decade lags statistically
significant at the 10% level. Longer lagged effects are noisier.
Sample restrictions Table A.8 considers different sample restrictions, with column 1 reproducing my baseline results. On the coal supply side, recall that in order to isolate local coal
transport distance shocks driven by regional conditions, I focused on large mines with areas
above the 95th percentile of Illinois Basin mines. Estimates in columns 2 and 3 use transport
distances constructed from mines with area above the 90th and 97.5th percentiles, respectively.
While the inclusion of smaller mines result in statistically significant lead coefficients, these
coefficients trend in the opposite direction of lagged effects.
24

On the coal demand side, to lessen the competing effects of other coal basins, my benchmark
sample restricted counties to those within 250 miles of the nearest Illinois Basin coal resource
and are situated closer to the Illinois Basin than to the Appalachian Basin. In column 4, I
further weaken the influence of other coal basins by restricting the sample to counties within
200 miles of the nearest Illinois Basin coal resource. I find similar point estimates and standard
errors. In column 5, I allow more counties into the sample by increasing the distance threshold
to 300 miles. In column 6, I allow counties that are situated closer to the Appalachian Basin
into the sample. For both larger samples, effect sizes are smaller, possibly due to the influence
of other coal resources. However, point estimates are within the confidence intervals of baseline
results.

Modeling choices The log-log functional form of equation (4) implicitly assumes that the
relationship between relative coal capital and coal transport distance is an isoelastic function.
While this will be appealing for the theory in Section 6, this functional form may not be
empirically supported. Figure A.12 examines whether the data supports linearity by estimating
a variant of equation (4) that breaks log distance to the nearest mine into discrete bins, allowing
a flexible relationship between distance and relative capital for each event-time period. Figure
A.12 shows log relative coal capital predicted by log distance to the contemporaneous nearest
mine, and by log distance to the earlier shallow mine two and seven decades after the switching
event. These three relationships are approximately linear.
The baseline model in equation (4) includes 10 lag and 2 lead terms. More lag terms allow
effects on new capital investments to be detected and 10 is the largest number of lags permitted
by my 11 decade-long dataset. I vary the number of lead terms in Table A.9. Column 1 replicates
the baseline model, column 2 includes 1 lead term, and column 3 includes 3 lead terms. I do not
detect statistically significant lead terms across these models, nor very different lagged effects.
Finally, I consider two alternatives to the baseline Poisson model. The first alternative is a
log-log linear model. The downside to such an approach is that a log transformation is sensitive
to small values of an outcome variable, which may arise from how missing small power plants

25

are imputed. A second alternative is to employ a negative binomial model. In contrast to a
Poisson model which semi-parametrically addresses overdispersion via clustered standard errors,
a negative binomial model parametrically models overdispersion as a function of the expected
outcome.
Column 4 of Table A.9 estimates equation (4) using a log-log linear model, while column 5
uses a negative binomial model. Both alternative models produce statistically significant lagged
effects, mostly at the 5% level. The overall shape of lagged effects from these two models,
including the jumps at two and seven decades later, mirrors baseline results. While these
coefficients are smaller in magnitude, the ratio of lagged to contemporaneous effects actually
imply stronger path dependence.

6

Mechanisms

Section 5’s reduced-form evidence of strong path dependence in energy transition suggests it is
possible for a permanent energy transition to be induced by a temporary intervention. However,
from a climate policy perspective, this statistical result may be unsatisfactory for two reasons.
First, it is unclear how these historical reduced-form estimates can inform future energy transitions in the U.S. or elsewhere. Second, even if estimates are externally valid, it is unclear under
what conditions can future climate policies sustain clean energy transition.
Addressing these concerns requires additional theory and empirics to isolate the relevant
mechanism behind my reduced-form results. To that end, this section first develops a model
of structural change model at the county level which incorporates two possible mechanisms
previously highlighted in the energy economics literature: increasing returns to scale and the
accumulation of fuel-specific productivity. Informed by the structure of this model, I then
conduct a series of empirical tests designed to isolate the relevant mechanism. For completeness,
I also test for mechanisms not considered by the model. While these tests by no means exhaust
all possible explanations, their results lend confidence for the particular structural interpretation
of my reduced-form results considered in Section 7.

26

6.1

A model of structural change for the electricity sector

Electricity production exhibits several distinct features that have long been recognized in the
literature. I first summarize these features before building them into a model.
F1 “Putty-clay” capital A generating unit in a power plant consists of a boiler which turns
fuel into steam and a generator which produces electricity from the boiler’s steam. Boilers
are typically designed to consume a particular fuel at a particular quantity. Sustained use
of other fuels or use of the intended fuel in other quantities can lead to large efficiency
losses (Avallone, Baumeister and Sadegh (2006), p.871). To account for this feature, prior
literature has modeled electricity capital as “putty-clay,” where it is fully utilized once
built (Joskow, 1985, 1987; Atkeson and Kehoe, 1999).
F2 Fuel and capital as perfect complements Fuel is essential for producing electricity
and cannot be substituted with other inputs. As such, the combination of fuel and capital
in a generating unit is typically modeled using a Leontief function (Komiya, 1962; Atkeson
and Kehoe, 1999; Fabrizio, Rose and Wolfram, 2007).
F3 Returns to scale At the power plant-level, boilers can be linked to multiple generators.
Thus, when a new boiler is installed, it can serve both new and existing generators, providing efficiency gains for generating units across multiple vintages of capital. This spillover
effect, together with newer boilers typically being more efficient, provides a physical basis
for increasing returns to scale. Nerlove (1963) and Christensen and Greene (1976) provide
seminal early estimates of scale economies in the electricity sector.
F4 Imperfect substitutability across fuel-specific electricity Electricity properties differ across input fuels. For example, electricity from coal provides “base load” supply that
cannot be easily ramped up or down in response to variable demand, unlike electricity
from natural gas. Similarly, electricity from solar and wind is less reliable than fossil-fuel
based electricity due to the intermittent availability of these renewable resources. This
imperfect substitutability across fuels is a crucial element of the directed technical change
27

model developed by Acemoglu et al. (2012).
I incorporate these features into a model of electricity production with vintaged capital. In
order to later map this model onto my county-level reduced-form evidence, I consider a county
that acts as a small open economy and served by a single electricity producer. The index
t denotes the time increment between each capital vintage. At the top tier, the final good,
electricity, Yt , is generated using two intermediate goods, Yct and Ynt , representing electricity
from coal and all other fuels respectively. Specifically, it takes the following Constant Elasticity
of Substitution form

/(−1)
(−1)/
(−1)/
Yt = Yct
+ Ynt

(5)

where  is the long-run elasticity of substitution between electricity produced from the two
intermediate sectors.24 To allow for imperfect substitutability between electricity from different
fuels (i.e., F4), I assume  ∈ (1, +∞). Final good price is normalized to 1.
Fuel-specific electricity, the intermediate good, is produced via middle and lower tiers of the
production structure. These two tiers combine to form the following expression
Yjt = (min[AXjt Xjt , AEjt Ejt ])α (min[AXjt−1 (1 − δ)Xjt−1 , AEjt−1 Ejt−1 ])α

for j∈{c,n}

(6)

where δ ∈ (0, 1) is the capital depreciation rate and α ∈ (0, 1) is the fuel-specific electricity
elasticity of input. Returns to scale (i.e., F3) is reflected in the middle tier where fuel-specific
electricity comes from combining generating units across two vintages with scale parameter
ψ = 2α.25 At the lowest tier, generating units combine fuel, Ejt , and t-vintaged capital, Xjt as
perfect complements in a Leontief function (i.e., F2). AXjt > 0 and AEjt > 0 indicate capital
and fuel productivities, respectively.
To explore how scale and productivity effects could generate path dependence for otherwise
similar intermediate sectors, suppose capital and fuel productivities were the same across the
two intermediate sectors in period t − 1, such that AXct−1 = AXnt−1 and AEct−1 = AEnt−1 .
24

This parameter is long-run in the sense that it reflects changes in capital.
This allows for diminishing marginal product under varying returns to scale. Otherwise, the relative input
demand curve becomes upward sloping. The assumption that returns to scale is constant for coal and non-coal
electricity production is examined in Table 3.
25

28

Next, observe that when fuel and capital are perfect complements, efficient allocation in the
lower production tier imply AXjt Xjt = AEjt Ejt for each intermediate sector j. Furthermore,
“clay” past-vintage capital (i.e., F1) with large efficiency losses implies that it is fully utilized,
set at AXjt−1 (1 − δ)Xjt−1 = AEjt−1 Ejt−1 for each intermediate sector j.26 Rewriting the first
et =
order conditions in terms of current-vintage relative coal capital investment, X

Xct
,
Xnt

yields

(see Appendix D.1 for full derivation)


α(1−)

α(1−)

ϕ−1 e ϕ−1
et = w
et−1
X
etϕ−1 X
AXt

where w
et =

wct
wnt

eXt =
is the relative input price index and A

(7)
AXct
AXnt

is the ratio of capital pro-

ductivity for coal and non-coal generating units of vintage t. ϕ = (1 − α)(1 − ) < 0, from
earlier assumptions.27 Equation (7) provides two channels through which past relative input
et . First, after applying
prices, w
et−1 , affect current-vintage relative coal capital investment, X
equation (7) recursively, it can shown that past relative input prices affect past-vintage relative
et−1 . This occurs through the scale channel. Second, while not expliccoal capital investment, X
itly modeled here, in the presence of sector-biased technical change, past relative input prices
eXt . This productivity channel
could also affect current-vintage relative capital productivities, A
would occur if there was accumulation over time in fuel-specific capital productivity such as
via learning-by-doing or if relative input prices direct research towards fuel-biased technological
change.
To empirically isolate which of these two channels are relevant for the estimates in Section
5, I turn next to a series of nested empirical tests informed by the tiered structure of the
model. First, I conduct power plant-level cost regressions for plants that only use coal to
recover the plant-level scale parameter. I then turn to generating unit-level regressions to test
for productivity effects.
26

Appendix D.2 shows how large efficiency losses when using electricity capital below its designed capacity
lead to full utilization of past-vintage capital.
27
I choose this notation to be consistent with that found in Acemoglu et al. (2012).

29

6.2

Testing for scale effects at the power plant level

To recover the scale parameter, ψ, I follow the approach developed initially by Nerlove (1963)
and implemented by Christensen and Greene (1976) to estimate returns to scale in the electricity
sector. Following Fabrizio, Rose and Wolfram (2007), I use power plant-level cost data from
the Utility Data Institute (UDI) from 1981-1999. To remove the influence of the elasticity of
substitution parameter, , I restrict my sample to power plants p in county i and state s that
exclusively use coal. Cost minimization of equation 6 implies the following regression of non-fuel
cost (see Appendix D.3 for full derivation)
ln non fuel costpis =

1
ln Y pis + θ0 Z pis + ηpis
ψ

(8)

where the bar indicates time-averaged variables over 1981-1999. My parameter of interest is
the scale parameter ψ. Y pis is electricity output in megawatt-hours (MWh). Z pis is a vector of
cross-sectional controls. They include observed log power plant-level delivered coal price from
UDI, state fixed effects, and the latitude and longitude of the county centroid. I also control for
differences across transmission grids by including NERC region fixed effects. Standard errors,
ηpis , are clustered at the county level. Table 3 displays estimates of ψ for coal-only power plants
in my baseline county sample. I estimate a scale parameter of ψ̂ = 1.8 that is statistically
significant at the 1% level.
Potential simultaneity bias in equation (8) has been noted as early as Nerlove (1963). In particular, electricity prices for electric utilities are historically regulated to cover a plant’s average
costs. As a consequence, electricity output may be correlated with unobserved determinants of
non-fuel costs. To address this endogeneity concern, I use past delivered coal prices as an instrument for current electricity output via an instrumental variables (IV) approach. Specifically, my
instrument is the interaction between county distance to the nearest shallow mine before the
switch to deep coal and the number of decades since that switching event. For identification to
be valid, shocks to local coal transport must affect current non-fuel costs only through current
output. Specifically, my first stage regression is

30

ln Y pis = κ1 ln doi ∗ sinceEventi + κ2 ln doi + κ3 sinceEventi + ϑ0 Z pis + νpis

(9)

Equation (9) estimates the event time-varying effects of past transport distance shocks and is
the cross-sectional analog to my panel estimator in equation (4). In particular, κ1 captures the
event time-varying effect of past shocks, or the slope of the lagged effects shown in Figure 3 over
time. Column 2 of Table 3 shows an IV estimate that is statistically significant at the 1% level
and similar in magnitude to my OLS estimate. Furthermore, this IV estimate is robust to the
potential presence of a weak instrument. The p-value and confidence interval from a conditional
likelihood ratio test strongly reject a null hypothesis that the coefficient on electricity output in
equation (8) is zero (Moreira, 2003), assuaging concerns over a seemingly low Kleibergen-Paap
first-stage F-statistic. Henceforth, my preferred scale parameter estimate is ψ̂ = 1.66 from
column 2.
The production function in Section 6.1 assumes that coal and non-coal electricity exhibit
the same returns to scale. To examine this assumption, I estimate equation (8) for power plants
that consume natural gas and oil in columns 3 and 4 of Table 3. Because the UDI database has
few plants that only consume natural gas and oil in my county sample, for adequate statistical
power, I expand the sample to the entire U.S. and to plants UDI designates as consuming natural
gas and oil as primary fuels.28 I find scale parameters from gas and oil-fired power plants that
are statistically indistinguishable from that of coal-fired power plants.
Finally, despite differences in sample time periods, it is noteworthy that the scale parameter
estimates from 1981-1999 in Table 3 are similar to prior estimates. Nerlove (1963)’s study of
electricity sector firms in 1955 recovers a scale parameter of 1.39. For the same sample of firms,
Christensen and Greene (1976) estimate an analogous scale parameter of 1.26.
28

Federal forms used in compiling the UDI data do not explicitly designate a power plant’s primary or
secondary fuel. For multi-fuel plants, UDI establishes primary fuel by calculating the energy input of each fuel
consumed and then assigning primary fuel to the fuel with the highest energy input.

31

Table 3: Returns to scale regressions at the power plant-level
(1)
ln Y pis (1/ψ)

(2)
(3)
Outcome is ln non-fuel cost

0.56***
(0.028)

0.60***
(0.087)

Kleibergen-Paap F-stat
CLR p-value
CLR confidence int (90%)
Implied scale parameter, ψ

Model
County sample
Fuel input
Power plants

(4)

0.57***
(0.052)

0.51***
(0.054)

3.250
0.0081
[.54, .89]
1.78***
(0.090)

1.66***
(0.24)

1.75***
(0.16)

1.96***
(0.21)

OLS
Baseline
Only coal
103

IV
Baseline
Only coal
96

OLS
All U.S.
Primary gas
32

OLS
All U.S.
Primary oil
73

Notes: Estimates of ψ from equation (8) using power plant-level log non-fuel cost as outcome.
All models include observed power plant-level log fuel price, state and NERC region fixed effects,
and county centroid longitude and latitude. Non-fuel cost and fuel price are 1981-1999 averages.
Columns 1 and 2 include coal-only power plants in baseline county sample shown in Figure A.4.
Columns 3 and 4 include all U.S. power plants using natural gas and oil as primary fuels, respectively. Columns 1, 3, and 4 show results from OLS regressions. Column 2 shows the result from an
IV regression with equation (9) as the first stage. Column 2 shows the Kleibergen-Paap F-statistic
(Kleibergen, 2004) as well as the p-value and confidence interval (in brackets) from a conditional
likelihood ratio test against a null hypothesis that 1/ψ is zero (Moreira, 2003). Robust standard
errors clustered at the county level in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

6.3

Testing for productivity effects at the generating unit level

Past shocks to local coal transport distance could also directly affect the accumulation of coalspecific productivity. If so, the IV estimator in Section 6.2 would not satisfy the exclusion
restriction needed for identifying the scale parameter. To detect productivity effects, I turn
to generating unit-level regressions where productivity effects can be more cleanly isolated. I
employ two standard measures of generating-unit productivity. Following Davis and Wolfram
(2012), capital productivity, AXct , is the ratio of electricity output to generating unit capacity on
an annualized basis. My second measure is thermal efficiency, or the ratio of heat from electricity
produced to heat from fuel consumed. This measure corresponds to fuel productivity, AEct . To
obtain both measures, I combine the previously mentioned generating unit capacity data from
EIA-860 forms with generating-unit electricity production and boiler-level fuel consumption

32

from EIA-923 forms (see Appendix A for data details). Averaging generating unit-level data
across 2009-2012,29 I estimate the following regression for generating unit g, in power plant p,
located in county i and state s with both productivity measures as outcomes
ln Agpis = ω1 ln doi × sinceEventi + ω2 ln doi + ω3 sinceEventi + λ0 Z gpis + υgpis

(10)

where the set of controls Z gpis includes state and NERC region fixed effects, and the latitude and
longitude of the county centroid. The standard error, υgpis , is clustered at the county level. As
with equation 9, ω1 in equation 10 captures the event time-varying effects of past coal transport
distance shocks on generating unit productivity.
Table 4: Productivity regressions at the generating unit-level
(1)

(2)
(3)
(4)
Outcome is ln
capital productivity fuel productivity
ln doi × sinceEventi (ω1 )
ln doi (ω2 )
sinceEventi (ω3 )

-0.052
(0.032)
0.12
(0.17)
0.14
(0.12)

-0.032
(0.031)
0.078
(0.18)
0.034
(0.11)
-0.012**
(0.0048)

0.015
(0.047)
-0.33
(0.26)
-0.12
(0.18)

0.034
(0.047)
-0.37
(0.27)
-0.22
(0.16)
-0.011
(0.0072)

224

224

224

224

age

Generating units

Notes: Estimates from equation 10 using generating unit-level outcomes. All
models includes state and NERC region fixed effects, and county centroid longitude
and latitude. Sample includes generating units in coal-only power plants located
in baseline county sample shown in Figure A.4. Outcome in columns 1 and 2 is
the 2009-2012 average ratio of electricity generation to generating unit capital,
which approximates capital productivity, AXct . Outcome in columns 3 and 4 is
the 2009-2012 average thermal efficiency, which approximates fuel productivity,
AEct . Models in columns 2 and 4 add generating unit age. Robust standard errors
clustered at the county level in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Results are shown in Table 4 for generating units in coal-only power plants located in my
baseline county sample. Columns 1 and 2 examine log capital productivity. I do not detect
statistically significant effects of past coal prices. Imprecise effects become smaller when I
29

Because productivity presumably accumulates over time, any lagged effects of past shocks to local coal
transport distance should be stronger and more detectable with more recent productivity data.

33

additionally control for the age of the generating unit in column 2. Columns 3 and 4 replicate
columns 1 and 2 but with log thermal efficiency as the outcome. Again, I do not find that past
shocks affect subsequent fuel productivity.
It is important to note that failing to find local productivity effects from local coal transport
distance shocks does not necessarily imply there are no productivity effects at a more aggregate
level. Induced innovation can spillover across the research sector and is not confined within
counties. Similarly, if productivity improvements occur through human capital accumulation,
there could be spillovers across counties through labor reallocation by firms with multiple power
plants. I return to this issue in Section 7.

6.4

Alternative mechanisms

The model in Section 6.1 necessarily omits other potential mechanisms. While the presence
of other mechanisms would not invalidate Section 5’s reduced-form estimates of strong path
dependence in energy transitions, they would complicate how these results are structurally
interpreted. This subsection tests for the presence of several alternative mechanisms.

Electricity sector regulation Capital investment responds to regulation. In particular,
two regulations may be pertinent for electricity capital decisions. For much of the 20th century,
electricity producers faced cost-of-service regulation by state Public Utility Commissions (PUC)
which set output prices to ensure producers recover “prudently incurred” variable costs plus a
regulated rate of return on capital investments. As noted first by Averch and Johnson (1962),
when the allowed rate of return exceeds the cost of capital, electricity producers have an incentive
to inefficiently over invest in capital relative to other inputs.30 Conceptually, the Averch-Johnson
effect is unlikely to drive my reduced-form results in Section 5. Structural change pertains to the
composition of capital across different fuels and not the overall level of capital. Because cost-ofservice regulations for electricity producers do not specify different rates of return for electricity
30

The literature has found some empirical support for the Averch-Johnson effect in the U.S. energy sector.
Joskow and Rose (1989) reviews evidence from the 1960-1980 period. Cicala (2015) finds this effect using more
recent data.

34

capital using different fuels, such regulations are unlikely to alter the relative marginal product
of capital across fuels. This is supported empirically by column 2 of Table A.10 which estimates
my baseline model in equation (4) but uses only the subset of observations during which there
was no state PUC regulation of electric utilities (see Appendix A for details). Despite the smaller
sample size, I detect statistically significant lagged effects with magnitudes that are similar to
my baseline estimates in column 1 of Table A.10.
A second important regulation is the U.S. Clean Air Act. Beginning with the 1970 U.S. Clean
Air Act Amendments, counties with concentrations of criteria air pollution exceeding national
ambient air quality standards were labeled as being in “nonattainment”. Both existing and new
polluting facilities in nonattainment counties were required to invest in pollution abatement
equipment. Because coal is dirtier than other fuels, it is possible that the 1970 and later Clean
Air Act Amendments altered the fuel composition of electricity capital. Table A.10 provides two
empirical tests. In column 3, I restrict the sample to observations during 1890-1960, the period
before the introduction of the 1970 Clean Air Act Amendments. I find lagged effects that are
similar in magnitude to my baseline results. Column 3 also suggests that my path dependence
estimates do not differ across the 20th century. To provide a more direct test, column 4 restricts
my sample to the subset of counties that never received a nonattainment designation during the
20th century. Again, I do not find lagged effects that differ much from my baseline estimates.

Upstream and downstream sectors The electricity sector consumes fuel from upstream
extraction and transport sectors and produces electricity for downstream manufacturing and
residential sectors. Features of these up- and down-stream sectors could generate the strong
path dependence detected in Section 5.
Power plants typically procure coal through long-term contracts with mines (Joskow, 1987).
As a consequence, plants may continue buying coal from certain producers even as contemporaneous circumstances change. Joskow (1987) showed that the average coal contract length in
1979 lasted 12.8 years. More recent work by Kozhevnikova and Lange (2009) and Jha (2015)
find this duration has since decreased to 4.4 years in the 1980s and 1990s. Coal contracts of such

35

duration are unlikely to generate lagged effects over multiple decades, as detected in Section 5.
Furthermore, even if coal contracts were of longer duration, it is unclear why they would cause
lagged effects to strengthen over time.
Rail and highway networks serve as complementary capital for delivering coal to power
plants. Increasing returns along with sunk costs in the transport sector can also generate path
dependence in the fuel composition of the electricity sector.31 To examine whether past coal
transport distance shocks affect the coal transport sector itself, I turn to a county-level version
of the specification in equation (10). Column 1 of Table A.11 examines whether there are event
time-varying effects of past transport distance shocks on log railroad density in 2010 (in miles
per square mile). I do not find such effects which is unsurprising given that most modern U.S.
railroads lines were already established by the end of the 19th century (Atack, 2013). Column 2
of Table A.11 also fails to detect effects of past transport distance shocks on log highway density
in 2010 (in miles per square mile).
Finally, I consider downstream effects. Previous literature detects long-term effects of historical access to hydropower electricity on local manufacturing sector employment (Kline and
Moretti, 2014) and population density (Severnini, 2014). Indeed, one alternative explanation
for my results involves downstream manufacturing sectors also exhibit increasing returns to
scale and somehow preferring electricity produced from coal over that from other fuels. If so,
one would expect my lagged effects to be altered when I control for local manufacturing sector
demand. Column 3 of Table A.6 shows that is not the case.
Preference sorting by residential households provides another potential downstream mechanism (Tiebout, 1956). If households with low valuation for environmental amenities sort into
historically coal-dependent locations, these residents may support more lenient local environmental policies that enable the expansion of coal-fired electricity even as economic circumstances
that initially favored coal disappear. Using the same specification from columns 1 and 2, columns
3 and 4 explore this sorting mechanism by estimating event time-varying effects of past coal
31

Sunk costs alone, however, would not generate path dependence in the long-run as initial capital would
eventually depreciate. See discussion in Bleakley and Lin (2012).

36

transport distance shocks on the share of a county’s population belonging to one of three major environmental NGOs in 1996 and the county share of eligible voters that voted for the
2000 Republican Presidential candidate (see Appendix A for data details). Neither proxy for
environmental preferences responds to past transport distance shocks.

7

Structural interpretation

Having isolated returns to scale as the relevant mechanism, this section employs the structure
of the model in Section 6.1 to interpret my reduced-form estimates. First, I formally define path
dependence in energy transitions as a function of two parameters: returns to scale, ψ, and the
long-run elasticity of substitution between electricity produced from coal and other fuels, . I
then use this definition to recover  implied by my reduced-form estimates of path dependence
in Section 5 and my estimates of the scale parameter in Section 6.2. Because this parameter
appears across a broad class of structural change models, this exercise enables some external
validity for my reduced-form results. Finally, I explore through calibrated model simulations
the conditions under which temporary interventions to fuel composition can induce sustained
future transitions away from coal at the county-level. Further simulations explore implications
for U.S.-wide clean energy transitions.

7.1

Formal definitions of path dependence

I formally defined scale-driven path dependence within the model in Section 6.1. To do this,
I first apply a log transformation to equation (7) and rewrite it recursively. Current-vintage
relative coal capital investment becomes

α(1 − )
α2 (1 − )2 
ln w
et +
ln w
et−1 +
ln w
et−2 + ...
(ϕ − 1)
(ϕ − 1)2
(ϕ − 1)3
3
3
α(1 − ) e
α2 (1 − )2
eXt−1 + α (1 − ) ln A
eXt−2 + ...
+
ln AXt +
ln
A
(ϕ − 1)
(ϕ − 1)2
(ϕ − 1)3

s
s+1
t
t 
X
X

α(1 − )
α(1 − )
eXt−s
=
ln w
et−s +
ln A
(ϕ
−
1)
(ϕ
−
1)
(ϕ
−
1)
s=0
s=0

et =
ln X

37

(11)

where s is a lagged time index. An increase in relative coal price lowers contemporaneous relative
coal capital investment,
et
∂ ln X
∂ ln w
et−s

et
∂ ln X
∂ ln w
et

< 0, and also lowers future relative coal capital investment,

< 0. The relative magnitude of these two effects dictate the strength of path dependence

in energy transitions. Formally,
PROPOSITION 1 Weak path dependence: The effect of past relative coal prices weakens
over time,

et )
e
∂ ln(X
/ ∂ ln(Xett))
∂ ln(w
et−1 ) ∂ ln(w

=

α(1−)
/ 
(ϕ−1)2 (ϕ−1)

< 1, or when ψ <

−
.
1−

PROPOSITION 2 Strong path dependence: The effect of past relative coal prices strengthens over time,

e
et )
∂ ln(X
/ ∂ ln(Xett))
∂ ln(w
et−1 ) ∂ ln(w

=

α(1−)
/ 
(ϕ−1)2 (ϕ−1)

> 1, or when ψ >

−
.
1−

Strong path dependence occurs whenever an increase in the relative coal price triggers a downward shift in the relative marginal product of capital investment in subsequent periods. This
shift is the net result of two countervailing forces, each of which I first consider in isolation.
The first force is increasing returns to scale, captured by ψ. Suppose there is only one
intermediate sector which uses coal for electricity. When ψ > 1, the cross partial derivative of
Yct with respect to past and current capital investment exceeds the second partial derivative
of Yct with respect to current capital investment.32 This “push” enables relative coal prices to
have a stronger effect on future coal capital investment than on current coal capital investment.
However, when there is more than one sector, ψ > 1 alone does not dictate the strength of
path dependence. A countervailing “pull” force comes from the imperfect substitutability between electricity produced from coal and other fuels,  ∈ (1, +∞). Suppose there is no increasing
returns to scale. An increase in the relative coal price induces a contemporaneous decrease in
relative coal capital investment. This capital imbalance does not persist in subsequent periods. When electricity from coal and other fuels are imperfect substitutes, subsequent periods
32

This comes directly from applying Euler’s theorem. Formally, the cross partial derivative of a function
Y (Xct , Xct−1 ) of homogeneous degree ψ can be written as



 2
∂ 2 Yct
ψ − 1 ∂Yct
Xct
∂ Yct
=
−
2
∂Xct ∂Xct−1
Xct−1 ∂Xct
Xct−1 ∂ 2 Xct
Setting Xct = Xct−1 so that one can compare the effects of lagged capital investment against current capital
∂ 2 Yct
∂ 2 Yct
investment, ∂Xct
∂Xct−1 > − ∂ 2 X 2 only when ψ > 1.
ct

38

experience a relative increase in demand for electricity from coal which induces relatively more
investment in coal-specific capital. As a consequence, the capital imbalance across the two fuels
eventually dissipates.
When both forces are at play, Proposition 2 states that strong path dependence can only
be achieved when increasing returns to scale provides a large enough push to overcome the pull
from imperfect substitutability, or when ψ >

− 33
.
1−

In the context of the electricity sector,

this occurs whenever the amplifying force of increasing returns to scale in electricity production
offsets the dampening force due to differences in the properties of electricity from different fuels,
such as electricity reliability.

7.2

Recovering the long-run elasticity of substitution

The long-run elasticity of substitution between intermediate sectors, , appears across a broad
class of structural change models (Baumol, 1967; Ngai and Pissarides, 2007; Acemoglu, 2002;
Acemoglu and Guerrieri, 2008; Acemoglu et al., 2012; Lemoine, 2017; Fried, 2018; Acemoglu
et al., 2019). Because these models exhibit different mechanisms for generating path dependence, recovering  enables this paper to inform other settings whereby energy transition is
driven by other mechanisms besides economies of scale in electricity production. Specifically, I
recover  using the mapping between the structural expression in equation (11) and reduced-form
coefficients in equations (4) and (8).
To start, observe that the time index in equation (11) is in terms of capital vintages. The
time index in my empirical results is in decades relative to the switching event. To convert from
event-time to vintage-time, I weight each reduced-form lagged effect, β̂ τ , by the probability
of generator retirement, ιτ , from the age distribution of retired generators in my sample.34
Specifically, using β̂ τ and π̂ from column 2 of Table 2, the ratio of reduced-form lagged to
contemporaneous effect is ρb =

1
5

P5

this ratio to its structural analog

τ =1

π̂

β̂ τ ∗ιτ

= 1.45, with a standard error of 0.72. Mapping

et )
e
∂ ln(X
/ ∂ ln(Xett))
∂ ln(w
et−1 ) ∂ ln(w

33

=

α(1−)
/ 
(ϕ−1)2 (ϕ−1)

and taking the estimated

Notice the similarities here with the “market size” and “price” effects found in models of directed technical
change (Acemoglu, 2002; Acemoglu et al., 2012).
34 τ
ι ∈ {.38, .27, .22, .11, .02}

39

scale parameter ψ̂ = 1.66 from column 2 of Table 3, one can express the long-run elasticity of
substitution entirely in terms of estimated statistical parameters
=1+

ρb
ψ̂
2

− ρb(1 − ψ̂2 )

= 3.5

As an example of how this elasticity value can inform other structural change models, in Acemoglu et al. (2012)’s macroeconomic model of optimal climate policy under directed technical
change,  = 3.5 falls within the parameter space for which a temporary policy intervention is
sufficient to avoid long-term climate disaster, defined as the state of the climate beyond which
recovery is impossible.35

7.3

Simulating future clean energy transitions

Evidence of strong path dependence implies it is possible for a temporary shock to fuel composition to induce permanent fuel switching. In the context of climate change policy, it suggests
that a temporary policy can induce a long-term decline in carbon emissions at the county-level.
But under what conditions? In particular, given the abundance of coal resources in the U.S.,
what is the required magnitude and/or duration of an intervention that can trigger a sustained
clean energy transition?
To shed light on these questions, I calibrate my structural model with reduced-form parameters to simulate future county-level electricity sector CO2 emissions following relative coal
price shocks of varying magnitude and duration. To ground my simulations in recent economic
conditions, the magnitude of the shocks considered are benchmarked to recent average national
relative coal prices following the introduction of natural gas hydraulic fracturing. Figure A.13
shows that as a consequence of hydraulic fracturing, relative U.S. coal prices in 2009 and 2010
was 143% higher than what a quadratic trend estimated over 1985-2008 would have predicted.
My simulations employ several simplifying assumptions (see Appendix E for details). First,
only electricity from coal and natural gas are considered.36 Second, to avoid forecasting trends
35
36

A county-level  may differ from a national-level . We explore this consideration in Section 7.3.
In 2009, coal- and natural gas-fired generating units constituted 92% of all U.S. generating units burning

40

1X recent prices

2X recent prices

1950

1950

1950

2000

2000

2000

2050
Year

2050
Year

2050
Year

1-decade duration

2100

2100

2100

2150

55.6% declining

2150

24.4% declining

2150

.4% declining

1950

1950

1950

2000

2000

2000

2050
Year

2050
Year

2050
Year

2100

2100

2100

3-decade duration

2150

73.2% declining

2150

65.2% declining

2150

42.4% declining

1950

1950

1950

2000

2000

2000

2050
Year

2050
Year

2050
Year

2100

2100

2100

2150

60% declining

2150

75.6% declining

2150

70.8% declining

5-decade duration

Figure 4: Simulating future county-level CO2 emissions following temporary relative coal price shocks

Notes: Simulations of CO2 electricity sector emissions over 2010-2150 for the average U.S. county following temporary relative coal price shocks of
varying magnitudes and durations. Top, middle, and bottom panels use price shocks 1, 2, and 6 times that of recent relative coal prices (see Figure A.13).
Left, middle, and right panels use price shocks that last 1, 3, and 5 decades (shown as shaded gray areas). Solid black lines show historical emissions
during 1950-2000. Dashed gray lines show future business-as-usual emissions without the shock. Thick solid blue and red lines show future projected
annual CO2 emissions (in Mton/yr) and coal capital investment share under the shock, respectively, using mean estimated values of ψ and . Thin solid
blue and red lines show future projected annual CO2 emissions and coal capital investment share under the shock, respectively, from 250 Monte Carlo
draws of the estimated uncertainty for ψ and . Percentage of draws with weakly declining long-term CO2 emissions are also shown. See Appendix E for
details.

6X recent prices

1.4

1.2

CO2 emissions (Mtons/yr)
.4
.6
.8
1

.2

0

1.4

1.2

CO2 emissions (Mtons/yr)
.4
.6
.8
1

.2

0

1.4

1.2

.2

0

CO2 emissions (Mtons/yr)
.4
.6
.8
1

1
Coal capital investment share
.5
0
1
Coal capital investment share
.5
0
.5
0

1
Coal capital investment share

1.4
1.2
CO2 emissions (Mtons/yr)
.4
.6
.8
1
.2
0
1.4
1.2
CO2 emissions (Mtons/yr)
.4
.6
.8
1
.2
0
1.4
1.2
.2
0

CO2 emissions (Mtons/yr)
.4
.6
.8
1

1
Coal capital investment share
.5
0
1
Coal capital investment share
.5
0
.5
0

1
Coal capital investment share

1.4
1.2
CO2 emissions (Mtons/yr)
.4
.6
.8
1
.2
0
1.4
1.2
CO2 emissions (Mtons/yr)
.4
.6
.8
1
.2
0
1.4
1.2
.2
0

CO2 emissions (Mtons/yr)
.4
.6
.8
1

1
Coal capital investment share
.5
0
1
Coal capital investment share
.5
0
1
Coal capital investment share
.5
0

41

in productivity, electricity demand, and other economic conditions, I assume that future productivity, total coal and natural gas capital, capital depreciation, and baseline relative coal prices
in the absence of the shock are held constant at recent average county values. Third, I assume
that the scale and elasticity of substitution parameters are constant throughout the simulation
period. Because of these assumptions, one should not interpret these simulations as forecasts
of county-level electricity sector CO2 emissions but rather as exercises in understanding the
conditions for triggering a sustained future clean energy transition.
Figure 4 shows how CO2 emission trajectories are altered when one varies the magnitude
and duration of the temporary relative coal price shock. Top, middle, and bottom panels use
price shocks that are 1, 2, and 6 times that of recent relative coal prices. Left, middle, and
right panels use price shocks that last 1, 3, and 5 decades. Business-as-usual emissions in the
absence of the shock are shown as dashed gray lines. When shocks are introduced, the thick
solid blue and red lines show CO2 emissions and the coal share of capital investment under mean
values of ψ and , respectively. The thin solid blue and red lines show CO2 emissions and coal
capital investment share, respectively, from Monte Carlo draws using the estimated uncertainty
for each structural parameter. Each panel also indicates the percentage of draws in which CO2
emissions are weakly declining in the long-term.37
In general, the likelihood of achieving weakly declining CO2 emissions in the long-term
increases with larger shocks and/or shocks of longer duration. Examining the top row of Figure
4, if recent relative coal prices were to last up to 3 decades, CO2 would still rise in the long-term
on average. For a better than 50% chance of weakly declining emissions and a sustained switch
away from new investments in coal-fired electricity capital, recent relative coal prices must last
at least 5 decades. Going down the first column of Figure 4, if an intervention can only last for
1 decade, it must be at least 6 times that of recent relative coal prices for a greater than 50%
chance of achieving weakly declining long-term emissions.
fossil fuels.
37
Because natural gas still contains carbon, in none of the simulations do CO2 emissions reach zero in the
long term. Instead, emissions converge asymptotically to a steady-state level where all electricity is produced
from natural gas. Thus, these simulations focus on whether temporary policies achieve weakly declining CO2
emissions in the long-term.

42

1.4

1.5

Returns to scale (ψ)
1.6
1.7
1.8

1.9

15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
2

Required shock duration in decades

2

Figure 5: Required duration of temporary shock under different structural parameter values

3

4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Elasticity of substitution (ε)
Notes: Vertical axis shows values for the returns to scale parameter, ψ. Horizontal axis shows values for the
elasticity of substitution parameter, . Heat map shows the minimum number of decades that a shock equal in
magnitude to that of recent relative coal prices must last in order for long-term CO2 emissions to be weakly
declining. X indicates parameter values estimated in this paper. See Appendix E for details.

Figure 4 suggests that given historical parameter values, a sustained clean energy transition
at the county level would require either a very large and/or long duration intervention. How
would different parameter values alter these requirements? This is of interest for two reasons.
First, future technological developments may alter parameter values. Storage technology can
improve the reliability of solar and wind-based electricity, making renewable energy sources
stronger substitutes for coal. Electricity from renewable energy may also exhibit different returns
to scale. Second, to understand U.S.-wide energy transitions, one may need different parameter
values than those recovered using reduced-form evidence at the county level.
Two macroeconomic considerations, in particular, may imply even stronger path dependence in energy transitions at the national level. The presence of a national research sector
would generate directed technical change, providing an additional “push” force (Acemoglu et al.,
2012). Furthermore, because a larger variety of energy inputs are available nationally through
regionally-connected electricity grids, it is plausible that the elasticity of substitution between

43

coal and non-coal electricity at the national level is higher than at the county level, resulting in
a weaker “pull” against energy transitions.
Figure 5 explores the energy transition implications of varying push and pull forces within
the structure of my model by considering different values of  and ψ. For each pair of parameter
values, the heat map in Figure 5 shows the minimum number of decades a shock equal in
magnitude to that of recent relative coal prices must last in order to achieve weakly declining
long-term CO2 emissions. The require length of the intervention falls when values of  and ψ
are higher than those estimated in this paper.

8

Conclusion

This paper estimates path dependence in energy transitions for the U.S. electricity sector over the
20th century. Exploiting shocks to county-level coal transport distance driven by the changing
regional accessibility of subsurface coal, I find increasing imbalance in the coal composition
of electricity capital lasting ten decades following a shock. This suggests that it is possible for
temporary shocks of sufficient magnitude and/or duration to induce permanent fuel switching in
the electricity sector at the county level. Additional evidence detects increasing returns to scale
in electricity production as the underlying mechanism. To interpret these results, I develop a
model of scale-driven structural change for the electricity sector at the county level which allows
for a formal definition of strong path dependence and a mapping between my reduced-form
estimates and a key structural parameter found across a class of structural change models.
This historical evidence is particularly timely given recent developments in the U.S. electricity sector and increasing concerns over climate change impacts. The current spike in relative coal
prices following breakthroughs in natural gas extraction is contributing to a slow-down in the
construction of new coal-fired power plants. However, these circumstances may not be enough to
trigger a sustained transition away from coal in the U.S. electricity sector. Simulations of future
energy transitions using this paper’s calibrated structural model demonstrate that a sustained
energy transition away from coal would require either a larger and/or longer lasting shock to

44

fuel composition. These simulations also show that a sustained clean energy transition can be
more easily achieved if investments were made to either increase scale economies in electricity
production or towards stronger substitutability between electricity from coal and alternative
fuels.
The presence of strong path dependence in energy transitions also provides further support
for Pigouvian interventions that directly price an externality over second-best policies that favor
specific technologies or resources. It is widely argued that technology- and resource-specific
policies are inefficient because they may fail to target cost-effective mitigation strategies. The
presence of path dependence amplifies this cost. Suppose a natural gas-specific subsidy induces
a transition from coal to natural gas but large climate damages ultimately requires a switch to
even cleaner fuels. The ensuing path dependence in natural gas would make the later switch to
cleaner fuels even more costly. A Pigouvian intervention would avoid this detour.

References
Acemoglu, Daron. 2002. “Directed Technical Change.” The Review of Economic Studies, 69(4): 781–
809.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Veronica Guerrieri. 2008. “Capital Deepening and Nonbalanced Economic
Growth.” Journal of Political Economy, 116(3): 467–498.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Will Rafey. 2018. “Mirage on the Horizon: Geoengineering and Carbon Taxation
Without Commitment.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 24411.
Acemoglu, Daron., Philippe. Aghion, Leonardo Bursztyn, and David Hemous. 2012. “The Environment
and Directed Technical Change.” American Economic Review, 102(1): 131–66.
Acemoglu, Daron, Philippe Aghion, Lint Barrage, and David Hemous. 2019. “Climate Change, Directed
Innovation, and Energy Transition: The Long-run Consequences of the Shale Gas Revolution.”
mimeo.
Acemoglu, Daron, Ufuk Akcigit, Douglas Hanley, and William Kerr. 2016. “Transition to Clean Technology.” Journal of Political Economy, 124(1): 52–104.
Aghion, Philippe, Antoine Dechezlepretre, David Hemous, Ralf Martin, and John Van Reenen. 2016.
“Carbon Taxes, Path Dependency, and Directed Technical Change: Evidence from the Auto Industry.” Journal of Political Economy, 124(1): 1–51.
Anderson, Sarah E. 2011. “Complex constituencies: intense environmentalists and representation.”
Environmental Politics, 20(4): 547–565.
Atack, Jeremy. 2013. “On the Use of Geographic Information Systems in Economic History: The
American Transportation Revolution Revisited.” The Journal of Economic History, 73(2): 313338.
Atack, Jeremy. 2015. “Historical Geographic Information Systems (GIS) database of SteamboatNavigated Rivers During the Nineteenth Century in the United States.”

45

Atack, Jeremy. 2017. “Historical Geographic Information Systems (GIS) database of Nineteenth Century U.S. Canals.”
Atkeson, Andrew, and Patrick J. Kehoe. 1999. “Models of Energy Use: Putty-Putty versus PuttyClay.” American Economic Review, 89(4): 1028–1043.
Atkinson, Scott E, and Robert Halvorsen. 1976. “Interfuel substitution in steam electric power generation.” Journal of Political Economy, 84(5): 959–978.
Avallone, Eugene A, Theodore Baumeister, and Ali Sadegh. 2006. Marks’ Standard Handbook For
Mechanical Engineers (Standard Handbook for Mechanical Engineers). Mcgraw-Hill Professional.
Averch, Harvey, and Leland L. Johnson. 1962. “Behavior of the Firm Under Regulatory Constraint.”
The American Economic Review, 52(5): 1052–1069.
Barreca, Alan, Karen Clay, and Joel Tarr. 2014. “Coal, Smoke, and Death: Bituminous Coal and
American Home Heating.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 19881.
Baumol, William J. 1967. “Macroeconomics of unbalanced growth: the anatomy of urban crisis.”
American Economic Review, 415–426.
Beach, Brian, and W. Walker Hanlon. 2018. “Coal Smoke and Mortality in an Early Industrial Economy.” Economic Journal, forthcoming.
Bleakley, Hoyt, and Jeffrey Lin. 2012. “Portage and Path Dependence.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 127(2): 587–644.
Boden, T.A., G. Marland, and R.J. Andres. 2013. “Global, Regional, and National Fossil-Fuel CO2
Emissions.” Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, U.S.
Department of Energy, Oak Ridge, Tenn., U.S.A. Working Paper.
BP. 2017. “Statistical Review of World Energy.”
Busse, Meghan R., and Nathaniel O. Keohane. 2007. “Market effects of environmental regulation: coal,
railroads, and the 1990 Clean Air Act.” The RAND Journal of Economics, 38(4): 1159–1179.
C. d’Aspremont, J. Jaskold Gabszewicz, J.-F. Thisse. 1979. “On Hotelling’s “Stability in Competition”.” Econometrica, 47(5): 1145–1150.
Campbell, Marius R. 1908. “Coal Fields of the United States.” U. S. Geological Survey Map.
Casey, Gregory. 2019. “Energy Efficiency and Directed Technical Change: Implications for Climate
Change Mitigation.” mimeo.
Chay, Kenneth Y., and Michael Greenstone. 2003. “The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant Mortality:
Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession.” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 118(3): 1121–1167.
Chay, Kenneth Y., and Michael Greenstone. 2005. “Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence from the
Housing Market.” Journal of Political Economy, 113(2): pp. 376–424.
Christensen, Laurits R, and William H Greene. 1976. “Economies of scale in US electric power generation.” The Journal of Political Economy, 655–676.
Cicala, Steve. 2015. “When Does Regulation Distort Costs? Lessons from Fuel Procurement in US
Electricity Generation.” American Economic Review, 105(1): 411–44.
Clay, Karen, Joshua Lewis, and Edson Severnini. 2016. “Canary in a Coal Mine: Infant Mortality,
Property Values, and Tradeoffs Associated with Mid-20th Century Air Pollution.” National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Paper 22155.
Coase, R. H. 1960. “The Problem of Social Cost.” Journal of Law and Economics, 3: pp. 1–44.
Davis, Lucas W., and Catherine Wolfram. 2012. “Deregulation, Consolidation, and Efficiency: Evidence
from US Nuclear Power.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(4): 194–225.

46

East, J.A. 2012. “Coal fields of the conterminous United States, National Coal Resource Assessment.”
U.S. Geological Survey 2012-1205.
Energy Information Administration. 1994. “Coal Industry Annual.”
Energy Information Administration. 2012. “Annual Energy Review, 1982-2011.”
Fabrizio, Kira R., Nancy L. Rose, and Catherine D. Wolfram. 2007. “Do Markets Reduce Costs?
Assessing the Impact of Regulatory Restructuring on US Electric Generation Efficiency.” American
Economic Review, 97(4): 1250–1277.
Fisher, Cassius A. 1910. “Depth and Minimum Thickness of Beds as Limiting Factors in Valuation.”
United States Geological Survey Bulletin 424.
Fried, Stephie. 2018. “Climate Policy and Innovation: A Quantitative Macroeconomic Analysis.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 10(1): 90–118.
Fujiwara, Thomas, Kyle Meng, and Tom Vogl. 2016. “Habit Formation in Voting: Evidence from Rainy
Elections.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8(4): 160–88.
Gaudet, Grard, Michel Moreaux, and Stephen W. Salant. 2001. “Intertemporal Depletion of Resource
Sites by Spatially Distributed Users.” The American Economic Review, 91(4): pp. 1149–1159.
Griffin, James M, and Paul R Gregory. 1976. “An intercountry translog model of energy substitution
responses.” The American Economic Review, 66(5): 845–857.
Haines, Michael R. 2010. “Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States,
1790-2002.” Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR) [distributor].
Hanlon, W. Walker. 2016. “Coal Smoke and the Costs of the Industrial Revolution.” mimeo.
Herfindahl, Orris C. 1967. “Depletion and economic theory.” Extractive resources and taxation, 63–90.
Hornbeck, Richard. 2012. “The Enduring Impact of the American Dust Bowl: Short- and Long-Run
Adjustments to Environmental Catastrophe.” American Economic Review, 102(4): 1477–1507.
Hotelling, Harold. 1929. “Stability in Competition.” The Economic Journal, 39(153): pp. 41–57.
Hotelling, Harold. 1931. “The Economics of Exhaustible Resources.” The Journal of Political Economy,
39(2): 137–135.
Jha, Akshaya. 2015. “Regulatory Induced Risk Aversion: Coal Procurement at U.S Power Plants.”
mimeo.
Joskow, Paul L. 1985. “Vertical Integration and Long-Term Contracts: The Case of Coal-Burning
Electric Generating Plants.” Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization, 1(1): 33–80.
Joskow, Paul L. 1987. “Contract duration and relationship-specific investments: Empirical evidence
from coal markets.” The American Economic Review, 168–185.
Joskow, Paul L., and Nancy L. Rose. 1989. “Chapter 25 The effects of economic regulation.” In . Vol. 2
of Handbook of Industrial Organization, 1449 – 1506. Elsevier.
Kleibergen, Frank. 2004. “Testing Subsets of Structural Parameters in the Instrumental Variables.”
The Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(1): 418–423.
Kline, Patrick, and Enrico Moretti. 2014. “Local Economic Development, Agglomeration Economies,
and the Big Push: 100 Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley Authority.” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 129(1): 275–331.
Knittel, Christopher R., Konstantinos Metaxoglou, and Andre Trindade. 2019. “Natural Gas Prices
and Coal Displacement: Evidence from Electricity Markets.” International Journal of Industrial
Organization.
Komiya, Ryutaro. 1962. “Technological Progress and the Production Function in the United States

47

Steam Power Industry.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 44(2): 156–166.
Kozhevnikova, Maria, and Ian Lange. 2009. “Determinants of Contract Duration: Further Evidence
from Coal-Fired Power Plants.” Review of Industrial Organization, 34(3): 217–229.
Lanzi, Elisa, and Ian Sue Wing. 2010. “Directed Technical Change in the Energy Sector: an Empirical
Test of Induced Directed Innovation.” mimeo.
Lemoine, Derek. 2017. “Innovation-Led Transitions in Energy Supply.” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper 23420.
MacLeod, W.B., G. Norman, and J.-F. Thisse. 1988. “Price discrimination and equilibrium in monopolistic competition.” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 6(4): 429 – 446.
McNerney, James, J. Doyne Farmer, and Jessika E. Trancik. 2011. “Historical costs of coal-fired electricity and implications for the future.” Energy Policy, 39(6): 3042 – 3054.
Moreira, Marcelo J. 2003. “A conditional likelihood ratio test for structural models.” Econometrica,
71(4): 1027–1048.
Nerlove, Marc. 1963. “Returns to Scale in Electricity Supply.” In Measurement in Economics - Studies
in Mathematical Economics and Econometrics in Memory of Yehuda Grunfeld. , ed. Carl F. Christ.
Stanford, CA:Stanford Univ. Press.
Ngai, L. Rachel, and Christopher A. Pissarides. 2007. “Structural Change in a Multisector Model of
Growth.” American Economic Review, 97(1): 429–443.
Papageorgiou, Chris, Marianne Saam, and Patrick Schulte. 2017. “Substitution between clean and dirty
energy inputs: A macroeconomic perspective.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 99(2): 281–290.
Pigou, Arthur C. 1920. The Economics of Welfare. McMillan & Co.
Pindyck, Robert S. 1979. “Interfuel substitution and the industrial demand for energy: an international
comparison.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 169–179.
Preonas, Louis. 2018. “Market Power in Coal Shipping and Implications for U.S. Climate Policy.”
mimeo.
Salop, Steven C. 1979. “Monopolistic Competition with Outside Goods.” The Bell Journal of Economics, 10(1): 141–156.
Severnini, Edson. 2014. “The Power of Hydroelectric Dams: Agglomeration spillovers.” IZA Discussion
Paper.
Speight, J. G. 1994. The Chemistry and Technology of Coal, 2nd edition. Marcel Dekker, Inc.
Tiebout, Charles M. 1956. “A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures.” Journal of Political Economy,
64(5): 416–424.
Troesken, Werner. 2006. “Regime Change and Corruption. A History of Public Utility Regulation.”
Corruption and Reform: Lessons from America’s Economic History, 259–282. University of Chicago
Press.
U.S. Census Bureau. 1975. “Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1970, Bicentennial Edition.” U.S. Department of Commerce U.S. Geological Survey.
Vickers, Chris, and Nicolas L Ziebarth. 2018. “The Census of Manufactures: An Overview.” Handbook
of Cliometrics, 1–24.
Vogel, Jonathan. 2008. “Spatial Competition with Heterogeneous Firms.” Journal of Political Economy,
116(3): 423–466.
Vogel, Jonathan. 2011. “Spatial Price Discrimination with Heterogeneous Firms.” The Journal of
Industrial Economics, 59(4): 661–676.
World Bank. 2014. “World Development Indicators.”

48

Appendix to
Estimating Path Dependence
in Energy Transitions

FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION

49

A

Data Sources

This section details data used in the paper.

A.1

Coal resources, mining, and delivered prices

USGS National Coal Resource Assessment (NCRA) I use two spatial datasets from the
NCRA (East, 2012). The first dataset contains shape files of Illinois and Appalachian Basin coal
resources that are situated less than and greater than 200 feet below the surface. These shape files
are used to generate Figure A.4 which maps coal resources for the two basins by depth. The second
dataset contains characteristics of all coal mines in the Illinois Basin that has operated since 1890.
Variables include mine location, opening year, closing year, and area.
Construction of local coal transport distances requires several steps. First, I spatially overlay all
large mines in the Illinois Basin that ever existed since 1890 onto shape files of the basin’s shallow and
deep coal resources, as shown in Figure 2. Using the opening and closing years of each mine, I construct
a mine-by-depth-by-decade panel indicating when each shallow or deep coal mine was in operation.38
Next, for each county and decade, I search for the nearest mine according to the Euclidean distance
between that county’s spatial centroid and the mine, noting whether it is from a shallow or deep coal
resource. This distance is dit in equation (4). Finally, for each county, I find the first decade in which
a county’s nearest mine first switches from shallow coal to deep coal. Distance to the nearest shallow
mine right before the switching event is denoted d0i in equation (4).

FERC-423 forms FERC-423 provides annual data on the quantity, price, heat content, sulfur
content, and ash content of purchased coal for each pair of purchasing power plant and county of coal
origin. This paper uses FERC-423 data in three ways. First, for the 1990-1999 period where the county
of coal origin is more reliable,39 FERC-423 data on coal heat, sulfur, and heat content is aggregated to
the county of origin and averaged across years to produce Table A.1 which documents the heterogeneity
in coal quality across the five major U.S. coal basins. Second, data from the 1990-1999 FERC-423 forms
are used to test the Herfindahl Principle, as shown in Figure A.8. Third, I use observed delivered coal
prices from the entire set of 1972-1999 FERC-423 forms to verify my local coal transport distances in
Table A.2.
38
Specifically, if the mine was in operation for any year in a decade, I note that it was in operation during
that decade.
39
According to the EIA, “The instructions for the FERC Form-423 require the respondent to report the
county in which the coal was mined. However, this data is not always known or reported correctly... It is very
difficult to verify county level data. Users of the data should be aware of this and use the data accordingly.”

50

A.2

Electricity capital and production

EIA-860 forms The EIA-860 forms records the capacity (or capital size), opening and closing years,
and primary fuel input at the generating unit level.40 This paper uses data on generating units from the
EIA-860 forms to construct my main outcome variable, relative coal capital at the county-by-decade
level covering decades from 1890 to 1990. There are several steps to this construction.
First, I create a cross-sectional dataset of operating and retired generating units, taking the most
recent data for each generating unit across the 1990-2012 EIA-860 forms. I then expand this crosssectional dataset along the time dimension using the opening and closing years of each generating unit
to create a generating unit-by-year panel dataset. Next, I sum all generating units that use coal and
all generating units that use other fuels to the county-by-decade level. Relative coal capital is defined
as the ratio of total capital across generating units that use coal to total capital across generating units
that use other fuels. Besides serving as my main outcome variable, relative coal capital is also used to
generate Figure 1.
Underlying assumptions behind this data construction procedure are examined in Figures A.9,
A.10 and Tables A.3 and A.4, using data from the 1990-2012 EIA-860 forms as well as from the 1980
EIA-860 form, which was digitized for this paper.
Knowing when generating units were built, I can also construct a county-by-decade dataset of
relative coal capital investment. I sum new generating units that use coal and that use other fuels to
the county-by-decade level. Relative coal capital investment is then defined as the ratio of total capital
across newly-built generating units that use coal to total capital across newly-built generating units
that use other fuels.

A.3

Control variables

Residential and manufacturing sector covariates County-by-decade residential and manufacturing covariates from 1890 to 1990 come from historical U.S. censuses, collected by Haines (2010).41
These variables include total population, urban population, number of manufacturing establishments,
manufacturing employment, manufacturing capital value, and manufacturing output value. To account
for changing U.S. county boundaries from 1890 to 1930, I redraw pre-1930 counties to their 1930 spatial definitions to produce a county-by-decade panel of covariates that are spatially consistent over the
20th century. This procedure uses historical GIS county shape files from the U.S. National Historical
Geographical Information System (N.H.G.I.S.)42 and is a modification of the method used by Hornbeck
(2012). The resulting data serve as outcome variables in the pre-trend tests shown in Table 1 and as
control variables in column 3 of Table A.6.
40

I only include generating units owned by public utility companies because units owned by non-utilities are
inconsistently reported across EIA-860 forms during the 1990-2012 period.
41
Available: http://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR02896.v3
42
Available: https://www.nhgis.org{}/documentation/gis-data

51

Geographical covariates County-level variance in slope is constructed using the USGS National
Elevation Dataset. County-level distance to nearest navigable river or canal at the start of the 20th
century combines GIS shape files from Atack (2015) and Atack (2017).43 Both variables are used as
controls in column 4 of Table A.6.

A.4

Testing mechanisms

PLATTS/UDI

Power plant-level cost data for 1981-1999 was obtained from PLATTS/UDI. It

provides non-fuel cost, or the difference between total production costs and fuel costs, which serves as
the outcome variable for the return to scale parameter estimates in Table 3.

EIA-923 forms Generating unit-level electricity output and boiler-level coal input data comes from
the 2009-2012 EIA-923 forms. Table 4 uses two generating unit-level productivity measures. Following
Davis and Wolfram (2012), my capital productivity measure is capital operating performance, or the
ratio of a generating unit’s electricity output to its capacity. For generating unit g, in power plant p,
county i, and state s, 2009-2012 averaged annual capital operating performance is
AXgpis =

Ygpis
Xgpis ∗ 8760

where Ygpis is annual electricity output (in MWh, from EIA-923 forms), Xgpis is capacity (in MW,
from EIA-860 forms), and 8760 is the number of hours in a year. My fuel productivity measure is
thermal efficiency. For generating unit g, in power plant p, county i, and state s, 2009-2012 averaged
annual thermal efficiency is
AEgpis =

Ygpis ∗ 1000 ∗ 3412
Egpis

where Egpis is generating unit-level fuel input (in BTU) and 3412 is the equivalent BTU heat content
of one KWh of electricity.44 Generating unit-level Egpis is not directly observed. Instead, the EIA923 forms provide a boiler-to-generator correspondence, which can have many-to-many matches. To
obtain generating unit-level fuel input, I assume that a boiler uniformly divides fuel input across
linked generators. EIA-923 forms prior to 2009 did not include boiler-to-generator correspondences
and therefore are excluded from the analysis.

Public Utility Commissions Column 2 of Table A.10 includes only counties in state and decades
where there was no Public Utility Commission regulation of electric utilities. The following table
summarizes when Public Utility Commission regulation electric utilities was introduced for states in
my baseline sample and the data source

43
44

Available: https://my.vanderbilt.edu/jeremyatack/data-downloads/
See https://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.cfm?id=107&t=3 for details.

52

First decade of
State

PUC regulation

Data source

Alabama

1920

Troesken (2006)

Arkansas

1920

State PUC website45

Iowa

1970

State PUC website46

Illinois

1920

Troesken (2006)

Indiana

1920

Troesken (2006)

Kentucky

1940

State PUC website47

Minnesota

1980

State PUC website48

Missouri

1920

Troesken (2006)

Mississippi

1960

State PUC website49

Tennessee

1920

Troesken (2006)

Wisconsin

1910

Troesken (2006)

U.S. Clean Air Act nonattainment status County-by-year nonattainment status during 19781999 under the Clean Air Act comes from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. A county-bydecade observation is labeled nonattainment if the county is designated wholly or partially in nonattainment for any of the six criteria pollutant during any year in that decade.50 This data is used for
the estimates in column 4 of Table A.10.

Transportation density County-level data on highway and railroad network density in 2010
come from the U.S. Department of Transportation’s National Transportation Atlas Database.51 These
variables are used as outcomes in the regressions shown in columns 1 and 2 of Table A.11.

Environmental NGO membership and vote share County-level membership for the Natural
Resources Defense Council, The Nature Conservancy, and The National Wildlife Federation in 1996
comes from Anderson (2011). County membership share divides membership by 2000 county population
from Haines (2010). County-level Republican Presidential vote share in 2000 comes from Fujiwara,
Meng and Vogl (2016). These variables are used as outcomes in the regressions shown in columns 3
and 4 of Table A.11.
45

Available: http://www.apscservices.info/commission-history.asp
Available: https://iub.iowa.gov/history
47
Available: https://psc.ky.gov/Home/About#AbtComm
48
Available: https://mn.gov/puc/about-us/
49
Available: https://www.psc.state.ms.us/executive/pdfs/2010/2010%20ANNUAL%20REPORT.pdf
50
The six regulated criteria pollutants are sulfur dioxide, particulates, nitrogen dioxide, carbon monoxide,
ozone, and lead.
51
Available: http://www.rita.dot.gov/bts/sites/rita.dot.gov.bts/files/publications/national_
transportation_atlas_database/2012/index.html
46

53

A.5

Other

Cross-country data Figure A.1 uses country-level CO2 emissions per capita and GDP per capita
in 2000 from Boden and Andres (2013) and World Bank (2014), respectively.

National U.S. time series data U.S. Census Bureau (1975) provides total and mechanically
produced U.S. bituminous coal production during 1890-1950 (shown in Figure A.2) and total electricity
capacity, from fossil fuel and hydropower during 1920-1970 (shown in Figure A.9).52 Figure A.7 plots
the transport cost share of national delivered coal prices during 1902-2007 obtained from McNerney,
Farmer and Trancik (2011). Figure A.13 shows national coal and natural gas sales prices during
1985-2011 obtained from the Energy Information Administration (2012).

B

Collection and availability of historical data

Sections 4.1 and 4.2 note that the required historical data were either never collected or, if collected,
may no longer exist. This section summarizes the data that was historically collected, its relevance for
this study, and its known availability today.

B.1

Coal prices

1882-1970
County-level producer coal prices were recorded by the U.S. Geological Survey Bureau of Mine in
“Mineral Resources of the United States 1882-1931” and “Mineral Yearbook 1932-1970.” This data
source, however, does not provide the county-level delivered coal prices needed for this study.

Availability Online.53

B.2

Electricity capital

1902-1917:
The U.S. federal government first collected power plant-level data in 1902 in the inaugural “Central
Electric Light and Power Station Census,” administered at the time by the Department of Commerce
and Labor. This survey was repeated in 1907, 1912, and 1917. Unfortunately, this survey classified
power plants by prime-mover (i.e. steam, hydro, internal combustion) and not by input fuel, which
this paper needs to calculate the fuel composition of electricity capital.
52

Electricity capital data from the U.S. Census Bureau (1975) is broken by steam and hydropower. Steam
power typically uses coal, oil, and natural gas as fuel.
53
Available: hathitrust.org

54

Availability Summaries of these censuses at aggregate data levels are available online.54 However,
power plant-level data could not be located following extensive private conversations with archivists
at the National Archives and Records Administration.55

1920-1970:
The Federal Power Commission (FPC), created in 1920, administered annual surveys to document
electricity production and fuel consumption. The most important of these were the Annual Financial
and Statistical Reports (Form 1) and the Power System Statements (Form 12). Form 1 collects fuel
usage at the power-plant level but has two limitations. First, in order to recover fuel-specific capital,
fuel-specific capacity factors are needed for each generating unit and are not available. Second, power
plant coverage is incomplete. For example, data from the 1948 Form 1 accounts for only 67% of total
U.S. steam-powered electricity capital.

Availability Annual state-level statistics for electricity capital by prime-mover and fuel consumption are available in “Production of Energy and Capacity of Plants and Fuel Consumption of Electric
Power Plants” as well as in “Electric Power Statistics, 1920-1940”.56 The report titled “Steam-Electric
Plant Construction Cost and Annual Production Expenses” has plant-level values from Form 1 and
Form 12 for 1948-1974.57

1977-1989:
In 1977, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) began publishing the “Inventory of Power
Plants in the United States,” which combines data on generating units from the Monthly Power Plant
Report (Form 4), Annual Power System Statement (Form 12), and the Supplemental Power Statement
(Form 12E). This annual inventory includes includes capacity, input fuel, and built year for all operating
generating units and those retired each year. Because data on previously retired generating units was
not collected, this data cannot be used for reconstructing historical electricity capital.

Availability The 1980 “Inventory of Power Plants in the United States” is available online58 . It
was digitized for the data validation exercises discussed in Section 4.2. Reports from other years are
available in microfiche in many research libraries.

1990-:
In 1990, the Energy Information Agency (EIA) began collecting “The Annual Electric Generator
Report,” (Form EIA-860) which replaced earlier FERC Forms 4, 12, and 12E. EIA notes
54

Available: http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015028113663
Typically, only 3% of historical government documents are deemed valuable and retained in NARA’s permanent collection.
56
Available: http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015023906806
57
Available: http://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/000904499
58
Available: http://hdl.handle.net/2027/umn.31951d02987924n
55

55

“The Form EIA-860 is a mandatory annual census of all existing and planned electric
generating facilities in the United States with a total generator nameplate capacity of 1
or more megawatts. The survey is used to collect data on existing power plants and 10
year plans for constructing new plants, as well as generator additions, modifications, and
retirements in existing plants. Data on the survey are collected at the individual generator
level.”

Availability Online.59

C

Imputing missing small power plants

Power plants with less than 1 MW of combined capacity (or capital) across generating units do not
appear in EIA-860 forms. This section explains how missing small power plants are imputed when
e it = Kcit .
constructing county-by-decade relative coal capital, K
Knit

For fuel j, county i, decade t, a new power plant indexed by pjit has capacity Xpjit . Because power
plants with Xpjit < 1 are missing from the EIA-860 data, county total fuel-specific capital investment
can be decomposed as
Xjit =

X

Missing

Xpjit

pjit :Xpjit ≥1

pjit :Xpjit <1
M
= Xjit
+
|{z}

X

Xpjit +
O
Xjit
|{z}

Observed from EIA-860

Next, I discretize the support of power plant capacities into 1 MW-wide bins starting at 0.5 MW.
b as the number of power plants with capacity X
Denote fjit
pjit ∈ [b − .5, b + .5). The missing county
M = 0.5 ∗ f 0.5 . My imputation procedure predicts f 0.5 .
total fuel-specific capital investment is then Xjit
jit
jit

Specifically, to obtain county total fuel-specific capital, Kjit , I implement the following procedure for
each decade t
1. Estimate ftb = gt (b) + error ∀b ∈ {1.5, . . . , b̄}, where gt () is a flexible polynomial function
2. Predict fbt0.5 = gbt (0.5)
0.5 =
3. Downscale national to local capital by using fbcit

fbt0.5 st
Nt ,

where Nt is the number of counties

with any operating power plants in decade t and st is the national share of electricity capital
0.5
0.5 = fbt (1−st ) . This implies
using coal, aggregated from observed power plants. Likewise, fbnit
Nt
b M = 0.5 ∗ fb0.5 .
X
jit

jit

O +
4. Calculate county total fuel-specific capital using Kjit = Kjit

P

τ =0 (1

b M , where K O
− δ)τ X
ji,t−τ
jit

is the observed county total fuel-specific capital, δ = 0.06 is the decadal depreciation rate set at
2000s values, and τ is the lagged time index.
59

Available: http://www.eia.gov/electricity/data/eia860/

56

Figure A.11 shows the fitted 4th order polynomial function, gbt (), estimated for new power plants
built in the 1910s (left panel) and in the 1950s (right panel) using observed power plants. The dotted
line shows the predicted national frequency of power plants smaller than 1 MW built each decade,
or gbt (0.5). Table A.5 shows summary statistics for raw relative coal capital in column 1 and imputed
relative coal capital when using a 3rd, 4th, and 5th order polynomial function to fit gt () in columns 2-4,
respectively. Finally, column 5 shows summary statistics for relative coal capital using an alternative,
less-informed, imputation for missing small power plants. Specifically, I add 1 MW of coal and non-coal
capital investment to each county-by-decade observation. This implicitly assumes that there was a new
1 MW coal-fired power plant and a new 1MW non-coal power plant built in each county-by-decade
observation. I then calculate fuel-specific capital using the capital accumulation expression in step 4
above.

D

Theory appendix

D.1

Model

This section solves the model presented in Section 6.1. In period t for each intermediate sector j ∈
{c, n}, the myopic electricity producer chooses capital, Xjt , and fuel, Ejt , for current-vintage generating
units and fuel, Ejt−1 , for past-vintage generating units. “Clay”-like capital for past-vintage generating
units, Xjt−1 , is fixed. The producer’s problem is
max

Xct ,Xnt ,Ect ,Ent ,Ect−1 ,Ent−1

Yt − zct (Ect + Ect−1 ) − znt (Ent + Ent−1 ) − rt (Xct + Xnt )

(A.1)

where zjt is the fuel price and rt is the price of capital. Final good Yt is given by equation (5) and
intermediate good Yjt is given by equation (6). To explore how scale and productivity channels could
generate path dependence for otherwise similar intermediate sectors, suppose productivities are the
same across intermediate goods during period t − 1, AXct−1 = AXnt−1 and AEct−1 = AEnt−1 .
Because fuel and capital are perfect complements, efficiency for current-vintage generating units
implies that the producer need only to choose capital, and not fuel, set at AXjt Xjt = AEjt Ejt for
j ∈ {c, n}. Clay-like past-vintage capital further implies AEjt−1 Ejt−1 = AXjt−1 (1 − δ)Xjt−1 . The
resulting constrained optimization problem is
max

Xct ,Xnt



[AXct Xct AXct−1 (1 − δ)Xct−1 ]α(−1)/ + [AXnt Xnt AXnt−1 (1 − δ)Xnt−1 ]α(−1)/

− zct (

/(−1)

AXct−1
AXnt
AXnt−1
AXct
Xct +
(1 − δ)Xct−1 ) − znt (
Xnt +
(1 − δ)Xnt−1 ) − rt (Xct + Xnt )
AEct
AEct−1
AEnt
AEnt−1

with optimality condition
1/

αYt

(AXjt AXjt−1 Xjt−1 )

α(−1)


ϕ−1

Xjt  =

57

AXjt
zjt + rt
AEjt

f or

j ∈ {c, n}

(A.2)

where ϕ = (1 − α)(1 − ). Taking the ratio of equation (A.2) for coal and non-coal subsectors, and
et = Xct , yields
rewriting in terms of current-vintage relative coal capital investment, X
Xnt

α(1−)



α(1−)

et = w
e ϕ−1 A
e ϕ−1
X
etϕ−1 X
t−1
Xt

(A.3)

A

ct
is relative input price,
zjt + rt is the productivity-weighted input price index, w
e = wwnt
where wjt = AXjt
Ejt
A
Xct
eXt =
and A
AXnt is relative capital productivity for generating units of vintage t. Equation (A.3) is

equation (7) in the main text.

D.2

Extension: productivity losses and capital under-utilization

Appendix D.1 assumes that past-vintage capital is fully utilized in the current period. This assumption
has previously been used in the putty-clay literature to avoid a well-known curse of dimensionality
problem in vintaged capital models (Atkeson and Kehoe, 1999). This section shows how this assumption
is justified when there are large efficiency losses associated with using electricity capital below its
designed capacity, as discussed in F1 of Section 6.1.
Suppose a generating unit could operate past-vintage capital below its designed capacity. Because
AEjt−1 Ejt−1 > AXjt−1 (1 − δ)Xjt−1 would lead to wasted inputs, the producer now faces the constraint
AEjt−1 Ejt−1 ≤ AXjt−1 (1 − δ)Xjt−1 for j ∈ {c, n}. The resulting constrained optimization problem is


max

Xct ,Xnt ,Ect−1 ,Ent−1

[AXct Xct AEct−1 Ect−1 ]α(−1)/ + [AXnt Xnt AEnt−1 Ent−1 ]α(−1)/

− zct (
s.t.

/(−1)

AXnt
AXct
Xct + Ect−1 ) − znt (
Xnt + Ent−1 ) − rt (Xct + Xnt )
AEct
AEnt

AEjt−1 Ejt−1 ≤ AXjt−1 (1 − δ)Xjt−1

for j ∈ {c, n}

with optimality conditions
1/

αYt

1/

αYt

AXjt
zjt + rt
AEjt

f or

j ∈ {c, n}

(A.4)


Ejt−1
= zjt + λj AEjt−1

f or

j ∈ {c, n}

(A.5)

λj [AEjt−1 Ejt−1 − AXjt−1 (1 − δ)Xjt−1 ] = 0

f or

j ∈ {c, n}

(A.6)

λj ≥ 0

f or

j ∈ {c, n}

(A.7)

AEjt−1 Ejt−1 ≤ AXjt−1 (1 − δ)Xjt−1

f or

j ∈ {c, n}

(A.8)

(AXjt AEjt−1 Ejt−1 )
(AXjt AEjt−1 Xjt )

α(−1)


α(−1)


ϕ−1

Xjt  =
ϕ−1

where λj is the Lagrange multiplier on each constraint.
Under what conditions would past-vintage capital be underutilized? To answer this, consider each
sector j in isolation and take the ratio of equation (A.4) over (A.5). When the constraint binds (i.e.,
λj > 0) and past-vintage capital is fully utilized, the ratio can be rewritten as
AEjt−1
zjt
Xjt
=
− λj
wjt
Ejt−1
wjt

58

(A.9)

When the constraint does not bind (i.e., λj = 0), this expression becomes
∗
Xjt
zjt
= ∗
wjt
Ejt−1

(A.10)

where the asterisk indicates the non-binding equilibrium. Setting equation (A.9) to equation (A.10)
AX ∗ jt−1
AE ∗ jt−1 (1

∗
and substituting in the Leontief equality Ejt−1
=

∗
− δ)Xjt−1
yields

∗
Xjt
AE ∗ jt−1 /AX ∗ jt−1
Xjt
− ∗
Xjt−1 Xjt−1 AEjt−1 /AXjt−1

λj
1
=
Axjt−1
wjt
1−δ

!
(A.11)

Next, define the fraction of under-utilization of past-vintage capital in the non-binding base as
%j =

∗
Xjt−1
Xjt−1

∈ [0, 1]. Further, denote the ratio of current-vintage capital for the non-binding over the

binding case as ςj =

∗
Xjt
Xjt

> 0. Inserting into equation (A.11)

λj
1
Axjt−1
=
wjt
1−δ



Xjt
Xjt−1



ςj AE ∗ jt−1 /AX ∗ jt−1
1−
%j AEjt−1 /AXjt−1

(A.12)

which implies λj > 0 if and only if
AE ∗ jt−1 /AX ∗ jt−1
%j
>0
>
ςj
AEjt−1 /AXjt−1

(A.13)

The right hand side of Equation (A.13) captures the lost in fuel productivity when past-vintage capital
operates below its designed capacity. Vintage capital is more likely to be fully utilized when fuel
productivity losses are large.

D.3

Recovering the scale parameter

Consider a power plant p that contains only coal-fired generating units. This allows one to ignore
the upper tier of electricity production, drop the fuel index j, and only consider intermediate good
production captured by equation (6). Applying efficient allocation for each generating unit, AXpt Xjt =
AEpt Ept and AXpt−1 (1 − δ)Xpt−1 = AEpt−1 Ept−1 , the constrained cost minimization problem can be
written in terms of fuel inputs
C(zpt , rpt , Ypt ) = min zpt (Ept + Ept−1 ) + rt (
Ept

AEpt
Ept )
AXpt

Ypt = (AEpt Ept AEpt−1 Ept−1 )α

s.t.

1/α

Rewriting the production function as Ept−1 = Ypt (AEpt AEpt−1 Ept )−1 , one obtains the following
equivalent unconstrained minimization problem
min (zpt +
Ept

AEpt
1/α
rt )Ept + zpt Ypt (AEpt AEpt−1 Ept )−1
AXpt

Taking the first order condition of equation (A.14) yields a conditional demand function

59

(A.14)

∗
Ept
= (Ypt )1/2α (

zpt
zpt +

AEpt
AXpt rt

)1/2 (AEpt AEpt−1 )−1/2

(A.15)

Inserting equation (A.15) into non-fuel cost at the cost-minimizing input level, non fuel costpt =
A

Ept
∗ +E
∗
C(zpt , rpt , Ypt ) − zpt (Ept
pt−1 ) = rt ( AXpt Ept ), and applying a log transformation

ln non fuel costpt =

zpt
1
1
1/2 −1/2
ln Ypt + ln(
) + ln rt + ln(AEpt AEpt−1 A−1
Xpt )
AEpt
ψ
2
zpt + AXpt rt

(A.16)

where ψ = 2α. Equation (A.16) is the structural analog to the OLS specification in equation (8) from
the main text with one exception. For ease of exposition, labor is omitted as a factor of production in
equation (6) and hence missing from equation (A.16). In practice, the UDI measure of non-fuel cost
modeled in regression equation (8) includes labor costs.

E

Simulating future emissions

This section details the procedure for simulating future CO2 emissions following a relative coal price
shock, as shown in Figure 4.

E.1

Parameters

• Reduced-form path dependence parameter: ρb =

1
5

P5

τ =1

π̂

β̂ τ

= 1.45, with standard error σ
bρ = 0.72

(from column 2 of Table 2)
• Returns to scale: ψb = 1.66, with standard error σ
bψ = 0.24 (from column 2 of Table 3)
• Baseline relative coal prices: w
eto = 0.4 (based on value in 2000s)
• Relative coal price shock: ∆ = 1.43 (based on Figure A.13)
eXt = 0.7 (based on value in 2000s)
• Relative productivity: A
• Capital depreciation rate: δ = 0.06 (based on value in 2000s)
• Carbon content of coal: Cc = 4931.3 lb CO2 /short ton coal60
• Carbon content of natural gas: Cn = 119.9 lb CO2 /thousand cubic feet61
60
61

Available here: https://www.eia.gov/environment/emissions/co2_vol_mass.cfm
Available here: https://www.eia.gov/environment/emissions/co2_vol_mass.cfm

60

E.2

Historical emissions

For each decade t ∈ [1950, 2000], electricity sector CO2 emissions for the average U.S. county is
Mt = Ect Cc + Ent Cn
where Ect and Ent is U.S. average county coal (in short tons) and natural gas (in thousand cubic feet)
consumed, respectively, by the electricity sector in decade t.62

E.3

Simulating future emissions

For each combination of shock duration, d ∈ {10, 30, 50}, and shock multiplier, M ∈ {1, 2, 6}, define
the time series of relative coal prices as
w
et = w
eto + ∆ ∗ M ∗ 1(t ≤ 2000 + d)
Conduct the following Monte Carlo procedure with b = 1...250 draws
b σc
• Draw ψ(b) ∼ N (ψ,
ρ, σ
bρ ). Define α(b) =
ψ ) and ρ(b) ∼ N (b
• Obtain (b) = 1 +

ρ(b)


ψ(b)
1− 2

ψ(b)
−ρ(b)
2

ψ(b)
2

and define ϕ(b) = (1 − α(b))(1 − (b))

• For each future decade t ∈ [2010, 2150]
1. Apply equation 11 to obtain relative coal capital investment:
e t = exp
X(b)

∞
X
s=0

!!




(b)
α(b)(1 − (b)) s
α(b)(1 − (b)) s+1 e
ln w
et−s +
ln At−s
(ψ(b) − 1)
(ϕ(b) − 1)
(ϕ(b) − 1)

2. Obtain coal capital investment while holding total capital fixed

X(b)ct = 


1
1
e t
X(b)

+1

 (K(b)ct−1 + K(b)nt−1 ) δ

3. Obtain natural gas capital investment while holding total capital fixed

X(b)nt = 1 −


1
1
e t
X(b)

+1

 (K(b)ct−1 + K(b)nt−1 ) δ

4. Obtain coal capital
K(b)ct = K(b)ct−1 (1 − δ) + X(b)ct
62

Ect and Ent obtained from the Energy Information Administration (2012).

61

5. Obtain natural gas capital
K(b)nt = K(b)nt−1 (1 − δ) + X(b)nt
6. Obtain total CO2 emissions using 2000 emissions intensity
M (b)t = K(b)ct

En2000
Ec2000
Cc + K(b)nt
Cn
Kc2000
Kn2000

Figure 4 plots CO2 emissions, M (b)t , and the coal capital investment share,

X(b)ct
X(b)ct +X(b)nt ,

for

the 250 Monte Carlo draws across each combination of shock duration, d ∈ {10, 30, 50}, and shock
multiplier, M ∈ {1, 2, 6}. It also shows the percentage of Monte Carlo draws for which long-term CO2
emissions are weakly declining.
To explore the consequences of different structural parameter values, Figure 5 replicates the above
simulation procedure for different values of  and ψ with the shock multiplier set at M = 1. The heat
map plotted in Figure 5 shows the minimum shock duration d needed for long-term CO2 emissions to
be weakly declining.

62

Appendix Figures
Figure A.1: CO2 emissions intensity and income in 2000

6

ABW

USA

BRN

CO2 per capita in 2000
2
4

TTO

CAN

AUS

SGP

CZE

BEL

EST

NCL

RUS

ISR
KOR

OMN
KAZ
TKM

ZAF

GRC

UKR
BIH

PLW

0

IRL
NLD
JPN

ITA

GBR
AND

DNK

AUT

NOR
BMU

ISL

ESP
CYP

SVN

FRA

PRT

HUN
BGR MYS
BLR
MLT
UZB
SUR
ATG BRB
HRV
ROU JAM LBN
ARG
CHL MEX
AZE
LTUTUR
JOR
SYR
MNG
THA
DZA
BLZ
CHN LVA
BWA
DOM
CUB
MUS
GUY
TUN PAN
EGY
GRD
MDVBRA
MHL
COLCRIDMA URY
IDN
TON
MAR
PER
IND
ARM
ZWE
SWZ
FJI
ALB
GEO
SLV
PHL
KGZ
GTM
NAM
GNQ
GAB
YEM
HND
WSM
NIC
PAK
VNM
PRY
BTN
DJI
LKA
PNG
MRT
VUT
CPV
SEN
KIR
SLB
CIV
TJK
GHA
KEN
COG
TGO
BEN
GMB
MMR
BGD
ERI
ZMB
GIN
HTI
NPL
LBR
KHM
SDN
COM
GNB
MDG
SLE
MOZ
NER
ETH
UGA
MWI
RWA
BFA
CAF
MLI
BDI
TCD
COD

0

NZL

POL
SYC

DEU
FIN

GRL

SWE

CHE

PYF

15000

30000
45000
60000
GDP per capita in 2000
Notes: Plot shows carbon dioxide emissions (in tons of carbon) per capita against GDP (in nominal USD) per
capita in 2000. Linear regression fit shown with 95% confidence interval. OPEC countries excluded. Data from
Boden and Andres (2013) and World Bank (2014).

U.S. coal production (mton)
200
400

600

Figure A.2: U.S. bituminous coal production and mechanization

0

Total
Mechanical extraction
1890

1900

1910

1920
1930
1940
1950
Year
Notes: Annual U.S. bituminous coal production (in mega short tons). Solid black line shows total coal
production. Dashed gray line shows coal production from mechanical extraction. Data from the U.S. Census
Bureau (1975).

63

Figure A.3: U.S. coal basins

Notes: Map of major U.S. coal basins. Reproduced from East (2012).

Figure A.4: Location of sample counties and coal basins

Notes: A county is included in the baseline sample (in yellow shading) if its spatial centroid is (i) closer to coal
resources in the Illinois Basin than in the Appalachian Basin and (ii) less than 250 miles from nearest Illinois
coal resource. Shallow (< 200 ft. underground) and deep (> 200 ft. underground) Illinois and Appalachian
Basin coal resources also shown in green and black shading, respectively.

64

Figure A.5: County distance to nearest mine by decade
1890
1910

1930

1950

Notes: County distance to nearest coal mine during 1890-1950 over sample counties.

0

50

Sample county
100
150

200

250

Figure A.6: Timing of shallow to deep coal switching for each sample county

1890

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940 1950
Decade

1960

1970

1980

1990

Notes: The timing of when a sample county’s nearest mine switches from a shallow to a deep coal mine for
the first time. Counties are stacked according to the decade when the switching event occurs. The gray, yellow,
and black shaded areas correspond to event-time periods h < 0, h = 0, and h > 0, respectively. h = 0 can span
multiple decades if there are several decades between the initial switch to a deep coal mine and the previous
switch in coal supplier.

65

.2

Coal transport cost share
.3
.4
.5

.6

Figure A.7: Share of delivered coal price due to transport costs at the national level

1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
Year

Notes: Share of transport cost (nominal USD per short ton) in delivered coal price (nominal USD per short
ton) for the U.S. during 1902-2007. Data from McNerney, Farmer and Trancik (2011).

0

Share of total coal purchases
.1
.2
.3
.4

.5

Figure A.8: Testing the Herfindahl Principle

1

6
11
16
21
26
31
36
41
46
Ranking of coal-supplying county by distance to destination county

Notes: Vertical axis shows share of total coal purchase from destination county. Horizontal axis shows the
ranking of bilateral distance between spatial centroids of origin and destination counties. Data averaged over
1990-1999 and all U.S. counties that purchase coal for electricity.

66

1940
1950
Year

1960

1970

Change in hydro capacity (GW)
0
1
2
3
4

1930

C

0

Hydro capacity (GW)
20
40

60

1920

Change in fossil fuel capacity (GW)
0
5
10 15 20 25

A

0

Fossil fuel capacity (GW)
100
200
300

Figure A.9: Comparing U.S. electricity capacity from EIA-860 vs. historical census

1920

1930

1940
1950
Year

1960

1970

EIA-860

B

1920

1930

1940
1950
Year

1960

1970

1930

1940
1950
Year

1960

1970

D

1920

Historical Census

Notes: Panel (A) compares annual aggregate U.S. electricity capacity (in GW) using fossil fuels constructed
from EIA-860 forms (solid black lines) against values from the U.S. Historical Census (dashed gray lines) over
1920-1970. Panel (B) plots capacity changes. Panels (C) and (D) show the same information as in panels (A)
and (B) but for aggregate U.S. hydropower capacity.

Reported generating unit capacity in 2012 (MW)
50
100
150
200
250
300

Figure A.10: Comparing generating unit capacity in late 1970s and 2012

0

slope= 1.01, p-value= 0.00, R2=0.98
0

50
100
150
200
250
Reported generating unit capacity in late 1970s (MW)

300

Notes: Scatter shows reported generating unit capacity (in MW) in the 2012 EIA-860 form against reported
generating unit capacity in the late 1970s (in MW). Both axes are truncated at 300 MW. Linear fit in red with
95% confidence interval shown in gray. Coefficient, p-value, and R2 shown from a linear regression using all
matched generating units.

67

300

50

Figure A.11: Fitted and predicted capacity distribution of power plants by built decade
Fitted
Predicted

0

0

10

100

Frequency

Frequency
20
30

200

40

Fitted
Predicted

0

5
10
15
20
25
Capacity of power plants built during 1910s (MW)

30

0

5
10
15
20
25
Capacity of power plants built during 1950s (MW)

30

Notes: Solid line shows fitted capital frequency distribution of all power plants built during 1910s (left panel)
and 1950s (right panel). Fitted relationship uses a 4th order polynomial function for power plants with capacity
less than 30 MW and greater than 1 MW. Dashed line shows predicted capacity frequency for power plants with
capacity less than 1 MW. See Appendix C for details.

0

Figure A.12: Testing for nonlinearity in the relative coal capital-distance relationship
Contemporaneous effect

-9

-6

-3

7-decade lag effect

-12

Predicted log relative coal capital

2-decade lag effect

[3.5, 4.5)

[4.5, 5.5)

[5.5, 6.5]

Log distance to mine
Notes: Plot examines whether log relative coal capital is linear in log distance to the nearest mine using a
version of equation (4) with discretized log distance bins. Log relative coal capital is predicted using log distance
to contemporaneous nearest mine, and log distance to shallow mine two and seven decades after the switching
event. Each log distance variable is broken into 1 log distance wide bins. For each period, the predicted log
relative coal capital is normalized to the value of the omitted log distance bin, defined as log distances between
0 and 3.5.

68

-1.25

Price shock

U.S. ln(coal price/gas price)
-1
-.75

-.5

Figure A.13: Ratio of U.S. coal to natural gas sales price

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Year

Notes: Solid black line shows log ratio of U.S. coal sales price to U.S. natural gas sales price (both in nominal
USD per million BTUs) during 1985-2010. Dashed gray line shows quadratic time trend estimated over 19852008.

69

Appendix Tables
Table A.1: Coal quality heterogeneity by basin
Coal basin
Appalachian
Colorado
Gulf
Illinois
Northern Rockies

No. of counties
187
79
56
279
65

heat content
657.24 (1)
1159.77 (3)
1370.36 (5)
807.30 (2)
1270.79 (4)

Std. dev. in
ash content sulfur content
2.96 (3)
0.93 (5)
4.47 (5)
0.15 (1)
3.71 (4)
0.29 (3)
2.52 (2)
0.84 (4)
1.79 (1)
0.22 (2)

Notes: Standard deviation in coal heat, ash, and sulfur content across counties that produce coal
in each coal basin. Basin ranking for each characteristic in parentheses (1=least heterogeneous).
County-level values calculated using 1990-1999 averages.

Table A.2: Observed delivered coal prices vs. constructed distance-based measure
(1)
(2)
(3)
Outcome is log delivered coal price
ln dit

Decade
Counties

0.381**
(0.150)

0.582***
(0.153)

0.342***
(0.113)

1970s
153

1980s
153

1990s
133

Notes: Each column is a separate cross-sectional regression of observed log delivered coal price
(in nominal USD per ton) averaged within each decade on log distance to nearest mine and state
fixed effects. County sample shown in Figure A.4. Columns (1), (2), and (3) use data from the
1970s, 1980s, and 1990s, respectively. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Table A.3: Comparing generating unit characteristics across 1990-2012 EIA-860 forms
Percentage of generating units with different reported values
Number of
different values
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Capacity
74.78
2.62
1.81
1.07
1.26
0.85
0.69
0.95
0.53
0.79
0.72

Primary fuel
94.25
1.49
0.57
0.23
0.2
0.51
0.46
0.29
0.27
0.2
0.25

Opening year
96.88
0.52
0.44
0.08
0.08
0.19
0.24
0.29
0.22
0.14
0.24

Retirement year
80.01
1.98
2.92
0.87
0.87
1.5
0.67
0.72
1.08
1.74
1.04

Notes: Row indicates the number of values from 1990-2011 EIA-860 forms that was different from
the 2012 EIA-860 form. Column shows generator unit-level characteristics. Each cell shows the
percentage of 1990-2011 EIA-860 forms with a reported value that is different from that reported
in the 2012 EIA-860 form. For example, row 1, column 1 indicates that 76.78% of generating units
reported the same capacity in 1990-2011 as was reported in 2012.

70

Table A.4: Comparing generating unit primary fuel in late 1970s and 2012
Primary fuel in 2012
Primary fuel
in 1970s
Coal
Coal
92.2

Hydro
0.0

Nat. gas
5.9

Nuclear
0.0

Oil
1.1

Hydro

0.0

100.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Nat. gas

0.8

0.0

77.2

0.0

21.9

Nuclear

0.0

0.0

0.0

100.0

0.0

Oil

1.0

0.0

24.4

0.0

74.6

Notes: Each row shows the distribution of reported primary fuel in
the 2012 EIA-860 forms conditional on the primary fuel reported in
the 1970s. For example, 92.2% of generating units which reported
coal as the primary fuel in the 1970s also reported coal in 2012.

Table A.5: Summary statistics for raw and imputed relative coal capital
(1)
Raw

Total
Missing
Zero
Other

2,371
1,248
825
298

Obs
1,123
Mean
9.71
Median
0
SD
53.44
Skewness 11.51

(2)
Imputed
3rd order poly.

(3)
Imputed
4th order poly.

(4)
Imputed
5th order poly.

(5)
Imputed
add 1 MW

2,371
0
0
2,371

Number of observations
2,371
2,371
0
0
0
0
2,371
2,371

2,371
0
0
2,371

2,371
64.95
.15
355.17
7.39

Summary statistics
2,371
2,371
75.42
65.08
.16
.14
416.33
356.31
7.48
7.41

2,371
8.53
1
37.28
6.76

Notes: Top panel shows the number of total, missing, zero-value, and other observations for the baseline county-by-decade sample shown in Figure A.4. Bottom panel shows various summary statistics.
Column 1 shows unadjusted relative coal capital. Columns 2-4 adds imputed missing power plants
with capacity less than 1 MW using 3rd, 4th, and 5th order polynomial functions for gt (), respectively.
Column 5 adjusts relative coal capital by adding 1 MW to both coal and non-coal capital investment.
See Appendix C for details.

71

Table A.6: Robustness: additional identification concerns
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Outcome is relative coal capital

(1)

(6)

ln d0i (β τ )
2 decades lead
1 decade lead

1 decade lag
2 decades lag
3 decades lag
4 decades lag
5 decades lag
6 decades lag
7 decades lag
8 decades lag
9 decades lag
10 decades lag
ln dit (π)

Mine fixed effect
Dropped if mine becomes 2nd closest
Demand covariates
Geography covariates
Dropped if event occurs after 1960
Observations
Counties

-1.38
(1.02)
-0.66
(0.67)
–
-0.68
(1.25)
-4.11***
(1.15)
-3.75***
(0.66)
-3.51***
(0.71)
-4.58***
(0.98)
-3.71***
(0.75)
-6.20***
(1.37)
-7.30***
(1.59)
-7.30***
(1.56)
-7.01***
(1.56)

-0.91
(1.07)
-1.45
(0.95)
–
-0.60
(1.29)
-4.95***
(1.25)
-3.83***
(0.76)
-2.87***
(0.88)
-3.31***
(0.98)
-2.85***
(0.91)
-3.30**
(1.67)
-4.36**
(1.77)
-4.62**
(1.96)
-4.27**
(1.89)

-1.49
(0.96)
-1.14
(0.71)
–
-2.22**
(1.01)
-4.92***
(1.39)
-4.29***
(0.62)
-4.33***
(0.67)
-5.40***
(1.09)
-4.53***
(0.67)
-7.12***
(1.45)
-8.27***
(1.71)
-8.22***
(1.69)
-7.86***
(1.68)

-0.69
(1.61)
-0.22
(0.85)
–
-0.72
(1.05)
-3.19***
(1.07)
-4.11***
(1.39)
-4.11***
(1.53)
-5.96***
(1.68)
-4.84***
(1.43)
-6.99***
(1.81)
-8.04***
(1.93)
-8.02***
(2.05)
-7.95***
(2.05)

-2.09
(1.90)
-1.29
(0.82)
–
-1.08
(1.40)
-5.04***
(1.20)
-4.88***
(1.10)
-4.87***
(1.22)
-5.54***
(1.15)
-4.84***
(1.15)
-8.11***
(1.52)
-9.53***
(1.68)
-10.3***
(1.69)
-10.6***
(1.83)

-1.48
(0.98)
-1.03
(0.73)
–
-2.21**
(0.99)
-4.90***
(1.40)
-4.27***
(0.61)
-4.35***
(0.65)
-5.41***
(1.00)
-4.43***
(0.64)
-6.92***
(1.30)
-8.05***
(1.53)
-8.07***
(1.52)
-7.73***
(1.50)

-1.53***
(0.53)

-2.20**
(0.86)

-1.69***
(0.55)

-1.56**
(0.61)

-1.86***
(0.50)

-1.54***
(0.53)

No
No
No
No
No
2,371
261

Yes
No
No
No
No
2,371
261

No
Yes
No
No
No
2,035
219

No
No
Yes
No
No
2,108
261

No
No
No
Yes
No
2,371
261

No
No
No
No
Yes
2,151
229

Notes: Estimates of β τ and π from equation (4) using a Poisson model. Outcome variable is relative coal
capital at the county-by-decade level. County sample shown in Figure A.4. Time period is 1890-1990. Each
model includes event time, county, and state-by-decade fixed effects. Column 1 replicates baseline estimates.
Column 2 adds shallow mine fixed effects. Column 3 estimates baseline model but drops counties for which
the shallow mine becomes the second nearest mine in any decade after the switching event. Column 4 adds
county-by-decade population, number of manufacturing establishments, and manufacturing employment, all
in logs. Column 5 adds log county distance to nearest navigable waterway and log variance in slope, both
interacted with a linear time trend. Column 6 examines the subsample of counties that experience the
switching event prior to the 1960s. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

72

Table A.7: Robustness: imputing missing small power plants
(1)

(2)
(3)
(4)
Outcome is relative coal capital

(5)

ln d0i (β τ )
2 decades lead
1 decade lead

1 decade lag
2 decades lag
3 decades lag
4 decades lag
5 decades lag
6 decades lag
7 decades lag
8 decades lag
9 decades lag
10 decades lag
ln dit (π)

Small plant imputation
Observations
Counties

-1.38
(1.02)
-0.66
(0.67)
–
-0.68
(1.25)
-4.11***
(1.15)
-3.75***
(0.66)
-3.51***
(0.71)
-4.58***
(0.98)
-3.71***
(0.75)
-6.20***
(1.37)
-7.30***
(1.59)
-7.30***
(1.56)
-7.01***
(1.56)

-1.31
(1.01)
-0.70
(0.67)
–
-0.58
(1.19)
-3.97***
(1.07)
-3.70***
(0.66)
-3.44***
(0.71)
-4.49***
(0.91)
-3.65***
(0.75)
-6.15***
(1.36)
-7.24***
(1.58)
-7.25***
(1.56)
-6.96***
(1.55)

-1.32
(1.00)
-0.69
(0.67)
–
-0.59
(1.19)
-3.97***
(1.08)
-3.68***
(0.66)
-3.43***
(0.71)
-4.46***
(0.91)
-3.63***
(0.74)
-6.12***
(1.36)
-7.22***
(1.57)
-7.22***
(1.55)
-6.94***
(1.54)

-0.23
(0.46)
0.0069
(0.31)
–
-0.12
(0.33)
-1.90***
(0.44)
-2.11***
(0.41)
-2.03***
(0.37)
-2.29***
(0.37)
-1.47***
(0.48)
-3.18***
(0.80)
-3.90***
(0.80)
-3.95***
(0.78)
-3.76***
(0.75)

-2.66
(2.22)
-1.53
(0.94)
–
-0.84
(0.58)
-2.49
(2.02)
-4.18**
(2.03)
-4.97**
(1.94)
-3.91*
(2.08)
-2.82
(2.20)
0.71
(2.96)
-3.33
(2.64)
-2.63
(2.45)
-2.20
(2.83)

-1.53***
(0.53)

-1.54***
(0.53)

-1.54***
(0.53)

-0.86**
(0.40)

-2.41***
(0.75)

4th ord. poly
2,371
261

3rd ord. poly
2,371
261

5th ord. poly
2,371
261

add 1MW
2,371
261

none
382
66

Notes: Estimates of β τ and π from equation (4) using a Poisson model. Outcome variable is relative coal
capital at the county-by-decade level. County sample shown in Figure A.4. Time period is 1890-1990. Each
model includes event time, county, and state-by-decade fixed effects. Column 1 replicates baseline estimates
which imputes missing small power plants with a 4th order polynomial function for gt () to construct relative
coal capital (see Appendix C). Column 2 uses a 3rd order polynomial function for gt (). Column 3 uses a 5th
order polynomial function for gt (). Outcome in column 4 adds 1 MW to both unadjusted coal and non-coal
capital investment to construct relative coal capital. Outcome in column 5 is unadjusted relative coal capital.
Of the 1,123 observations with non-missing unadjusted relative coal capital, column 5 drops 724 observations
from counties where the outcome variable is always zero and 17 observations from counties with only one
non-missing variable per county in order to estimate a Poisson model with fixed effects. Robust standard
errors clustered at the county level in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

73

Table A.8: Robustness: sample restrictions
(1)

(2)

-1.38
(1.02)
-0.66
(0.67)
–
-0.68
(1.25)
-4.11***
(1.15)
-3.75***
(0.66)
-3.51***
(0.71)
-4.58***
(0.98)
-3.71***
(0.75)
-6.20***
(1.37)
-7.30***
(1.59)
-7.30***
(1.56)
-7.01***
(1.56)

-4.28**
(1.68)
-2.54**
(1.04)
–
-0.94
(1.40)
-5.33***
(1.02)
-5.78***
(1.14)
-5.40***
(1.39)
-3.79**
(1.64)
1.84
(3.80)
-6.16**
(3.07)
-7.85**
(3.11)
-7.66**
(3.10)
-7.94**
(3.23)

-0.98
(1.07)
-0.53
(0.66)
–
-0.61
(1.22)
-4.02***
(1.12)
-3.65***
(0.65)
-3.40***
(0.71)
-4.46***
(0.95)
-3.63***
(0.74)
-6.17***
(1.37)
-7.27***
(1.58)
-7.28***
(1.56)
-6.98***
(1.55)

-2.22*
(1.27)
-1.27
(0.82)
–
-1.99
(1.23)
-6.01***
(1.16)
-4.61***
(0.83)
-4.50***
(0.93)
-7.31***
(2.07)
-4.49***
(0.98)
-6.91***
(1.36)
-8.09***
(1.54)
-8.10***
(1.48)
-7.76***
(1.48)

-1.21
(1.02)
-0.49
(0.75)
–
-0.24
(1.17)
-2.71***
(1.03)
-2.34***
(0.90)
-2.01**
(0.96)
-1.69
(1.12)
-1.59
(1.16)
-3.71**
(1.50)
-4.62***
(1.69)
-4.43***
(1.66)
-4.18**
(1.67)

-1.41
(1.05)
-0.76
(0.66)
–
-0.71
(1.05)
-3.94***
(1.03)
-3.70***
(0.65)
-3.49***
(0.69)
-4.14***
(0.77)
-3.84***
(0.73)
-4.56***
(0.97)
-5.16***
(1.21)
-5.12***
(1.23)
-5.06***
(1.23)

-1.53***
(0.53)

1.89
(1.37)

-1.56***
(0.53)

-1.53***
(0.52)

-1.33**
(0.52)

-0.74
(0.59)

(3)
(4)
(5)
Outcome is relative coal capital

(6)

ln d0i (β τ )
2 decades lead
1 decade lead

1 decade lag
2 decades lag
3 decades lag
4 decades lag
5 decades lag
6 decades lag
7 decades lag
8 decades lag
9 decades lag
10 decades lag
ln dit (π)

>90th
>97.5th
<200 miles
<300 miles
Incl. closer
pct mines pct mines from Ill. coal from Ill. coal to App. coal
Observations
2,371
1,922
2,403
1,938
2,881
3,218
Counties
261
223
261
208
320
338
Notes: Estimates of β τ and π from equation (4) using a Poisson model. Outcome variable is relative coal
capital at the county-by-decade level. Time period is 1890-1990. Each model includes event time, county,
and state-by-decade fixed effects. Column 1 uses baseline county sample shown in Figure A.4. Column 2 uses
transport distance constructed from mines with area above the 90th percentile. Column 3 uses transport
distance constructed from mines with area above the 97.5th percentile. Columns 4 and 5 restricts sample to
counties within 200 and 300 miles from the nearest Illinois Basin coal resource and are closer to Illinois Basin
coal than to Appalachian Basin coal. Column 6 restricts sample to counties within 250 from the nearest
Illinois Basin coal resource but include counties that are closer to Appalachian Basin coal than to Illinois
Basin coal. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.
Sample

Benchmark

74

Table A.9: Robustness: alternative modeling choices
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

ln d0i (β τ )
3 decades lead
2 decades lead

-1.38
(1.02)
1 decade lead
-0.66
-0.72
(0.67)
(0.69)
–
–
1 decade lag
-0.68
-0.65
(1.25)
(1.23)
2 decades lag -4.11*** -4.06***
(1.15)
(1.14)
3 decades lag -3.75*** -3.70***
(0.66)
(0.66)
4 decades lag -3.51*** -3.44***
(0.71)
(0.72)
5 decades lag -4.58*** -4.53***
(0.98)
(0.97)
6 decades lag -3.71*** -3.65***
(0.75)
(0.75)
7 decades lag -6.20*** -6.14***
(1.37)
(1.37)
8 decades lag -7.30*** -7.24***
(1.59)
(1.59)
9 decades lag -7.30*** -7.24***
(1.56)
(1.56)
10 decades lag -7.01*** -6.95***
(1.56)
(1.56)

0.87
(1.49)
-1.35
(1.00)
-0.64
(0.67)
–
-0.71
(1.28)
-4.16***
(1.15)
-3.82***
(0.67)
-3.58***
(0.72)
-4.65***
(0.99)
-3.78***
(0.75)
-6.27***
(1.37)
-7.37***
(1.59)
-7.37***
(1.57)
-7.08***
(1.57)

-0.27
(0.42)
0.27
(0.40)

0.32
(1.04)
0.27
(0.64)

-0.42
(0.26)
-1.21***
(0.31)
-1.71***
(0.49)
-1.80***
(0.55)
-2.18***
(0.66)
-1.79**
(0.85)
-2.89**
(1.29)
-4.10***
(1.37)
-3.71**
(1.51)
-3.74**
(1.71)

-0.76*
(0.39)
-1.40**
(0.60)
-1.93**
(0.87)
-2.36**
(1.04)
-2.61**
(1.06)
-2.49**
(1.12)
-3.23
(2.04)
-4.20**
(2.02)
-3.86*
(2.04)
-3.55*
(2.08)

ln dit (π)

-1.53***
(0.53)

-1.53***
(0.53)

-1.53***
(0.53)

-0.18
(0.62)

-0.66
(0.90)

Model
Observations
Counties

Poisson
2,371
261

Poisson
2,242
261

Poisson
2,500
261

Linear
2,371
261

Neg. bin.
2,371
261

Notes: Estimates of β τ and π from equation (4). Outcome variable is at the county-bydecade level. County sample shown in Figure A.4. Time period is 1890-1990. Each model
includes event time, county, and state-by-decade fixed effects. Column 1 replicates baseline
model using a Poisson model with relative coal capital as the outcome and includes 2 lead
terms. Column 2 is identical to column 1 except for having 1 lead term. Column 3 is
identical to column 1 except for having 3 lead terms. Column 4 uses a log-log linear model
with log relative coal capital as the outcome and includes 2 lead terms. Column 5 uses a
negative binomial model with dispersion parameter that is a function of expected relative
coal capital and includes 2 lead terms. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level
in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

75

Table A.10: Other mechanisms: cost-of-service and Clean Air Act regulations
(1)

(2)
(3)
(4)
Outcome is relative coal capital

ln d0i (β τ )
2 decades lead
1 decade lead

1 decade lag
2 decades lag
3 decades lag
4 decades lag
5 decades lag
6 decades lag
7 decades lag
8 decades lag
9 decades lag
10 decades lag
ln dit (π)

Drop PUC
Drop ever in nonattainment
Sample period
Observations
Counties

-1.38
(1.02)
-0.66
(0.67)
–
-0.68
(1.25)
-4.11***
(1.15)
-3.75***
(0.66)
-3.51***
(0.71)
-4.58***
(0.98)
-3.71***
(0.75)
-6.20***
(1.37)
-7.30***
(1.59)
-7.30***
(1.56)
-7.01***
(1.56)

-0.75
(0.91)
-0.71
(0.56)
–
-2.80**
(1.09)
-2.93***
(1.11)
-2.93*
(1.55)
-6.99*
(3.92)
-3.11***
(1.13)
-3.12***
(1.14)

-1.61
(1.00)
-1.46
(1.00)
–
-1.91**
(0.83)
0.032
(0.87)
-3.12***
(1.07)
-2.46
(2.02)
-5.56*
(2.91)
-4.50
(2.95)
-4.85*
(2.57)

0.093
(1.39)
0.53
(1.12)
–
-3.09**
(1.39)
-3.26**
(1.29)
-4.14***
(0.80)
-3.70***
(1.13)
-2.24*
(1.26)
2.11
(2.19)
-4.30*
(2.25)
-5.75**
(2.42)
-5.94***
(2.14)
-5.31**
(2.10)

-1.53***
(0.53)

0.36
(1.11)

0.75
(1.13)

-1.76***
(0.67)

No
No
1890-1990
2,371
261

Yes
No
1890-1970
746
201

No
No
1890-1960
1,588
261

No
Yes
1890-1990
1,685
185

Notes: Estimates of β τ and π from equation (4) using a Poisson model. Outcome variable is
relative coal capital at the county-by-decade level. County sample shown in Figure A.4. Each
model includes event time, county, and state-by-decade fixed effects. Column 1 replicates
baseline estimates. Column 2 drop county-decade observations when there is a state Public
Utility Commission regulating electric utilities. Column 3 includes only observations during
1890-1960. Column 4 drops counties that were ever designated as nonattainment under the
U.S. Clean Air Act. Robust standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

76

Table A.11: Other mechanisms: upstream and downstream sectors
(1)
ln railroad
density
ln doi × sinceEventi (ω1 )
ln doi (ω2 )
sinceEventi (ω3 )

Counties

(2)

(3)
Outcome is
ln highway env. NGO
density
share

(4)
republican vote
share

-0.048
(0.031)
-0.0019
(0.17)
0.23*
(0.14)

-0.022
(0.018)
0.013
(0.11)
0.051
(0.072)

-0.000022
(0.000078)
-0.00057
(0.00046)
-0.000095
(0.00031)

0.0033
(0.0034)
-0.0022
(0.021)
-0.011
(0.014)

458

458

458

458

Notes: Estimates from equation 10 using county-level outcomes. All models includes state and
NERC region fixed effects, and county centroid longitude and latitude. County sample shown in
Figure A.4. Outcome in column 1 is log railroad density in 2010 (in miles per square mile). Outcome
in column 2 is log highway density in 2010 (in miles per square mile). Outcome in column 3 is the
population share of individuals who are members of three major environmental NGOs in 1996 (in
%). Outcome in column 4 is the share of eligible voters who voted for the Republican Presidential
candidate in 2000 (in %). Robust standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

77

