                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             THE PERSISTENT POWER OF BEHAVIORAL CHANGE:
     LONG-RUN IMPACTS OF TEMPORARY SAVINGS SUBSIDIES FOR THE POOR

                                       Simone Schaner

                                     Working Paper 22534
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22534


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2016


I thank Erica Field, Dean Karlan, Erzo F.P. Luttmer, Rohini Pande, Joshua Schwartzstein,
Jonathan Zinman, and seminar participants at UC Berkeley, Boston University, Brown
University, IFPRI, Notre Dame, Tufts University, UC San Diego, and the University of Missouri
for numerous useful comments. This project would not have been possible without the tireless
assistance, hard work, and commitment of many employees of Family Bank. I am particularly
indebted to Victor Keriri Mwangi, Steve Mararo, and Michael Aswani Were. I also thank James
Vancel, Noreen Makana, and Thomas Ginn for superb field management and the IPA field
officers for their excellent assistance with the data collection. I gratefully acknowledge the
financial support of the Russell Sage Foundation, the George and Obie Shultz Fund, MIT's
Jameel Poverty Action Lab, the National Science Foundation's Graduate Research Fellowship,
and the Yale Savings and Payments Research Fund at Innovations for Poverty Action, sponsored
by a grant from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. Research activities were approved by
Institutional Review Boards at MIT, the Kenya Medical Research Institute, Innovations for
Poverty Action Kenya, and Dartmouth College. This RCT was registered in the American
Economic Association Registry for randomized control trials under trial number
AEARCTR-0001358. All errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Simone Schaner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Persistent Power of Behavioral Change: Long-Run Impacts of Temporary Savings Subsidies
for the Poor
Simone Schaner
NBER Working Paper No. 22534
August 2016
JEL No. D14,O1,O12

                                           ABSTRACT

I use a field experiment in rural Kenya to study how temporary incentives to save impact long-
run economic outcomes. Study participants randomly selected to receive large temporary interest
rates on an individual bank account had significantly more income and assets 2.5 years after the
interest rates expired. These changes are much larger than the short-run impacts on experimental
bank account use and almost entirely driven by growth in entrepreneurship. Temporary interest
rates directed to joint bank accounts had no detectable long-run impacts on entrepreneurship or
income, but increased investment in household public goods and spousal consensus over
finances.


Simone Schaner
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
328 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
simone.schaner@dartmouth.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/1358
1     Introduction
In spite of recent progress, approximately 700 million people still live in extreme poverty, with
35 percent of individuals in Sub-Saharan Africans living in this state (Cruz et al. 2015). As such,
understanding how to help poor families grow their incomes remains a top global policy priority.
Recent empirical work has produced compelling evidence that one-time “big push” interventions,
where individuals are given large grants (and sometimes additional support) either in cash or in
kind, can raise income and consumption levels well after grants are disbursed.1 But are resource-
intensive big pushes always necessary? At least some individuals in the developing world seem to
have the potential to grow themselves out of poverty: recent experimental and non-experimental
studies have found very large – on the order of 5-30 percent per month – marginal returns to capital
among microenterprises in contexts as varied as Sri Lanka, Ghana, India, Mexico, and Uganda.2
Other researchers have documented individuals regularly revolving debt at interest rates as high
as 10 percent per day (Aleem 1990; Ananth et al. 2007; Banerjee and Duflo 2007). Yet business
training and financial literacy programs that coach the poor on how to change their behavior with-
out providing incentives or economic support often deliver disappointing results (McKenzie and
Woodruff 2014; Karlan et al. 2014).
    A simple alternative to coaching and counseling is to directly pay for the desired behavior
change, at least at first. In this paper, I ask whether temporary, but high-powered incentives to
save can have persistent impacts on economic outcomes. To this end, I analyze the results of a
field experiment that I conducted in rural Kenya in 2009, in which married couples were given
the opportunity to open new formal bank accounts. All participating couples could open up to
three accounts: an individual account in the name of each spouse and a joint account. Before
participants decided which accounts to open, each account was randomly assigned a temporary
interest rate, which lasted for six months and ranged from zero to 20 percent in annual terms. The
randomization was conducted so that all interest rates were completely independent of one another
– thus, the experiment created variation in overall incentives to save and variation in the way that
couples were incentivized to save (i.e. jointly versus individually).
    In the short run, the interest rates had their intended effect: study participants were much more


    1 For  evidence on cash and in-kind grants to entrepreneurs, see de Mel et al. (2008), de Mel et al. (2012), and
Fafchamps et al. (2014). For evidence on small business grants plus training or technical assistance for small business
see Macours et al. (2012) and Blattman et al. (2014). For evidence on ultra-poor graduation programs, which combine
grants of productive assets (usually livestock) with intensive technical assistance, see Banerjee et al. (2015), Bandiera
et al. (2015), and Blattman et al.. See Gertler et al. (2012) for the long-term impact of Opportunidades, Mexico’s
well-known conditional cash transfer program.
     2 For Sri Lanka, see de Mel et al. (2008) and de Mel et al. (2012). For Ghana see Udry and Anagol (2006) and

Fafchamps et al. (2014). For India see Banerjee and Duflo (2012) and Field et al. (2013). For Mexico see McKenzie
and Woodruff (2008). For Uganda see Blattman et al. (2014).

                                                           1
likely to open and use accounts with higher interest rates when the interest rates were active.3
Although these short-run responses are robust, they are modest in magnitude: moving from no
interest to 20 percent interest increased average daily balances in the individual and joint accounts
by $1.38 and $1.65 respectively.
     In the longer run (3-4 years after the experiment or 2.5-3.5 years after the interest rates expired),
I find that the interest rates changed savings behavior in more notable ways, and that the nature
of the impact depends on how the household was incentivized to save. When an individually-
owned bank account received a high interest rate, assets were reallocated towards the owner of that
account and as a result both individual and overall household income increased. These gains are
driven by growth in entrepreneurship – study participants who received the highest interest rate
on their individual account were significantly (10 percentage points, or a 26 percent increase from
the mean) more likely to be entrepreneurs and had substantially more business profit and capital
at endline. One striking feature of the individual interest rate is that its long-run impacts are much
larger than its short-run impacts on experimental bank account use. Moving from the lowest to
the highest individual rate increased the short-run average daily balance in individual accounts by
less than $2, yet in the long run the interest rate increased monthly individual business profit by
$6.85-$7.98 and business capital by $33. While these long-run effects are large, they are quite
consistent with treatment effects on short-term account use and the returns to capital suggested by
the data, which are well within the range of returns found by other researchers.4
     In contrast, I cannot reject the null hypothesis that the joint interest rate had no impact on
overall income or assets. I do, however, find some evidence that the joint rate increased investment
in “household” assets such as home renovations and livestock. Couples who received higher joint
interest rates also reported greater levels of spousal agreement regarding consumption and savings
decisions. This suggests that the joint interest rate compelled couples to work together towards
a mutually-agreeable savings goal, while the individual interest rate spurred study participants to
invest in more independent (and, based on the income results, higher return) ventures.
     Why didn’t study participants simply revert back to their old savings and investment behaviors
after the interest rates expired? Perhaps the most straightforward explanation is that the interest
rates helped study participants accumulate more capital in the short run, which helped them grow
output in the long run. To test this hypothesis, I contrast the impact of the interest rates to that of
a randomly-assigned modest cash payment, which did not explicitly incentivize saving. Twenty

     3 I analyze the short-term response to the interest rates in detail in Schaner (2015a). Although all couples respond to

interest rates, I find that couples who are well matched on time preferences are more likely to save in a way consistent
with efficient investment.
     4 The individual rate’s long-run treatment effects on business profits and assets could be attained by making an

additional $0.75 investment in productive capital and reinvesting the proceeds at a 14 percent monthly return for the
next 2.5 years, for example.

                                                             2
percent of study respondents were selected for this “cash prize”, which was delivered as part of the
baseline discount factor elicitation procedure. The cash payments ranged from $0.13-$3.75 with
an average value of $3.09, were delivered within three months of the baseline sessions, and could
be deposited in respondents’ newly-opened bank accounts. Although the cash payment increased
short-run bank account balances more than the interest rates, it had no detectable impact on long-
run economic outcomes. I therefore argue that the interest rate effects cannot be explained by
changes in the short-run capital stock alone. I also find no evidence that the interest rates helped
study participants by easing external savings constraints or increasing access to bank credit.
    The contrast between the interest rate and cash prize results suggests that explicitly incen-
tivizing study participants to exert effort to save (in a specific type of bank account) in the short
run may have been important. More specifically, making a conscious, concerted attempt to save
could have helped individuals establish new savings and investment practices that persisted af-
ter the interest rates expired. A notable prediction of models of habit formation is that behavior
change induced by temporary incentives can continue after those incentives are removed (Becker
and Murphy 1988). The interest rates could have also induced individuals to make plans or adopt
new financial heuristics to support long-run behavior change (Thaler 1999). Consistent with these
hypotheses, I find that respondents treated with higher individual interest rates were 27 percent
(7.6 percentage points) more likely to say that they “saved regularly” 3.5 years after the interest
rates expired. I also find that long-run treatment effects are concentrated among individuals who
exhibited the largest responses to the interest rates in the short run. Moreover, those treated with
higher individual interest rates were 35 percent (5.4 percentage points) more likely to explicitly
budget for business expenses, and this increase is entirely driven by growth in downwardly-rigid
business budgets: that is, budgets in which the respondent stated he or she would not reduce the
allocated amount to meet an unexpected expense. Although these results are not definitive, they
reinforce the notion that behavioral mechanisms like habit formation and mental accounting were
important for sustaining the impact of the individual interest rate.
    The main contribution of this paper is to demonstrate that temporary financial incentives can
generate persistent changes in savings and investment behavior, and that these changes can trans-
late into impacts on income. To date, most research on temporary incentives for behavior change
has focused on education or health-related behaviors like gym attendance or smoking in developed-
country contexts. Here, studies that track outcomes after incentives expire tend to do so for a lim-
ited period (e.g. one year or less after the intervention ends) and usually find modest-to-no impacts
in the longer run, with treatment effects decaying over time.5 This paper provides novel evidence
    5 In terms of financial behavior, De Mel et al. (2013) find evidence that deposit collection services helped Sri
Lankan study participants form a savings habit, but they do not study impacts on outcomes beyond saving. Studies
of incentives to exercise or lose weight generally find that initial short-run effects dwindle over time, especially when
habits are interrupted by holiday breaks (Charness and Gneezy 2009; John et al. 2011; Acland and Levy 2015; Royer

                                                           3
that temporary incentives can have amplified effects in the long run, at least in the financial do-
main. One reason for this difference could be the fact that some individuals in my sample had
very high (and potentially very salient) returns to saving, which could provide dynamic feedback
to help reinforce new behaviors.
     My results also contribute more broadly to existing research on saving in the developing world.
Researchers have evaluated the impacts of a range of savings products, including basic formal bank
accounts (Dupas and Robinson 2013; Prina 2015), commitment savings accounts (Ashraf et al.
2006b; Brune et al. 2016; Dupas and Robinson 2014), savings accounts with reminders (Karlan
et al. 2013), savings groups that leverage peer pressure and support (Kast et al. 2013; Dupas and
Robinson 2014; Breza and Chandrasekhar 2015), and deposit collection services (Ashraf et al.
2006a; Callen et al. 2014), among others. Although this literature has identified a number of
services that help individuals increase savings balances, there is little evidence as to whether, or
under what conditions, behavioral changes persist after services are discontinued – my paper helps
fill this gap.
     My results stand in sharp contrast to most literature on business training and financial literacy.
These studies evaluate programs that utilize educational modules, rather than financial incentives,
to alter financial behavior and generally find limited impacts on economic outcomes, especially
in the long run (McKenzie and Woodruff 2014; Karlan et al. 2014). In this sense my results
align with Cole et al. (2011), who find that financial subsidies are more effective than financial
literacy training at boosting takeup and long-run use of savings accounts in Indonesia. I deepen
this finding by shedding light on how financial subsidies impact outcomes beyond use of bank
accounts targeted by the subsidies.
     Of course, my results should not be taken to imply that interest rates are a panacea. Two recent
papers find that much lower interest rates – both in absolute and real terms – had no measured
impact on savings in targeted accounts (Kast et al. 2013; Karlan and Zinman 2014). This sug-
gests that high-powered incentives may be needed to stimulate a substantial behavioral response
in the short run. There are several other aspects of my design (e.g. multiple interest rates drawn
by lottery, a choice between bank accounts, spouses attending baseline experimental sessions to-
gether) that may have been important for my results. I cannot pinpoint the relative importance of
these features with my experiment; I therefore prefer to interpret my results as demonstrating that
the right incentives targeted to the right population can have meaningful, lasting effects. Further
work would be needed to generate additional evidence on optimal design and targeting of these
incentives to maximize policy impact.

et al. 2012). Volpp et al. (2009) find that financial incentives to quit smoking have decaying impacts over the longer-
run, while Giné et al. (2010) find that a commitment savings account tied to smoking behavior had small effects that
lasted at least six months after savings were released. In education, Jackson (2010) finds that paying students for
passing advanced placement tests improved standardized test scores and increased college matriculation.

                                                          4
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 begins by describing the experi-
mental context and design, then Section 3 presents the main results. Section 4 provides additional
discussion with a focus on mechanisms, and Section 5 concludes.


2     Experimental Design and Data

2.1   Experimental Context
The experiment was conducted between July and September 2009 in partnership with Family Bank
of Kenya – Appendix Figure A1 illustrates a timeline of major experimental activities. Study
participants were recruited from 19 communities in two districts near the bank’s Busia branch in
Western Province. Even though six formal banks were operating in Busia at the time, most of these
banks did not offer low-cost accounts suitable for a low-income clientele. Importantly, Family
Bank had just begun to market a new, low-fee account at the onset of the experiment. In contrast to
traditional Kenyan bank accounts, which required relatively large minimum balances (around Ksh
1,000, or US$12.50 at a 2009 exchange rate of Ksh 80 per dollar) and charged monthly account
maintenance fees, the new Family Bank account had a minimum operating balance of Ksh 100
($1.25), no maintenance fees, and no deposit fees. The only fees charged were for withdrawals,
which cost Ksh 62 over-the-counter and Ksh 30 at the ATM. Like most bank accounts on the
market, the new Family Bank account did not bear any interest.
    Just one other bank apart from Family Bank offered a similar low-cost account when the exper-
iment began. The bank accounts in this study were therefore a relatively new technology and many
study participants were unfamiliar with them. When interpreting the results it is important to keep
in mind that Kenya’s financial services landscape has evolved dramatically since 2009. By the time
of the 2012 endline survey nearly all banks offered low-cost accounts. Banking services have also
been integrated into mobile money products and banks have expanded their reach into rural areas
via agency banking. Thus, while the experimental accounts dominated most other accounts on the
market in 2009, this was no longer the case at the time of the endline survey.


2.2   Experimental Design
The experiment targeted married couples who did not have any accounts with Family Bank but
expressed interest in opening one. Trained enumerators recruited couples in 19 communities sur-
rounding the bank branch. Couples who expressed initial interest were issued invitations to attend a
group meeting at a local primary school. All baseline interviews, account opening paperwork, and
randomization activities were conducted at these meetings. Upon arrival, couples were informed


                                                 5
that they could open up to three accounts with Family Bank at the meeting – a joint account, an
individual account for the husband, and an individual account for the wife. All accounts opened
at the meetings were funded with the Ksh 100 minimum balance to eliminate barriers to account
use. This amount could not be withdrawn, so participants had little incentive to open accounts they
knew they would never use.
     Before deciding which accounts to open, participants were given the opportunity to draw a
temporary 6-month interest rate for each account. This process was designed so that interest rates
on the three accounts were independent of one another. All randomization was conducted in the
field, with respondents drawing folded envelopes from plastic bins.6 Individual accounts were
assigned an annual interest rate of either 0, 4, 12, or 20 percent with equal probability, while joint
accounts were assigned an annual interest rate of either 4, 12, or 20 percent with equal probability.
The interest rates in the experiment were purposely chosen to exceed market rates by a large
margin, with the hope that such substantial subsidies would stimulate a short-run savings response.
At the time, most formal financial institutions offered no interest on small-scale savings balances
– at best participants could have earned 0.5-2 percent annually elsewhere.7
     Since many study participants had little-to-no experience with banks, project staff carefully
explained what an interest rate was, provided numerical examples for each interest rate, and ex-
plained that the promotion would only last for six months. While very few couples chose to open
all three bank accounts, all couples opened at least one account – as a result 99 percent of study
participants had access to either a newly-opened joint account or a newly-opened individual ac-
count in their own name (Appendix Table A1 shows the distribution of account opening choices).
Thus, the experimental design allows me to study the impact of interest rates on different account
types holding access to a new bank account constant. Participants were also given a pocket-sized
card for each account that they opened, which featured a reminder to save and, when applicable,
the interest rate.
     Before leaving the meeting all individuals participated in a final drawing for a “cash prize”.8
This prize was the incentive for baseline questions on rates of time preference, which consisted of
choices between a smaller monetary amount at time t and a larger amount at time t + τ (see the
Data Appendix for additional detail). All individuals had a 20 percent chance of being selected
    6 Respondents   took separate draws for each potential account. The field staff were carefully trained not to allow
respondents more than one draw for each treatment. I find no evidence of protocol problems when comparing the
empirical distribution of treatments to the theoretical distribution of treatments.
    7 For comparison, average inflation was 9.3 percent in 2009 and 2.0 percent in 2010. By September 2009 inflation

had already tapered off substantially – annualized inflation over the 6-month subsidy period averaged 3.4 percent.
Hence, heavily subsidized experimental accounts offered a very attractive return in real terms.
    8 Individuals were also selected for an information sharing treatment and free ATM card treatments at this stage.

I do not discuss these interventions in the main paper as they have no impact on the results in this paper. Robustness
Appendix R provides additional detail on these interventions and shows that explicitly controlling for them has no
impact on my results.

                                                          6
for a cash prize – selected individuals then drew one of their time preference questions at random
for payout. Payouts ranged from Ksh 10 to Ksh 300, with an average payout of Ksh 247.9 All
payouts could be either picked up in person at the project field office or deposited automatically
into the individual’s newly-opened bank account. In practice, 77 percent of individuals elected
to have their payouts deposited into a bank account, even though accessing these funds would
require payment of the Ksh 62 withdrawal fee (there was no fee to pick up funds at the field office,
although respondents only had a one-month window to claim their cash). This suggests that most
individuals saw some value to the bank accounts and intended to use them for saving.


2.3    Data and Randomization Verification
My analysis uses data from four sources. The first is a baseline survey conducted during the
experimental sessions. The baseline collected basic demographic information, information on rates
of time preference, and data on income and use of several popular savings devices. Second, I use
three years of administrative data from the bank to get an accurate measure of short- and long-
run use of the experimental accounts. This administrative data includes the date and amount of
all transactions posted to experimental accounts. Finally, I use data from two waves of endline
surveys. The first wave was conducted between August and November of 2012, approximately
three years after the initial experiment. The wave 1 endline collected detailed information about
respondents’ financial lives: in addition to basic demographic information it asked about income,
savings, and debt by source as well as financial transfers and household decision-making. The
wave 2 endline was conducted between July and August of 2013 and was much shorter. This wave
was informed by results from the wave 1 endline and was explicitly designed to collect additional
detail on study participants’ budgets and savings attitudes. The Data Appendix gives more detail
on the data sources and how key variables used in the analysis were constructed.
    A total of 1,558 individuals (779 couples) opened 1,152 bank accounts during the initial ex-
periment. The survey team was able to re-interview 1,417 (91 percent) of these individuals during
the wave 1 endline and 1,331 (85 percent) of these individuals during the wave 2 endline. Table 1
presents baseline demographic characteristics and verifies that these characteristics are not system-
atically correlated with the interest rates. The first column of the table shows means and standard
deviations of the variables of interest. The next three columns present the coefficients and stan-
dard errors from regressions of individual characteristics on the treatment of interest. For ease of
interpretation I divide the interest rate variables by 20 before running regressions – thus, a change
from 0 to 1 can be interpreted as the effect of moving from no interest rate to a 20 percent interest
rate. This convention is maintained for the rest of the paper. The final row of the table presents
    9 Theseamounts were designed to be substantial enough to ensure that individuals made choices carefully – for
comparison the median weekly income at baseline was Ksh 500.

                                                       7
p-values from chi-squared tests that the coefficient on the treatment is jointly equal to zero across
all outcomes.
    The first two rows of Table 1 verify that follow-up is uncorrelated with treatment status.10
Overall, participants have relatively low levels of human capital, income, and financial access.
While three quarters of individuals are literate, average educational attainment is low, at 6.79
years. The most common occupations are subsistence farming and small-scale entrepreneurship,
each accounting for 42 percent of respondents.11 Individuals reported an average income of Ksh
4,595 ($57) per month, but the median income is much lower, at Ksh 2,167 ($27).12
    Just 22 percent of respondents reported owning a bank account at baseline. However, nearly
all individuals reported saving in some way, with the most popular methods being storing cash
at home (87 percent of respondents) and saving with a rotating savings and credit association, or
ROSCA (58 percent of respondents). Individuals report saving roughly Ksh 1,500 in the bank and
in savings and credit cooperatives (SACCOs), and keep an average of Ksh 849 at home. Although
my study sample was drawn from just two districts in Western Kenya, Appendix Table A3 uses
the 2009 Kenyan Census and FinAccess Survey to show that my sample is quite similar to the
broader population of adult married Kenyans in terms of age, education, fertility, engagement in
entrepreneurship, and savings device ownership.
    Columns 2-4 of Table 1 show that the randomization functioned well, with none of the joint
tests rejecting the null of no relationship. Since none of the joint tests reject and the randomization
was not stratified, I do not control for any baseline characteristics in the main analysis. All the
results are, however, essentially unchanged when controlling for all variables in Table 1.


3          Main Results

3.1        Impacts on Experimental Bank Account Use
Figure 1 illustrates the impact of the individual and joint interest rates on experimental account use
over time. Panel A graphs the share of individual (A.i) or joint (A.ii) accounts that received at least
one deposit within a given quarter following account opening. Panel B performs the same exercise
for withdrawals. Note that since the interest rate randomization was unconditional on account
opening, unopened accounts are always kept in the sample and coded like unused accounts – this
convention is held throughout the paper. Lighter lines correspond to higher temporary interest

    10 Moreover, there is no evidence of selective attrition – see Appendix Table A2.
    11 Idefine entrepreneurship to include individuals operating an independent business. Common examples include
market vendors, bicycle taxi drivers, shop owners, and commercial farmers.
   12 Income, savings, and debt measures in my sample are all highly skewed – I therefore topcode all variables

denominated in Kenyan Shillings, in baseline, endline, and administrative bank account data at the 99th percentile.

                                                        8
rates.13 There are three noteworthy patterns apparent in the graphs: First, rates of deposits fall
off rapidly after the first quarter, which suggests that many individuals who experimented with the
accounts failed to establish a regular savings practice. Second, both individual and joint accounts
with higher interest rates were more likely to see deposits and withdrawals in the short run. Third,
the individual interest rate had a persistent long-run effect on rates of account use. In contrast, the
impact of the joint interest rate appears to dissipate after the first nine months.
    Table 2 takes a more detailed look at treatment effects on experimental accounts. Panel A
studies participants’ use of individual accounts. The underlying regression equation is as follows:

                  yic = β0 + β1 intIic + β2 intI−ic + β3 intJc + β4 cashic + β5 cash−ic + εac                           (1)

where yic is use of account i owned by couple c, intIic is the interest rate on that account, intI −ic
is the interest rate on the couple’s other individual account (owned by spouse −i), intJc is the
interest rate on the couple’s joint account, cashic is a dummy variable equal to 1 if individual i was
selected to receive a cash prize, and cash−ic indicates that i’s spouse was selected to receive a cash
prize. All standard errors are clustered at the couple level and all variables denominated in Kenyan
Shillings are top-coded at the 99th percentile. This specification lets me study direct own-account
effects (β1 , analogous to patterns in Figure 1), the extent to which spousal and joint interest rates
crowd out own-individual-account use (β2 and β3 ), and the effect of own and spousal cash prizes
on individual account use.
    Panel A, column 1 shows that moving from no individual interest to 20 percent interest in-
creased the share of open individual accounts by 17.4 percentage points (56 percent), increased the
likelihood that the account would receive at least one deposit in the first 6 months by 9 percentage
points (150 percent), and more than quadrupled total deposits over the course of the first 6 months
(a treatment effect of Ksh 625, or $7.81). The individual interest rate also significantly increased
withdrawals, so effects on short-run ending and average daily balances are more modest, at just
over Ksh 100 ($1.25), a tripling of the mean for the zero-interest group.14 It is important to keep in
mind, however, that just 16 percent of individual accounts in the 20 percent interest group received
any deposits in the first 6 months. Hence, treatment effects for compliers are necessarily much
larger. Finally, column 7 shows that accounts with the highest individual interest rate were 4.2
percentage points more likely to be used in the third year following account opening.15
    Panel A also shows some (imprecise) evidence that other interest rates crowded out use of
    13 In order to give a picture of account use absent the cash prize, I drop accounts randomly selected to be eligible

for a cash prize when performing calculations for the first quarter. Results are very similar, but first quarter usage rates
are higher, when including these accounts.
    14 The treatment effect on deposits less the treatment effect on withdrawals does not add up to the treatment effect

on ending balances due to fees and top-coding.
    15 I code an account as “used” if it received either a deposit or a withdrawal during the relevant time period.



                                                             9
individual accounts: higher spousal and joint interest rates are consistently associated with lower
rates of individual account use, though point estimates are only sporadically significant. Finally,
Panel A illustrates that the cash prize had large impacts on rates of individual account use, with no
crowd out from the spousal cash prize.
    Panel B presents analogous treatment effects for joint accounts. Since there are two individual
interest rates for each joint rate, I impose a restriction that both individual rates have the same
impact on joint account use. I also impose a restriction that both cash prizes have the same impact
on joint account use. These choices streamline the analysis and seem reasonable, as the restrictions
are never rejected in practice (p-values range from 0.23-0.97). I implement this via the following
regression equation:

              yJc = γ0 + γ1 (intIHc + intIWc ) + γ2 intJc + γ3 (cashHc + cashWc ) + εJc             (2)

where yJc is a measure of joint account use in couple c, intIHc and intIWc are the husband’s and
wife’s individual interest rates, and cashHc and cashWc are dummy variables indicating that the
husband and wife were selected for a cash prize. Here, I find that the joint interest rate signifi-
cantly increased the probability that joint accounts were opened and used, though effects on actual
balances are only marginally significant. Panel B also shows that joint accounts were less likely to
be opened when couples drew higher individual interest rates.
    Although the crowd out estimates in Panels A and B are not robustly significant, they are
important in practice. Panel C makes this clear by calculating treatment effects on couples’ overall
use of experimental accounts – regressions follow equation 2. Appendix Figure A2 collects point
estimates from Panels A-C of Table 2 to visually depict crowd out. Figure A2 Panel A.i shows that
going from no individual interest to 20 percent interest increased short-run total deposits in the
treated individual account by Ksh 625, but reduced deposits in the spousal individual account by
Ksh 193 and reduced joint account deposits by Ksh 263, leading to a small effect on the couples’
total deposits across all experimental accounts. The net effect of the joint interest rate on total
deposits is similarly small. Patterns for the average daily balance (Panel B), are similar. Overall, the
figure underscores that the first order effect of the interest subsidies was to change where couples
saved and, by extension, who within the couple did the saving. That said, I do find evidence that
couples who received higher absolute interest rates saved more: Appendix Table A4 shows that
the maximum interest rate available to the couple significantly increased all measures of overall
experimental account use.
    I also find strong evidence that the cash prize increased overall use of experimental accounts.
Panel C of Table 2 shows that the cash prize increased total deposits into experimental accounts by
Ksh 904 (notably larger than the average cash payout of Ksh 247) and increased the average daily


                                                  10
balance held across all experimental accounts by Ksh 218.
    Finally, Table 2 and Figure 1 make it clear that the vast majority of study participants abandoned
the experimental accounts in the long-run – just three percent of individual accounts (8 percent of
individual accounts that were actually opened) and five percent of joint accounts (8 percent of
opened accounts) were used in their third year. This, however, does not necessarily imply that
most study participants abandoned formal banking altogether. Given the rapid change in Kenyan
financial services over my study period, study participants may have transitioned to other formal
banking products over time. The next subsection turns to the two endlines to study impacts on
overall bank account use and broader economic outcomes in the long run.


3.2    Impacts on Long-Run Economic Outcomes
I study long-run outcomes collected during the wave 1 endline, which was conducted three years
after the initial experiment, or 2.5 years after the interest rates expired, and the wave 2 endline,
conducted 3.5 years after the interest rates expired. All regressions are run at the individual level,
following equation 1. This specification is useful because it allows me to simultaneously study
own, spillover, and overall household-level effects of the individual interest rate and the cash prize.
To that end, the tables present p-values from an F-test of the null hypothesis β1 + β2 = 0 – this lets
me test whether the individual interest rate had a significant effect on household-level outcomes
(since the regressions are run at the individual level, effects are in per-capita terms). In addition,
I present p-values from F-tests of whether the net effect of the cash prize on household-level out-
comes is equal to zero (β4 + β5 = 0), whether the individual and joint interest rates had equivalent
impacts on household-level outcomes, i.e. (β1 + β2 ) = β3 , whether the overall effect of the indi-
vidual interest rate is equal to the overall effect of the cash prize, i.e. (β1 + β2 ) = (β4 + β5 ), and
whether the treatments had any joint impact on outcomes (β1 = β2 = β3 = β4 = β5 = 0). In what
follows I use the Central Bank of Kenya’s consumer price index to deflate all monetary amounts
into 2009 values for comparability with the baseline.

Impacts on Savings and Income Table 3 presents treatment effects on overall bank account use,
as well as broader economic outcomes from the wave 1 endline including total assets, total debt,
and total income. The wave 2 endline, which focused on budgeting behavior, was much shorter and
did not collect any data on assets or debt. It did, however, ask respondents about overall income
and self-reported savings practices – these outcomes are also included in Table 3. Column 1 of
Table 3 shows that study participants who received the highest interest rate on their own individual
account are 9 percentage points more likely to report having an individual or joint bank account
with any bank. There is also marginally significant evidence that the joint interest rate increased


                                                  11
overall rates of bank account ownership. Hence the individual and joint interest rates did not simply
keep people more attached to experimental accounts; they also kept people engaged in the banking
sector more broadly. In contrast, there is no evidence that the cash prize increased rates of bank
account ownership, but some evidence that it increased bank balances among account owners.
    Even more striking are results in columns 3 through 10, which illustrate impacts on total assets,
debt, assets net debt, and income.16 Here we see that the individual interest rate reallocated assets
within the household – study participants who received the highest individual interest rate reported
Ksh 5,994 ($75) more in total assets, while their spouses reported a Ksh 5,871 reduction in assets.
I do interpret this finding with caution, however, since the effect of the spousal interest rate is
not robust to taking a log transformation of total assets (while the direct impact of the individual
interest rate is very robust to this transformation). The asset reallocation appears to have been
productivity enhancing: study participants who received higher individual interest rates report Ksh
1,137 ($14) more income per month at endline 1 and Ksh 2,474 more income per month at endline
2. Although the point estimate for endline 2 is notably larger than the point estimate for endline 1,
inspection of the dependent variable means shows that overall income is much higher at endline 2
as well – as such, both point estimates represent a 26-27 percent increase relative to the no interest
comparison group. I believe this apparent growth in income is driven by survey design, rather than
economic progress. The wave 2 endline allowed respondents to specify income in daily, weekly,
or monthly terms, while the baseline and endline 1 enforced a common lookback period for all
respondents. The Data Appendix (Appendix D) shows that the income distributions for baseline,
endline 1, and endline 2 closely overlap for respondents who chose to specify income monthly,
while the endline 2 income distribution is skewed far right relative to baseline and endline 1 for
those who specified income on a daily or weekly basis (Appendix Figure D1). This is likely driven
by enumerators recording income during working periods for those who work sporadically for
short intervals, thereby overstating total income on a monthly basis. Given this, I view the endline
2 income results with caution, but report them in the interest of transparency. Importantly there
is no correlation between the individual and joint interest rate and the reporting interval, although
individuals who received higher spousal interest rates were more likely to report income on a daily
basis.
    The impact of the individual interest rate on income does not reflect a reallocation within the
household – the impact of the spousal interest rate on income is very small in magnitude and not
significantly different from zero at both endlines. As a result, I am able to formally reject that
the individual interest rate had no impact on household income at endline 1 and when pooling
   16 Totalassets include cash saved in banks, SACCOs, mobile money accounts, at home, and in ROSCAs, as well
as business assets, livestock, and “other assets”. When calculating livestock savings I record the value of all livestock
owned by the household and assign half to each member of the couple, as livestock is an inherently joint method of
saving. Total income includes returns from agricultural activities, business profits, wage earnings, and “other income”.

                                                          12
rounds.17 In order to give a sense of distributional impacts, Figure 2 graphs quantile treatment
effects for bank savings, total assets, and endline 1 and 2 monthly income. In order to improve
legibility of the graphs, I normalize treatment effects by the quantile value in the lowest interest
comparison group - hence, coefficients reflect growth in each quantile relative to the control. Panel
A makes it clear that the impacts of the individual interest rate are not driven by a narrow part of
the distribution. Consistent with this, I find that the main results in Table 3 are robust to a variety
of top-coding and trimming schemes (see Robustness Appendix Table R2).
    Columns 8 and 9 of Table 3 use data from the wave 2 endline to study how the individual in-
terest rate impacted savings attitudes and practices. There is no impact on the share of respondents
who state that “saving is a priority for me”. But agreeing with this statement may not signal much:
even though the vast majority (over 80 percent) of respondents state that saving is a priority, just
29 percent of respondents receiving no individual interest say they actually save regularly. No-
tably, the individual interest rate increases this proportion by 7.6 percentage points (27 percent).
Hence the individual interest rate helped respondents sustain better savings practices in both the
short run and the long run. Overall, the individual interest rate had large, meaningful impacts on
study participants’ economic lives, well after the interest rates expired. In contrast, I find no robust,
consistent patterns with respect to the joint interest rate or the cash prize. I caveat, however, that I
cannot formally reject that the individual and joint interest rates had equivalent impacts and I can
only reject equality of the individual interest rate and the cash prize in 3 out of 10 specifications.

Impacts on Business Outcomes What types of income and assets are driving the aggregate
changes in Table 3? Table 4 shows that the individual interest rate had large and important effects
on business outcomes, while Appendix Tables A5 and A6 show that the individual interest rate had
no detectable impact on any other type of income or asset.18 Given this, I prefer to interpret the
somewhat smaller impacts I find on business profits and capital as the main driver of the overall
effect the interest rate had on income and assets.
    Table 4 shows that receiving the highest individual interest rate increased study participants’
probability of running a business at endline 1 by 8 percentage points (a 28 percent increase versus
the no interest group) and increased the probability that a study participant reported entrepreneur-
ship as his or her main occupation by 10 percentage points (26 percent). Moreover, the individual
interest rate increased business capital by Ksh 2,651 ($33) and business profits by Ksh 548 ($7)
per month. Endline 2 did not ask about business assets or occupation, but it did ask about business
profit and hours spent working on a business. Columns 4-6 show that the four year impact on
   17 Although the p-value on the joint test falls just short of the 5 percent significance level for endline round 1, I

am easily able to reject at the 1 percent level if I impose the restriction that the spousal interest rate had no impact on
individual income, which is clearly supported by the data.
   18 Appendix Table A7 illustrates impacts on debt.



                                                           13
business profits is quite similar to the three year impact, at Ksh 638 ($8) per month.19 Extensive
margin effects are more muted, however – I find no significant impact of the individual interest
rate on business operation or business labor at endline 2, although there is evidence of significant
spillover effects on spouses – this could be driven by respondents drawing spouses in to work on
growing businesses, or helping support spouses to start new businesses. I view these estimates
with caution, however, since Appendix Table A2 shows that the spousal interest rate is correlated
with missing values for these variables (note that there is no problem with the individual interest
rate). Appendix Figure A3 graphs quantile treatment effects on business profits and assets by the
individual and joint interest rates. Here I find significant impacts across a broad range of quantiles,
though gains in percentage terms are smaller at larger quantiles.
    Columns 8 and 9 of Table 4 use data from the wave 2 endline to ask whether observed changes
in business outcomes are accompanied by changes in financial management. Here I make use
of a budgeting module that was the primary focus of the second endline: this module first asked
individuals if they made spending decisions with a pre-planned budget in mind. Respondents
were then asked to list each of their budget items and indicate whether the budgeted amounts
were flexible (i.e. would the respondent reduce spending on the item to meet an unexpected Ksh
1,000 expense). I term budget items that would not be reduced to meet an unexpected expense as
“downwardly rigid”. Here, I find that the individual interest rate increased the share of respondents
explicitly budgeting for business by 5 percentage points (35 percent). This effect is entirely driven
by growth in downwardly rigid budgeting. Even though just 6.6 percent of individuals in the lowest
individual interest rate group had downwardly-rigid business budgets – which implies that most
small-scale entrepreneurs in my sample do not budget for business in this way – the individual
interest rate treatment nearly doubled this share. This, coupled with my earlier finding that the
individual interest rate increased the share of people who save regularly, suggests that the individual
interest rate had a sustained impact on financial behaviors that translated in to meaningful growth
in economic resources.
    Overall, I reject that the individual interest rate had no impact on household level business
outcomes for all variables except business capital. In contrast, estimated impacts for the joint
interest rate and the cash prize are generally close to zero and insignificant (if anything, cash prize
receipt is associated with less business profit at endline 2). Moreover, in contrast to Table 3 I
find robust evidence that the different treatments had significantly different impacts on business
outcomes. I am able to formally reject that the impact of the individual interest rate is equal to the
joint interest rate for eight out of 11 specifications on Table 4. I reject that the individual interest
rate and the cash prize had equivalent impacts in 10 out of 11 specifications.
    My data also reveal a great deal of business churning – just 50 percent of individuals who re-
  19 I   caveat that endline 2 business profits have the same lookback period problem as income.

                                                          14
ported entrepreneurship as their main occupation at baseline reported the same at endline 1, while
23 percent of non-entrepreneurs transitioned into entrepreneurship. Appendix Table A8 explores
heterogeneity in main effects by baseline occupation. Here we see that the impact of the individual
interest rate is concentrated among participants who were entrepreneurs at baseline. Hence the
individual interest rate helped existing entrepreneurs stay in business, but did not facilitate much
business creation. My results also suggest that the individual interest rate helped existing busi-
nesses grow – in order for the extensive margin to entirely account for the treatment effects on
endline 1 capital and profits, the average business “kept alive” by the higher interest rate would
need to have been around the 90th percentile of the business profits and assets distributions. These
results mirror recent findings from a number of capital drop experiments and microfinance evalu-
ations, which suggest that only individuals with some pre-existing entrepreneurial skill are able to
benefit from interventions to grow self-employment income (Crépon et al. 2011; Angelucci et al.
2013 Banerjee et al. 2013; Field et al. 2013; Fafchamps et al. 2014). Appendix Table A9 shows
that the positive impacts of the individual interest rate are driven by men, which suggests that the
men in my sample may have had higher marginal returns to capital than women. This is also con-
sistent with de Mel et al. (2009) and Fafchamps et al. (2014), who find that women (especially
those operating small, subsistence businesses) have lower returns to capital than men.

Impacts on “Joint” Household Outcomes Although I find no significant evidence that the joint
interest rate impacted overall income and assets, I do find that it impacted outcomes beyond joint
bank account use: Table 5 uses wave 1 endline data to explore how the interest rates affected
measures that capture investment in household public goods and levels of spousal alignment (the
second endline did not cover these topics). The first column of the table focuses on livestock
holdings. Livestock are arguably the most important class of assets held by study households –
nearly all households (95 percent) own some sort of livestock, and their value accounts for half
of total assets. Livestock are also inherently joint investments, as they are easily observed and
accessed by both members of a couple. Although the joint interest rate did not significantly impact
average livestock holdings (see Appendix Table A5), Table 5 uses the inverse hyperbolic sine
transformation to show that the joint rate did substantially increase livestock holdings at the lower
end of the distribution.20
    It is common practice in the study area for households to make periodic, incremental invest-
ments in their homes. Investments in home improvement are also inherently joint, as all members
of the household benefit from them. Column 2 of Table 5 shows that nearly half of individuals

                                                               .5 
   20 The inverse hyperbolic sine of x is given by ln x + x2 + 1      ≈ ln (2x). The impact of the joint interest rate on
livestock holdings is confirmed by quantile regressions on level values, which reveal significant, positive impacts on
the 28th to the 70th quantiles.

                                                          15
reported making some investment in home renovation in the past year, and moving from the lowest
to the highest joint interest rate increased this share by 6 percentage points (recall that the joint
interest rate variable runs from 0.2-1, so I multiply the point estimate in Table 5 by 0.8 to get this
effect). There is also evidence of increased home investment based on actual home quality. Col-
umn 3 shows that individuals who received higher joint interest rates were more likely to live in a
home with a permanent (i.e. iron sheet as opposed to thatch) roof at endline.
    The next two columns of Table 5 test whether the joint interest rate increased spousal alignment
over decision making: at endline, all individuals were asked to rate, on a scale of 0 to 10, how much
they and their spouse agreed about consumption and savings decisions.21 Columns 4 and 5 show
that individuals who received higher joint interest rates reported greater levels of agreement about
both topics. In spite of this, I do not observe any significant impacts on self-reported joint decision
making regarding savings (column 6).
    Taken together, the results in Table 5 suggest that the joint interest rate moderately increased
investment in “joint” assets while slightly increasing spousal alignment. I caveat that these results
are much more modest in magnitude and less statistically significant than my earlier results for the
individual interest rate – as such, I cannot formally reject that the individual and joint interest rates
had equivalent impacts on the outcomes in Table 5.

Robustness It is important to ask how robust my results are to alternative empirical specifica-
tions and treatments of outliers. Robustness Appendix R provides a number of sensitivity tests,
showing that there is no evidence that the results are driven by reporting bias, and showing that the
main results are robust to a variety of top-coding, trimming, and imputation strategies. Another
concern is that constraining the effect of the interest rates to be linear distorts estimates or ob-
scures important patterns. My decision to highlight the linear specification is motivated by a desire
to keep the analysis clear and focused, not by substantive differences in results. Appendix Tables
R4-R6 present long-run results where the interest rates are dummied out instead of entered linearly
– here, the effect of the 20 percent individual interest rate (relative to the no interest comparison
group) is remarkably similar to the coefficients from the linear specification. I reject linearity for
the individual interest rate in just 4 out of 27 specifications.
    Since my analysis asks how several treatments impact a range of economic outcomes, it is
also important to ask whether inferences are robust to corrections for multiple hypothesis testing.
Figure 3 graphs standard p-values in my main analysis as compared to sharpened q-values that
control the false discovery rate (FDR).22 I follow Anderson (2008) and use the two-step procedure
described by Benjamini et al. (2006) to calculate q-values. The adjustment includes p-values from
   21 Individualswho were no longer married were asked refer back to when they were married.
   22 Thefalse discovery rate refers to the share of rejected null hypotheses that are type I errors; the q-value is the
lowest FDR at which a hypothesis would be rejected.

                                                          16
regression coefficients in all the main tables in this paper (except the randomization verification
in Table 1), as well as coefficients in Appendix Tables A4-A6, which show income, assets, and
debt by source. I group the results into families by treatment, pooling across all outcomes. For
legibility, Figure 3 only plots results for traditional p-values below 0.20. I only display p- and q-
values for the long-run results (Tables 3-5, Appendix Tables A4-A6) to graphically highlight their
robustness.
    Panel A of Figure 3 shows that all coefficients on the individual interest rate initially significant
at the 1 percent level or better remain significant at the 5 percent level after the FDR adjustment,
while results initially significant at the 5 percent level remain significant at the 5 or 10 percent
level. In contrast, none of the initially-significant results for the spousal interest rate, joint interest
rate, or own cash prize remain significant after the adjustment, and just two coefficients on the
spousal cash prize remain marginally significant.23 Given this, I interpret my results for the joint
interest rate with caution and focus on the effect of the individual interest rate in what follows.


3.3     Are the Long-Run Estimates Reasonable in Magnitude?
The estimated coefficients on the individual interest rate in Tables 3 and 4 are quite large in mag-
nitude, especially when compared to the much more modest short-run effects found in Table 2.
The average interest payout on open individual accounts with 20 percent interest was just Ksh 42
($0.53), yet 2.5-3.5 years later this group reported Ksh 548-638 more per month in business profit.
Are these two observations compatible with one another? In this sub-section, I take the point esti-
mates at face value and ask if they are both internally consistent and consistent with other studies
on returns to capital in the developing world.
    I address the latter question first. The ratio of the treatment effect on endline 1 business profits
to the treatment effect on endline 1 business capital implies a monthly return to capital of 20.7
percent.24 Although this is high, it is in line with existing estimates in the literature, which range
from 4 percent per month (Blattman et al. 2014) to 33 percent per month (McKenzie and Woodruff
2008). It is also worth noting that my results are strikingly consistent with other evidence from
Africa – Udry and Anagol (2006) estimate a 17-25 percent monthly return to pineapple cultivation
in Ghana, while Fafchamps et al. (2014) find a 21-29 percent monthly return to a 150 cedi in-kind
grant to Ghanaian microentrepreneurs.25
    23 The two outcomes are conceptually unrelated: the spousal cash prize is associated with a decline in the share of

respondents saying they save regularly in Table 3 and a decline in debt owed to family members in Appendix Table
A6.
    24 The wave 1 endline survey did not ask about labor supply and individuals were not asked to report profits net

of the value of their time. The “return” to capital I present is therefore simply the change in monthly income divided
by the change in assets or business capital. To the extent that capital accumulation led participants to increase labor
supply, these estimates give an upper bound on the true marginal return to capital.
    25 I do, however, find larger returns than those estimated by Blattman et al. (2014) in Uganda.



                                                         17
     While the relative changes I observe in income and assets are consistent with existing evi-
dence, one must also ask whether the absolute changes make sense given the observed impacts on
short-run bank account use. To help put my results in perspective, consider the following thought
experiment: Assume that study participants who received large individual interest rates accumu-
lated savings over the course of the six-month subsidy period, some of which they subsequently
invested in productive activities. Call this “new” investment (or initial treatment effect on capital)
K0 . Further assume that the monthly return to capital is r, and that all subsequent capital accumu-
lation is driven by reinvesting some of the returns on K0 . If the marginal propensity to reinvest is
i, then after t months the treatment effect on capital stocks would be K0 (1 + ir)t . I observe study
participants roughly 32 months after the interest rate expired. Given this, a 0.5 marginal propen-
sity to reinvest, and a 20.7 percent monthly return to capital, a Ksh 113 ($1.41) initial investment
would be needed to generate my treatment effects on business profit and capital. If the marginal
propensity to reinvest were 1, an initial investment of just Ksh 6 would be needed. These num-
bers compare favorably to the short-run treatment effects on bank account use in Table 2, where I
find that the individual interest rate increased deposits into the individual account by Ksh 625 and
the average daily balance in individual accounts by Ksh 110. The hypothetical initial investment
amounts are also modest relative to the average amount of cash study participants reported keeping
at home at baseline (Ksh 849). Appendix Table A10 summarizes these calculations and existing
estimates of returns to capital in the literature.
     Another important issue relevant for interpreting magnitudes is the number of potential com-
pliers: when the individual interest rate was 20 percent, 49 percent of study participants opened
an individual account. Just 16 percent of study participants opened and used the account. If one
assumes that only people who opened an individual account benefitted from the interest rate, then
the absolute maximum fraction of compliers in the population would be 49 percent, while a more
reasonable maximum fraction of compliers would be closer to 16 percent.26 If 16 percent of in-
dividuals complied, the short-run investment among compliers needed to generate my treatment
effects would be either Ksh 706 ($9 – when i = 0.5) or Ksh 38 ($0.48 – when i = 1), which is still
quite reasonable. Taking these observations together, I argue that the long run treatment effects
are plausible assuming the interest rates generated sustained behavior change that allowed returns
to compound over time. Given that the short-run changes in experimental bank account use are
relatively modest, it is much more difficult to justify the magnitude of the long-run results without
a compounding mechanism.

   26 Itis possible that some participants who opened an individual account but did not use it still benefitted – if, for
example, individuals accumulated a stock of money at home earmarked for the bank account but never got around to
actually making a deposit. Given the experimental context, this is plausible: most individuals had to commute into
town to use the bank, so making small frequent deposits was less practical than making a smaller number of large
deposits.

                                                          18
    It is also important to keep in mind that the long-run point estimates are drawn from sampling
distributions with high variances. As such, the confidence intervals contain a range of much more
modest (and more extreme) values. For example, a 95 percent confidence interval on the impact
of the individual interest rate on business capital is [413, 4889], while the 95 percent confidence
interval on monthly business profits is [156, 940], and the 95 percent confident interval on the
return to capital implied by changes in business assets and profits is [0.03, 0.38]. Therefore a more
conservative way to interpret the results is that I am able to reject that the individual interest rate
had only moderate impacts on income and assets. Given that the average open individual account
with a 20 percent interest rate earned just Ksh 42 in interest, even this interpretation is compelling.


4     Discussion and Mechanisms

4.1     Mechanisms
The results for the individual interest rate present an apparent puzzle: although its short-run im-
pacts were modest, the treatment increased monthly income by Ksh 1,137 at endline 1 (or Ksh
1,635 in nominal 2012 Shillings). Given a 2012 PPP exchange rate of Ksh 37 per US dollar, this
is almost enough extra income to support an additional household member at a poverty line of
PPP$1.90/day. Why did study participants need the inducement of the interest rate to take advan-
tage of such a lucrative income-generation opportunity? The rest of this section discusses potential
mechanisms that could rationalize this result.

Capital Stock-Based Mechanisms One salient feature of my results is that the individual in-
terest rate generated long-run divergence between the high- and low-interest groups – differences
in savings behavior were amplified over time rather than reduced.27 One of the simplest explana-
tions for my results is that they are driven by the short-run changes in the capital stock generated
by the temporary interest rate. This could create divergence if, for example, entrepreneurs have
non-convex production functions, which in turn generate multiple steady-state levels of output. If
the interest rate helped people save past a nonconvexity then income and capital levels could have
continued to diverge after the interest rate expired. Alternatively, short-run savings accumulation
could have served as a buffer stock that encouraged households to make higher risk, higher return
investments after the subsidy period ended.28 In either case, the key mechanism of action is the
    27 Although I do not have short-run data on income and overall assets, this pattern is directly evident for experimen-

tal bank balances. The individual interest rate increased 6-month average daily balances in experimental individual
accounts by Ksh 110, 3-year average daily balances in experimental individual accounts by Ksh 194, and overall
endline bank balances by Ksh 1060.
    28 Karlan et al. (2014), Cole et al. (2013), and Elabed and Carter (2015) all find that access to weather or yield

insurance induces agricultural households to make riskier investments. But is it not obvious that access to savings will

                                                           19
short-run increase in the stock of savings.
    One issue with a “capital stock only” mechanism is that the individual interest rate did not
increase overall bank savings in the short run, while the cash prize did (Table 2, Panel C). Yet it is
the interest rate, and not the cash prize, that had persistent impacts on economic outcomes. More-
over, I can strongly reject that the cash prize and individual interest rate had equivalent impacts
on business outcomes in Table 4 - I also reject equality for overall income in columns 7 and 10 of
Table 3. Given the fact that the cash prize had no impact on long run outcomes, yet a larger impact
on overall short-run balances in experimental accounts, mechanisms working solely through the
household-level capital stock seem unlikely.29
    However, the individual interest rate did increase the amount of money stored in individual
accounts, thereby changing responsibility for (and ownership of) saving within the household.
Moreover, the individual interest rate’s short-run implied local average treatment effects on indi-
vidual account balances exceed those of the cash prize; hence a capital stock-based explanation
could still be relevant if intra-household control of resources matters for how those resources are
invested, e.g. due to innovations in bargaining power or other intra-household constraints (Maz-
zocco 2007; Ashraf 2009; Schaner 2015a). To think through the plausibility of a capital-stock
based mechanism more broadly, consider the utility of an individual in the experiment. I assume
that this utility can be written as follows:

                        V i (At , Rt ) =      max ui cti + δV i (At+1 , Rt+1 ) subject to
                                                        
                                             ct ,bt ,kt
                                               0          0        0       0
                                             ct 1 + bt 1 + kt 1 ≤ At 1
                                                              0        0
                                             f (kt ) + Rt bt = At+1 1
                                             intra-household constraints
                            0
where At = Ati , At−i , AtJ represents individually and jointly owned assets available at the start of
             
                               0                                                                  0
period t, Rt = Rti , Rt−i , RtJ are period t interest rates on bank accounts, bt = bti , bt−i , btJ is saving
                                                                                 
                                           0
in each bank account, kt = kti , kt−i , ktJ is individual and joint investment outside the bank (e.g.
                                  
                                                                                                 0
business capital or livestock), f (kt ) is the household production function, ct = cti , ct−i is period t
                                                                                    

consumption, and 1 is a 3 × 1 vector of ones.
    I do not place an explicit structure on the household bargaining process in order to allow for
the possibility that households are making decisions in a non-standard fashion. I only assume that


increase risk taking: Carter et al. (2016) find evidence that access to savings accounts decreases long-run adoption of
higher-return, riskier agricultural technologies.
    29 A capital stock mechanism at the household-level could still be relevant if the mean effects in Table 2 mask

important distributional differences in treatment effects. Quantile regression results, not shown here, suggest that this
is not the case, however.

                                                                  20
individual i makes the best choice possible, subject to these constraints. To match the experiment,
let each t interval be six months. In what follows I will contrast the impact of a shock to the
individual interest rate Rti with the impact of a shock to individual assets Ati while keeping all
                                                                                  

other interest rates and assets levels fixed. To simplify notation, in what follows I write utility only
in terms of these focal quantities – Vti Ati , Rti .
                                                  
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                   i
    Let Vti Ati , Rti be utility when the period t individual interest rate is low and Vti Ati , Rt be
                     

utility when the period t interest rate is high. Next, note that if an individual were given

                                                    1  i       
                                            γti =       R − R i
                                                             t st
                                                                  i
                                                    Rti t

                                                                                                    i
in the first period (where sti is i’s optimal savings when the individual interest rate is Rt ), then the
household could reproduce the high-interest allocation in the low-interest state of the world by
                                                                                i
simply increasing individual savings to sti . As long as the allocation under Rt is available when the
interest rate is low and spouse i is given γti (which seems reasonable in this case since spouse i has
property rights over γti and savings in account i), then it must be that
                                                                 
                                                                i
                               Vti Ati + γti , Rti ≥ Vti Ati , Rt > Vti Ati , Rti
                                                                                 


    Consider the 16 percent of households who saved in the individual account when the individual
interest rate was 20 percent – γti for this group is just Ksh 116 ($1.45). Put another way, the above
inequality implies that “complier” study participants would prefer an up-front payment of Ksh 116
to the higher interest rate. Recall that the cash prize, which had an average payout of Ksh 247,
had no impact on long-run income. This in turn implies that study participants put little value (less
than Ksh 247) on having substantially more income three years in the future, which would only be
true if the discount factors and/or elasticity of intertemporal substitution are very low. Given that
study participants did robustly respond to the temporary interest rates in the short run, this seems
unlikely. I therefore argue that the combined facts of (a) a robust response to the short-run interest
rates, (b) modest interest rate payouts, and (c) no long-run effects of the cash prize suggest that my
results are difficult to explain with mechanisms that only work through the short-run capital stock.

Increased Use of Formal Bank Accounts Another possibility is that the individual interest rate
worked by encouraging participants to adopt individual bank accounts, which in turn impacted
business outcomes. Bank accounts may have been useful for savings-constrained individuals long
after the interest rates expired.30 For example, when production requires lumpy expenditures it
   30 Dupas and Robinson (2013) find that giving female Kenyan entrepreneurs access to no-interest bank accounts
had very large impacts on productive investment in the short-run (four to six months after account opening). This
paper does not, however, study longer-run impacts.

                                                       21
could be helpful to store resources at the bank until it is time to purchase additional working
capital. This could be particularly important if resources kept at home are “taxed” away by other
members of the community or household (Platteau 2000; Anderson and Baland 2002; Jakiela and
Ozier 2016).31
    Recall that all couples opened at least one bank account as part of the experiment and bank
accounts were widely available on the market – the individual interest rate did not solve an access
problem. However, the majority of study participants were unbanked at baseline; these individuals
may not have totally understood bank accounts and their benefits. If individuals learn about these
benefits as they experience the accounts, temporary interest rates that increase experimentation
could have long-run impacts. Appendix Table A11 tests this hypothesis by estimating the impact
of the interest rates separately by baseline bank account ownership.32 The table shows that the
individual interest rate benefitted banked respondents just as much as unbanked respondents, which
suggests that the interest rate did not work by helping people learn about bank accounts.
    Alternatively, increased bank account use in the short run may have facilitated future access to
bank credit, which could have helped study participants build their businesses. However, Appendix
Table A7 shows that recipients of higher individual interest rates actually report (insignificantly)
less bank debt, and administrative data from the bank shows that just 1.5 percent of couples re-
ceived a loan from Family Bank. It is therefore unlikely that the interest rates worked by connecting
respondents with financial services that relieved savings or credit constraints.

Psychological Channels The final possibility I consider is that the individual interest rate op-
erated through a (broadly defined) behavioral channel. The idea here is that actively responding
to the interest rate in the short run may have had lasting impacts on psychological forces govern-
ing financial behavior. Consider, for example, a participant who wishes to take advantage of a 20
percent interest rate on his individual account. First, he must decide where to get deposits for the
account: Will he reallocate his existing wealth? Or cut back on consumption? If the latter, he must
decide what to cut back on and may need to devise new strategies to overcome temptation to spend
money. Second, he must decide what to do with his new savings once the interest rate expires.
Should he keep it in the bank for emergencies? Or invest the money in something productive, like
his business or the family farm? The interest rate may have helped some individuals build better
savings habits, or set up new savings and investment heuristics. If these changes persisted after
the interest rates expired, then small short-run changes in behavior could compound over time,

   31 Household constraints could also help explain why the individual and joint interest rates had different long-run

impacts.
   32 I focus on the inverse hyperbolic sine of income and assets because banked individuals reported substantially

more resources at baseline and treatment effects scale roughly proportionally with baseline resources. Using level
values does not change conclusions, however.

                                                         22
especially when returns to investment are high.
    The idea behind Becker and Murphy (1988)’s model of habitual consumption is that individ-
uals accumulate a “habit stock” as they engage in a particular behavior, and that the habit stock
lowers the marginal cost of engaging in that behavior in future periods. This can give rise to multi-
ple steady states, where price changes or other shocks can lead to dramatically different behavioral
patterns in the long run. Recall that both the endline data on overall bank account use and admin-
istrative data on experimental account use shows that respondents who received higher individual
interest rates were more likely to use individual bank accounts both during and after the promo-
tional period. Moreover, 4 years after the initial experiment respondents treated with the highest
individual interest rate were 7.6 percentage points (27 percent) more likely to say that they “saved
regularly” (Table 3). This is consistent with the idea that the individual interest rate helped study
participants build a stock of saving habits, which lowered the marginal cost of saving even after the
interest rates expired. A related possibility is that the experience of saving (and investing) in the
short-run helped individuals learn about their marginal returns to capital, which in turn supported
sustained savings and investment.
    Habit and experience-based explanations imply that individuals who had the largest treatment
effects on short-run bank account use should also exhibit the largest treatment effects on long-run
outcomes.33 I test this implication by constructing an index of short-run account use by standard-
izing all the 6-month bank account outcomes except withdrawals in Table 2 and taking a simple
average of the standardized outcomes.34 I then regress this outcome on the individual interest rate
and its interactions with all baseline demographic variables in Table 1. I use the interaction terms
to obtain a predicted treatment effect for all individuals, and then split the sample based on whether
that predicted treatment effect is below median (non-compliers) or above median (compliers). Fig-
ure 5 graphs individual interest rate treatment effects by complier status for short-run bank account
use and long-run economic outcomes. The figure makes it clear that compliers had notably larger
treatment effects in both the short and the long run.
    Mental accounting may have also played an important role in helping study participants sustain
business investment after the interest subsidies expired. Thaler (1999) defines mental accounting
to be “the set of cognitive operations used by individuals and households to organize, evaluate,
and keep track of financial activities”. One aspect of mental accounting that is particularly relevant
in my context is the idea that individuals mentally allocate income and wealth into a series of

   33 This implication is, of course, not unique to theories of habit formation – I therefore consider the following

analysis to be suggestive.
   34 Since treatment effects at the lower end of the distribution are often important (see Figures 2 and A3), I use

hypersine transformations of variables denominated in Kenyan shillings and the number of deposits instead of level
values in the index to identify compliers in terms of percentage changes in outcomes. Results are very similar if I use
level values instead.

                                                         23
differentiated, non-fungible “accounts”, which help constrain financial decision-making. If the
individual interest rate cued respondents to set up mental accounts for business, this could help
explain why study participants were able to make continued investments in their businesses after
the interest rates expired. My finding that the individual interest rate dramatically increased the
share of respondents keeping downwardly rigid business budgets (Table 4) is consistent with a
mental accounting hypothesis. Of course the increased rates of business budgeting could simply
be driven by higher rates of overall entrepreneurship. It is worth noting, however, that the majority
of business owners do not keep downwardly rigid business accounts – hence, the fact that growth
in business budgeting is driven entirely by this type of planning is striking.
    Finally, the patterns in my data suggest that the nature of the interest rate may have been impor-
tant for determining the type of savings and investments that households made. Small businesses
are generally independently operated in this part of Kenya, while investments such as livestock
and the home are inherently joint. Priming effects – where different contextual stimuli leads indi-
viduals to make systematically different decisions – could have been particularly important in my
experiment because all couples had the option to open both individual and joint accounts.35 Mar-
ried couples attended the experiment together and were able to directly observe the interest rate
for their own, their spouse’s, and the joint account. Thus, a particularly high joint rate could have
easily cued the idea that “we need to start saving together”, while a particularly high individual
interest rate could have made it more acceptable for the relevant account owner to redirect more
resources towards his or her own enterprise.
    The wave 1 endline was specifically designed to shed light on the extent to which couples
viewed income and assets as “individual” versus “joint”. For each type of income and asset, re-
spondents were asked to report how much was individually earned/held versus jointly earned/shared
with a spouse. In the previous tables, I have focused on overall measures of resources, which in-
clude individually-held resources plus half of jointly-held resources.36 Appendix Table A12 breaks
down my results for income and assets by individual and joint ownership. Here, we see that the
impacts of the individual interest rate are entirely driven by growth in individually-owned income
and assets. Although I observe no significant impacts for the joint interest rate, the coefficient on
joint assets is meaningful in magnitude and just shy of marginal significance with a p-value of
0.125. Thus, one interpretation of my results is that the individual interest rate spurred participants
to invest in high-return individual enterprises (hence leading to income growth), while the joint
interest rate spurred participants to invest in lower-return jointly-held assets.




  35 See   Kamenica (2012) for an economics-focused review of priming.
  36 This  way, the average individual-level report of, e.g., business profit, reflects per-capita business profit.

                                                             24
Summary Although I cannot pin down a single mechanism that can explain my findings, I pro-
vide suggestive evidence that behavioral savings channels are important. My preferred interpre-
tation is that two forces interacted to generate my results: First, higher individual interest rates
pushed couples to consider higher-return “individual” forms of investment beyond the bank ac-
counts, while higher joint interest rates encouraged couples to save for lower-return “public” in-
vestments. Second, the experience of making a concerted effort to save in the short run helped
individuals sustain greater levels of saving and investment in the long run. Here, a mix of factors
could be at play, including habit formation, mental accounting, and learning about the return to
saving.


5    Conclusion
I show that large short-term incentives to save have long-run implications for the economic lives
of low-income, rural Kenyans. It is not just the absolute value of the incentive that matters, but
how it is delivered: incentivizing study participants to save in individually owned bank accounts
increased rates of entrepreneurship and overall household income, while incentivizing use of joint
bank accounts increased investment in livestock and the home. In contrast, simply delivering an
unconditional payment in the form of a modest cash prize had no impact on long-run outcomes.
The magnitudes of some of the estimates for the individual interest rate are quite large – but given
the high returns to capital in my sample, the effect sizes can be accounted for by simply assuming
that people continuously reinvest a portion of the returns on a modest initial capital investment.
    The main contribution of this paper is to demonstrate that appropriately targeted temporary
financial incentives to save can cause sustained behavior change and long-run growth in economic
outcomes. The contrast between my results for the interest rate and the cash prize suggests that
incentivizing individuals to accumulate capital on their own can be more effective than simply
giving out equivalent (but very modest) amounts of capital without condition.
    The cash prize results also suggest that the interest rates did not simply help people make a
short-run push to save past a nonconvexity in the production function. Moreover, my results are
inconsistent with the hypothesis that the interest rates helped respondents by exposing them to
bank accounts or giving them access to credit. I argue that my results are better reconciled by
behavioral channels. Additional research would be needed to shed further light on the precise
behavioral channels, such as priming, habit formation and mental accounting, that likely account
for my results.
    It is also important to ask what, exactly, about the interest rate treatments stimulated behavior
change, especially since other studies that consider more market-oriented ranges of interest rates
(up to 5 percent per year), find little-to-no impact on savings behavior (Karlan and Zinman 2014;

                                                 25
Kast et al. 2013). There are several potential explanations for this difference: First, unlike those
studies this paper evaluates the impact of interest rates that were very large (and well above market
rates) both in nominal and real terms. Thus, high-powered incentives may be needed to bring
about lasting behavior change. Second, the interest rates in my experiment were time-limited. The
temporary nature of the treatments may have given individuals a deadline that helped them break
a cycle of savings procrastination. Third, individuals in my study were given the opportunity to
open and save in multiple bank accounts. As a result, a large part of the experiment’s impact on
bank account use was driven by switching between accounts (i.e. individual versus joint). Simply
subsidizing one type of account could have different psychological effects, especially if “buy-in”
from the spouse is needed to make real change, or if individuals make different choices in private
as opposed to in full view of their spouse (Ashraf 2009).
    Since my experiment bundled all the features listed above, I cannot speculate as to which fea-
tures were most important for generating persistent behavior change. Further research focused on
more scalable and standard short-term savings subsidy programs would help fill this evidence gap.
However, the simple fact that I reject that the interest rates had no impact offers important evi-
dence that savings behaviors can be sticky, and that activating the right set of short-run behavioral
changes can have important, persistent effects on overall income and asset holdings, especially
when individuals have access to high-return investment opportunities. This result is striking, and
stands in contrast to studies of temporary incentives in other areas, such as health. Thus, a key
takeaway from my results is that some individuals have the capacity to improve their economic sit-
uation without sustained external assistance or a large, expensive “big push” intervention – rather,
they simply need the “right push”.




                                                 26
References
 Acland, D. and M. Levy (2015). Naiveté, Projection Bias, and Habit-Formation in Gym Atten-
    dance. Management Science 61(1), 146–160.
 Aleem, I. (1990). Imperfect Information, Screening, and the Costs of Informal Lending: A
    Study of a Rural Credit Market in Pakistan. The World Bank Economic Review 4(3), 329–
    349.
 Ananth, B., D. Karlan, and S. Mullainathan (2007). Microentrepreneurs and Their Money:
    Three Anomalies.
 Anderson, M. L. (2008). Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of Early Inter-
   vention: A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training Projects.
   Journal of the American statistical Association 103(484).
 Anderson, S. and J.-M. Baland (2002). The Economics of Roscas and Intrahousehold Resource
   Allocation. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(3), 963–995.
 Angelucci, M., D. Karlan, and J. Zinman (2013). Win Some Lose Some? Evidence from a Ran-
   domized Microcredit Program Placement Experiment by Compartamos Banco. Dartmouth
   Working Paper.
 Ashraf, N. (2009). Spousal Control and Intra-household Decision Making: An Experimental
    Study in the Philippines. American Economic Review 99(4), 1245–1277.
 Ashraf, N., D. Karlan, and W. Yin (2006a). Deposit Collectors. Advances in Economic Analysis
    and Policy 6(2).
 Ashraf, N., D. Karlan, and W. Yin (2006b). Tying Odysseus to the Mast: Evidence from a
    Commitment Savings Product in the Philippines. Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(2),
    635–672.
 Bandiera, O., R. Burgess, N. Das, S. Gulesci, I. Rasul, and M. Sulaiman (2015). The Misallo-
    cation of Labor in Village Economies. Technical report, Suntory and Toyota International
    Centres for Economics and Related Disciplines, LSE.
 Banerjee, A. and E. Duflo (2012). Do Firms Want to Borrow More? Testing Credit Constraints
    Using a Directed Lending Program. MIT Working Paper.
 Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, R. Glennerster, and C. Kinnan (2013). The Miracle of Microfinance?
    Evidence From a Randomized Evaluation. MIT Working Paper.
 Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, N. Goldberg, D. Karlan, R. Osei, W. Parienté, J. Shapiro, B. Thuysbaert,
    and C. Udry (2015). A multifaceted program causes lasting progress for the very poor:
    Evidence from six countries. Science 348(6236), 1260799.

                                              27
Banerjee, A. V. and E. Duflo (Winter 2007). The Economic Lives of the Poor. The Journal of
   Economic Perspectives 21(27), 141–167.
Becker, G. S. and K. M. Murphy (1988). A Theory of Rational Addiction. The Journal of Polit-
   ical Economy, 675–700.
Benjamini, Y., A. M. Krieger, and D. Yekutieli (2006). Adaptive Linear Step-Up Procedures
   That Control the False Discovery Rate. Biometrika 93(3), 491–507.
Blattman, C., N. Fiala, and S. Martinez (2014). Generating Skilled Self-Employment in De-
   veloping Countries: Experimental Evidence from Uganda. The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
   nomics 129(2), 697–752.
Blattman, C., E. P. Green, J. C. Jamison, M. C. Lehmann, and J. Annan (forthcoming). The
   Returns to Microenterprise Support among the Ultra-Poor: A Field Experiment in Post-War
   Uganda. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.
Breza, E. and A. G. Chandrasekhar (2015). Social Networks, Reputation and Commitment: Evi-
   dence from a Savings Monitors Experiment. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
   Research.
Brune, L., X. Gine, J. Goldberg, and D. Yang (2016). Facilitating Savings for Agriculture: Field
   Experimental Evidence from Malawi. Economic Development and Cultural Change 64(2),
   187–220. Mimeo.
Callen, M., S. De Mel, C. McIntosh, and C. Woodruff (2014). What are the Headwaters of
   Formal Savings? Experimental Evidence from Sri Lanka. Technical report, National Bureau
   of Economic Research.
Carter, M. R., R. Laajaj, and D. Yang (2016). Subsidies, Savings and Sustainable Technology
   Adoption: Field Experimental Evidence from Mozambique.
Charness, G. and U. Gneezy (2009). Incentives to Exercise. Econometrica 77(3), 909–931.
Cole, S., T. Sampson, and B. Zia (2011). Prices or Knowledge? What Drives Demand for
   Financial Services in Emerging Markets? The Journal of Finance 66(6), 1933–1967.
Cole, S. A., X. Giné, and J. I. Vickery (2013). How Does Risk Management Influence Pro-
   duction Decisions? Evidence from a Field Experiment. Harvard Business School Working
   Paper 13-080.
Cruz, M., J. Foster, B. Quillin, and P. Schellekens (2015). Ending Extreme Poverty and Sharing
   Prosperity: Progress and Policies. Policy research note, The World Bank.
Crépon, B., E. Duflo, F. Devoto, and W. Pariente (2011). Impact of Microcredit in Rural Areas
   of Morocco: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation. MIT Working Paper.

                                             28
De Mel, S., C. McIntosh, and C. Woodruff (2013). Deposit Collecting: Unbundling the Role of
   Frequency, Salience, and Habit Formation in Generating Savings. The American Economic
   Review 103(3), 387–392.
de Mel, S., D. McKenzie, and C. Woodruff (2008). Returns to Capital in Microenterprises:
   Evidence from a Field Experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(4), 1329–
   1372.
de Mel, S., D. McKenzie, and C. Woodruff (2009). Are Women More Credit Constrained? Ex-
   perimental Evidence on Gender and Microenterprise Returns. American Economic Journal:
   Applied Economics 1(3), 1–32.
de Mel, S., D. McKenzie, and C. Woodruff (2012). One-Time Transfers of Cash or Capital Have
   Long-Lasting Effects on Microenterprises in Sri Lanka. Science 335(6071), 962–966.
Dupas, P. and J. Robinson (2013). Savings Constraints and Microenterprise Development: Ev-
  idence from a Field Experiment in Kenya. American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
  nomics 5(1), 163–192.
Dupas, P. and J. Robinson (2014). Why Don’t the Poor Save More? Evidence from Health
  Savings Experiments. American Economic Review 103(4), 1138–1171.
Elabed, G. and M. Carter (2015). Ex-Ante Impacts of Agricultural Insurance: Evidence from a
   Field Experiment in Mali. Working Paper.
Fafchamps, M., D. McKenzie, S. R. Quinn, and C. Woodruff (2014). Microenterprise Growth
   and the Fly-paper Effect: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in Ghana. Journal of
   Development Economics 106, 211–226.
Field, E., R. Pande, J. Papp, and N. Rigol (2013). Does the Classic Microfinance Model Dis-
    courage Entrepreneurship Among the Poor? Experimental Evidence from India. American
    Economic Review 103(6), 2196–2226.
Gertler, P. J., S. W. Martinez, and M. Rubio-Codina (2012). Investing Cash Transfers to Raise
   Long-Term Living Standards. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4(1), 164–
   92.
Giné, X., D. Karlan, and J. Zinman (2010). Put Your Money Where Your Butt is: A Commit-
   ment Contract for Smoking Cessation. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
   213–235.
Jackson, C. K. (2010). A Little Now for a Lot Later: A Look at a Texas Advanced Placement
   Incentive Program. Journal of Human Resources 45(3), 591–639.



                                           29
Jakiela, P. and O. Ozier (2016). Does Africa Need a Rotten Kin Theorem? Experimental Evi-
   dence from Village Economics. Review of Economic Studies 83(1), 231–268. Mimeo.
John, L. K., G. Loewenstein, A. B. Troxel, L. Norton, J. E. Fassbender, and K. G. Volpp (2011).
   Financial Incentives for Extended Weight Loss: A Randomized, Controlled trial. Journal of
   General Internal Medicine 26(6), 621–626.
Kamenica, E. (2012). Behavioral Economics and Psychology of Incentives. Annual Review of
  Economics 4(1), 427–452.
Karlan, D., M. McConnell, S. Mullainathan, and J. Zinman (2013). Getting to the Top of Mind:
   How Reminders Increase Saving.
Karlan, D., R. Osei, I. Osei-Akoto, and C. Udry (2014). Agricultural Decisions after Relaxing
   Credit and Risk Constraints. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(2), 597–652.
Karlan, D., A. L. Ratan, and J. Zinman (2014). Savings by and for the Poor: A Research Review
   and Agenda. Review of Income and Wealth 60(1), 36–78.
Karlan, D. and J. Zinman (2014). Price and Control Elasticities of Demand for Savings. Tech-
   nical report, Working Paper.
Kast, F., S. Meier, and D. Pomeranz (2013). Under-Savers Anonymous: Evidence on Self-Help
   Groups and Peer Pressure as a Savings Commitment Device. NBER Working Paper No.
   18417.
Macours, K., P. Premand, and R. Vakis (2012). Transfers, diversification and household risk
  strategies: experimental evidence with lessons for climate change adaptation. World Bank
  Policy Research Working Paper (6053).
Mazzocco, M. (2007). Household Intertemporal Behaviour: A Collective Characterization and
  a Test of Commitment. Review of Economic Studies 74(3), 857 – 895.
McKenzie, D. and C. Woodruff (2008). Experimental Evidence on Returns to Capital and Ac-
  cess to Finance in Mexico. World Bank Economic Review 22(3), 457–482.
McKenzie, D. and C. Woodruff (2014). What are We Learning From Business Training and
  Entrepreneurship Evaluations Around the Developing World? The World Bank Research
  Observer 29(1), 48–82.
Platteau, J.-P. (2000). Institutions, Social Norms, and Economic Development. Amsterdam:
    Harwood Academic.
Prina, S. (2015). Banking the Poor via Savings Accounts: Evidence From a Field Experiment.
    Journal of Development Economics 115, 16–31. Mimeo, Case Western Reserve University.


                                            30
Royer, H., M. F. Stehr, and J. R. Sydnor (2012, November). Incentives, Commitments and Habit
   Formation in Exercise: Evidence from a Field Experiment with Workers at a Fortune-500
   Company. Working Paper 18580, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Schaner, S. (2015a). Do Opposites Detract? Intrahousehold Preference Heterogeneity and Inef-
   ficient Strategic Savings. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 7(2), 135–174.
Schaner, S. (2015b). The Cost of Convenience? Transaction Costs, Bargaining Power, and
   Savings Account Use in Kenya. (Mimeo).
Thaler, R. H. (1999). Mental Accounting Matters. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 12,
   183–206.
Udry, C. and S. Anagol (2006). The Return to Capital in Ghana. Yale Working Paper.
Volpp, K. G., A. B. Troxel, M. V. Pauly, H. A. Glick, A. Puig, D. A. Asch, R. Galvin, J. Zhu,
   F. Wan, J. DeGuzman, et al. (2009). A Randomized, Controlled Trial of Financial Incentives
   for Smoking Cessation. New England Journal of Medicine 360(7), 699–709.




                                           31
Table 1. Attrition and Randomization Verification
                                                (1)              (2)             (3)          (4)         (5)
                                            Variable               Interest Rates           Cash
                                              Mean          Individual          Joint        Prize         N
No Follow Up: Wave 1                          0.091           -0.021          -0.008        0.015        1558
                                            [0.287]           (0.019)         (0.024)      (0.019)
No Follow Up: Wave 2                          0.146           -0.033          -0.010        0.021        1558
                                            [0.353]           (0.024)         (0.030)      (0.023)
Female                                        0.500            0.036              --        0.006        1558
                                            [0.500]           (0.034)             --       (0.033)
Age                                            40.3           -0.709           2.63*        0.712        1558
                                             [13.5]           (0.891)          (1.34)      (0.883)
Education (Years)                              6.87           0.444*           0.097        -0.128       1551
                                             [3.98]           (0.265)         (0.363)      (0.252)
Literate                                      0.753            0.027          -0.027        -0.009       1558
                                            [0.431]           (0.029)         (0.035)      (0.029)
Number Children                                5.18            0.071         0.758**        -0.035       1555
                                             [3.44]           (0.219)         (0.328)      (0.210)
Polygamous                                    0.234           -0.024          0.091*        0.035        1546
                                            [0.424]           (0.027)         (0.048)      (0.029)
Subsistence Farmer                            0.411            0.016           0.005        -0.049       1551
                                            [0.492]           (0.033)         (0.044)      (0.032)
Entrepreneur                                  0.420           -0.016          -0.006        0.026        1551
                                            [0.494]           (0.033)         (0.042)      (0.032)
Monthly Income                                4602             -183             -368        -856*        1513
                                             [7446]            (524)           (633)         (439)
Has Bank Account                              0.220            0.030           0.024        0.008        1558
                                            [0.414]           (0.028)         (0.035)      (0.027)
Has SACCO Account                             0.039            0.021           0.009        -0.004       1554
                                            [0.193]           (0.013)         (0.015)      (0.012)
ROSCA Participant                             0.581            0.011         0.095***       0.020        1558
                                            [0.494]           (0.033)         (0.040)      (0.032)
Saves at Home                                 0.872            0.017          -0.035        0.034*       1556
                                            [0.334]           (0.022)         (0.026)      (0.020)
Bank Savings                                  1587              591             -380          312        1499
                                             [5646]            (402)           (468)         (429)
SACCO Savings                                 1627              564              398         -767        1551
                                            [11496]            (787)           (957)         (605)
Home Savings                                   845              61.5            -222         -41.5       1522
                                             [1718]            (116)           (140)         (114)
I Mostly Save                                 0.428           -0.022          -0.037        0.018        1550
                                            [0.495]           (0.033)         (0.038)      (0.032)
My Spouse Mostly Saves                        0.350            0.002           0.013        -0.020       1550
                                            [0.477]           (0.032)         (0.036)      (0.031)
Impatient Now-Patient Later                   0.217            0.013          -0.030        -0.034       1537
                                            [0.412]           (0.027)         (0.032)      (0.026)
Patient Now-Impatient Later                   0.293           -0.029          -0.016         0.011       1537
                                            [0.455]           (0.030)         (0.037)      (0.030)
Weekly Discount Factor                        0.757           -0.018          -0.027        -0.026       1558
                                            [0.243]           (0.016)         (0.019)      (0.017)
Distance to Bank (Miles)                       3.82           -0.179           0.109        -0.020       1558
                                             [2.16]           (0.143)         (0.243)      (0.132)
P-value - Joint Test                                           0.452           0.239        0.248
Notes: Standard deviations in brackets, robust standard errors clustered at the couple level in parentheses.
All income and savings variables top-coded at the 99th percentile. In 2009 Ksh 80≈$1. The joint test is an
F-test of the null hypotheses that the coefficients on the treatment variable across all equations/outcomes
are jointly equal to zero. The individual interest rate is renormalized to run from 0-1, while the joint
interest rate is renormalized to run from 0.2-1.

                                                    32
Table 2. Impacts on Experimental Bank Account Use
                           (1)       (2)       (3)            (4)                     (5)           (6)            (7)
                                                  In First 6 Months:

                                                        Total          Total          Ending     Avg. Daily        Used -
                                Opened      Used      Deposits     Withdrawals       Balance       Balance         Year 3
Panel A. Individual Accounts
   Individual Interest         0.174*** 0.090***      625***          475***          105***       110***        0.042***
                                (0.033)    (0.019)      (194)          (160)           (33.8)       (30.4)        (0.013)
   Spousal Interest             0.055*      0.016        -193           -127          -57.4*        -48.7*         0.002
                                (0.033)    (0.018)      (162)          (132)           (30.3)       (25.4)        (0.012)
   Joint Interest             -0.148*** -0.013           -254           -227            6.75         -12.1       -0.033**
                                (0.050)    (0.026)      (206)          (172)           (34.8)       (34.1)        (0.015)
   Cash Prize                    0.029 0.267***       547***           408**         98.7***       130***          0.025*
                                (0.033)    (0.030)      (221)          (187)           (35.8)       (38.2)        (0.014)
   Cash Prize - Spouse           0.016    0.049**         205            126            48.5         50.0          0.008
                                (0.033)    (0.023)      (194)          (157)           (34.6)       (32.0)        (0.012)
   DV Mean (0% Ind)              0.308      0.060         206            133            40.7         35.3          0.020
   N                              1558      1558        1558           1558             1558         1558           1558
Panel B. Joint Accounts
   Individual Interest        -0.085*** -0.024           -263           -212            -41.0        -58.9         0.002
                                (0.031)    (0.028)      (237)          (196)           (50.5)       (40.3)        (0.015)
   Joint Interest              0.186*** 0.131***          409            340            167*         132*         0.051**
                                (0.051)    (0.048)      (457)          (363)           (91.1)       (74.7)        (0.025)
   Cash Prize                    -0.048 0.271***          152          -22.9            70.3         63.5          -0.011
                                (0.032)    (0.034)      (274)          (220)           (46.2)       (39.6)        (0.013)
   DV Mean (4% Joint)            0.598      0.213         897            544             177          161          0.032
   N                              779        779          779            779             779          779            779
Panel C. Overall Use of Experimental Accounts
   Individual Interest                     0.053*         169            136            6.14         2.55         0.042**
                                           (0.028)      (306)          (254)           (59.4)       (50.1)        (0.021)
   Joint Interest                           0.071       -99.1           -113             180          108          -0.006
                                           (0.048)      (600)          (490)           (115)        (99.4)        (0.035)
   Cash Prize                            0.479***      904**             511          218***       243***          0.021
                                           (0.028)      (421)          (351)           (72.0)       (68.4)        (0.023)
   DV Mean (4% Joint)                       0.402       1970           1333              319          331           0.112
   N                                         779          779            779             779          779            779
Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors, clustered at the couple level when relevant, in parentheses. The
individual interest rate is renormalized to run from 0-1, while the joint interest rate is renormalized to run from 0.2-1.
Variables denominated in Kenyan Shillings are top-coded at the 99th percentile. In 2009 Ksh 80≈$1. An account is
coded as used in the first 6 months if it received any deposit or withdrawal over that time period. An account is coded
as used in year 3 if it received any deposit or withdrawal in the third year following account opening. ***, **, and *
indicate significance at the 1 5, and 10 percent levels respectively.




                                                            33
Table 3. Long-Run (3-Year) Impacts on Overall Economic Outcomes
                                   (1)          (2)        (3)       (4)                   (5)          (6)           (7)        (8)           (9)             (10)
                                                        Wave 1 Endline                                                      Wave 2 Endline                   Pooled
                               Has Bank        Bank       Total    Total                    Net      Monthly       Monthly Savings a         Saves          Monthly
                                Account      Savings     Assets     Debt                  Assets     Income         Income     Priority   Regularly         Income
Individual Interest            0.089***        796*     5994**     -41.6                7673***      1137***       2474***      0.036      0.076***         1798***
                                (0.032)       (439)      (2642)   (1634)                  (2782)      (477)          (1005)    (0.028)      (0.032)           (597)
Spouse's Interest                 0.019        -480    -5871***     2026                -6578***       139            -96.8     0.011        -0.003            26.4
                                (0.032)       (451)      (2499)   (1590)                  (2788)      (463)           (947)    (0.028)      (0.032)           (571)
Joint Interest                   0.072*        -498       5095     4268*                   -1300       558           2232*     0.057*        -0.004          1377*
                                (0.039)       (524)      (3283)   (2392)                  (3594)      (542)          (1305)    (0.033)      (0.042)           (772)

Cash Prize - Self                     0.037        1252**        -2005       -1208       -2424          228           -102        0.039        -0.025          62.4
                                     (0.031)        (584)        (2468)      (1636)      (2681)        (436)         (1108)      (0.025)      (0.033)         (658)
Cash Prize - Spouse                   -0.010         313          -982        1859        -554          544        -2119***       -0.001     -0.094***         -759
                                     (0.031)        (425)        (2599)      (2086)      (2790)        (451)          (850)      (0.026)      (0.031)         (548)

P-value: Ind+Spouse=0                0.033**        0.591         0.976       0.383       0.792       0.065*         0.120        0.268        0.129         0.045**
P-value: (Ind+Spouse)=Joint           0.560         0.322         0.359       0.503       0.676        0.387         0.941        0.855        0.224          0.694
P-value: Cash Self+Spouse=0           0.550        0.034**        0.455       0.806       0.473        0.243         0.112        0.342       0.011**         0.426
P-value: Net Ind.=Net Cash            0.259         0.179         0.551       0.681       0.451        0.574        0.021**       0.887      0.004***        0.036**
P-value: All Treatments=0            0.023**        0.197       0.002***      0.277     0.004***       0.219        0.014**       0.133      0.008***        0.013**

DV Mean (0% Ind.)                       0.664         1530        21913        7724        13579         4265           9499       0.817         0.286             6812
DV Mean (4% Joint)                      0.675         2017        24029        5864        19105         4657          10295       0.813         0.343             7414
N                                       1413          1237         1053        1394         1039         1279           1225        1317          1322             2504
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the couple level in parentheses. The individual interest rate is renormalized to run from 0-1, while the joint interest rate is
renormalized to run from 0.2-1. The pooled monthly income regression also controls for endline wave. All variables denominated in Kenyan Shillings are top-coded
at the 99th percentile and deflated to 2009 values. In 2009 Ksh 80≈$1. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1 5, and 10 percent levels respectively.




                                                                                  34
Table 4. Long-Run Impact of Interest Rates on Entrepreneurial Activity
                                      (1)           (2)         (3)                 (4)           (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)                (9)              (10)            (11)
                                                 Wave 1 Endline                                                          Wave 2 Endline                                            Pooled

                                          Main                                                                            Hours                 Downwardly
                                       Occupation      Operating     Business    Business     Operating    Business     Worked on Has Business Rigid Business            Operating      Business
                                      Entrepreneur     Business      Capital      Profits     Business      Profits     Business    Budget        Budget                 Business        Profits
Individual Interest                     0.104***       0.079***      2651**      548***         0.045      638***         0.335     0.054*       0.059***                0.077***       592***
                                         (0.036)        (0.032)       (1142)      (200)        (0.036)      (264)        (0.261)    (0.029)       (0.021)                 (0.030)        (181)
Spouse's Interest                        0.068*          0.036         -371        343*        0.079**       375         0.595**     0.049         0.022                 0.078***         358*
                                         (0.036)        (0.032)       (1049)      (204)        (0.036)      (265)        (0.269)    (0.030)       (0.022)                 (0.029)        (184)
Joint Interest                            0.022          0.023         820         254          -0.027       31.7         0.063      0.028         -0.011                  -0.008          152
                                         (0.044)        (0.042)       (1340)      (222)        (0.045)      (317)        (0.332)    (0.036)       (0.027)                 (0.036)        (218)

Cash Prize - Self                          0.002         0.036         -746         -187         0.014      -528***        0.053          -0.031          -0.017             0.016       -341**
                                         (0.034)        (0.033)       (1026)       (161)        (0.037)      (222)        (0.263)        (0.028)         (0.021)           (0.029)        (151)
Cash Prize - Spouse                       -0.022        -0.058*        15.8        -21.5         -0.026     -620***      -0.480**       -0.057**          -0.019            -0.020        -302*
                                         (0.033)        (0.031)       (1106)       (177)        (0.036)      (215)        (0.236)        (0.027)         (0.021)           (0.027)        (164)

P-value: Ind+Spouse=0                  0.002***         0.017**        0.166     0.003***      0.021**     0.014**       0.023**        0.020**         0.013**          0.001***      0.001***
P-value: (Ind+Spouse)=Joint             0.030**          0.149         0.524      0.081*       0.030**      0.052*        0.097*          0.197         0.033**          0.005***       0.023**
P-value: Cash Self+Spouse=0              0.697           0.653         0.633       0.433        0.832      0.001***       0.286         0.030**           0.259            0.923        0.011**
P-value: Net Ind.=Net Cash              0.013**          0.057*        0.163     0.005***       0.087*     0.000***      0.020**        0.002***        0.008***          0.013**      0.000***
P-value: All Treatments=0               0.048**         0.032**        0.217     0.046**        0.217      0.003***       0.052*         0.058*          0.086*           0.025**      0.002***

DV Mean (0% Ind.)                         0.398           0.284         3263         796         0.424        1504          2.04         0.155             0.066            0.411          1128
DV Mean (4% Joint)                        0.488           0.355         4575         1036        0.500        1815          2.44         0.205             0.117            0.492          1402
N                                         1409            1417          1380         1368        1325         1196          1288          1305             1305              2605          2564
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the couple level in parentheses. The individual interest rate is renormalized to run from 0-1, while the joint interest rate is renormalized to run from 0.2-1.
The pooled regressions also control for endline wave. All variables denominated in Kenyan Shillings are top-coded at the 99th percentile and deflated to 2009 values. In 2009 Ksh 80≈$1.
***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1 5, and 10 percent levels respectively.




                                                                                                35
Table 5. Long-Run Impact of Interest Rates on Public Goods and Spousal Agreement
                                    (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)                       (5)              (6)
                                      Value            Any          Home Has      Agreement - Agreement - Savings Decision
                                    Livestock      Renovations      Permanent    How to Spend How Much to Making -Decide
                                   (Hypersine)      Last Year          Roof         Money        Save         Together
Individual Interest                   0.096           0.018           0.003         -0.112      -0.066        -0.057*
                                     (0.195)         (0.035)         (0.031)        (0.177)     (0.208)        (0.034)
Spouse's Interest                     -0.048          0.020            0.011         0.243       0.075          0.020
                                     (0.193)         (0.035)         (0.031)        (0.172)     (0.210)        (0.034)
Joint Interest                       0.594**         0.087*           0.092*        0.386*      0.407*          0.005
                                     (0.259)         (0.045)         (0.050)        (0.216)     (0.243)        (0.042)

Cash Prize - Self                     -0.157         -0.065*        -0.067**         0.140          -0.019            0.003
                                      (0.185)        (0.035)         (0.032)        (0.167)         (0.206)          (0.035)
Cash Prize - Spouse                    -0.270         -0.010          -0.041         0.262           -0.067           -0.036
                                      (0.189)        (0.035)         (0.031)        (0.168)         (0.211)          (0.034)

P-value: Ind+Spouse=0                  0.891          0.487          0.802           0.617           0.976            0.468
P-value: (Ind+Spouse)=Joint            0.213          0.489          0.313           0.463           0.328            0.523
P-value: Cash Self+Spouse=0            0.196          0.165          0.073*           0.117          0.781            0.515
P-value: Net Ind.=Net Cash             0.307          0.145          0.160           0.459           0.833            0.965
P-value: All Treatments=0              0.177          0.208          0.124           0.058*          0.689            0.459

DV Mean (0% Ind.)                         8.78          0.468          0.715           7.55             7.34            0.432
DV Mean (4% Joint)                        8.63          0.460          0.681           7.34             7.11            0.412
N                                        1366            1404           1411           1398             1397             1411
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the couple level in parentheses. The individual interest rate is renormalized to run from 0-1,
while the joint interest rate is renormalized to run from 0.2-1. The agreement variables run from 0 (no agreement) to 10 (perfect
agreement). The value of livestock is deflated to 2009 values. In 2009 Ksh 80≈$1 ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1 5,
and 10 percent levels respectively.




                                                               36
Figure 1. Use of Experimental Accounts Over Time



                                                                   A. Share Accounts with 1+ Deposits

                                                    i. Individual Accounts                                                           ii. Joint Accounts
                                   .2




                                                                                                                     .2
         Share Accts. with Deposit




                                                                                           Share Accts. with Deposit
                           .15




                                                                                                             .15
                   .1




                                                                                                     .1
           .05




                                                                                             .05
                         0




                                                                                                           0
                                           4-6 10-12 16-18 22-24 28-30 34-36                                                 4-6 10-12 16-18 22-24 28-30 34-36
                                             Months Since Account Opening                                                      Months Since Account Opening



                                                                 B. Share Accounts  with 1+
                                                                              A.Individual   Withdrawals
                                                                                           Accounts
                                              .2




                                                    i. Individual Accounts                                                           ii. Joint Accounts
                                      .2




                                                                                                                        .2
         Share Accts. with Withdrawal




                                                                                           Share Accts. with Withdrawal
                                              .15
                             .15




                                                                                                               .15
                                              .1
                      .1




                                                                                                        .1
             .05




                                                                                               .05
                                              .05
                         0




                                                                                                           0
                                              0




                                           4-6 10-12 16-18 22-24 28-30 34-36                                                 4-6   10-12 16-18 22-24 28-30 34-36
                                                        4-6Account Opening
                                             Months Since           10-12  16-18                  22-24       28-30
                                                                                                     Months Since         34-36
                                                                                                                  Account Opening
                                                                             Months Since Account Opening

                                                                     0%              4%                                      12%             20%

Notes: The figure plots the share of "potential" individual accounts (panel A.i and B.i) and joint accounts (Panels A.ii and B.ii) that
received either a deposit (Panel A) or withdrawal (Panel B) in the relevant three month period. "Potential" signals that unopened
accounts are coded the same as open, but unused accounts. The first three month period drops all cash-prize eligible accounts to reflect
transaction rates independent of the cash prize.




                                                                                      37
Figure 2. Distributional Impact of Interest Rates on Long-Run Economic Outcomes



                                                                                                              A. Impact of Individual Interest

                                           Bank Savings                                                 Total Assets                                         Monthly Income - Endline 1                             Monthly Income - Endline 2
                       6




                                                                                3




                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                         4
           Impact/Control Quantile




                                                                   Impact/Control Quantile




                                                                                                                                 Impact/Control Quantile




                                                                                                                                                                                          Impact/Control Quantile
                             4




                                                                                                                                                   3
                                                                                   2




                                                                                                                                                                                                         .5
                                                                                                                                            2
                     2




                                                                          1




                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                     1
              0




                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                      -.5
                       -2




                                     75   80   85 90      95 100                               0   20    40 60         80 100                                0   20   40 60      80 100                             0   20   40 60      80 100
                                               Quantile                                                  Quantile                                                     Quantile                                               Quantile



                                                                                                                B. Impact of Joint Interest

                                           Bank Savings                                                 Total Assets                                         Monthly Income - Endline 1                             Monthly Income - Endline 2
                       2




                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                           1
           Impact/Control Quantile




                                                                   Impact/Control Quantile




                                                                                                                                 Impact/Control Quantile




                                                                                                                                                                                          Impact/Control Quantile
                                                                                                                                                                                                           .5
                             1




                                                                                                                                                  .5
                                                                                   .5
                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                      -.5




                                                                                                                                   -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                            -.5
             -1




                                                                                -1




                                                                                                                                              -1
                       -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                      -1
                                     75   80   85 90      95 100                               0   20    40 60         80 100                                0   20   40 60      80 100                             0   20   40 60      80 100
                                               Quantile                                                  Quantile                                                     Quantile                                               Quantile



Notes: This chart graphs coefficients from quantile regressions of the outcome of interest on the individual, spousal, and joint interest rate, as well as the cash prize. The interest rate variables have been
normalized to run from 0 to 1 (individual and spousal interest) or 0.2 to 1 (joint interest). All point estimates have been divided by the quantile in the lowest interest group so that point estimates give
percent changes. Whiskers give 90 and 95 percent confidence intervals and are scaled in the same way.




                                                                                                                            38
Figure 3. Sharpened Q-Values to Control the False Discovery Rate by Treatment


                                   A. Individual Interest Rate                                      B. Spousal Interest Rate                                      C. Joint Interest Rate




                                                                                            1




                                                                                                                                                          1
      .05 .1 .15 .2 .25
     FDR Sharpened Q-Value




                                                                      FDR Sharpened Q-Value




                                                                                                                                    FDR Sharpened Q-Value
                                                                                       .8




                                                                                                                                                     .8
                                                                                  .6




                                                                                                                                                .6
                                                                            .4




                                                                                                                                          .4
                                                                        .2




                                                                                                                                      .2
                 0




                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                0
                               0       .05    .1    .15          .2                             0      .05    .1    .15        .2                             0    .05    .1    .15        .2
                                      Unadjusted P-Value                                              Unadjusted P-Value                                          Unadjusted P-Value


                                      D. Own Cash Prize                                             E. Spousal Cash Prize
                           1




                                                                                            1
     FDR Sharpened Q-Value




                                                                      FDR Sharpened Q-Value
                      .8




                                                                                       .8
                 .6




                                                                                  .6
           .4




                                                                            .4
       .2




                                                                        .2
                 0




                                                                                  0




                               0        .05       .1         .15                                0      .05    .1    .15        .2
                                      Unadjusted P-Value                                              Unadjusted P-Value


Notes: This figure graphs traditional p-values on the x-axis and sharpened q-values that control the false discovery rate on the y-
axis. The q-value represents the smallest possible false discovery rate at which a hypothesis would still be rejected. In other
words, a q-value of 0.05 implies that a hypothesis would be rejected when the false discovery rate is set to 5 percent (i.e. 5
percent of rejected hypotheses are in fact true). I use the two-stage procedure proposed by Benjamini et al. (2006) to calculate q-
values.




                                                                                                          39
Figure 4. Impacts of the Individual Interest Rate by Predicted Short-Run "Complier" Status

                                                                      A. Impacts on Short-Run Outcomes

                                     Opened Individual Account                                            Used Acct. - First 6 Months            Average Daily Balance - First 6 Months




                                                                                                                                           300
              .4




                                                                        .3
              .3




                                                                        .2




                                                                                                                                           200
              .2




                                                                        .1




                                                                                                                                           100
              .1




                                                                        0
                                                                        -.1
              0




                                                                                                                                           0
                                  Non-Compliers       Compliers                                        Non-Compliers        Compliers                        Non-Compliers        Compliers



                                        Balance at 6 Months                                           Number Deposits - First 6 Months                         Total Deposits - First 6 Months




                                                                                                                                            1000 1500 2000
              300




                                                                       .6
              200




                                                                       .4
                                                                       .2
              100




                                                                                                                                            500
                                                                       0
              0




                                                                                                                                            0
                                  Non-Compliers       Compliers                                       Non-Compliers         Compliers                        Non-Compliers        Compliers



                                                                      B. Impacts on Long-Run Outcomes

                            Income Last Month - Pooled Endlines                                       Main Occ. Entrepreneur - Endline 1             Operating Business - Pooled Endlines
           2000 4000 6000




                                                                       .3




                                                                                                                                           .2
                                                                                                                                           .15
                                                                       .2




                                                                                                                                           .1
                                                                       .1




                                                                                                                                           .05
                                                                       0
           0




                                                                                                                                           0
           -2000




                                                                                                                                           -.05
                                                                       -.1




                                  Non-Compliers       Compliers                                       Non-Compliers         Compliers                        Non-Compliers        Compliers



                                  Business Profit - Pooled Endlines                                      Business Assets - Endline 1                         Rigid Business Account - Endline 2
             500 1000 1500 2000




                                                                        -2000 0 2000 4000 6000 8000




                                                                                                                                           .15
                                                                                                                                           .1
                                                                                                                                           .05
                                                                                                                                           0
             0
             -500




                                                                                                                                           -.05




                                  Non-Compliers       Compliers                                        Non-Compliers        Compliers                        Non-Compliers        Compliers




Notes: I identify compliers by regressing the individual interest rate and its interactions with all baseline variables in Table
1 on an index of short-run individual account use. The index is the simple average of standardized versions of all measures
of individual account use in Table 2 except withdrawals. I use the inverse hyperbolic sine of all variables denominated in
Kenyan Shillings and the number of deposits. I use this regression to predict individual-specific treatment effects and then
split the sample into non-compliers (below median predicted response) and compliers (above median predicted response).
This graph plots coefficients from regressions of the specified outcome on the individual interest rate, the spousal interest
rate, and own cash prize selection. The individual interest rate is renormalized to run from 0-1. All outcomes in Kenyan
Shillings are topcoded at the 99th percentile and deflated to 2009 values (Panel B). In 2009 Ksh 80≈$1. All regressions are
run separately for compliers and non-compliers with standard errors clustered at the couple level. Whiskers give 90 and 95
percent confidence intervals on point estimates.




                                                                                                                       40
             SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDICES – FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION ONLY


R          Robustness of Main Results
Reporting Bias A first concern is that my results are simply driven by reporting bias. For re-
porting bias to rationalize the results, participants would have had to show their “appreciation” of
higher individual interest rates by reporting more individual economic activity/increased rates of
entrepreneurship, while showing appreciation of higher joint interest rates by reporting greater lev-
els of spousal agreement. Although this type of systematic bias does not seem particularly likely
ex-ante, the experimental design permits two additional tests of reporting bias. A first indication
that reporting bias is likely not a concern is the fact that the cash prize treatment had no appreciable
impact on long-run outcomes (see Tables 3-5). The cash awards were substantial, averaging Ksh
247 ($3.09) for those receiving a payout. In contrast, the value of the interest payments were much
smaller – the average payout (for those who received a positive payment) was just Ksh 26. One
would therefore expect reporting bias to be most pronounced for the cash payments, which is not
the case in practice.
    Second, as part of pilot research for a separate project, a subset of individuals were asked
whether they would be interested in a mobile money based commitment savings device (these
questions were administered after completing the first endline survey). This product was presented
as a potential offering from Innovations for Poverty Action-Kenya, just as the initial interest rates
were. The product was not actually on offer at endline – participants were simply asked to indicate
on a scale of 0-10 how helpful they thought the product would be and how likely they would be to
sign up if offered the product. Appendix Table R1 tests whether the interest rates or the cash prize
are related to participants’ ratings of the pilot savings product.37 There is no systematic evidence
that individuals who received more favorable interest rate treatments rated the hypothetical product
more favorably.

Top-Coding and Trimming Another concern is that the results are driven by a small number of
observations in the upper tails of the income and assets distribution. Appendix Table R2 presents
results for total and business income and assets where outcomes are top-coded at the 98th-90th
percentiles or trimmed at the 99th-95th percentiles. I also present raw results with no top-coding.
As expected, the point estimates using level outcomes decline with increased top-coding and trim-
ming. However, the results are generally quite robust to additional top-coding and trimming, with
many results surviving top-coding up to the 90th percentile and trimming through the 98th per-
centile. Thus, although right-tail observations are clearly important for my results, estimates are
relatively robust and are not exclusively driven by a small number of extreme outliers.

    37 I
       do note that given that the interest rates impacted participants’ financial lives, it is not totally clear that the
subsidies should be unrelated to the product rating, even absent reporting bias.

                                                            1
Imputing Missing Values It is important to note that I am missing endline data on outcomes
due to both survey attrition and the fact that respondents occasionally reported that they did not
know the answer to a question, or did not wish to provide an answer to a question. This latter
source of missing data is amplified for variables that aggregate responses to a number of questions,
such as my endline 1 measures of total income and assets. Although attrition is not systematically
correlated with treatments (recall Appendix Table A2), I still ask whether the results are robust to
alternative imputation schemes in Appendix Table R3.
     The methods in the first two panels of Table R3 are designed to be “treatment neutral”. In Panel
A, all missing values are replaced with the sample mean among individuals with non-missing data.
In Panel B, I regress each outcome of interest on the baseline control set and use the predicted
values from that regression to impute missing values. The last two panels take a decidedly less
neutral approach to further test the robustness of the individual interest rate results (I focus on
just the individual interest rate here, since the results for the joint interest rate are more modest
in magnitude and less statistically robust). In Panel C missing values in the 0 percent individual
interest rate group are replaced with the mean outcome for the 20 percent interest group, while the
4 percent interest group is imputed with the mean for the 12 percent interest group, the 12 percent
interest group is imputed with the mean for the 4 percent interest group, and the 20 percent interest
group is imputed with the mean for the 0 percent interest group. In Panel D I replace missing values
in the 0 percent interest group with the 80th percentile among non-missing values. The 4 percent
interest group is imputed with the 60th percentile, the 12 percent interest group with the 40th
percentile, and the 20 percent interest group with the 20th percentile. I perform the imputations
using raw values, and then top-code the imputed variables at the 99th percentile. Note that all
imputation and top-coding is performed on variable sub-components, which are then aggregated
up. Thus, the “total income” variable is the sum of imputed/top-coded measures of farm, wage,
business, and other income. (Results are very similar when aggregates are imputed/top-coded
instead).
     Appendix Table R3 illustrates that the results for endline 1 business outcomes are robust to
all four imputation schemes, while the results for overall income are robust to all but the reverse
percentile imputation strategy. Endline 1 assets and endline 2 business profits only withstand
“treatment-neutral” imputations. Overall, this analysis indicates that missing data is not a major
problem for my results.

Nonlinear Effects of Interest Rates I constrain the impact of the interest rates to be linear in
the main analysis. Appendix Tables R4-R6 present my main results (Tables 3-5) where the interest
rates are dummied out instead. These tables also report p-values for tests of whether the linear
restriction can be rejected by the data. Table R4 replicates Table 3 – here I am never able to


                                                 2
reject the restriction for the the individual and spousal interest rate and reject the restriction for
the joint interest rate once. Table R5 presents results for business outcomes. Here, I reject the
restriction three times (out of 11 specifications) for the individual interest rate, never reject for
the spousal interest rate, and reject 5 times for the joint rate. One qualitative pattern apparent in
Tables R4 and R5 is that the no interest group has notably lower average outcomes than the positive
interest groups, and impacts for the 12 and 20 percent interest groups are fairly similar. Appendix
Table R6 reports results for “joint” outcomes. Here, I reject the restriction once for the individual
interest rate, once for the spousal rate, and one for the joint rate. In all tables, the coefficient on
the 20 percent subsidy is usually very similar to the coefficient on the linear interest rate in the
main tables. Given this, I prefer to present my main results with the linear restriction, since this
streamlines and tables and helps focus the discussion.

Controlling for Background Treatments Couples participating in this experiment were eligible
for two other treatments: the first was a free ATM card, which was randomly assigned to opened
bank accounts. I analyze the effect of this treatment in detail in Schaner (2015b). The second
was an information sharing treatment, which gave individuals the option to view the balance of
a spouse’s account (provided the spouse consented). I analyze the impact of this treatment in
Schaner (2015a). Appendix Tables R7-R9 confirm that my main results are virtually unchanged
when I control for ATM cards and the information sharing treatment. Since ATM cards were
assigned by lottery only to open accounts, I construct an “ex-ante ATM” treatment dummy that
is equal to true ATM status for open accounts and is set to 1 for a randomly chosen subset of
unopened accounts – here I randomly choose accounts with the same probability as the ex-post
ATM selection probability. All regressions in Tables R7-R9 control for whether the individual
received an ex-ante ATM card on his/her own account, whether the spouse received an ex-ante
ATM card, and whether the joint account received an ex-ante ATM card. I also include a dummy
variable for whether the couple was randomly selected for the information sharing treatment and
a dummy variable that identifies the first six experimental sessions. I include this control because
the ATM and information sharing selection probabilities changed after this session.


D     Data Appendix
This paper uses four different sources of data: information from a baseline survey conducted
from July-September 2009, information from a wave 1 endline survey conducted from August-
November 2012, information from a wave 2 endline conducted from July-August 2013, and admin-
istrative data from Family Bank that covers the first three years of experimental account activity.
All analysis is conducted at an individual level, using a core sample of 1,417 men and women who

                                                  3
participated in the initial experiment and the first endline survey. This section provides additional
detail on the construction of key variables used in the analysis. Note that top-coded variables that
are an aggregate of multiple components (such as total endline assets) are the sum of top-coded
components rather than the top-code of the sum.

Selected Baseline Variables

   • Main occupation is entrepreneur – this variable is constructed from individuals’ reports of
     what their primary source of income is. I code an individual to be an entrepreneur if they are
     working in an independent business. Common entrepreneurial occupations include market
     vendors, bicycle taxi drivers, shop keepers, commercial farmers, and handymen.

   • Income last month – based on survey question “what was you income from all your income-
     generating activities last week?”. For comparability with the endline income measure, the
     weekly variable is multiplied by 52/12 in the analysis to construct a monthly measure.

   • Time preference questions – participants were administered 10 tables of monetary choices,
     with each table consisting of 5 separate choices between a larger xt+τ = Ksh 300 and a
     smaller Ksh xt ∈{290, 220, 150, 80, 10}. The (t,t + τ) pairs (where t and τ are expressed in
     weeks) were 71 , 1 , 71 , 2 , 17 , 3 , 17 , 4 , 17 , 8 , 71 , 12 , (2, 3), (2, 4), (4, 8), (4, 12).
                                                                


         – Time inconsistency variables – the baseline survey included 4 different opportunities
           for an individual to display time inconsistent preferences. A respondent is coded as
           “impatient now-patient later” if this is the most prevalent form of time inconsistency in
           her answers. Similarly a respondent is coded as “patient now-impatient later” if this is
           the most prevalent form of time inconsistency in her answers.
         – Weekly discount factor – For each of the 10 time preference tables I assume that if an
           individual switches from “earlier” to “later”, that she is indifferent between the smaller
           and larger of the two xt amounts and estimate the implied discount factor over monetary
           amounts. I then take the simple average of the estimates for each of the 10 tables as an
           estimate of the weekly discount factor.

Selected Wave 1 Endline Variables

   • Measures of income – each respondent was asked about five different income sources: har-
     vests (earnings in past 12 months), horticultural crops (earnings in past month), wage labor
     (earnings in past month), non-farm business (earnings in past month), and other income
     (earnings in past month). For each category, an individual was asked to specify how much

                                                  4
     income they themselves earned, and how much was earned jointly with his/her spouse. In-
     dividual income for each subcategory is defined as all individually earned income plus half
     of jointly earned income. The total income measure takes individual harvest income divided
     by 12 and adds the monthly individual income measures for all other subcategories together.

   • Measures of assets – each respondent was asked about 8 different types of assets: bank
     accounts, SACCO accounts, money stored at home, ROSCA contributions, mobile money
     accounts, inventories and assets used to run a small business, the value of livestock, and other
     forms of savings. Respondents were asked about both individual assets and joint assets for
     bank accounts, business assets, and other savings. As with income, I construct total assets by
     adding up all individually owned assets and half of all joint assets. I assume that all livestock
     is jointly held (thus, this variable is always divided by two for all analysis in the paper).

   • Debt – respondents were separately asked about both individually and jointly held debt to
     family and friends, formal/village banks, microfinance lenders, local moneylenders, shops,
     and other debt. Individual debt is the sum of all individually held amounts plus half of all
     jointly held amounts.

   • Operating a business – this variable is equal to one if an individual reported positive business
     profits or business assets and is set equal to zero otherwise.

   • Main occupation is entrepreneur – this variable is constructed from individuals’ reports of
     what their primary source of income is. I code an individual to be an entrepreneur if they are
     working in an independent business. Common entrepreneurial occupations include market
     vendors, bicycle taxi drivers, shop keepers, commercial farmers, and handymen.

Selected Wave 2 Endline Variables

   • Has budget account for item X (e.g. business, home improvement) – all respondents were
     first asked if they keep a budget in mind when making financial decisions, or if they simply
     pooled funds and met expenses as they came up. Respondents were then asked to list out all
     items in their budget, and specify how much money was devoted to that item. An individual
     is coded as having an account for item X if the individual reports keeping a budget and lists
     item X when giving budget detail.

   • Has “inflexible” account for item X – this variable indicates that a respondent had a budget
     item for X and stated that they would not reduce spending on item X in order to meet a Ksh
     1,000 expense.



                                                 5
   • Total income – individuals were asked to report their total average income, including their
     share of income earned together with their spouse. Individuals were permitted to report
     income on a daily, weekly, or monthly basis.

   • Business profits – individuals were asked to report their average business profit. Like income,
     individuals were permitted to report income on a daily, weekly, or monthly basis.

   • Savings a priority – this dummy variable is equal to one if an individual answered “yes” to
     the question “is savings and investment a priority for you”?

   • Saves regularly – this dummy variable is equal to one if the individual reported that they
     were someone who saves and/or invests money regularly (as opposed to sometimes, rarely,
     or never).

   • Operating a business – this is equal to one if an individual reported that they are currently
     operating a business either independently or jointly with a spouse. This variable is also set
     equal to one for any individuals who reported working a positive number of hours on their
     own business.

Selected Variables from Administrative Bank Data

   • Used individual/joint account in first 6 months – a respondent is coded as “used an individual
     account” if any transactions (other than the initial Ksh 100 opening balance) were posted to
     his or her account in the first 6 months of account activity (before interest payments were
     made). A respondent is coded as “used a joint account” if any transaction was posted to the
     joint account.

   • Individual/joint deposits – equal to total deposits (excluding the Ksh 100 opening balance)
     posted to the account in the first 6 months of account activity.

   • Individual/joint withdrawals – constructed the same way as total deposits. Excludes fees.

   • Individual/joint average balance – the average daily balance (excluding the Ksh 100 opening
     balance) on an account for the first 6 months of account activity.

   • Used individual/joint account in year 3 – equal to 1 if any transaction was posted to the
     account in the final 12 months of the three year account activity observation window.

   • Used any account in the first 6 months – equal to 1 if there was any transaction posted to any
     account owned by the couple, 0 otherwise.


                                                6
   • Used any account in year 3 – equal to 1 if any transaction was posted to an experimen-
     tal account owned by the couple in the final 12 months of the three year account activity
     observation window.

Converting Monetary Amounts Into Real 2009 Terms I deflate 2012 and 2013 monetary amounts
to 2009 levels by using the Kenyan CPI published by the Central Bank of Kenya. 2012 amounts
are adjusted for 28 percent inflation (obtained by comparing Q3 price indices for 2009 and 2012),
while 2013 amounts are adjusted for 37 percent inflation (obtained by comparing Q3 price indices
for 2009 and 2013).

Endline 2 Reporting Intervals and Implications for Measuring Income and Profits In endline
2 individuals were permitted to report income, profit, and labor supply at intervals of their choos-
ing. (The baseline and endline 1 enforced common lookback periods). The data suggest that this
overstated income and profits for individuals reporting on shorter intervals. Appendix Figure D1
illustrates this issue by graphing the distribution of income at baseline, endline 1, and endline 2 by
reporting interval. Although the distributions for monthly reporters track one another closely with
some growth in income apparent over time, it is clear that the endline 2 income distributions for
daily and weekly reporters is shifted notably to the right. The endline 2 income distribution also
has a much longer tail, in spite of winsorizing at the 99th percentile.
    An alternative possibility is that the baseline and endline 1 understated income for high-frequency
income earners. However, Appendix Table D1 shows that correlations between education and in-
come are stable across round for monthly and weekly earners, but much lower at endline 2 for daily
income earners. I see similar patterns when looking at correlations between total assets (measured
at endline 1) and income. The correlation between income and assets for monthly reporters is 0.44
for endline 1 income and 0.35 for endline 2 income. I see a correlation of 0.39 at endline 1 and
0.15 at endline 2 for weekly earners, and a correlation of 0.40 and 0.38 for daily earners. This
suggests that reporting bias is less of an issue for daily income earners, but this likely reflects the
data cleaning process. I set endline 2 values for income and profits to missing if they represented
a seven or more standard deviation change in the outcome between waves 1 and 2. This seems
reasonable: a 7 standard deviation change in monthly income for men amounts to $832, while a
7 standard deviation increase for women amounts to $428. Only 5 men reported monthly income
above $832 in endline 1 and only 3 women reported monthly income above $428. This correction
only affects 15 profit observations and 42 income observations. Absent this correction I see notably
lower correlations between endline 2 income and education/assets for daily income earners.




                                                 7
Appendix Table A1. Account Opening Decisions
                                 Share Couples    N
Joint Account Only                   0.546       425
Two Individual Accounts Only         0.302       235
All Three Accounts                   0.050       39
Joint and Husband's Account          0.042       33
Joint and Wife's Account             0.035       27
Husband's Account Only               0.015       12
Wife's Account Only                  0.010        8
Declined to Open Any Account           0          0
Total                                  1         779




                                8
Appendix Table A2. Endline Attrition: Correlation with Treatment and Differential Selection
                                            (1)          (2)       (3)             (4)                    (5)          (6)
                                             P-value: Treatment Correlated with          P-value: Differential Selection on
                                                          Missing                                  Observables
                                             Individual    Spousal       Joint          Individual    Spousal         Joint
                                              Interest     Interest     Interest         Interest      Interest     Interest
A. Wave 1 Endline Outcomes
   In Wave 1 Endline                             0.280          0.558         0.743          0.714         0.539        0.392
   Has Individual Bank Account                   0.280          0.558         0.743          0.714         0.539        0.392
   Has Joint Bank Account                        0.335          0.743         0.219          0.687        0.074*        0.793
   Individual Bank Savings                       0.685          0.813         0.896          0.828        0.073*        0.373
   Joint Bank Savings                            0.735          0.785         0.850          0.666         0.662        0.793
   Total Assets                                  0.342          0.272         0.609          0.265         0.228        0.339
   Net Assets                                    0.217          0.269         0.542          0.231         0.168        0.344
   Monthly Income                                0.901          0.619         0.410          0.347         0.694        0.149
   Main Occ. Entrepreneur                        0.280          0.558         0.743          0.714         0.539        0.392
   Has Business Profits/Assets                   0.428          0.710         0.810          0.680         0.317        0.815
   Business Assets                               0.513          0.615         0.780          0.838         0.423        0.946
   Business Income                               0.614          0.740         0.750          0.636         0.104        0.210
   Value Livestock                              0.044**         0.143         0.490          0.942         0.605        0.571
   Home Reno. Last Year                          0.105          0.164         0.811          0.825         0.413        0.363
   Has Permanent Roof                            0.330          0.593         0.890          0.603         0.360        0.264
   Agree: Spend Money                            0.414          0.540         0.871          0.437         0.641        0.500
   Agree: How Much to Save                       0.221          0.948         0.945          0.575         0.582        0.702
   Savings: Decide Together                      0.366          0.626         0.738          0.712         0.421        0.365
B. Wave 2 Endline Outcomes
   In Wave 2 Endline                             0.168          0.101         0.736          0.776         0.796        0.685
   Monthly Income                                0.170          0.224         0.764          0.936         0.969        0.459
   Savings a Priority                            0.324         0.056*         0.785          0.777         0.739        0.628
   Saves Regularly                               0.148        0.046**         0.674          0.781         0.737        0.767
   Operating Business                            0.227         0.098*         0.674          0.862         0.840        0.637
   Monthly Profit                                0.221         0.060*         0.859          0.928         0.410        0.619
   Has Businnes Budget                           0.139         0.056*         0.832          0.924         0.896        0.640
   Downwardly Rigid Business Budget              0.139         0.056*         0.832          0.924         0.896        0.640
   Labor on Own Business                         0.352        0.040**         0.648          0.773         0.852        0.125
   N                                             1558           1558           1558          1558          1558         1558
Notes: P-values are from F-tests of coefficient restrictions on regressions with robust standard errors clustered at the
couple level. The underlying regression in the first three columns regresses an indicator for whether the specified outcome
is missing on the treatment of interest. The table reports p-values for whether attrition is significantly correlated with
treatment. The underlying regression in the last three columns regresses the missing indicator on the treatment of interest,
all demographic controls listed in Table 1, and interactions between the demographic variables and the treatment of
interest. The table reports the p-value from a joint test of whether the interaction terms are equal to zero. The individual
interest rate is renormalized to run from 0-1, while the joint interest rate is renormalized to run from 0.2-1. ***, **, and *
indicate significance at the 1 5, and 10 percent levels respectively.




                                                               9
Appendix Table A3. Comparing the Study Sample to the Broader Population of Kenyans
                                                            2009 Kenya Census                               FinAccess 2009               Study
                                          All Kenya         Western Kenya       Study Districts      All Kenya     Western Kenya       Sample
Age                                           38.3               38.9                38.1                --              --               40.3
Education                                     6.87               6.85                6.00                --              --               6.87
Children Born (Women Only)                    4.20               4.89                4.85                --              --               4.58
Polygamous                                   0.093              0.124               0.159                --              --              0.234
Self Employed - Census Definition            0.245              0.215               0.211              0.284           0.267             0.246
Self Employed - Study Definition                --                --                  --               0.410           0.372             0.420
Has Bank Account                                --                --                  --               0.237           0.171             0.220
Uses ROSCA                                      --                --                  --               0.374           0.413             0.581
Has SACCO Account                               --                --                  --               0.113           0.081             0.039
Has Mobile Money Accounta                       --                --                  --               0.275           0.218             0.224
N                                           944033             103461               10782               3962            482              1558
Notes: aInformation on mobile money usage was not collected for individuals in the first 6 experimental sessions of my study. The first three
columns report weighted estimates from the 2009 Kenyan Census, obtained from IPUMS International. The next two columns present weighted
estimates from Financial Sector Deepening's 2009 FinAccess household survey, which is representative down to the province level. The study
version of entrepreneur includes commercial farmers and businesses involving trade in livestock. The census version of entrepreneur excludes
agriculture and livestock occupations. All statistics are reported for married individuals aged 18 and above.




                                                                     10
Appendix Table A4. Impacts of the Maximum Interest Rate on Experimental Bank Account Use
                                      (1)          (2)            (3)       (4)        (5)                          (6)
                                                         In First 6 Months:

                                                           Total          Total        Ending      Avg. Daily Used - Year
                                            Used         Deposits     Withdrawals      Balance       Balance          3
Maximum Interest 12 Percent                 0.102            641           241         204***         250***        0.039
                                           (0.070)         (532)          (453)         (85.7)         (76.2)      (0.034)
Maximum Interest 20 Percent                0.151**       1444***         910**         314***         315***      0.087***
                                           (0.066)         (511)          (463)         (75.5)         (59.9)      (0.033)
Husband's Account Has Max. Int.             0.008           70.2           47.7          -26.2          -22.2      0.041*
                                           (0.037)         (438)          (363)         (78.0)         (75.0)      (0.024)
Wife's Account Has Max. Int.                0.037           -328           -291          -38.8          -93.6       0.013
                                           (0.037)         (418)          (348)         (79.7)         (73.0)      (0.024)
DV Mean (4% Max. Int.)                      0.339            893            710           137            123        0.051
N                                            779             779            779           779            779         779
Notes: Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses. Variables denominated in Kenyan Shillings are top-coded
at the 99th percentile. All outcomes reflect usage across all three potential experimental accounts. ***, **, and * indicate
significance at the 1 5, and 10 percent levels respectively.




                                                           11
Appendix Table A5. Impact of Interest Rates on Other Types of Assets (At Endline 1, Excluding Bank,
Business Assets)
                                        (1)           (2)           (3)             (4)          (5)          (6)
                                                                                Mobile
                                       Value       ROSCA          SACCO         Money          Home         Other
                                     Livestock     Savings        Savings       Savings       Savings      Savings
Individual Interest                     175          321            404            27.3         85.9          138
                                      (1179)        (261)          (601)         (61.8)        (73.2)       (916)
Spouse's Interest                      -831          87.3        -1678***          67.1         109          -989
                                      (1196)        (249)          (597)         (60.1)        (81.6)       (757)
Joint Interest                         2582          231            53.1          -9.79         47.3         69.3
                                      (1732)        (320)          (836)         (71.6)        (91.9)      (1054)

Cash Prize - Self                      -1114          -170         235            -60.6         -20.4        -856
                                      (1106)         (233)        (682)          (55.5)        (75.0)       (702)
Cash Prize - Spouse                   -1080           -119         81.9           90.6          -25.0        -846
                                      (1189)         (250)        (672)          (63.4)        (72.0)       (790)

P-value: Ind+Spouse=0                  0.768         0.252       0.074*          0.284         0.094*       0.523
P-value: (Ind+Spouse)=Joint            0.227         0.705        0.253          0.315          0.306       0.647
P-value: Cash Self+Spouse=0            0.291         0.420        0.717          0.716          0.661       0.116
P-value: Net Ind.=Net Cash             0.617         0.153        0.128          0.591          0.120       0.613
P-value: All Treatments=0              0.541         0.690       0.021**         0.510          0.673       0.441

DV Mean (0% Ind.)                       12458          1823          1454           269            359        2375
DV Mean (4% Joint)                      11657          1946          1780           284            432        2196
N                                        1366          1343          1398          1388           1387        1398
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the couple level in parentheses. The individual interest rate is renormalized to
run from 0-1, while the joint interest rate is renormalized to run from 0.2-1. On the endline survey each individual
was asked to report total livestock owned by the household. The individual was then assigned half this value. All
variables denominated in Kenyan Shillings are top-coded at the 99th percentile and deflated to 2009 values. In
2009 Ksh 80≈$1. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1 5, and 10 percent levels respectively.




                                                            12
Appendix Table A6. Impact of Interest Rates on Income, by Source
(At Endline 1, Excluding Business Profits)
                                       (1)           (2)          (3)
                                      Farm         Wage         Other
                                     Income       Income       Income
Individual Interest                   -47.2         466         -34.8
                                      (128)        (293)        (149)
Spouse's Interest                     -21.2         -199         26.0
                                      (127)        (275)        (176)
Joint Interest                        -35.2        -24.9         217
                                      (171)        (331)        (198)

Cash Prize - Self                      25.7         361         -130
                                      (134)        (288)        (134)
Cash Prize - Spouse                    204          316          54.3
                                      (137)        (287)        (153)

P-value: Ind+Spouse=0                 0.730         0.501       0.966
P-value: (Ind+Spouse)=Joint           0.894         0.574       0.419
P-value: Cash Self+Spouse=0           0.314        0.083*       0.696
P-value: Net Ind.=Net Cash            0.347         0.442       0.768
P-value: All Treatments=0             0.772         0.374       0.858

DV Mean (0% Ind.)                       1102         1705          605
DV Mean (4% Joint)                      1080         1869          635
N                                       1354         1390         1403
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the couple level in parentheses. The
individual interest rate is renormalized to run from 0-1, while the joint
interest rate is renormalized to run from 0.2-1. All variables
denominated in Kenyan Shillings are top-coded at the 99th percentile
and deflated to 2009 values. In 2009 Ksh 80≈$1. ***, **, and * indicate
significance at the 1 5, and 10 percent levels respectively.




                                    13
Appendix Table A7. Impact of Interest Rates on Debt (At Endline 1), by Source
                                    (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)                 (5)           (6)
                                                              Debt From:
                                                         Money-                             Family        Other
                                  Banks        MFIs       lenders       Shops              Members       Sources
Individual Interest                -780        -80.9        201          -23.7               18.4         654*
                                 (1368)        (252)       (299)        (20.7)              (19.8)        (348)
Spouse's Interest                  445         -41.7      883***         13.3                25.4         696*
                                 (1298)        (219)       (292)        (20.6)              (17.7)        (358)
Joint Interest                    2994          478         294          6.59                6.16          542
                                 (2036)        (357)       (361)        (23.1)              (26.9)        (399)

Cash Prize - Self                      -646          77.8          -190         -3.31        0.846          -402
                                      (1469)        (267)         (250)        (20.2)        (20.3)        (281)
Cash Prize - Spouse                    1494          1.27          436          -19.7      -41.4***        -91.7
                                      (1834)        (253)         (318)        (15.8)        (13.8)        (327)

P-value: Ind+Spouse=0                 0.860         0.716       0.008***       0.735        0.113       0.006***
P-value: (Ind+Spouse)=Joint           0.245         0.284         0.165        0.626        0.382         0.216
P-value: Cash Self+Spouse=0           0.716         0.833         0.568        0.356        0.123         0.244
P-value: Net Ind.=Net Cash            0.677         0.650         0.145        0.752       0.020**      0.004***
P-value: All Treatments=0             0.506         0.797        0.046**       0.549       0.024**       0.051*

DV Mean (0% Ind.)                       4118           705          1564         52.5          68.7         1201
DV Mean (4% Joint)                      2234           582          1531         41.5          93.8         1359
N                                       1410          1413          1407        1414           1414         1406
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the couple level in parentheses. The individual interest rate is renormalized to
run from 0-1, while the joint interest rate is renormalized to run from 0.2-1. All variables denominated in Kenyan
Shillings are top-coded at the 99th percentile and deflated to 2009 values. In 2009 Ksh 80≈$1. ***, **, and *
indicate significance at the 1 5, and 10 percent levels respectively.




                                                       14
Appendix Table A8. Heterogeneity in Impacts on Business Outcomes by Baseline Entrepreneurship
                                              (1)           (2)         (3)             (4)             (5)          (6)        (7)        (8)                (9)            (10)            (11)
                                                            Wave 1 Endline                                                  Wave 2 Endline                                          Pooled
                                                                                                                                                         Downwardly
                                               Main                                                                             Hours          Has            Rigid
                                          Occupation Operating          Business      Business       Operating Business Worked on Business                 Business        Operating      Business
                                         Entrepreneur Business            Capital      Profits        Business     Profits    Business      Budget           Budget        Business        Profits
Main Occupation Entrepreneurial at Baseline
    Individual Interest                     0.196***       0.109**       5355***      1108***           0.026     1135***       0.539       0.114**        0.112***        0.121***       1132***
                                             (0.052)       (0.054)        (2278)        (397)          (0.055)      (466)      (0.467)      (0.051)          (0.041)         (0.043)       (340)
    Spouse's Interest                       0.109**         0.046          -1321         -151           0.020        34.3        0.332        0.046            0.046         0.073*         -69.0
                                             (0.054)       (0.054)        (2052)        (358)          (0.055)      (434)      (0.474)      (0.051)          (0.040)         (0.043)       (307)
    Joint Interest                            -0.007        0.008           1471          452           -0.084       7.37       -0.522        0.007           -0.039          -0.045         246
                                             (0.062)       (0.064)        (2320)        (389)          (0.062)      (536)      (0.530)      (0.057)          (0.046)         (0.050)       (366)
    DV Mean                                   0.613         0.498           7118        1641            0.601       2670         3.47         0.297            0.164           0.613        2120
    N                                          584            590            572          560            549         489          528          542              542            1073         1049
Other Main Occupation at Baseline
    Individual Interest                       0.028         0.053            736          146           0.056        244         0.161        0.013            0.020           0.041         222
                                             (0.045)       (0.037)         (975)        (173)          (0.046)      (279)      (0.288)      (0.032)          (0.023)         (0.037)       (173)
    Spouse's Interest                         0.003         -0.009          -319       537**           0.088*        377         0.425        0.029           -0.011           0.046       474**
                                             (0.045)       (0.038)         (971)        (235)          (0.047)      (321)      (0.305)      (0.036)          (0.025)         (0.038)       (222)
    Joint Interest                            0.056          0.037           688          137           0.008        40.8        0.474        0.043            0.015           0.017        59.2
                                             (0.055)       (0.048)        (1481)        (232)          (0.059)      (317)      (0.377)      (0.043)          (0.033)         (0.046)       (216)
    DV Mean                                   0.365          0.224          2818          725           0.365       1260         1.49         0.145            0.076           0.364         981
    N                                          820            822            803          804            772         703          756          759              759            1532         1515
Tests of Equality (Ent.=Non-Ent.)
    P-Value: Indiv. Interest                0.015**          0.402        0.059*      0.025**           0.675      0.097*        0.493       0.096*          0.050*            0.165      0.016**
    P-Value: Spousal Interest                 0.129          0.415         0.656       0.105            0.345       0.519        0.871        0.782            0.225           0.633       0.148
    P-Value: Joint Interest                   0.438          0.714         0.775       0.483            0.285       0.956        0.124        0.613            0.338           0.354       0.650
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the couple level in parentheses. The individual interest rate is renormalized to run from 0-1, while the joint interest rate is renormalized to run from 0.2-1.
All variables denominated in Kenyan Shillings are top-coded at the 99th percentile and deflated to 2009 values. In 2009 Ksh 80≈$1. All regressions also control for own and spousal cash
prize selection. Pooled regressions also control for endline wave. Regressions for entrepreneurs and non-entrepreneurs are jointly estimated using seemingly unrelated regression in order to
perform tests of equality. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1 5, and 10 percent levels respectively.




                                                                                                15
Appendix Table A9. Heterogeneity in Business Impacts by Gender
                                      (1)          (2)          (3)                    (4)           (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)            (9)            (10)            (11)
                                                  Wave 1 Endline                                                           Wave 2 Endline                                          Pooled
                                                                                                                                                       Downwardly
                                          Main                                                      Has                       Hours           Has         Rigid             Has
                                       Occupation Has Business         Business     Business      Business      Business     Worked on      Business    Business          Business     Business
                                      Entrepreneur   Profit            Capital       Profits       Profit        Profits     Business       Budget       Budget            Profit       Profits
Men
  Individual Interest                   0.135***       0.138***        5774***       967***        0.086*       1128***        0.605*       0.072*       0.087***        0.111***      1047***
                                         (0.049)        (0.046)         (1910)        (305)        (0.050)       (401)         (0.357)      (0.037)       (0.030)         (0.039)       (277)
   Spouse's Interest                      0.039          0.017           -542          200         0.111**         444         1.21***      0.068*        0.046*         0.078**         312
                                         (0.049)        (0.045)         (1854)        (322)        (0.050)       (413)         (0.365)      (0.037)       (0.028)         (0.039)       (297)
   Joint Interest                         -0.030         0.009           -774          297          -0.093        -235          -0.138       0.023         -0.003          -0.058        49.2
                                         (0.057)        (0.053)         (2118)        (335)        (0.058)       (461)         (0.426)      (0.041)       (0.033)         (0.045)       (308)
  DV Mean                                 0.451          0.297           6833         1243           0.377        1775           1.87        0.148         0.082            0.410        1489
  N                                        705            708             693          694            661          598           643          657           657             1361         1292
Women
  Individual Interest                     0.071           0.016           -217        144           -0.003         141          0.033        0.030         0.030           0.029             142
                                         (0.049)         (0.048)        (1174)       (249)         (0.051)        (352)        (0.376)      (0.043)       (0.033)         (0.041)           (241)
   Spouse's Interest                     0.103**          0.061           -506       466**          0.058          325          0.040        0.037         0.001          0.081**           401*
                                         (0.050)         (0.049)         (849)       (232)         (0.051)        (335)        (0.387)      (0.045)       (0.035)         (0.041)           (219)
   Joint Interest                         0.076           0.041         2478**        215            0.046         332          0.311        0.041         -0.016          0.054             276
                                         (0.058)         (0.057)        (1168)       (265)         (0.059)        (362)        (0.461)      (0.054)       (0.042)         (0.048)           (247)
    DV Mean                               0.487           0.382          2382         959            0.550        1906          2.74         0.269         0.144           0.509            1404
    N                                      704             709             687        674             664          598           645          648           648            1356             1272
Tests of Equality (Men=Women)
    P-Value: Individual Interest            0.346          0.072*        0.007***     0.034**         0.217      0.066*        0.273         0.467          0.210           0.150       0.014**
    P-Value: Spousal Interest               0.352           0.514          0.986        0.495         0.455       0.825       0.028**        0.600          0.331           0.959        0.810
    P-Value: Joint Interest                 0.151           0.655          0.135        0.842        0.064*       0.289        0.446         0.777          0.796          0.054*        0.521
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the couple level in parentheses. The individual interest rate is renormalized to run from 0-1, while the joint interest rate is renormalized to run from 0.2-
1. All variables denominated in Kenyan Shillings are top-coded at the 99th percentile and deflated to 2009 values. In 2009 Ksh 80≈$1. All regressions also control for own and spousal
cash prize selection. Pooled regressions also control for endline wave. Regressions for men and women are jointly estimated using seemingly unrelated regression in order to perform
tests of equality. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1 5, and 10 percent levels respectively.




                                                                                             16
Appendix Table A10. Returns to Capital and External Validity
A. Returns to Capital and Time to Effect Size from Individual Interest Subsidies
                                                             Initial Investment (in Ksh) Needed
                                                             to Meet Effect Sizes in 32 Months
                                            ΔMonthly            When Marginal Propensity to
                                             Income/                      Reinvest is:
                                            ΔCapital                 0.5               1
   Business Assets and Income               0.207***                113                 6
     Baseline Controls                       (0.088)
   Total Assets and Income                   0.190**                145                10
     Baseline Controls                       (0.093)

Panel B. Existing Evidence on Returns to Capital in Microenterprises
                                         ΔMonthly                                  Maximum
                                          Profit/       Monthly Return             Follow-Up
  Paper                                  ΔCapital           to Capital               Period
                                                          (i) 0.17-0.25,
  Udry and Anagol (2006)a                    --              (ii) 0.05                N/A
  de Mel et al. (2008)                   0.05-0.06             0.05                 2 years
  McKenzie and Woodruff (2008)           0.20-0.33               --                1.25 years
  de Mel et al. (2012)                   0.06-0.12              0.11                6 years
  Field et al. (2013)                    0.10-0.14          0.11-0.13               3 years
  Fafchamps et al. (2014)b               0.21-0.29               --                  1 year
  Blattman et al. (2014)                 0.04-0.07               --                 4 years
Notes: aEstimate (i) is for return to pineapple cultivation, (ii) is return to automotive capital
in Accra. bThese estimates divide the impact of an in-kind cash grant on monthly profits
(Table 3) by the value of the grant (150 cedis).




                                                 17
Appendix Table A11. Heterogeneity in Impacts by Baseline Bank Account Ownership
                                              (1)            (2)            (3)         (4)               (5)           (6)              (7)           (8)           (9)
                                                                       Outcomes from Endline 1:                                             Outcomes from Endline 2:

                                                        Total Income    Main                                         Monthly        Total Income Downwardly Monthly
                                         Total Assets    Last Month Occupation            Operating    Business      Business        Last Month Rigid Business Business
                                         (Hypersine)    (Hypersine) Entrepreneur          Business     Capital        Profits       (Hypersine)    Account      Profits
Had Bank Account at Baseline
   Individual Interest                     0.594**          0.227        0.167***          0.124*       5963*           659           0.481***         0.104*        1783***
                                           (0.293)         (0.205)        (0.071)          (0.074)      (3524)         (588)           (0.181)         (0.056)        (691)
   Spouse's Interest                        -0.431          -0.239         0.061            -0.007     -6642**          -539            0.039           0.002          790
                                           (0.292)         (0.198)        (0.070)          (0.073)      (3189)         (613)           (0.166)         (0.052)        (686)
   Joint Interest                          0.568*           0.147          -0.013           -0.019      6145*            494            -0.090          -0.094         -884
                                           (0.330)         (0.246)        (0.084)          (0.084)      (3616)         (641)           (0.196)         (0.065)        (772)
    DV Mean                                  10.7            9.25          0.390             0.554      10020          1885              9.51            0.153        2718
    N                                        225             278            308               305         296            295             267              288           268
Did Not Have Bank Account at Baseline
    Individual Interest                   0.425***        0.276**          0.051        0.090**           1547         413**            0.045           0.040*            226
                                           (0.167)         (0.137)        (0.037)        (0.040)         (1077)         (192)          (0.098)         (0.023)          (283)
    Spouse's Interest                       -0.017          0.187          0.027        0.086**           1204        548***            -0.067           0.027            232
                                           (0.157)         (0.133)        (0.037)        (0.041)          (996)         (178)          (0.107)         (0.024)          (276)
    Joint Interest                          -0.025          -0.005         0.028          0.024            -789          98.0           0.088            0.012            234
                                           (0.224)         (0.171)        (0.047)        (0.049)         (1224)         (204)          (0.124)         (0.029)          (308)
    DV Mean                                  9.74            8.12          0.326          0.446           3142           888             8.91            0.101           1587
    N                                         828            1001          1109           1104            1084          1073             958             1017             928
Tests of Equality (Banked=Non-Banked)
    P-Value: Individual Interest             0.615          0.841          0.157          0.688           0.233         0.690         0.033**            0.286         0.039**
    P-Value: Spousal Interest                0.207         0.068*          0.672          0.266         0.020**        0.087*           0.590            0.663          0.454
    P-Value: Joint Interest                  0.122          0.607          0.665          0.648          0.060*         0.552           0.434            0.127          0.166
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the couple level in parentheses. The individual interest rate is renormalized to run from 0-1, while the joint interest rate is renormalized
to run from 0.2-1. All variables denominated in Kenyan Shillings are top-coded at the 99th percentile and deflated to 2009 values. In 2009 Ksh 80≈$1. All regressions
also control for own and spousal cash prize selection. Pooled regressions also control for endline wave. Regressions for banked andunbanked are jointly estimated using
seemingly unrelated regression in order to perform tests of equality. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1 5, and 10 percent levels respectively.




                                                                                     18
Appendix Table A12. Impact of Interest Rates on Individually-Held and Jointly-Held Resources (Endline 1)
                                    (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)                        (6)              (7)             (8)
                                                    Individually-Held Resources                                          Jointly Held Resources
                                     Income -         Assets -       Business          Business         Income -        Assets -       Business          Business
                                    All Sources      All Sources      Income            Assets         All Sources     All Sources     Income             Assets
Individual Interest                  1142***          3536***         569***           1712**              -75.6          1642           -1.97             603
                                       (411)           (1489)          (191)             (855)            (98.4)         (1592)         (39.1)            (518)
Spouse's Interest                       112            -2506*           265               28.0              33.8          -2051          10.1              25.7
                                       (406)           (1452)          (187)             (786)            (103)          (1529)         (45.1)            (493)
Joint Interest                          391              252            216               361              -33.1           2896          -3.01             84.9
                                       (466)           (1822)          (208)            (1043)            (139)          (1904)         (52.1)            (554)

Cash Prize - Self                        253            755             -181              729             -19.3           -1733            10.3           -840**
                                        (382)          (1468)           (152)            (918)            (93.4)          (1373)          (41.0)           (376)
Cash Prize - Spouse                      245            2031             -128             175             220**            -2159           60.4             -258
                                        (390)          (1629)           (161)            (855)            (107)           (1416)          (45.2)           (438)

P-value: Ind+Spouse=0                 0.039**           0.609         0.003***           0.104            0.797          0.882            0.903            0.454
P-value: (Ind+Spouse)=Joint            0.241            0.791          0.077*            0.391            0.965          0.310            0.885            0.608
P-value: Cash Self+Spouse=0            0.381            0.212           0.217            0.461            0.219          0.091*           0.242           0.065*
P-value: Net Ind.=Net Cash             0.342            0.544         0.003***           0.586            0.285          0.341            0.432           0.070*
P-value: All Treatments=0              0.130           0.029**         0.037**           0.301            0.276          0.053*           0.849            0.161

DV Mean (0% Ind.)                        3110            7548             629             1998              903          13546              106             1056
DV Mean (4% Joint)                       3550           10283             866             3081              943          13202              137             1335
N                                        1317            1207            1375             1397              1363          1223             1410             1399
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the couple level in parentheses. During the endline respondents were asked to report whether resources were held individually
or jointly with a spouse. Hence, total resources per person (outcomes in Table 3) are equal to individual resources plus half of joint resources. To be consistent
with this coding and to keep outcomes in per capital terms, reported jointly-held resources are multiplied by one-half in this table. The individual interest rate is
renormalized to run from 0-1, while the joint interest rate is renormalized to run from 0.2-1. All variables denominated in Kenyan Shillings are top-coded at the
99th percentile and deflated to 2009 values. In 2009 Ksh 80≈$1. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1 5, and 10 percent levels respectively.




                                                                                 19
Appendix Table D1. Correlation Between Income and
Education by Round and Endline 2 Reporting Interval
                         (1)                (2)             (3)
                       Monthly            Weekly           Daily
Baseline                0.294              0.159           0.181
Endline 1               0.316              0.246           0.157
Endline 2               0.297              0.193           0.061
N                        517                377             376
Notes: This table reports the correlation coefficient between
monthly income at either baseline, endline 1, or endline 2 and
education (as recorded at baseline). The first column reports
correlations for individuals who chose to report income on a
monthly basis at endline 1. The second column reports correlations
for individuals who reported income on a weekly basis at endline 2,
and the third column reports correlations for those who reported
income on a daily basis at endline 2. All income measures are top-
coded at the 99th percentile.




                                 20
Appendix Table R1. Reporting Bias - Impact of Treatments on Pilot Product Ratings
                                          (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)

                                       Helpful:        Sign Up:        Helpful:       Sign Up:
                                         Scale            Scale         10/10           10/10
Individual Interest                     0.269            0.023          -0.011          0.047
                                       (0.199)          (0.214)        (0.049)         (0.051)
Spouse's Interest                       -0.148           -0.173         0.053           0.011
                                       (0.201)          (0.226)        (0.049)         (0.051)
Joint Interest                          0.309            0.303          0.092           0.042
                                       (0.252)          (0.294)        (0.064)         (0.062)
Cash Prize - Self                        0.232          0.289           0.044           0.076
                                        (0.177)        (0.216)         (0.049)         (0.047)
Cash Prize - Spouse                      -0.186        -0.436*         -0.082*          -0.075
                                        (0.189)        (0.246)         (0.048)         (0.049)

P-value: Ind+Spouse=0                    0.662          0.649           0.568           0.431
P-value: (Ind+Spouse)=Joint              0.609          0.296           0.588           0.864
P-value: Cash Self+Spouse=0              0.856          0.670           0.602           0.989
P-value: Net Ind.=Net Cash               0.849          0.994           0.449           0.590
P-value: All Treatments=0                0.258          0.200           0.199           0.239

DV Mean (0% Ind.)                         8.36            8.18            0.440         0.464
DV Mean (4% Joint)                        8.44            8.03            0.423         0.514
N                                         651             650              650           651
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the couple level in parentheses. The variables in the first
two columns run from 0 (least helpful/least likely to sign up) to 10 (most helpful/would
definitely sign up). The individual interest rate is renormalized to run from 0-1, while the joint
interest rate is renormalized to run from 0.2-1. The sample sizes in this table are small because
these questions were only asked to a subset of respondents. ***, **, and * indicate
significance at the 1 5, and 10 percent levels respectively.




                                                  21
Appendix Table R2. Robustness of Main Results to Additional Top-Coding and Trimming
                             (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)              (5)            (6)            (7)
                                        Top-Coded,     Top-Coded,     Top-Coded,       Trimmed,       Trimmed,       Trimmed,
                                           98th           95th           90th             99th           98th           95th
                            Raw          Percentile     Percentile     Percentile      Percentile     Percentile     Percentile
Panel A - Total Assets (Endline 1)
 Individual Interest     10927***       4455**              2013           1124         6436**         5028**            2587
                          (4608)        (2112)            (1502)         (1039)          (2932)        (2464)          (1875)
 Spousal Interest          -5652       -4746**             -1962          -1062        -6845***        -4287*          -3089*
                          (5142)        (2058)            (1480)         (1024)          (2799)        (2347)          (1839)
 Joint Interest             9797         4171             3411*          2706*           6254*           3554            2546
                          (6549)        (2746)            (2016)         (1432)          (3530)        (3017)          (2411)
 N                         27690        21924             17800          14080           23357          22414           19912
Panel B -Monthly Income (Endline 1)
 Individual Interest      1247**        961***            630**           342*         1143***          836**            362
                           (584)         (393)            (293)           (188)         (471)           (390)           (305)
 Spousal Interest           -277           175             121             90.5          105             120             468
                           (590)         (377)            (281)           (181)         (480)           (399)           (299)
 Joint Interest              680           515             392             322           377             372             627
                           (697)         (443)            (340)           (223)         (550)           (454)           (386)
 N                          4996         4299              3768           2944           4648            4265           3712
Panel C - Business Capital (Endline 1)
 Individual Interest      4533**        2096**            1219*          459**          1875*           1048             368
                          (2034)         (969)            (647)          (229)           (977)          (765)           (378)
 Spousal Interest          -1429         -64.9              119           138             890            215             334
                          (1437)         (894)            (615)          (224)           (892)          (706)           (363)
 Joint Interest            -17.2           623             301            89.7            390            239             276
                          (2301)        (1138)            (775)          (283)          (1108)          (903)           (441)
 N                          5708         4210              3302           1604           3964           3270            1690
Panel D - Monthly Business Profit (Endline 1)
 Individual Interest       576**        482***           350***          248***         437***         315**             154
                           (271)         (176)            (126)           (94.6)         (169)          (145)          (94.9)
 Spousal Interest            228         346*             239*           199**          393**          346***            123
                           (260)         (178)            (126)           (96.5)         (170)          (142)          (96.4)
 Joint Interest              178           197             114             102            301            41.7           -6.26
                           (293)         (199)            (151)           (115)          (205)          (165)          (115)
 N                          1160         1007              877             725            936            909             661
Panel E - Monthly Income (Endline 2)
 Individual Interest       1808*       2054***           1717**          1118**         1265**            799            583
                           (944)         (855)            (742)           (535)          (630)          (539)           (427)
 Spousal Interest           -176          -151            -84.6            295            76.5           -195            398
                           (774)         (830)            (727)           (534)          (634)          (533)           (439)
 Joint Interest           2421**         1545             1157             537            777             287            257
                          (1205)        (1110)            (954)           (692)          (806)          (659)           (554)
 N                          1225         1225             1225            1225           1213           1201            1168
Panel F - Monthly Business Profit (Endline 2)
 Individual Interest      738***        622***            429**          343**            437*         521***            191
                           (292)         (256)            (194)          (150)           (240)          (221)           (151)
 Spousal Interest            285           391             342*           287*           548**         555***           282*
                           (286)         (256)            (197)          (154)           (242)          (221)           (160)
 Joint Interest              147         -1.57             -111           -140            -189           -345            -170
                           (346)         (308)            (238)          (187)           (288)          (257)           (186)
 N                          1196         1196              1196           1196            1185          1175            1137
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the couple level in parentheses. The individual interest rate is renormalized to run from 0-
1, while the joint interest rate is renormalized to run from 0.2-1. All regressions control for individual and spousal cash prize
selection. All variables denominated in Kenyan Shillings are deflated to 2009 values. In 2009 Ksh 80≈$1. ***, **, and *
indicate significance at the 1 5, and 10 percent levels respectively.




                                                              22
Appendix Table R3. Robustness of Main Results to Imputing Missing Values
                                               (1)            (2)               (3)             (4)               (5)               (6)
                                        Total Assets       Monthly          Business         Business          Monthly          Business
                                            (EL1)       Income (EL1) Assets (EL1) Profits (EL1) Income (EL2) Profits (EL2)
Panel A - Impute Mean Values
     Individual Interest                    3737*           795**           2361***           477***           1348***           497***
                                            (1983)          (391)            (1007)            (175)            (551)             (206)
     Spousal Interest                      -3437*             140              -106            298*             -35.6              309
                                            (1930)          (379)             (931)            (178)            (525)             (206)
     Joint Interest                          2485             361              451              219              1134              30.9
                                            (2559)          (462)            (1187)            (194)            (721)             (249)
Panel B - Predict Missing Values Using Baseline Covariates
     Individual Interest                    3578*            725*            2207**           469***           1385***            414**
                                            (2093)          (404)            (1017)            (178)            (574)             (210)
     Spousal Interest                        -3194            195              97.0            328*              -108              271
                                            (2074)          (399)             (944)            (189)            (552)             (210)
     Joint Interest                          3295             253              314              221               776             -94.9
                                            (2723)          (477)            (1211)            (203)            (765)             (258)
Panel C - Reverse Imputation by Individual Interest Rate
     Individual Interest                     3028            678*             1955*           411***            963*               332
                                            (1985)          (391)            (1010)            (175)            (553)             (207)
     Spousal Interest                      -3512*             135              -147            297*             -41.4              304
                                            (1931)          (379)             (934)            (178)            (526)             (207)
     Joint Interest                          2379             353              371              210              1127              26.6
                                            (2559)          (462)            (1187)            (194)            (722)             (250)
Panel D - Percentile Imputation by Individual Interest Rate
     Individual Interest                      1181            451           2439***           414***             -363             -92.1
                                            (2026)          (398)            (1013)            (176)            (575)             (214)
     Spousal Interest                      -3286*             145             -26.4            296*             -11.5              344
                                            (1967)          (387)             (937)            (179)            (544)             (214)
     Joint Interest                          2290             294              484              198               983             -43.6
                                            (2595)          (474)            (1192)            (194)            (737)             (256)
N                                             1558           1558             1558             1558             1558              1558
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the couple level in parentheses. All regressions control for individual and spousal cash prize
selection. The individual interest rate is renormalized to run from 0-1, while the joint interest rate is renormalized to run from 0.2-1.
All variables are top-coded at the 99th percentile. In Panel A, missing values of the dependent variable are replaced with overall
means among non-missing observations. In Panel B, missing values are replaced by predicted values obtained by regressing the
dependent variable of interest on the baseline control set listed in Table 1. In Panel C, missing values in the 0 percent individual
interest rate group are replaced by the mean value in the 20 percent individual interest rate group. Missing values in the 4 percent
interest group are replaced with the mean in the 12 percent interest group, missing values in the 12 percent interest group are replaced
with the mean in the 4 percent interest group, and missing values in the 20 percent interest group are replaced with the mean value in
the 0 percent interest group. In Panel D missing values in the 0 percent individual interest group are replaced with the 80th percentile
among non-missing values. Missing values in the 4 percent interest group are replaced with the 60th percentile, missing values in the
12 percent interest group are replaced with the 40th percentile, and missing values in the 20 percent interest group are replaced with
the 20th percentile. All variables denominated in Kenyan Shillings are deflated to 2009 values. In 2009 Ksh 80≈$1. ***, **, and *
indicate significance at the 1 5, and 10 percent levels respectively.




                                                                   23
Table R4. Long-Run (3-Year) Impacts on Overall Economic Outcomes - Nonlinear Effect of Interest Rates
                               (1)      (2)         (3)       (4)      (5)         (6)             (7)       (8)         (9)                         (10)
                                                 Wave 1 Endline                                        Wave 2 Endline                              Pooled
                          Has Bank    Bank        Total     Total      Net      Monthly       Monthly Savings a        Saves                       Monthly
                           Account   Savings     Assets      Debt    Assets     Income         Income     Priority   Regularly                     Income
Individual Interest Rate:
   4 Percent                -0.010    -272        3993       -625    5435*        352             197      0.009       0.020                        280
                            (0.036)   (416)      (2822)    (1990)    (3275)      (440)           (951)    (0.029)     (0.037)                      (574)
   12 Percent                0.037    861*       4134*       -571    5487*      1016**        2575***      0.013       0.029                      1787***
                            (0.034)   (483)      (2439)    (2022)    (3065)      (474)          (1023)    (0.030)     (0.034)                      (610)
   20 Percent              0.082***    446      7223***      -157   9408***     1076**          1989*      0.039      0.082**                     1526***
                            (0.034)   (474)      (2850)    (1799)    (3101)      (513)          (1093)    (0.030)     (0.036)                      (648)
Spousal Interest Rate:
   4 Percent                 0.007     303        1035       1098      628        291             346      0.018       0.038                         329
                            (0.035)   (534)      (3134)    (1909)    (3373)      (482)          (1089)    (0.028)     (0.038)                       (658)
   12 Percent                -0.017    -436       -2535      1528     -2002       136             313      -0.010      -0.029                        237
                            (0.033)   (456)      (2722)    (1917)    (2938)      (479)          (1043)    (0.031)     (0.034)                       (614)
   20 Percent                 0.031    -242      -5169*      2258   -6303**       246             4.74      0.023       0.024                        130
                            (0.035)   (489)      (2701)    (1643)    (2996)      (499)          (1024)    (0.030)     (0.036)                       (616)
Joint Interest Rate:
   12 Percent                -0.010    -312        1283       917      129        170             -407      0.009     -0.060*                        -119
                            (0.033)   (436)      (2826)    (1607)    (2945)      (449)           (921)    (0.028)     (0.033)                       (557)
   20 Percent               0.058*     -388        3973     3389*     -1152       425           1708*     0.045*       -0.006                       1055*
                            (0.031)   (415)      (2628)    (1922)    (2888)      (439)          (1036)    (0.027)     (0.033)                       (614)
P-Values from Test of Linearity:
   Individual Interest        0.710   0.180       0.607     0.936     0.464      0.694           0.339      0.904       0.767                       0.318
   Spousal Interest           0.467   0.423       0.773     0.939     0.721      0.845           0.911      0.459       0.140                       0.868
   Joint Interest             0.114   0.829       0.677     0.465     0.769      0.827          0.098*      0.445     0.049**                       0.149

DV Mean (0% Ind.)             0.664         1530          21913       7724         13579        4265          9499        0.817         0.286          6812
DV Mean (4% Joint)            0.675         2017          24029       5864         19105        4657         10295        0.813         0.343          7414
N                             1413          1237           1053       1394          1039        1279          1225         1317         1322           2504
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the couple level in parentheses. All specification also control for own and spousal cash prize selection. The pooled
income regression also controls for survey round. All variables denominated in Kenyan Shillings are top-coded at the 99th percentile and deflated to 2009
values. In 2009 Ksh 80≈$1. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1 5, and 10 percent levels respectively.




                                                                            24
Table R5. Long-Run Impact of Interest Subsidies on Entrepreneurial Activity - Nonlinear Effect of Interest Rate
                          (1)           (2)         (3)       (4)           (5)        (6)           (7)                     (8)           (9)            (10)            (11)
                                       Wave 1 Endline                                           Wave 2 Endline                                                   Pooled
                                                                                                                                      Downwardly
                                Main                                               Has                     Hours                         Rigid            Has
                             Occupation Has Business Business       Business     Business     Business    Worked on Has Business       Business         Business      Business
                            Entrepreneur   Profit    Capital         Profits      Profit       Profits    Business    Budget            Budget           Profit        Profits
Individual Interest Rate:
   4 Percent                 0.086***     0.071**        1914*        261          0.042        204          0.307       0.067**        0.048**          0.064**         237
                              (0.036)      (0.034)        (995)      (169)        (0.039)      (249)        (0.267)       (0.030)        (0.021)         (0.030)        (158)
   12 Percent                0.084**       0.056*          195       411**        0.073**      584**         0.436       0.093***       0.086***        0.073***       496***
                              (0.037)      (0.033)        (891)      (205)        (0.037)      (272)        (0.277)       (0.031)        (0.023)         (0.029)        (195)
   20 Percent                0.127***     0.103***      3714***     592***         0.047       606**         0.370        0.060*        0.059***        0.087***       600***
                              (0.038)      (0.034)       (1178)      (213)        (0.039)      (285)        (0.283)       (0.031)        (0.022)         (0.031)        (193)
Spousal Interest Rate:
  4 Percent                    0.061*       0.012         1389        81.5         -0.013       119         0.176          0.050*         0.028           0.027            99.5
                              (0.036)      (0.034)       (1193)      (195)        (0.039)      (282)       (0.281)        (0.030)        (0.023)         (0.030)          (194)
   12 Percent                  0.052        0.042         -300        89.8         0.034        101         0.284          0.041          0.037           0.041            96.5
                              (0.036)      (0.034)       (1050)      (192)        (0.037)      (257)       (0.271)        (0.031)        (0.023)         (0.030)          (175)
   20 Percent                 0.087**       0.031         302        385*         0.070*        437        0.639**        0.063**         0.025         0.083***          408**
                              (0.039)      (0.035)       (1080)      (219)        (0.039)      (285)       (0.292)        (0.032)        (0.024)         (0.031)          (195)
Joint Interest Rate:
   12 Percent               -0.069*        -0.061*        -427        37.3       -0.081**       190          -0.364        -0.003         0.002        -0.075***           109
                            (0.035)        (0.032)       (1033)      (189)        (0.036)      (274)        (0.268)       (0.029)        (0.023)        (0.029)           (194)
  20 Percent                 0.012          0.015         610         200          -0.024       28.0         0.030         0.019          -0.011         -0.007            121
                            (0.035)        (0.034)       (1083)      (178)        (0.036)      (254)        (0.267)       (0.029)        (0.022)        (0.029)           (174)
P-Values from Test of Linearity:
  Individual Interest        0.185          0.228       0.018**      0.657         0.338       0.691        0.539         0.038**        0.034**          0.235           0.641
  Spousal Interest           0.381          0.760        0.318       0.655         0.756       0.753        0.876          0.401          0.416           0.836           0.586
  Joint Interest           0.012**        0.009***       0.396       0.639        0.031**      0.483        0.089*         0.568          0.647         0.005***          0.836

DV Mean (0% Ind.)              0.398         0.284         3263        796           0.424       1504         2.04          0.155          0.066          0.405         1128
DV Mean (4% Joint)             0.488         0.355         4575       1036           0.500       1815         2.44          0.205          0.117          0.487         1402
N                              1409           1417         1380       1368           1325        1196         1288          1305           1305            2717         2564
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the couple level in parentheses. All specification also control for own and spousal cash prize selection. The pooled regressions also control
for survey round. All variables denominated in Kenyan Shillings are top-coded at the 99th percentile and deflated to 2009 values. In 2009 Ksh 80≈$1 ***, **, and * indicate
significance at the 1 5, and 10 percent levels respectively.




                                                                                      25
Table R6. Impact of Interest Subsidies on Public Goods and Spousal Agreement - Nonlinear Effect of Interest Rate
                                        (1)             (2)              (3)           (4)             (5)              (6)

                                       Value          Any             Home Has     Agreement - Agreement - Savings Decision
                                     Livestock     Renovations        Permanent   How to Spend How Much to Making -Decide
                                    (Hypersine)     Last Year            Roof        Money        Save         Together
Individual Interest Rate:
   4 Percent                           0.003           0.028            0.036        -0.054          -0.072           -0.069*
                                      (0.204)         (0.037)          (0.034)       (0.203)         (0.227)          (0.036)
   12 Percent                         0.359*           0.001           -0.007          0.111          0.042           -0.067*
                                      (0.185)         (0.035)          (0.033)       (0.187)         (0.220)          (0.036)
   20 Percent                          -0.005          0.031            0.021         -0.174          -0.112         -0.072**
                                      (0.211)         (0.037)          (0.033)       (0.199)         (0.226)          (0.037)
Spousal Interest Rate:
  4 Percent                            -0.012          0.046           0.059*       -0.450**        -0.394*            0.000
                                      (0.200)         (0.037)          (0.034)       (0.205)        (0.235)           (0.036)
   12 Percent                          0.165          -0.017            0.012        -0.087          0.061            -0.024
                                      (0.190)         (0.035)          (0.033)       (0.185)        (0.218)           (0.035)
   20 Percent                          -0.110          0.049            0.034         0.094          -0.117            0.033
                                      (0.207)         (0.037)          (0.034)       (0.192)        (0.228)           (0.037)
Joint Interest Rate:
   12 Percent                         0.260           -0.002           0.067*         0.231           0.269         -0.096***
                                     (0.217)          (0.036)          (0.040)       (0.190)         (0.207)         (0.033)
   20 Percent                        0.464**          0.068*           0.073*        0.328*          0.339*           0.004
                                     (0.209)          (0.036)          (0.040)       (0.173)         (0.194)         (0.033)
P-Values of Test of Linearity:
  Individual Interest                 0.062*          0.618             0.357        0.366           0.780             0.228
  Spousal Interest                    0.352           0.117             0.168       0.045**          0.100             0.371
  Joint Interest                      0.919           0.180             0.490        0.832           0.714           0.001***

DV Mean (0% Ind.)                       8.78           0.468           0.715            7.55            7.34           0.432
DV Mean (4% Joint)                      8.63           0.460           0.681            7.34            7.11           0.412
N                                       1366            1404           1411             1398            1397            1411
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the couple level in parentheses. All specification also control for own and spousal cash prize
selection. The agreement variables run from 0 (no agreement) to 10 (perfect agreement). The value of livestock is deflated to
2009 values. In 2009 Ksh 80≈$1 ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1 5, and 10 percent levels respectively.




                                                                 26
Table R7. Long-Run (3-Year) Impacts on Overall Economic Outcomes - Control for ATM Card and Information Sharing Treatments
                                 (1)          (2)        (3)       (4)         (5)     (6)           (7)       (8)           (9)                               (10)
                                                      Wave 1 Endline                                      Wave 2 Endline                                     Pooled
                              Has Bank      Bank        Total     Total        Net   Monthly     Monthly Savings a         Saves                            Monthly
                              Account      Savings     Assets     Debt       Assets  Income       Income     Priority   Regularly                           Income
Individual Interest           0.088***      785*      6121**      -120     7855*** 1136***       2452***      0.036      0.075***                           1785***
                               (0.032)      (437)      (2633)   (1636)       (2797)   (478)        (1005)    (0.028)      (0.032)                             (597)
Spouse's Interest               0.019        -486    -5908***     1941     -6543***    117          -147      0.010        -0.002                             -15.7
                               (0.032)      (447)      (2490)   (1568)       (2781)   (468)         (949)    (0.028)      (0.032)                             (574)
Joint Interest                 0.072*        -511       5119     4717*        -1827    557         2317*     0.055*         0.002                            1415*
                               (0.040)      (535)      (3338)   (2494)       (3699)   (556)        (1342)    (0.033)      (0.042)                             (795)

Cash Prize - Self                    0.038        1220**        -2302       -1386       -2436          187           -184        0.037        -0.026          -2.47
                                    (0.031)        (589)        (2456)      (1622)      (2683)        (439)         (1120)      (0.025)      (0.033)          (663)
Cash Prize - Spouse                  -0.008         271          -1160       1705        -544          518        -2208***       -0.003     -0.096***          -814
                                    (0.031)        (424)        (2626)      (2079)      (2833)        (454)          (862)      (0.026)      (0.031)          (552)

P-value: Ind+Spouse=0               0.034**        0.609        0.958        0.418       0.752       0.072*         0.131        0.270        0.126         0.051*
P-value: (Ind+Spouse)=Joint          0.563         0.319        0.367        0.399       0.590        0.410         0.995        0.868        0.263          0.758
P-value: Cash Self+Spouse=0          0.514        0.046**       0.391        0.903       0.478        0.292         0.094*       0.403      0.009***         0.359
P-value: Net Ind.=Net Cash           0.278         0.203        0.483        0.637       0.431        0.543        0.020**       0.832      0.003***        0.032**
P-value: All Treatments=0           0.026**        0.223      0.002***       0.268     0.004***       0.239        0.012**       0.155      0.008***        0.012**

DV Mean (0% Ind.)                      0.664        1530          21913          7724      13579        4265            9499       0.817       0.286          6812
DV Mean (4% Joint)                     0.675        2017          24029          5864      19105        4657           10295       0.813       0.343          7414
N                                      1413         1237           1053          1394       1039        1279            1225       1317         1322          2504
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the couple level in parentheses. All regressions include additional controls for whether an individual was selected for an "ex-
ante" ATM card, whether the spouse was selected for an "ex-ante" ATM card, whether the joint account was selected for an "ex-ante" ATM card, whether the
couple was selected for the "extra statements" information sharing treatment, and a dummy variable indicating the first 6 experimental sessions. The individual
interest rate is renormalized to run from 0-1, while the joint interest rate is renormalized to run from 0.2-1. All variables denominated in Kenyan Shillings are top-
coded at the 99th percentile and deflated to 2009 values. In 2009 Ksh 80≈$1. The pooled income regression also controls for survey round. ***, **, and * indicate
significance at the 1 5, and 10 percent levels respectively.




                                                                                  27
Table R8. Long-Run Impact of Interest Subsidies on Entrepreneurial Activity - Control for ATM Card and Information Sharing Treatments
                                    (1)           (2)        (3)       (4)          (5)        (6)        (7)         (8)           (9)                            (10)            (11)
                                               Wave 1 Endline                                        Wave 2 Endline                                                       Pooled
                                                                                                                              Downwardly
                                   Main                                                                 Hours                     Rigid
                                Occupation Operating Business Business Operating Business Worked on Has Business Business                                       Operating     Business
                               Entrepreneur Business      Capital    Profits    Business    Profits   Business      Budget       Budget                         Business       Profits
Individual Interest              0.104***      0.078*** 2643** 551***             0.045     625***      0.353       0.053*      0.059***                        0.077***      588***
                                  (0.036)       (0.032)    (1144)    (200)       (0.036)     (263)     (0.261)      (0.029)      (0.021)                         (0.030)       (180)
Spouse's Interest                 0.068*         0.034      -353      343*       0.079**      360      0.576**       0.048        0.020                         0.078***        350*
                                  (0.036)       (0.032)    (1038)    (206)       (0.036)     (265)     (0.267)      (0.030)      (0.022)                         (0.030)       (185)
Joint Interest                     0.022         0.027      809        206        -0.028      14.6      0.090        0.031        -0.008                          -0.010         117
                                  (0.044)       (0.042)    (1353)    (224)       (0.045)     (323)     (0.333)      (0.036)      (0.028)                         (0.037)       (221)

Cash Prize - Self                       0.002         0.036        -779        -196        0.013      -538***        0.049          -0.032         -0.018         0.015       -355***
                                       (0.034)       (0.033)      (1034)      (160)       (0.037)      (224)        (0.263)        (0.029)        (0.021)        (0.029)        (151)
Cash Prize - Spouse                     -0.022       -0.056*       21.1       -33.3        -0.026     -610***       -0.466*       -0.058**         -0.019         -0.020       -307*
                                       (0.034)       (0.032)      (1117)      (179)       (0.036)      (218)        (0.238)        (0.027)        (0.021)        (0.027)        (165)

P-value: Ind+Spouse=0                 0.002***       0.020**       0.164    0.003***      0.022**     0.017**       0.023**       0.021**        0.014**        0.001***      0.001***
P-value: (Ind+Spouse)=Joint           0.031**         0.179        0.522     0.064*       0.030**      0.058*         0.110         0.225        0.043**        0.004***       0.021**
P-value: Cash Self+Spouse=0             0.697         0.682        0.627      0.389        0.827      0.001***       0.301        0.028**          0.258          0.909       0.009***
P-value: Net Ind.=Net Cash            0.013**        0.066*        0.165    0.004***       0.086*     0.000***      0.022**       0.002***       0.009***        0.012**      0.000***
P-value: All Treatments=0              0.050*        0.039**       0.223     0.046**       0.219      0.003***       0.063*        0.055*         0.091*         0.025**      0.002***

DV Mean (0% Ind.)                        0.398          0.284        3263          796        0.424        1504          2.04        0.155         0.066           0.411         1128
DV Mean (4% Joint)                       0.488          0.355        4575         1036        0.500        1815          2.44        0.205         0.117           0.492         1402
N                                         1409          1417         1380         1368         1325        1196          1288         1305         1305             2605         2564
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the couple level in parentheses. All regressions include additional controls for whether an individual was selected for an "ex-ante" ATM card,
whether the spouse was selected for an "ex-ante" ATM card, whether the joint account was selected for an "ex-ante" ATM card, whether the couple was selected for the "extra
statements" information sharing treatment, and a dummy variable indicating the first 6 experimental sessions. The pooled regressions also control for survey round. The individual
interest rate is renormalized to run from 0-1, while the joint interest rate is renormalized to run from 0.2-1. All variables denominated in Kenyan Shillings are top-coded at the 99th
percentile and deflated to 2009 values. In 2009 Ksh 80≈$1 ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1 5, and 10 percent levels respectively.




                                                                                          28
Table R9. Impact of Interest Rates on Public Goods and Spousal Agreement (Endline 1) - Control for ATM Card and
Information Sharing Treatments
                                        (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)              (6)

                                      Value           Any           Home Has     Agreement - Agreement - Savings Decision
                                    Livestock     Renovations       Permanent   How to Spend How Much to Making -Decide
                                   (Hypersine)     Last Year           Roof        Money        Save         Together
Individual Interest                   0.095          0.018            0.002        -0.122      -0.065        -0.058*
                                     (0.196)        (0.035)          (0.031)       (0.177)     (0.208)        (0.034)
Spouse's Interest                     -0.045         0.022            0.012         0.238       0.080          0.021
                                     (0.193)        (0.035)          (0.031)       (0.172)     (0.210)        (0.034)
Joint Interest                       0.564**        0.084*            0.093*       0.368*       0.371          0.001
                                     (0.262)        (0.045)          (0.050)       (0.217)     (0.242)        (0.042)

Cash Prize - Self                     -0.150         -0.065*        -0.068**         0.156          -0.005            0.004
                                      (0.185)        (0.035)         (0.032)        (0.168)         (0.206)          (0.035)
Cash Prize - Spouse                    -0.268         -0.011          -0.044         0.273           -0.058           -0.035
                                      (0.187)        (0.035)         (0.031)        (0.168)         (0.211)          (0.034)

P-value: Ind+Spouse=0                 0.886           0.465          0.805          0.657           0.961             0.465
P-value: (Ind+Spouse)=Joint           0.240           0.540          0.305          0.473           0.382             0.564
P-value: Cash Self+Spouse=0           0.201           0.164          0.066*         0.098*          0.838             0.559
P-value: Net Ind.=Net Cash            0.312           0.137          0.150          0.400           0.863             0.926
P-value: All Treatments=0             0.210           0.231           0.111         0.056*          0.754             0.463

DV Mean (0% Ind.)                        8.78           0.468            0.715          7.55           7.34             0.432
DV Mean (4% Joint)                       8.63           0.460            0.681          7.34           7.11             0.412
N                                        1366            1404            1411           1398          1397              1411
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the couple level in parentheses. All regressions include additional controls for whether an
individual was selected for an "ex-ante" ATM card, whether the spouse was selected for an "ex-ante" ATM card, whether the
joint account was selected for an "ex-ante" ATM card, whether the couple was selected for the "extra statements" information
sharing treatment, and a dummy variable indicating the first 6 experimental sessions. The individual interest rate is renormalized
to run from 0-1, while the joint interest rate is renormalized to run from 0.2-1. The agreement variables run from 0 (no
agreement) to 10 (perfect agreement). The value of livestock is deflated to 2009 values. In 2009 Ksh 80≈$1 ***, **, and *
indicate significance at the 1 5, and 10 percent levels respectively.




                                                               29
Appendix Figure A1. Timeline of Experimental Activities


     Day before                                                       1 day - 3 months 6 months
                                                                        post-meeting                3 years   4 years
  account opening            Account opening group meeting                               post-       post-     post-
      meeting                                                                           meeting     meeting   meeting



        Subject       Couples    Baseline Couples Cash prize               Cash prize    Interest   Wave 1    Wave 2
     recruitment, draw interest survey      decide   drawing               payments     payments    endline   endline
      invitations rate subsidies             which                           made         made
      passed out     for joint,            accounts
                    husband’s,             to open,
                       wife’s               fill out
                      account             paperwork

Note: Activities took place in sequential order from left to right.




                                                                      30
Appendix Figure A2. Impact of Interest Rate Subsidies on Short-Run Experimental Account Deposits and Balances


                                                                                                A. Total Deposits
                                                          i. Interest Subsidy to Individual Account                                                ii. Interest Subsidy to Joint Account
                                          1000 2000




                                                                                                                                  1000 2000
                               Total Deposits




                                                                                                                       Total Deposits
                                      0




                                                                                                                              0
                      -2000 -1000




                                                                                                              -2000 -1000
                     150




                                                      Own Indiv. Spousal Indiv.  Joint         Total                                           Individual         Joint              Total
                                                       Account     Account      Account                                                       Account (x2)       Account
                     100




                                                                                          B. Average Daily Balance
                      avg_bal_coeff




                                                          i. Interest Subsidy to Individual Account                                                ii. Interest Subsidy to Joint Account
                                      100 200 300




                                                                                                              -200 -100 0 100 200 300
                 0 Balance50




                                                                                                                  Average Daily Balance
     -50Average Daily
                                      0
                                      -200 -100




                                                      Own Indiv. Spousal Indiv.  Joint         Total                                           Individual         Joint              Total
                                                       Account 1 Account        Account         2                                             Account (x2)
                                                                                                                                                       3         Account              4
                                                                                                            accttype

                                                                       Own Account Effect                                    Spillover Effect                              Total Effect

Notes: This figure provides a graphical representation of estimates in Table 2. The darkest bars give the direct impact of the
interest rate on the account attached to that interest rate. The lightest bars give the effect of a given interest rate on other
potential accounts. The mid-toned bar reflects the total effect of a given interest rate on deposits/balances across all
experimental accounts. Whiskers give 90 and 95 percent confidence intervals based on robust standard errors clustered at the
couple level when relevant. See notes to Table 2 for additional detail.




                                                                                                       31
Appendix Figure A3. Distributional Impact of Interest Rates on Long-Run Business Outcomes



                                                             A. Impact of Individual Interest

                                          Business Assets                                   Business Profit - Endline 1                               Business Profit - Endline 2




                                                                          15
                                  15




                                                                                                                                                  3
          Impact/Control Quantile




                                                              Impact/Control Quantile




                                                                                                                          Impact/Control Quantile
                         10




                                                                             10




                                                                                                                                   1      2
                 5




                                                                   5




                                                                                                                            0
                        0




                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                     -1
                                        75 80 85 90 95 100                                  75 80 85 90 95 100                                        60    70     80 90     100
                                              Quantile                                            Quantile                                                       Quantile



                                                                       B. Impact of Joint Interest

                                          Business Assets                                   Business Profit - Endline 1                               Business Profit - Endline 2
                                                                                      1.5
                                  1.5




                                                                                                                                                  1
          Impact/Control Quantile




                                                              Impact/Control Quantile




                                                                                                                          Impact/Control Quantile
                             1




                                                                                1




                                                                                                                                           .5
                       .5




                                                                        .5




                                                                                                                                   0
                  0




                                                                                                                            -.5
                                                                 0
            -.5         -1




                                                                                                                                     -1
                                                                          -.5




                                        75 80 85 90 95 100                                  75 80 85 90 95 100                                        60    70     80 90     100
                                              Quantile                                            Quantile                                                       Quantile



Notes: This chart graphs coefficients from quantile regressions of the outcome of interest on the individual, spousal, and joint interest rate, as well as
the cash prize. The interest rate variables have been normalized to run from 0 to 1 (individual and spousal interest) or 0.2 to 1 (joint interest). All
point estimates have been divided by the quantile in the lowest interest group so that point estimates give percent changes. Whiskers give 90 and 95
percent confidence intervals and are scaled in the same way.




                                                                                                     32
Appendix Figure D1. Distribution of Income by Survey Round and Endline 2 Reporting Interval


                           A. Monthly Reporting                                                B. Weekly Reporting                                             C. Daily Reporting


          .0002




                                                                           .0002




                                                                                                                                            .0002
          .00015




                                                                           .00015




                                                                                                                                            .00015
                                                                                                C. Daily Reporting




                                                          .0002
        Density




                                                                         Density




                                                                                                                                          Density
      .0001




                                                                       .0001




                                                                                                                                        .0001
                                                          .00015
                                                       Density
                                                       .0001
          .00005




                                                                           .00005




                                                                                                                                            .00005
                                                          .00005
          0




                                                                           0




                                                                                                                                            0
                                                          0




                   0   20000   40000      60000            80000
                                                              0                     020000 20000    40000
                                                                                                    40000       60000 60000
                                                                                                                         80000             800000        20000   40000      60000           80000
                         Income - Monthly Basis                                              Income
                                                                                              Income -- Monthly Basis
                                                                                                                Basis                                      Income - Monthly Basis
                                                                                    Baseline            Endline 1                Endline 2

Notes: This chart graphs the distribution of monthly income at baseline, endline 1, and endline 2 by endline 2 income reporting interval. All income measures have been top-coded at the 99th percentile.




                                                                                                 33
