                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          LONG-TERM ORIENTATION AND EDUCATIONAL PERFORMANCE

                                         David Figlio
                                        Paola Giuliano
                                         Umut Özek
                                        Paola Sapienza

                                     Working Paper 22541
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22541


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2016

We thank participants at Bocconi University, Catholic University of the Sacred Hearth (Milan),
Erasmus University, European Association of Labor Economists, Family and Education
Workshop, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, IZA, Gerzensee Summer Symposium 2015,
Harvard-MIT Positive Political Economy Seminar, Long Run Factors in Comparative
Development conference, New York University, Nordic Summer Institute in Labor Economics,
OECD, University of British Columbia, University of Calgary, University of Colorado,
University of Warwick, University of Zurich and the Warwick summer Workshop in Economic
Growth for comments that substantially improved the papers. We also thank Gaia Dossi and
Riccardo Marchingiglio for extraordinary research assistantship. We appreciate the financial
support from the National Institutes of Child Health and Human Development (Figlio), National
Science Foundation (Figlio), and US Department of Education (Figlio and Özek). We are
especially grateful to the Florida Department of Education and Health for providing the linked
population-level administrative data that permitted this analysis to take place. All errors and
opinions are those of the authors and do not reflect those of the funders or the Florida
Departments of Education and Health. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by David Figlio, Paola Giuliano, Umut Özek, and Paola Sapienza. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Long-Term Orientation and Educational Performance
David Figlio, Paola Giuliano, Umut Özek, and Paola Sapienza
NBER Working Paper No. 22541
August 2016
JEL No. I20,I24,J15,Z1

                                           ABSTRACT

We use remarkable population-level administrative education and birth records from Florida to
study the role of Long-Term Orientation on the educational attainment of immigrant students
living in the US. Controlling for the quality of schools and individual characteristics, students
from countries with long term oriented attitudes perform better than students from cultures that
do not emphasize the importance of delayed gratification. These students perform better in third
grade reading and math tests, have larger test score gains over time, have fewer absences and
disciplinary incidents, are less likely to repeat grades, and are more likely to graduate from high
school in four years. Also, they are more likely to enroll in advanced high school courses,
especially in scientific subjects. Parents from long term oriented cultures are more likely to secure
better educational opportunities for their children. A larger fraction of immigrants speaking the
same language in the school amplifies the effect of Long-Term Orientation on educational
performance. We validate these results using a sample of immigrant students living in 37
different countries.

David Figlio                                      Umut Özek
Institute for Policy Research                     American Institutes for Research/CALDER
Northwestern University                           1000 Thomas Jefferson St. NW
2040 Sheridan Road                                Washington, DC 20007
Evanston, IL 60208                                uozek@air.org
and NBER
figlio@northwestern.edu                           Paola Sapienza
                                                  Kellogg School of Management
Paola Giuliano                                    Northwestern University
Anderson School of Management                     2001 Sheridan Road
UCLA                                              Evanston, IL 60208
110 Westwood Plaza                                and CEPR
C517 Entrepreneurs Hall                           and also NBER
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481                        paola-sapienza@northwestern.edu
and IZA
and also NBER
paola.giuliano@anderson.ucla.edu
Introduction

        Several papers find a remarkable correlation between individual educational achievement and
family socioeconomic background in the US and around the world (see, e.g., Black, Devereux, and
Salvanes, 2005; Chevalier, Denny, and McMahon, 2009; Fryer and Levitt, 2004; Hanushek and
Woessmann, 2010; Hertz et al, 2007; Reardon and Galindo, 2009; and Rothstein and Wozny, 2013).
To understand the strong persistence in educational achievement across generations, several
economists have tried to examine the direct effect on education of some specific components of
parental socioeconomic background: parental education, income, and wealth.2 This research has found
at most moderately-sized (and often zero) causal effects, suggesting that much of the correlation
between parents’ and children’s educational outcomes must be due to other family characteristics,
including access to high quality schools (Rouse and Barrow, 2006), or inherited abilities and traits
(Krapohl et al., 2014).
        Parents transmit to their children not only human capital, income, wealth, and genetic traits
but also a specific set of cultural values (Bisin and Verdier, 2001). This paper follows the literature on
cultural transmission and explores the importance of a distinct cultural trait transmitted from parents
to children as an alternative and complementary source of persistence in educational outcomes across
generations. Research in psychology suggests that the ability to defer gratification and to exert self-
control fosters educational attainment and cognitive competence (Mischel and Ebbese, 1970; Mischel
et al., 1988; Mischel et al., 1989; Shoda et al., 1990). In a recent paper, Galor and Ozak (2016) show a
remarkable persistence over time of preferences for delayed gratification and trace their origin to
geographical conditions that affected the return to agricultural investment. Furthermore, Galor and
Ozak (2016) show that, across geographical areas, preferences for delayed gratification correlate, not
only with education, but also with technology adoption and savings. Given that time preferences and
delayed gratification correlate with educational attainment at the macro level, in this paper we study
whether the transmission of these preferences across generations can explain individual educational
attainment and possibly account for the intergenerational persistence observed in the literature.
        To investigate this hypothesis, we face several challenges. First, if parents share a culture of
high educational attainment, they are likely to be highly educated and, thus, more likely to have high


2 For example, Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2005) study the effect of an exogenous mandatory change in
parental education on their children educational outcomes and cognitive abilities. Similarly, Dahl and Lochner
(2012) study the effect of exogenous changes in parental income while Bleakley and Ferrie (2016) investigate
the effect of an exogenous change in wealth.

                                                      2
income and live in areas with better schools, therefore hindering our ability to distinguish between a
transmission of cultural values and a direct effect of parental education or income. Second, cultural
determinants of educational attainment cannot be distinguished from other institutional and economic
factors using cross-country aggregate data. For example, a culture that values delayed gratification
could foster high quality of schools and other educational institutions. If that is the case, we would
not be able to distinguish whether the effect of higher education attainment is due to better institutions
or to children’s attitudes of delayed gratification.
        To address these concerns we focus on immigrants in the US and in other countries. We link
immigrants to their country of origin cultural measure of the willingness to forego immediate utility
for future gratification. Studying immigrants yields several key advantages. First, before fully
assimilating, immigrants are more likely to maintain a strong connection with the culture of their
country of origin. Second, many immigrants often fall in the lowest range of the income distribution
and do not come from privileged backgrounds compared to other residents of their new countries.
As such, they share schools with students of similar socioeconomic background, making it easier to
separate the effects of culture from other school characteristics and parental socioeconomic
background. Following Fernandez and Fogli (2009) and Giuliano (2007), our identification strategy
relies on the opportunity to observe immigrant children from different cultures in the same location
(same school), thus distinguishing between the cultural factors from other institutional and economic
factors. However, this is the first paper that studies cultural transmission by focusing on children’s
outcomes, thus allowing us to understand the role of parenting in the transmission of culture. Other
papers in this literature observe immigrants when they are already young adults, therefore making it
harder to understand the channels of cultural transmission.
        We study immigrants’ educational outcomes in a unique population-level dataset that contain
individual-level administrative data from the Florida Department of Education (FLDOE) Warehouse
on K-12 students, matched to birth certificate data from the Florida Bureau of Vital Statistics for the
purposes of this research agenda. This dataset presents numerous advantages. First, this paper presents
the first use of administrative data to study the relevance of cultural traits in explaining educational
outcomes of first and second-generation immigrants. Florida is one of the largest immigrant-receiving
states in the United States3 and the FLDOE data allow us to observe the entire population of public


3 Florida has over four million foreign-born individuals, more than all but 15 entire countries on earth. Florida’s
foreign-born population is also diverse: While the foreign-born population is disproportionately Hispanic
(include 23% Cuban and 7% Mexican), it is also 21% from non-Hispanic Caribbean countries, 11% from Asian

                                                        3
school students, and to control for school fixed effects and several socioeconomic characteristics. The
link to birth records allows us to identify second generation students and also to control (in the case
of Florida-born children) for variables not typically observed in administrative education data such as
maternal age, marital status, and education, birth order, and the like. The richness of the dataset also
allows us to follow students at a level of disaggregation finer than a neighborhood (the school of
attendance), therefore improving on the existing literature, which at most compares outcomes of
migrants in similar MSAs. Second, we are able to follow these students over time during their primary
education years, measuring not only their educational achievement at one point in time, but also the
change over time. The longitudinal nature of the dataset is also an improvement compared to other
studies of culture, which only present cross-sectional analysis. Point-in-time comparisons can conflate
cultural transmission with unmeasured shared correlates between parents and children, but
longitudinal data permit the opportunity to explore both levels and trajectories of outcomes.
Furthermore, the ability to study both first generation and second generation immigrants permits us
to pin down more confidently the degree to which it is the parents’ country of residence where they
grew up, rather than the student’s country of residence, that is influential.
        To study the importance of delayed gratification, we link each student within subgroups of
interest (based either on country of origin or language spoken at home) to a measure of Long-Term
Orientation developed by Hofstede et al. (2010). Hofstede et al. (2010) define Long-Term Orientation
as the cultural value that “stands for the fostering of virtues oriented toward future rewards.”
Controlling for school and year fixed effects, as well as individual characteristics and measures of
family income, we correlate the performance of first and second generation immigrant students to the
Long-Term Orientation of their countries of origin. The results show that immigrants from countries
with high Long-Term Orientation not only score substantially higher in standardized tests than
immigrants originating from countries with lower Long-Term Orientation, but, over time, their scores
in mathematics and reading grow more, controlling for their initial third grade score, suggesting that,
in comparison with low Long-Term Orientation students, these immigrants not only have higher
educational achievement in third grade but also continue to improve in relative terms over time. This
is noteworthy because it is unusual for students to make large changes in their relative positions
between the third and eighth grades, but the higher the measure of Long-Term Orientation, the more


countries, 10% from European countries, and 2% from African countries. The heterogeneity in countries of
origin of foreign-born residents of Florida is dramatically greater than in Texas and California, where the
majority of foreign-born residents come from a single country, Mexico.

                                                    4
likely this is to happen. Similarly, we find that immigrants from long term oriented countries have
better school attendance records, are less likely to repeat a grade and to be truant, and are more likely
to graduate in four years. Students from more long term oriented countries are also more likely to
enroll in advanced college level classes (AP, IB, and AICE classes) during high school and more likely
to choose advanced classes in scientific subjects. Given that we control for school-by-year fixed
effects in all our specifications, our results are not driven by school quality, a potential source of
selection for immigrants coming from long term oriented cultures. They are also robust to including
several measures that control for potential confounding characteristics of the country of origin,
including, for instance, differential educational selection of immigrants, economic conditions of the
country of origin, and international test scores of the country of origin, as well as several maternal
characteristics. Also, our results are not driven by specific groups of immigrants; importantly, we can
rule out the possibility that our results are merely comparisons of immigrants from one part of the
world (e.g., Asia) versus those from another part of the world (e.g., Latin America). The findings are
also confirmed when we use two alternative measures of time preferences.
        The theoretical literature on intergenerational transmission of preferences (Bisin and Verdier,
2000, 2001; Doepke and Zilibotti, 2008, 2015) suggest that economic conditions and altruistic motives
induce parents into teaching specific preferences to their children. Our results are consistent with this
view and suggest that, especially in the context of Galor and Ozak (2016), parents from certain regions
are more likely to teach values of patience and Long-Term orientation.4 The effects of Long-Term
Orientation on educational attainment could potentially be driven by two complementary
mechanisms. On the one hand, the offspring of more long-term oriented parents may be taught a
culture that value working harder and studying harder to achieve long term goals. On the other hand,
parents with a higher Long-Term Orientation may exert higher effort in securing good education
opportunities for their children by prioritizing their kids’ education over other personal goals. In turn,
children may better absorb the values shared by their parents when they observe them prioritizing
education.
        To gain further insights on how the transmission of this cultural value impacts performance
we study some of these potential mechanisms. While we cannot directly measure the transmission of
values from parents to children, nor measure students’ effort, we can test whether parents originating
from countries that share values of delayed gratification take actions that increase the educational

4Alternatively, persistent behavior over time may be due to the transmission of beliefs (Guiso et al, 2008).
Parents may teach the belief that sacrificing immediate reward for future reward brings long term benefits.

                                                     5
attainment of their children. We study whether these parents are more likely to select better schools
within the school district of residence5 and whether they are more likely to advocate for their children’s
inclusion in gifted programs, conditional on the student’s achievement. We find evidence consistent
with the hypothesis that parents from countries with higher Long-Term orientation are more likely to
select good educational opportunities for their children. This mechanism can increase educational
outcomes and increase the direct effect of transmitting values of delayed gratification to their children.
As an additional channel of cultural transmission we study whether social learning (Boyd et al., 2011)
reinforces the importance of the cultural values transmitted at home. Consistent with a social learning
story, we find that the fraction of children speaking the same language in school indeed magnifies the
effect of Long-Term Orientation on educational performance.
        While our data are unique as they allow us to follow immigrant students over time, we face
the potential criticism that the self-selection of immigrants in Florida can be accounting for the results.
For this reason, we repeat our analysis using a large set of countries from the Programme of
International Student Assessment (PISA) absorbing the country of destination fixed effect. We find a
remarkable qualitative and quantitative similarity with this very different sample of immigrants
suggesting that independently of the formal institutions of the country of destination, the relative
performance of immigrants is related to the Long-Term Orientation of the country of origin, thereby
indicating that our results have a reasonably high degree of external validity.
        Our results suggest the existence of a cultural channel that explains the persistence of
educational outcomes across generations, beyond income and educational transmission. Besides being
related to a fast growing literature on cultural transmission (Alesina et al., 2013; Alesina and Giuliano,
2015; Algan and Cahuc, 2010; Becker et al., 2016: Galor and Moav, 2002; Galor and Michalopoulos,
2012; Guiso et al., 2006; Nunn and Wantchekon, 2011; Sacerdote, 2005; Tabellini, 2008; Voigtlander
and Voth, 2012), our paper relates to the intergenerational mobility literature and to the research on
immigrants’ assimilation. Chetty and Hendren (2015) find that local conditions matter less for
immigrants consistently with the conjecture that culture, rather than neighborhood’s characteristics,
can play an important role for immigrants. The literature on immigrants has systematically identified
an “advantage” of some immigrant groups but, as far as we know, no paper has identified which




5Note that our analysis of student outcomes includes school-by-year fixed effects, so this differential school
choice associated with Long-Term Orientation is not the factor that drives the student outcomes results that
we describe in the paper.

                                                      6
cultural factors may be responsible for these findings (Card et al., 2000; Abramitzky, Boustan, and
Eriksson, 2014).
        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section describes the main
dataset. Section 2 presents the empirical evidence from the FLDOE data. The results using PISA are
presented in Section 3. We conclude in Section 4.
    1. Data and outcome of interests
        The main data sources for our analysis are school records obtained from the Florida
Department of Education Data Warehouse, and the measure of Long-Term Orientation at the country
level based on Hofstede (2010). For external validity we rely on student level data coming from the
Program for International Student Assessment (PISA), described in Section 3.
        1.1. Florida Department of Education Data
        We use a unique dataset of school records for the state of Florida merged with birth certificates
coming from the Florida Bureau of Vital Statistics.
        The individual-level administrative data from the Florida Department of Education (FLDOE)
Warehouse contains information on K-12 students who attended Florida public schools between
2002-2003 and 2011-2012. The dataset also contains information about the country of origin of the
child and the language spoken at home. The dataset is longitudinal in nature, therefore it allows us to
follow students over a decade and study their progress within subgroups of interest (either country of
origin or language spoken at home).
        Birth certificates contain a larger set of socio-economic controls (such as maternal education,
marital status and age of the mother), normally not included in school records. They also contain
information on whether the mother was born abroad. Birth certificates and school records were
matched using first and last names, date of birth and social security numbers.6 Since data from birth
certificates are available only for children born between 1992 and 2002, we limit our analysis to these
cohorts for all immigrants groups (including the first generation for which the birth certificates are
not present). The FLDOE dataset merged with birth certificates allows us to study educational
outcomes for first, second and higher than second generation immigrants. To identify the different



6 The sample of birth records consists of 2,047,633 observations. Of these, 1,652,333 were present in Florida

public school data. The match rate of 81% is consistent with the percentage of children who are born in Florida,
reside there until school age, and attend public school, as calculated from the Census and the American
Community survey for the corresponding years. See Figlio et al. (2014) for details about the nature and
additional evidence on the quality of the birth-school data merge.

                                                       7
generations, we use information about the country of origin of the child, whether the mother was
born abroad7, and the language spoken at home.
        We identify first generation immigrants using a question present in the FLDOE on the country
of birth of the child. We also use a more restricted definition of first generation immigrants, which
combines the information regarding the country of birth and the language spoken at home. Using the
restricted version, we define as first generation a child born in country A, who also speaks at home
one of the main languages spoken in that specific country.8 This restriction can reduce some
measurement error coming from those cases in which a child is born abroad but he/she is from the
United States (for example children born in a US military base) or it could also capture a stronger
cultural attachment as it reflects the intention of the family to speak their own language at home to
preserve their cultural identity.
        We identify two groups of second generation immigrants. As a first group, we define a
maternal second generation immigrant as a child who was born in the US but whose mother was born
abroad. Birth certificates do not contain information about the maternal foreign country of birth (with
the exception of the following countries/territories: Canada, Cuba, Guam, Mexico, Puerto Rico, and
Virgin Islands); they only indicate whether the mother was born abroad or not. For that reason, we
identify the second generation using the three countries identified in the birth certificate for which we
have the Long-Term Orientation data (Canada, Mexico, and Puerto Rico) and the language spoken at
home for all the remaining cases.9 We also use an alternative definition of second generation students
by adding all children born in the US, speaking a language different than English at home, and whose
maternal place of birth is either the US or unknown. This group could potentially include a generation
higher than the second, but also second generation immigrants from the paternal side10 (children with
fathers born abroad and mothers born in the United States). We called this group “extended second
generation.”




7 The birth record data provided by the Florida Bureau of Vital Statistics does not include information on
father’s place of birth.
8 The list of the main languages spoken in a country is taken from the 17th version of the Ethnologue.
9 Therefore, for the second generation, we have difficulty differentiating among the approximately 15% of

second generation immigrants who are Spanish-speaking but whose mothers were not born in one of the
specified locations. We carry out all analyses both with and without Spanish speakers and demonstrate that this
is not driving our findings in any meaningful way.
10 We cannot identify this group from birth certificates as we have only information regarding maternal country

of birth.

                                                      8
        The total sample of student records (immigrants and non-immigrants) consists of 18,734,847
student-year observations. The initial sample of unique individual students for the 1992-2002 cohorts
observed during the period between the 2002-2012 school years consists of 3,018,961 students. The
sample of first generation immigrants consists of 354,954 unique individual students. The sample of
second generation immigrants (the restricted version) consists of 396,330 unique students identified
based on the foreign-born status of the mother. For our extended definition of second generation
students we include additional 269,487 unique students, identified using the language spoken at home.
The sample of natives (individuals born in the US, whose mothers were born in the US and who speak
English at home) consist of 1,959,058 unique students.11
        For the first generation, we merge the country of origin with the Long-Term Orientation
variable defined at the country level. We have information on Long-Term Orientation for 93 different
countries. (The list of countries and the number of observations by country is provided in the
Appendix, Table A1, for both the unrestricted and restricted definition).
        For the groups of immigrants identified through language (second generation) we construct a
measure of Long-Term Orientation at the language level. For most languages there is a one to one
association between language and country of origin (for example Norwegian). For languages spoken
in multiple countries (for example Portuguese) we calculate the Long-Term Orientation cultural
variable as a weighted average of the Long-Term Orientation of all the countries in which Portuguese
is the main language spoken in the country. We use as weights the fraction of first generation
immigrants in our sample speaking that language and born in a country where that language is one of
the spoken languages. For instance, in the case of Portuguese, we allocate 98% of the weight to Brazil
and 2% of the weight to Portugal, in accordance with their shares of language-speakers in the Florida
school data.12
        The number of observations by language for the second generation from the maternal side
and for extended definition of children of immigrants are presented in Table A2 of the On-line
Appendix. We have information on 93 different languages.



11 We also consider as natives, children speaking English at home, born in the US but outside Florida and for
whom the place of birth of the mother is unknown (if a child is born outside Florida, the birth certificate is not
available). We drop from the sample 39,132 unique students for whom the language and the country of origin
of the child are missing and/or were born in Florida but the mother birthplace is labeled as “missing” in the
birth records.
12 As a robustness check, we also run our regressions limiting the sample to countries which can be uniquely

identified with a language. Our results (available from the authors) are robust to this specification.

                                                        9
     1.1.1    Comparison between natives and immigrants
         Florida is one of the top immigrant states in the United States, both in terms of numbers of
immigrants and immigrant share of the total population. Given that our data only includes students
in public schools, it is important to compare the characteristics of first and second generation
immigrants going to public schools with those of the natives.13 The descriptive statistics for the three
groups based on Census 2000 and 2010 are shown in the on-line Appendix (Table A3). In 2000, the
fraction of natives and second generation immigrants going to public schools is very similar (88% of
natives and 87% of second generation), while the number is slightly higher for the first generation
(93%).14 Similarly, the family income of natives and second generation immigrants does not differ
substantially in 2000 (around $61,000), whereas the average income is lower for the first generation
($46,441). Furthermore, when we restrict the sample to families sending their children to public
schools, the income is lower than the income of families with children in private schools, as expected,
but the differences between groups is again similar for natives and second generation immigrants
($55,838 and $52,842, respectively) and lower for first generation immigrants ($43,526).15 The patterns
are similar for 2010.

     1.1.2    Outcomes of interest
         We study the following five different outcomes, separately for our first generation, second
generation and extended second generation samples:
         i)      Test scores in mathematics and reading. Here, we look both at differences in the Florida
                 Comprehensive Assessment Test (FCAT), the state’s high-stakes criterion-referenced
                 test, in grade 3 (the first grade of statewide testing) as well as the increase in
                 performance from grade 3 to grade 8, after controlling for the initial score reported in
                 grade 3. Studying test score growth is especially important because test score levels
                 might reflect some omitted variable correlated with Long-Term Orientation, but it is
                 very rare for students to dramatically change their relative position in the statewide test
                 score distribution between grades 3 and 8. Because the test changed in 2011 and to aid
                 in interpretation, we standardize the statewide test scores to zero mean and unit



13 When we look at the Census, we define second-generation immigrants as children born in the US with at
least one parent born abroad.
14 The numbers are very similar in the Census 2010: 88% of native and second generation immigrants, and 93%

of first generation immigrants, attend public schools.
15 The differences across groups in the Census 2010 are similar.


                                                    10
                 variance at the grade/year level based on the sub-sample used in the
                 regression/specification.
        ii)      Probability of being retained, defined as a dummy equal to one if the student repeats the
                 same grade at least once. Retention is calculated for all grades from 3 to 12.16
        iii)     Absence rates during academic year defined as the percentage of days in which the
                 student is absent during the academic year. Absence rates are calculated for all grades
                 from 3 to 12.
        iv)      Disciplinary incidents: a dummy for whether the student was involved in a disciplinary
                 incident (serious offences often resulting in suspension). Disciplinary incidents are
                 calculated from grades 6 to 12, as incidents are extremely rare in elementary school.
        v)       High school graduation: a dummy for whether the student received a standard diploma
                 within four years after entering the 9th grade for the first time. This part of the analysis
                 is conducted only for those students who have the potential to be observed for at least
                 four years after they start high school, so we can only study this outcome for the oldest
                 students in our population.


        In addition, in the section devoted to understand the potential mechanisms linking Long-Term
Orientation and educational attainment, we study four additional outcomes:
        vi)      Enrollment in advanced classes: we calculate the fraction of advanced classes, including
                 Advanced Placement (AP), International Baccalaureate (IB), and Advanced
                 International Certificate of Education (AICE), over the total of all classes taken by the
                 student in a given year, for grades 9 to 1217.




16 In Florida there is a mandated third-grade retention for all students who do not meet a Level 2 benchmark
or higher (the second lowest of five levels) on the Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test (FCAT) reading
exam, though some exceptions to this rule are admitted (LiCalsi, Özek, and Figlio, 2016). LiCalsi, Özek, and
Figlio (2016) find that family factors are important determinants of differential enforcement of the mandatory
retention rule, and that children from high-SES families are comparatively more likely to be promoted despite
the mandatory retention rule, indicating some room for parental influence in school decision-making, even in
cases when decisions are putatively mandatory. Retention in subsequent grades is not based on a strict score
cutoff. As such retention in third grade is substantially higher than in other grades. In our tables we will study
the retention in every grade. In unreported regressions, we tested retention only in grade 3 and the effects are
similar in magnitude.
17 These three possible types of advanced classes are offered in Florida public schools and are recognized as

college level classes at least by state Universities.

                                                       11
         vii)       Fraction of advanced classes in scientific subjects: we calculate the fraction of advanced classes
                    in scientific subjects (defined as Math, Computer Science or Natural Sciences) over
                    the total of advanced classes.
         viii)      School choice: the Florida Department of Education reports school scores on a letter
                    scale from A (best) through F (worst)18. We study school choice by looking at the
                    relationship between Long-Term Orientation and the score assigned to the school in
                    the year before entering kindergarten (this is the first time in which the student enters
                    the public school system). We also look at the relationship between Long-Term
                    Orientation and school scores for all grades.
         ix)        Gifted students: Florida defines gifted students as “students who have superior
                    intellectual development and are capable of high performance.” Each district serves
                    gifted students with local plans and a specific track. Eligibility for the program is
                    determined by the parents, the student when appropriate, the teacher, a school system
                    representative, and an evaluation specialist. Family intervention is therefore very
                    relevant to determine the enrollment in a gifted program. To study family intervention
                    we restrict our sample to children who are top performers19 in grade 3 and not enrolled
                    in a gifted program, and test whether the probability of being enrolled in a gifted
                    program in grade 4 is correlated with Long-Term Orientation.
         Sample statistics for all outcomes are described in Table 1 and more details about each variable
are contained in the Online Appendix.

     1.1.3       Individual controls
         All our regressions contain a large set of controls, including demographics (age in months and
gender), a measure of English proficiency (measured by a dummy equal to one if the student is enrolled
in the limited English proficiency program), a measure of low-income status (measured by a dummy
equal to one if the student is eligible to receive free or reduced free lunch or attend a “provision 2”




18 For a description of the school grading process in Florida, see http://schoolgrades.fldoe.org/. We recoded
the letter scores on a scale from 1 through 5, where 1 corresponds to an “F” score and 5 corresponds to an
“A” score. These scores are highly salient to households when making decisions regarding residential location
(Figlio and Lucas, 2004) or voluntary donations to public schools (Figlio and Kenny, 2009).
19 These are students who reach the highest achievement level (that is, level 5) in either Math or Reading, and

either level 4 or 5 in the other subject.

                                                          12
school)20 and a measure for whether the student has some special education needs.21 Because special
education, family income, and limited English proficiency are all potential consequences of parental
Long-Term Orientation, we investigate the degree to which our results are driven by the decision of
whether or not to control for these variables, and we find that our results are highly robust to their
inclusion or exclusion. In our main specifications, we control for these variables, as well as school-by-
year fixed effects (themselves a partial control for family background possibly driven by Long-Term
Orientation), in order to obtain a likely underestimate of the “true” effect of Long-Term Orientation.
           For second generation immigrants (including the extended version) born in Florida we also
have information on maternal characteristics (educational attainment22, marital status at time of birth
and whether the mother had the child when she was younger than 16), the number of older siblings
and the zip code of the home address at time of birth. Sample statistics for these controls are shown
in Table 1 and more details about each variable are contained in the Online Appendix.
     1.2      Long-Term Orientation Data
           Hofstede et al. (2010) define Long-Term Orientation as the cultural value that “stands for the
fostering of virtues oriented toward future rewards, perseverance and thrift”. Hofstede (1991) based
his original analysis on data gathered from interviews of IBM employees across the world. This original
data was later expanded using the data from the Chinese Values Survey and from the World Values
Survey23. The Long-Term Orientation measure varies between 0 (short-term orientation) and 1 (long-
term orientation). Figure 1 shows the distribution of Long-Term Orientation around the world. There
is substantial heterogeneity: in our sample, the country with lowest Long-Term Orientation is Puerto
Rico (taking the value of 0), whereas the country with the highest score is South Korea (taking the
value of 1). Most Asian and many European countries show high numbers, most African and Latin
American countries belong to the lowest part of the distribution, and Canada and Northern European
Countries tend to lie somewhere in between. However, even within regions of the world, there exists
considerable variation in the Long-Term Orientation measure.


20 To qualify for free or reduced lunch, the family income has to be respectively below 185% and 130% of the
federal income poverty. Provision 2 schools establish claiming percentages and serve all meals at no charge for
a 4-year period. For details see http://www.fns.usda.gov/school-meals/provisions-1-2-and-3.
21 Categories for special education include mentally handicapped, orthopedically, speech, language, or visually

impaired, deaf or hard of hearing. It also includes students with emotional or behavioral disabilities, with autistic
spectrum disorder and other forms of serious disabilities (such as students with traumatic brain injuries).
22 We define dummies for high school completion, some years of college, and four or more years of college. In

the regressions the excluded group is given by high school dropout mothers.
23 For details see http://www.geerthofstede.nl/vsm-08.


                                                         13
        Galor and Ozak (2016) explore the origins of the distribution of Long-Term Orientation
across countries and establish empirically that pre-industrial agro-climatic characteristics conducive to
higher return to agricultural investment were the main determinant of the distribution of Long-Term
Orientation across societies. The authors estimate the potential (rather than actual) caloric yield per
hectare per year, under low level of inputs and rain-fed agriculture capturing cultivation methods that
characterized early stages of development, while removing potential concerns that caloric yields reflect
endogenous choices that could be affected by Long-Term Orientation.
        In Section 2.5 we use Galor and Ozak’s measure of potential caloric suitability as the most
exogenous proxy for Long-Term Orientation. We also test the robustness of our results to differences
in linguistic structures (Chen, 2013) that also proxy for a different weight attributed to future versus
present choices.24


     2. Evidence from Florida data
        Before starting our empirical analysis, we first examine whether there exist systematic
differences between each educational outcome and Long-Term Orientation as measured in the
country of origin or by language spoken at home in our sample of first and second generation
immigrants in Florida.
        These raw correlations are reported in Figures 2 and 3.25 For all the outcomes we find that the
relationship is in the hypothesized direction. Coming from cultures that emphasize the importance of
Long-Term Orientation is positively correlated with test scores, an improvement in educational
performance over time and the probability of graduating on time; immigrants and children of
immigrants coming from long-term oriented cultures are also less likely to be retained in school, be
absent from school or have disciplinary problems. The figures also show that the relationship is not
driven by a small number of countries.
        These differences could be driven by individual characteristics, school characteristics or
systematic differences across countries of origin. Our empirical analysis takes care of all the above
mentioned concerns by estimating the following equation:
                                                                                   ∙


24Detailed information on Galor and Ozak (2016) and Chen (2013) measures are provided in Section 2.5.
25For purposes of confidentiality, we only show data points for countries of origin/languages where we observe
at least 50 individuals. The statistical analyses that follow include all data, including those from countries of
origin/language-speakers with fewer than 50 observations.

                                                       14
        where         is an outcome of interest for student i coming from country c, and           is our
measure of Long-Term Orientation measured at the country level or by language spoken at home.
and     are time invariant and time variant individual controls including age and gender ( ), free-
lunch eligibility, limited English proficiency and a dummy indicating whether the student has special
educational needs (     ). Our specification also includes grade fixed effects ( ), in the outcomes for
which this is relevant, a full set of academic year fixed effects ( ), school dummies ( ), and all the
non-linear interactions between school and academic year fixed effects (      ∙   ) to control for cohort
specific differences in performance across different schools. The standard errors are clustered at the
country of origin or language level respectively for first and second generation immigrants.
        Table 2 reports the results, for the first generation, for two measures of performance in
mathematics: in levels, at grade 3 (the first time standardized tests are administered in Florida), and
the change in performance from grade 3 to grade 8, controlling for the initial condition at grade 3.
Column 1 presents findings for test scores in mathematics when we control for age, gender, year,
school fixed effects, and all their non-linear interactions. Column 2 includes the full set of individual
controls (limited English proficiency, special education status, and free lunch) intended to capture the
relevance of socio-economic status in school performance. The estimates show that first generation
immigrants coming from countries with a high level of Long-Term Orientation have higher test scores
in mathematics. The results remain strong after controlling for all the socioeconomic status variables,
although the coefficient size decreases from 0.597 to 0.336.
        Differences in scores in mathematics could be related to differences in patterns of assimilation
across migrants from different countries of origin. Therefore, Long-Term Orientation could simply
pick up in a systematic way some of these unobserved differences in initial conditions. To rule out
this confounding effect, we also look at the change in performance in mathematics from grade 3 until
grade 8, after controlling for the initial score in grade 3. These results are reported in columns 3-4.
Coming from a long term oriented country not only gives students an initial advantage when they first
test in grade 3, it also has an additional strong effect over a long time horizon, as the performance of
these students continues to improve. From the specification in column 4: a one-standard-deviation
increase in Long-Term Orientation (0.236) corresponds to a 0.051 (0.236*0.217) of a standard
deviation in change in math performance. To put this in perspective we can compare it to the effect
of maternal education. While we do not have this variable for the sample of first generation students,
in the population of second generation students for which the effect of Long-Term Orientation is


                                                   15
similar, the typical child of a mother with a four-year college degree or more experiences a change in
math performance of 0.052 of a standard deviation over the same time period.26 This specification is
particularly compelling as we are able to control for the initial condition of the student (measured with
the test score in grade 3), therefore further limiting the possibility that the results are driven by initial
selection. Note also how the inclusion of the socio-economic characteristics in column 4 does not
change substantially the size of the coefficient, an indication that the initial test score in grade 3
captures already most differences in socio-economic status.
        Columns 5-8 restrict the sample to first generation immigrants who also speak one of the
languages spoken in their place of birth. The results are even stronger. The coefficients on Long-Term
Orientation is equal to 0.591 and 0.814, with and without the inclusion of socio-economic status
characteristics. As explained above, this increase in magnitude could be driven by a reduction of
measurement error or because speaking the country of origin language is a manifestation of cultural
attachment. When the dependent variable is the change in math scores between grade 3 and 8, the
coefficient is also larger in magnitude and almost double in size compared to the unrestricted sample.
        Not only are the coefficient estimates statistically significant, but they are also economically
meaningful. Based on the estimates of column 6, a one-standard-deviation increase in Long-Term
Orientation (0.192) is associated with an increase in math score of 11.3% of a standard deviation
(0.591*0.192). The estimated impact of the same increase in Long-Term Orientation implies an
increase in math performance of 10.4% of a standard deviation.
        Table 3 reports the effect of Long-Term Orientation on other educational outcomes.27 The
results show that overall there is a strong statistically significant relationship between Long-Term
Orientation and various measures of school outcomes are generally large: A one standard deviation
increase in Long-Term Orientation is associated with 8% of a standard deviation increase in reading
levels and conditional reading gains, 7% of a standard deviation reduction in truancy, and 7% of a
standard deviation reduction in disciplinary problems. When considering the dependent variables that
are dichotomous, a one standard deviation increase in Long-Term Orientation is associated with a
0.35 percentage point reduction in grade retention and a 1.9 percentage point increase in graduation,


26 We do not observe maternal education levels for foreign-born children, and therefore cannot control for or
stratify by maternal education in the population of first generation students. However, we can do this for second
generation immigrants, and we report the results of these analyses below.
27 We only report the results for the restricted sample of the first generation (where we impose that the child

should speak one of the main languages spoken in his/her country of origin). Results on the unrestricted sample
are available from the authors.

                                                       16
both large in relation to the 3.8% of students who are retained in any given year and the 20.9% who
fail to graduate in the population.
        Tables 4 and 5 report the results for all educational outcomes for second generation
immigrants (defined using the foreign born status of the mother, her country of birth, when available
or the language spoken at home) and the extended sample of second generation immigrants (defined
only using the language spoken at home without any restriction on whether the mother is born abroad
or not). It is interesting to note that the relative magnitude of the coefficients is very similar for the
two groups and also almost identical to the magnitude of the results obtained with the sample of first
generation immigrants. These results are consistent with the literature that show a remarkable
persistence over time of cultural traits across generations (Albanese et al., 2016; Alesina et al., 2013;
Algan and Cahuc, 2010; Fernández and Fogli, 2009; Giuliano, 2007; Guiso et al., 2006, 2016;
Voigtlaender and Voth, 2012). The estimated effects for the continuous dependent variables range
from a minimum of 5.2% of a standard deviation of the dependent variable (for truancy in the
extended definition of second generation) to a maximum of 11.5% (for differences in math score at
grade 3). All the beta coefficients are reported at the bottom of all our Tables.
        Figures 4 and 5 present binned scatter-plots of the mean of different educational outcomes
for first and second generation students versus the mean level of Long-Term Orientation. To
construct this figure, we divided the horizontal axis into 40 equal-sized (percentile) bins and plotted a
given mean education outcome versus the mean level of Long-Term Orientation in each bin.28
Consistently with our regression results, we do find a significantly strong relationship between Long-
Term Orientation and educational outcomes for both generations.
        In the analysis presented so far, we could include only a limited number of family control
characteristics. For the sample of second generation immigrants (restricted and extended) we can also
include the information about maternal characteristics contained in the birth certificates. In Table 6,
we present the results for the extended sample of second generation immigrants where we include
dummies for education, a dummy for whether the mother was younger than 16 when she gave birth
(teen pregnancy), a dummy for whether the mother was married at time of birth, the number of older
siblings, the income in the zip code of birth measured in 1999 (columns 1-5) and all controls included
together (column 6).29


28These regressions are estimated on the underlying microdata using OLS regressions.
29Results for the restricted version of the second generation are virtually identical and available from the
authors.

                                                    17
             The controls have all the expected sign: a higher level of maternal education, being married at
the time of birth and a higher income (proxied by the income in the zip code at birth) improve school
performance; on the other hand, a larger family and teen pregnancy both reduce educational
performance. The maternal characteristic with the largest economic effect is four years of maternal
college degree: its coefficient of 0.385 indicates that a child of a mother with a college degree has a
math score 40% higher than a child whose mother is a high school dropout. It is useful to compare
this magnitude to the magnitude of the Long-Term Orientation coefficient. Moving from Puerto
Rico’s Long-Term Orientation (lowest) to South Korea’s (the highest) the math score increases by
73%. Another way to compare the economic significance of our results is to compare beta coefficients
based on column 6 estimates. The beta coefficient of Long-Term Orientation for math score is equal
to 0.10, similar in size to the beta coefficient of a four-year college degree dummy (0.12) and much
larger than the beta coefficient of other maternal characteristics, such as teen pregnancy (-0.007),
marital status (0.049), and the number of older siblings (-0.034). The Long-Term Orientation beta
coefficient is also five times larger than the beta coefficient of the income in the zip code of residence
at birth and substantially larger than the beta coefficient on the eligibility to free or reduced price lunch
(-0.069). Only the beta coefficients of enrollment in a limited English proficiency program (-0.26) and
of whether the student has special education needs (-0.22) are substantially larger.
             In Table A4 we repeat our regressions on the other educational outcomes by including all
maternal controls. The size and the significance of the coefficients on Long-Term Orientation are not
affected by this inclusion.
       2.1      Controlling for country of origin observable characteristics
             A potential concern with the OLS estimates reported up to this point is that the Long-Term
Orientation measure could capture some omitted country of origin characteristics. To attenuate this
concern we control for additional country of origin observable characteristics30 (Table 7). We first
introduce these controls one by one. The first obvious candidate is the level of GDP: if countries with
higher Long-Term Orientation are also richer, a better performance of immigrants from these
countries could be a reflection of differences in income (not fully captured by our free lunch control).
Contrary to the argument above, students who come from a country with lower GDP perform better
than immigrants from a higher GDP country, suggesting that selected students are more likely to come




30   A detailed description of the country controls and their sources are provided in the Appendix.

                                                        18
from poorer countries. Nonetheless, as shown in column 1, the inclusion of this control has little
impact on the coefficient of interest.
           Distance from the US could be another prominent determinant of differences in educational
attainment: perhaps immigrants coming from countries farther away from the United States have
higher determination and perseverance. Higher distance could be also correlated to a higher amount
of initial resources necessary to move to the US. Indeed, distance from the US has a positive and
significant effect on educational attainment, but, as shown in column 2, the coefficient of Long-Term
Orientation remains robust to the inclusion of this control.
           Galor and Ozak (2016) show that a culture emphasizing the future relatively more than the
present has a direct positive effect on savings rates. As a result, differences in educational performance
could be driven by differences in saving rates among immigrant groups and not directly related to
differences in Long-Term Orientation, as higher savings may give the necessary resources for moving.
We control for a measure of domestic savings over GDP in the country origin in column 3. Savings
in the country of origin is not statistically significant and does not affect the coefficient on Long-Term
Orientation.
           Although we directly control for maternal education in our regressions, there are two other
aspects of differences in education which is worth taking into account in our analysis. The first is a
systematic difference in educational attainment between Florida immigrants from specific countries
and their fellow citizen. If immigrants in Florida do not reflect a random sample of the population
from which they came, Long-Term Orientation could be simply capturing the positive selection in the
education of the immigrants. To address this issue, we follow Feliciano (2005) and construct an index
of selection based on a comparative measure of immigrants’ and non-immigrants’ educational
attainment adjusted for age along all points of the education distribution.31 For example, an index of
0.15 indicates that an immigrant’s educational attainment probabilistically will exceed that of a non-
immigrants from the same country 15 percent more often than a non-immigrant’s education will
exceed the education of an immigrant from the same country. The higher this measure of selectivity,
the more educated the immigrants are relative to the non-immigrant population in their home country.
On the contrary, if immigrants are more often less educated than non-immigrants, the index of
selectivity will be negative indicating negative selection. For our purpose, the concern is that Long-
Term Orientation may be capturing part of this selection, in case Long-Term Orientation is correlated


31   The construction of this selection measure is described in detail in the Online Appendix.

                                                        19
with Feliciano’s selectivity measure. In our sample, the index of selectivity goes from a minimum of
0.10 (Mexico) to a maximum of 0.92 (Tanzania). China has an index of 0.62, very close to Argentina
(0.60) whereas South Korea appears in the bottom part of the distribution (0.30). Overall, this measure
appears very relevant in explaining differences in educational performance, but interestingly enough,
the measure per se shows a very low (and negative) correlation with Long-Term Orientation. In
addition, its inclusion in our specification leaves the coefficient of Long-Term Orientation almost
unchanged (column 4 of Table 7).
        The second concern is that differences in educational performance could be driven by
differences in the quality of education in the country of origin, as reflected in reading and math scores.
Higher quality of education received by the parents could be reflected later in higher achievement of
the children as parents with higher quality of education could help their children doing homework
more effectively. In column 5 we control for the average math score in the country of origin
constructed from PISA. The coefficient on Long-Term Orientation is still significant, despite the
much smaller number of immigrant groups included in the regression due to the availability of the
data from PISA.
        In column 6, we include all the country controls in one specification. Although the Long-
Term Orientation coefficient is reduced in size, it remains highly significant and overall, the estimated
impact is robust across the various specifications. The coefficients also remain fairly stable, ranging
from 0.41 to 0.61 (for math score). Similar results are obtained for the change in mathematical
performance from grade 3 to grade 8 (columns 7-12 of Table 7), where the coefficient varies from
0.29 to 0.41. Results are also very similar when we repeat the same analysis for the extended version
of second generation immigrants (Table 8), both in terms of magnitude and significance.
        In the appendix (Tables A5 and A6) we report the robustness to the inclusion of these country
controls to the remaining educational outcomes for first and second generation immigrants.32
        We also test the robustness of our results to the inclusion of additional country of origin
controls, including the log of the population in 2000, the Gini coefficient in 2000, the type of migrants
(share of employed, and family-led diversity migrants over the total population of migrants) and a



32The inclusion of the math score from PISA substantially reduces the sample. For that reason, in Panel A of
Tables A5 and A6 (Online Appendix) we report the regressions without the inclusion of this control, whereas
in Panel B of both Tables we repeat the regressions with the inclusion of this control. Also, the results for
second generation immigrants (restricted) are very similar to the extended version and are reported in Table
A7.

                                                     20
measure of genetic distance from the US. The results, available from the authors, are robust to the
inclusions of this larger set of controls.
     2.2       Robustness to sample selection
           In this section, we consider the robustness of our results to the use of different sub-samples.
In Panel A of Table 9, given the similarity of results for the different generations, we pool together all
the generations of immigrants and repeat the baseline regressions for this pooled sample, which we
use for comparison for this set of results.33 In Panel B, we exclude the first and second generation
immigrants coming from Latin America and Central America34, the biggest immigrant group in
Florida. Since this group also tends to be in the bottom part of the educational performance
distribution, by excluding them, we also test the robustness of the results to the exclusion of the
approximate lower tail of the performance distribution. The results remain robust to the exclusion of
this group. In addition, the magnitude of the beta coefficients remains similar (and are sometimes
reduced) compared to the baseline specification of Panel A.
           Asian immigrants are often considered a “model minority”. Since immigrants from Asia tend
to show the highest levels of Long-Term Orientation, we also test the robustness of our results to the
omission of all Asian countries. Panel C shows that the results are robust to this exclusion and that
our results are not driven by the group that is disproportionately represented among the top
performers in our population. The beta coefficients, not surprisingly, are smaller when we exclude the
top performers from our specification.
           Overall, examining Figure 1, it is apparent that there exists some geographical cluster in Long-
Term Orientation by continent. We also check that our results do not reflect these differences by
adding continent dummies to the whole sample. The estimates are also robust to this procedure (Panel
D), with almost no difference in terms of magnitude. 35




33 We only report the coefficient of Long-Term Orientation and omit to report the other controls (gender, age,
free or reduced priced lunch, special education, and limited English proficiency). In these regressions, since we
are merging generations based on language and country, we define the continent dummy based on both
variables. The details of the construction of this variable are provided in the Online Appendix. Also, the
constructions of the clusters are explained in the Online Appendix.
34 Note that we define "Latin America" as all countries located in the Americas with the exclusion of Canada

and the US.
35 For the first generation, the continent dummy is equal to one if the country belongs to a given continent, 0

otherwise. As for language, we adopted the following rule: a language is assigned to a given continent if among
the sample of first generation immigrants who speak that language at least 50% come from that specific
continent.

                                                       21
   2.3      Heterogeneous effects: family and peers
         So far, our analysis has assumed that Long-Term Orientation has similar effects for all
individuals with a similar cultural background. However, the effect of Long-Term Orientation on
educational outcomes could have heterogeneous effects, both in terms of family characteristics but
also with respect to the interaction with peers of similar cultural background in the school where
children study.
         We test for these two possibilities separately in Tables 10 and 11. In Table 10, we include
interaction terms between Long-Term Orientation and different family characteristics (including free-
lunch eligibility, number of older siblings, the zip code median income at birth and all maternal
characteristics). We observe some heterogeneous estimated effects with the marital status and the level
of education of the mother. Being married apparently reinforces the effect of Long-Term Orientation
(column 6); mother’s education, surprisingly, reduces it, although in a non-linear way. Perhaps if the
mother dropped out of high school, she is more likely to stay at home and socialize her children to
her values. Despite the negative effect on the interaction terms of the mother’s educational dummies,
the overall effect of Long-Term Orientation remains positive and significant, even when we include
as regressors all the interactions in the same specification (Column 6). Table A8 finds similar results
for all other educational outcomes.
         The fraction of children speaking the same language in a given school may also play an
important role in transmitting and preserving the importance of Long-Term Orientation: If cultural
transmission is important, the larger the fraction of children speaking the same language in a school,
the larger should be the effect of Long-Term Orientation on school performance. Note that this
fraction depends on the extent to which a group tends to cluster in a school but also on how large a
group speaking a given language is.
         We calculate a proxy for cultural density as the proportion of children speaking a given
language in each school for every academic year. For each language, the numerator is therefore given
by the number of children speaking a given language in the school in a year, whereas the denominator
is the number of all students in the school (including non-immigrants) in that year. Although the
average fraction of students speaking a given language in a school is fairly low in our sample (lower
than one percent) there is a substantial heterogeneity in our sample, with some languages reaching up
to 38% in a given school/year. Languages with high percentages other than English, Spanish, and
Haitian Creole, the three most commonly spoken languages in Florida, include French, Hebrew,
Russian, Vietnamese, Chinese, Serbian, Arabic and Portuguese.

                                                  22
           We attach to each child speaking a given language, his/her own measure of cultural density by
school and academic year. To limit the possibility that our results are biased by some languages that
are spoken by a very large fraction of students and in order to capture sufficient variation, we drop
from the sample the students speaking Spanish, Haitian Creole, or English.36
           The results are reported in Table 11. Across all specifications, a higher fraction of children
speaking the same language of the student has a negative and significant effect on the student’s
educational attainment for almost all outcomes.37 This is not surprising, given that speaking a language
different than English can have some impediment on the learning process and a larger fraction of
students speaking a foreign language can reduce a student’s incentive to speak English. However,
interestingly, the interaction between Long-Term Orientation (based on the language spoken by the
student) and the fraction of students speaking the same language in school is positive and significant.
In addition, the full marginal effect of Long-Term Orientation remains positive and significant when
evaluated at the mean of cultural density: a one standard deviation increase in Long-Term Orientation
is associated, for example, with a 11.5% standard deviation increase in math level. The degree to which
children cluster in the same school appears to be an important vehicle to explain the effect of Long-
Term Orientation on educational outcomes.38
     2.4      Potential mechanisms
           In this section, we look at some additional outcomes and try to shed some light on some
possible mechanisms linking Long-Term Orientation and school performance. We begin by studying
the probability of being enrolled in advanced classes in high school and also at the probability of
choosing advanced scientific classes. Both could be another manifestation of Long-Term Oriented
attitudes. Advanced classes require hard work and perseverance today in exchange for future rewards,
as measured for instance by access to better colleges which normally reward a more rigorous
curriculum. Also scientific subjects, on average, give access to better paying jobs. Furthermore, we
provide evidence for ways in which parents with higher Long-Term Orientation may contribute to

36 These observations are dropped only from the numerator (and the regressions), while they will be part of the
denominator, which includes the total population of each school.
37 It is interesting to note that the fraction of students speaking the same language in a school is significant only

when the Long-Term Orientation variable is also included. When we run a regression only with the fraction of
students speaking the same language as a control, this variable is only significant when the LHS variables are
reading scores in grade 3, disciplinary incidents, and retention. In these three cases the cultural density variable
has a negative effect on all three educational outcomes.
38 When the left hand side variable is the change in scores between 3rd grade and 8th grade we interact Long-

Term Orientation with our variable of cultural density either in 3rd grade (the first time the student was tested)
or in 8th grade. The results are similar in the two specifications.

                                                         23
their children’s success by selecting better schools and successfully enrolling their children in a gifted
program. We examine all these outcomes in Table 12. 39
        We start by looking at whether there is a direct link between Long-Term Orientation and being
enrolled in advanced placement or equivalent classes in high school and whether this correlation also
exists for advanced placement classes in scientific subjects (columns 1-2). We include our standard
controls but also add performance in mathematics at grade 8. The effect is statistically significant and
also has a large effect for both outcomes (the beta coefficients are equal to 0.09 and 0.10 respectively).
        We then examine whether children coming from Long-Term Oriented families go to better
schools, controlling for the school district of residence. Starting in 1996 the Florida Department of
Education required school districts to design an open enrollment plan which allows parents to choose
among several options including magnet schools, schools-within-schools, alternative schools, year-
round schools, dual enrollment, and controlled open enrollment schools. We study whether parents
with high Long-Term Orientation are more likely to either use Florida’s school choice programs or
otherwise choose neighborhoods served by better schools, as measured by the quality reported by the
Florida Department of Education. In each district parents have access to the schools’ scores before
enrollment. These school scores have 5 possible letter grades, from A to F, which we coded from
worst (1) to best (5). Since school’s letter scores change frequently and it is unlikely that parents re-
optimize every year, in column 3 we regress the quality of the school chosen the first time the student
enters the public school system (in kindergarten or pre-kindergarten) – the time when school choice
is most relevant -- on Long-Term Orientation. In column 4, we also repeat the analysis by regressing
the school score in any grade on Long-Term Orientation.40 The results are very similar: Families
coming from Long-Term Oriented societies actively choose better schools (the beta coefficient is
equal to 0.058 and 0.052 respectively) within their school district.
        All of the previous mechanism analyses point toward a pattern in which families from high
Long-Term Oriented backgrounds take active steps to secure good outcomes for their children. There
exists one outcome in the administrative data that is especially conducive to studying the likely role of
direct parental involvement in school decisions – whether a student is enrolled in a school’s gifted
program. Though there are differences across school districts in the implementation of gifted
programs, the state of Florida mandates that each district is responsible for providing an appropriate


39The definition of these variables is given in section 2.1.2.
40In this regression we use the school score at time t-1. This is the school score that the family observes at the
time of enrollment.

                                                       24
program that serves all exceptional students and the State Board of Education provides oversight over
district plans. By fourth and fifth grade, most elementary schools in Florida offer separate full-time
instruction for gifted students. To qualify for being included in gifted instruction, students have two
routes. The first way is to submit an IQ test above the state cutoffs. Students could be tested by either
a district psychologist or by a private psychologist and submit the results to the school. Students with
IQs above the relevant threshold are eligible for gifted status, with the final determination made in
consultation between parents, teachers, and the school’s Exceptional Student Education (ESE)
specialist. Alternatively, seats in the gifted classrooms are filled by non-gifted students -- known as
high achievers -- who scored highest among their school/grade cohort in statewide achievement tests
in the previous year.
         While we do not have information on external tests, we have a mechanism for testing the
degree to which immigrant students ultimately receive gifted instruction. Our approach is as follows:
We look at the set of students who were not yet classified as gifted in third grade, before the first
statewide assessment, but then who received the highest performance (level 5) rating on either
mathematics or reading and either a level 4 or 5 on the other test, and then see whether, conditional
on being in this rarefied group of exceptionally high achievers, the student is enrolled in the gifted
program in the following year. We find that children coming from Long-Term Oriented cultures are
more likely to be enrolled in a gifted program and the effect is again sizeable (a beta coefficient of
0.05).
         These last two results are important. First, they confirm that parents from countries with a
long-term oriented culture appear to care relatively more about education and, despite the cultural
barriers that a foreign school system poses to immigrant families, they are determined to use the rules
of the system to secure better educational opportunities for their children. Indeed, part of the higher
educational achievement of immigrants coming from countries with high Long-Term Orientation may
be the result of a direct intervention of parents selecting better schools and advocating for the
inclusion of their children in gifted programs. This evidence, together with the one presented on the
importance of having students speaking the same language attending the same school, is also
consistent with models of cultural transmission emphasizing the relevance of social learning (Boyd et
al., 2011): children are more likely to internalize the value transmitted by their parents if people around
them behave in a similar way.




                                                    25
    2.5       Alternative measures of Long-Term Orientation
          We finally consider the robustness of our results to the use of two alternative proxies for Long-
Term Orientation. We first look at linguistic differences in the use of the future tense as a proxy for
the relevance of future-oriented versus present oriented actions. Chen (2013) uses the fact that
languages differ in the way they grammatically mark future events and test whether this difference has
an effect on savings, health behavior, and retirement assets. His idea is that languages that
grammatically separate the future and the present lead speakers to dissociate the future from the
present. This would make the future feel more distant, therefore making future-oriented choices
harder. On the other hand, if the language makes the present and the future indistinguishable, its
speakers will be more willing to take future-oriented actions, because they appear to be closer in time.
          Chen (2013) distinguishes languages in two groups: those that have a strong future-time
reference and those that do not. The measure has been constructed by the European Science
Foundation’s Typology of Languages in Europe (EUROTYP) project. According to this criterion,
languages are classified as “futureless” if they do not require “obligatory use in prediction-based
contexts”. To use one of Chen’s (2013) examples: “if I wanted to explain to an English-speaking
colleague why I can’t attend a meeting later today, I could not say ‘I go to a seminar’. English grammar
would oblige me to say ‘I will go,’ ‘I am going,’ or ‘I have to go to a seminar.’ If on the other hand I
were speaking Mandarin, it would be quite natural for me to omit any marker of future time and say
the equivalent of I go listen to a seminar, with no reference to future time, since the context leaves
little room for misunderstanding. In this way, English forces its speakers to habitually divide time
between the present and the future in a way that Mandarin (which has no tenses) does not.” According
to Chen’s hypothesis, in our specification therefore Futureless languages should be positively correlated
to educational performance.
          In Table 13, Panel A, we report the impact of speaking a futureless language on all our
measures of educational performance: The similarity with our main results is remarkably strong, in
terms of both magnitude and significance. We match all the immigrants with Chen’s linguistic measure
using the language spoken at home. One big advantage of matching directly on language is the
possibility of including (at least for the first generation) country of origin fixed effects, further reducing
the possibility that our results are driven by unobservable country of origin characteristics. Performing
this very demanding test does not change the nature of our results: linguistic differences that proxy
for a different weight to future and present choices are sufficient in explaining differences in
educational performance (Table 13, Panel B).

                                                     26
        The fraction of students speaking a futureless language in our sample is not very large (2%)
given the large fraction of Spanish speaking students (coded as zero). Therefore, we also run our
regressions excluding from the sample Spanish speaking countries from both the pooled sample and
the first generation sample and the results do not change (Table A9).
        Galor and Ozak (2016) study the origins of the distribution of Long-Term Orientation across
the world. They establish empirically that these differences can be traced back to geographical
variations in the return to agricultural investment in pre-industrial societies: societies whose ancestors
experienced a higher crop yield are characterized by higher Long-Term Orientation today. The authors
test their hypothesis constructing a measure of the potential caloric yield per hectare for each country.
Their historical measure of crop yield is constructed based on data from the Global Agro-Ecological
Zones (GAEZ) project of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). The GAEZ project supplies
global estimates of crop yield for a variety of crops in grids with cell size of 5’ X 5’. For each crop,
GAEZ also provides estimates for crop yield based on three alternative levels of inputs (high, medium
and low) and two source of water supply (rain-fed and irrigation). The authors construct their measure
under low level of inputs and rain-fed agriculture to limit concerns of endogeneity due to human
intervention.41
        We use the measure constructed by Galor and Ozak (2016) and test its relevance for the
determination of school performance. Panel C establishes a positive statistically and economically
significant effect of crop yield on school performance. In particular, the OLS effects suggest that the
magnitude of the beta coefficients is very similar to the magnitude of Hofstede’s Long-Term
orientation measure (for example, the beta coefficients for math score and math change are 0.097 and
0.089). Consistent with Galor and Ozak’s (2016) theory, individuals whose ancestors experienced
higher crop yields exhibit long-term oriented behavior. 42



41 We use the ancestry adjusted measure for the post-1500 CE period. Given the large fraction of migrants
speaking Spanish and coming from the new world, where intercontinental migration and population
replacement were very high, we limit our attention to the Old World sample. For further details about the
construction of this measure see Galor and Ozak (2016).
42 In a recent paper, Dohmen et al. (2015) construct a measure of patience which should isolate the trade-offs

between immediate and delayed monetary rewards. This measure is part of a larger project, the Global
Preference Survey, measuring time preferences, risk preferences, social preferences and trust from
representative populations of 76 countries. The patience measure is derived from a combination of responses
to two survey measures, one with a quantitative and one with a qualitative format. These two were the best
predictors of behavior in experiments involving incentive choices between earlier versus later rewards with a
time delay of 12 months, therefore capturing annual discounting. We would like to test the robustness of our
results to this measure, when the data will be made available from the authors to other scholars.

                                                     27
     2.6      Relative performance of immigrants and natives
           One final concern with our analysis is the possibility that immigrants (especially the first
generation) face a disadvantage in their new school environment. Our regressions could therefore pick
up a reversion to the mean (the average performance of natives). To show that this is not the pattern
in the data, we plot the performance of migrants compared to the group of natives. To perform this
exercise, we keep students who are observed in our panel from grade 3 to grade 8, we then first
collapse math and reading scores by country of origin (or language spoken at home) and then by
immigrant group (first and second generation).
           In Figure 6A we report the performance of natives, first, and second generation immigrants
from grade 3 to grade 8. Not only immigrants start at higher level compared to the natives but their
performance also continues to increase over time, whereas the performance of natives stays flat. Given
the large difference in educational performance by race in the United States, in the same figure we also
report test scores for native whites. Although the scores of white students are higher in level when
compared to the overall sample, immigrants tend to out-perform white natives over time in both
mathematics and reading43. Once again, the performance of white natives is flat over time. In
comparing the first and the second generation, it appears that the second generation tends to be closer
to the natives. This result is not surprising as these children are born and raised in the US and,
therefore, they are less isolated from the dominant culture.44
           Since part of the immigrants’ school performance appears to be driven by school selection, to
gain further understanding of the differences between immigrants and natives, we also compare the
three groups in the best schools (those receiving a score of A). Schools have definitely a strong
relationship with educational performance (the scores are higher for the three groups compared to the
averages in the overall sample) but the differential patterns between the three groups remain the same.
This is an important result. It suggests that immigrants outperform natives, even holding constant the
school institutional environment (Figure 6B), and it is consistent with Chetty and Hendren (2015)’s
finding that local conditions matter less for immigrants. In Figure 7 we plot the performance in
mathematics and reading by Long-Term Orientation quartiles and for white natives. Note that the
Long-Term Orientation for the United States is 0.26, close to the lowest quartile of our immigrants’



43White natives have slightly higher scores in reading only at grade 3.
44Second generation immigrants in our sample are not the children of the first generation in our sample. The
differences compared to the white could still be due to differences in the cohort of migration of the first
generation.

                                                    28
distribution. 45 We find a remarkably monotonic effect of Long-Term Orientation on math and reading
scores: only immigrants with Long-Term Orientation lower than the natives perform worse in both
mathematics and reading.
        Overall, these results suggest that especially immigrants with higher Long-Term Orientation
lose some of their cultural advantages when they assimilate to the US culture. In our setting, it is hard
to measure the full effect of assimilation because, by definition, our immigrants have not fully
assimilated as they continue to speak a language different from English. Özek and Figlio (2016) find
that the Asian or Hispanic students who speak English at home perform worse than other Asian and
Hispanic students who are first or second generation immigrants. The broader classification based on
race, however, could mask large differences in composition because each race shows a large
heterogeneity in terms of cultural values.


     3. External Validity from the Program for International Student Assessment (PISA)
        For external validity, we use student-level data from the Program for International Student
Assessment (PISA), an internationally standardized assessment conducted by the Organization of
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and administered to 15-year olds students every
three years since 2000. We use the 2003, 2006, 2009 and 2012 waves.46 PISA contains information on
the country of origin of children and their parents. The analysis based on this dataset can therefore be
more precise for second generation immigrants, since it is based on the parental country of origin and
not the language spoken at home. For consistency with the Florida analysis, we define second
generation immigrants based on maternal information.47 The list of countries of origin for first and
second generation is provided in the appendix (Table A11).48
        PISA assesses a range of relevant skills in three main domains: mathematics, reading, and
science. For these domains PISA presents the test scores in standardized forms, with mean of 500
test-score points and a standard deviation of 100 test-score points across OECD countries.49 To make



45 Long-Term Orientation for the bottom 25th percentile is 0.21.
46 We use these waves because in 2000 the information about the countries of origin of the parents is not

provided (the questionnaire only asks if the students and/or their parents were born in the country where the
student took the test).
47 Results based on fathers’ country of origin are presented in Table A12 of the Appendix. They show that the

effects are very similar.
48 The countries of destination included in our analysis are reported in Table A11.
49 For details on how PISA reports student scores see the on-line Appendix.


                                                     29
these results comparable with the analysis for Florida we re-standardized all the scores to zero mean
and unit variance.
           In addition to test scores, PISA also provides information on retention and truancy. Retention
is a dummy variable equal to 1 if a student repeated at least one year during his/her school career and
0 if she/he did not. Truancy is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the student reported that in the last two
full weeks of school he/she skipped a whole school day more than once, and zero otherwise.50
Descriptive statistics for our sample are provided in Table 14.
           Overall we are able to provide external validity for most of the outcomes present in the
FLDOE dataset, the only exception being the changes in mathematics and reading scores over time,
which cannot be calculated due to the cross-sectional nature of PISA.
           We start by examining the raw correlations between Long-Term Orientation and the five
educational outcomes for both first and second generation immigrants (Figures 8 and 9). Although
we are now observing immigrants or their children in thirty-seven different destination countries, the
basic correlation between Long-Term Orientation and educational performance appears to be very
similar to the one observed among immigrants in Florida.
           The results are confirmed when we run individual level regressions for the two immigrant
groups (Tables 15 and 16). Our specification is similar to the Florida dataset. Our controls include
gender, age, parental education, grade and country of destination fixed effects (columns 1-5 of Tables
15-16). PISA also contains an index for family wealth, an important control as differences in
educational performance could be driven by differences in the initial level of resources among different
immigrant groups. We control for this index in columns 6-10. The inclusion of wealth, if something,
makes our results more precisely estimated. The results are similar between the two groups, though
slightly stronger for second generation immigrants. Despite we use a very different set of destination
countries from the US, it is remarkable that the magnitudes of the Long-Term Orientation beta
coefficients reported at the bottom of each table have a similar order of magnitude to the Long-Term
Orientation beta coefficients estimated in the Florida sample.
           Finally, Figures 10 and 11 present binned scatter plots of the mean of different educational
outcomes for first and second generation students in PISA versus the mean level of Long-Term
Orientation. As for Figures 4 and 5 to construct this figure, we divided the horizontal axis into 40
equal-sized (percentile) bins and plotted the mean education outcome versus the mean level of Long-


50   This variable is present only in the 2012 PISA wave.

                                                        30
Term Orientation in each bin (using OLS regressions on the microdata). Consistent with our
regression results, we do find a significantly strong relationship between Long-Term Orientation and
educational outcomes for both generations.


    4. Conclusions
        This paper explores the role of Long-Term Orientation on educational attainment and
outcomes. It establishes that, controlling for the quality of schools and individual characteristics,
immigrant students from countries with long term oriented attitudes perform better in school than
immigrants from countries that do not emphasize the importance of delayed gratification. Coming
from a long term oriented country not only gives students an initial advantage when they first test in
grade 3 in both math and reading, it also has an additional strong effect over time, as the performance
of these students continues to improve relatively to students coming from less long term oriented
cultures. Also, students from long term oriented cultures have fewer absences, fewer disciplinary
incidents, are less likely to repeat the same grade and are more likely to graduate from high school in
four years. Finally, they are more likely to enroll in advanced level classes while in high school and to
be more likely to select, among these, scientific subjects.
        Parental intervention appears to be an important channel of cultural transmission: Parents are
more likely to choose highly ranked schools and to advocate for inclusion in gifted programs,
controlling for students’ achievement level. At the same time, we also find that the composition of
the school, in particular the fraction of children speaking the same language, magnifies the effect of
Long-Term Orientation on educational performance. Both results are consistent with the idea that
social learning (Boyd et al., 2011) is an important channel of cultural transmission: children are more
likely to internalize the value transmitted by their parents if people around them (family and peers)
behave in a similar way.
        Our results also show that, independently from formal institutions (schools and
neighborhoods), both first and second generation immigrants from countries with longer term
oriented attitudes than the US perform substantially better than native US students. We validate these
results with a sample of student immigrants to other non–US countries.
        Our results can finally shed light on the remarkable persistence found in the educational
literature. Besides income, wealth, and education, parents transmit cultural traits to their children. If
Long-Term Orientation is an important trait to explain educational outcomes, disentangling its
independent effect on educational outcomes is important for policy implications. Our results can

                                                   31
partially explain why the exogenous effect of a sudden shock to income, albeit significant, has a
relatively small economic impact on future generations, especially if compared with the limited
mobility across generations.
       Our results may also shed light on why, despite the importance of socioeconomic background
for students’ achievement, a substantial exogenous shock to wealth has limited or no effect on future
generations. Bleakley and Ferrie (2016) find indeed that the children and grandchildren of winners of
the 1832 Cherokee Land Lottery did not experience better educational outcomes than non-winners,
suggesting that wealth shocks alone are insufficient to have persistent effects in the formation of
human capital of future generations. More importantly, it suggests that part of the correlation that we
observe across generations in educational achievement is driven by some other characteristics different
from wealth that are transmitted along family lines. In this paper, we have shown evidence consistent
with Long-Term Orientation being culturally transmitted from parents to children.
       Beyond finding evidence of parental transmission of values, our results are also consistent with
the existence of non-parental channels of cultural transmission, consistently with Algan et al. (2013).
Our findings that the impact of Long-Term Orientation also depends on school composition could
also explain why observed school quality do not fully account for the differences across schools in the
number of high-achieving students (Ellison et al., 2016) suggesting that the school’s cultural
composition may potentially play an important role in students’ performance. The full impact of
schools’ cultural composition on the educational performance of the overall student body is left for
future research.




                                                  32
                                              References
Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, Katherine Eriksson (2014), A Nation of Immigrants:
       Assimilation and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration, Journal of Political
       Economy, 122:3, 467-717, June 2014.
Albanese, G., G. De Blasio, and P. Sestito (2016) "My parents taught Me. Evidence on the family
       transmission of values," Journal of Population Economics, 29:571-592.
Alesina, Alberto, Paola Giuliano, and Nathan Nunn (2013) “On the Origin of Gender Roles: Women
       and the Plough,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(2): 469-530
Alesina, Alberto and Paola Giuliano (2015), “Culture and Institutions,” Journal of Economic Literature,
       December 2015, 53(4): 898-944.
Algan, Yann and Pierre Cahuc (2010) "Inherited Trust and Growth," American Economic Review, 100(5):
       2060-92.
Algan, Yann, Pierre Cahuc, and Andrei Shleifer (2013) "Teaching Practice and Social Capital,"
       American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(3): 189–210
Becker, Sascha O., Katrin Boeckh, Christa Hainz and Ludger Woessmann (2016), The Empire is
       Dead, Long Live the Empire! Long-Run Persistence of Trust and Corruption in the
       Bureaucracy, The Economic Journal, 126(2): 40–74.
Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier (2000), “Beyond the Melting Pot: Cultural Transmission, Marriage,
       and the Evolution of Ethnic and Religious Traits, Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXV (3), 955-
       988,
Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier (2001), “The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the
       Dynamics of Preferences,” Journal of Economic Theory, 97, 298–319.
Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes (2005) “Why the Apple Doesn’t Fall Far:
       Understanding Intergenerational Transmission of Human Capital,” American Economic Review,
       95(1): 437-449.
Bleakley, Hoyt and Joseph Ferrie (2016), “Shocking Behavior: Random Wealth in Antebellum Georgia
       and Human Capital Across Generations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Boyd, Robert, Peter J. Richerson, and Joseph Henrich (2011), “The cultural niche: Why social learning
       is essential for human adaptation,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108 (Supplement
       2) 10918-10925.



                                                   33
Card, David, John E. Di Nardo and Eugena Estes (2000), “The More Things Change: Immigrants
       and the Children of Immigrants in the 1940s, the 1970s, and the 1990s,” in George J. Borjas,
       editor, Issues in the Economics of Immigration, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Chen, Keith M. (2013), “The Effect of Language on Economic Behavior: Evidence from Savings
       Rates, Health Behaviors, and Retirement Assets,” American Economic Review, 103(2): 690-731.
Chetty, Raj and Nathaniel Hendren (2015), “The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational
       Mobility: Childhood Exposure Effects and County-Level Estimates,” working paper.
Chevalier, Arnaud, Kevin Denny, and Norren McMahon (2009), “A Multi-county Study of Inter-
       generational Education Mobility,” in Peter Dolton, Rita Asplundh, and Erling Barth, editors,
       Education and Inequality Across Europe, London: Edward Elgar.
Dahl, Gordon B. and Lance Lochner (2012), “The Impact of Family Income on Child Achievement:
       Evidence from the Earned Income Tax Credit,” American Economic Review, 102(5): 1927–1956.
Doepke, Mathias and Fabrizio Zilibotti (2008), “Occupational Choice and the Spirit of Capitalism,”
       The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2), 747–793.
Doepke, Mathias and Fabrizio Zilibotti (2015), “Parenting with Style: Altruism and Paternalism in
       Intergenerational Preference Transmission,” working paper.
Dohmen, Thomas, Benjamin Enke, Armin Falk, David Huffman, Uwe Sunde (2015), “Patience and
       The Wealth of Nations,” working paper.
Ellison, G. and A. Swanson, 2016, “Do Schools Matter for High Math Achievement? Evidence from
       the American Mathematics Competition”, American Economic Review, 106 (6): 1244-1277.
Feliciano, Cynthia (2005), “Does Selective Migration Matter? Explaining Ethnic Disparities in
       Educational Attainment among Immigrants' Children,” The International Migration Review, Vol.
       39, No. 4, pp. 841-871.
Fernández, Raquel and Alessandra Fogli (2009), “Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs,
       Work, and Fertility,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1 (1): 146–177.
Figlio, David, Jonathan Guryan, Krzysztof Karbownik, and Jeffrey Roth (2014), “The Effects of Poor
       Neonatal Health on Children’s Cognitive Development,” American Economic Review 104 (12):
       3921-3955.
Figlio, David and Larence Kenny (2009), “Public Sector Performance Measurement and Stakeholder
       Support,” Journal of Public Economics 93 (9-10): 1069-1077.
Figlio, David and Maurice Lucas (2004), “What’s in a Grade? School Report Cards and the Housing
       Market,” American Economic Review 94 (3): 591-604.

                                                   34
Fryer, Roland, and Steven Levitt (2004), “Understanding the Black–White Test Score Gap in the First
        Two Years of School,” Review of Economics and Statistics 86 (2): 447–64
Galor, Oded and Stelios Michalopoulos (2012), “Evolution and the Growth Process: Natural Selection
        of Entrepreneurial Traits,” Journal of Economic Theory, 147, 759-780.
Galor, Oded and Omer Moav (2002), “Natural Selection and the Origin of Economic Growth,”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 1133-1192,
Galor, Oded and Omer Ozak (2016), “The Agricultural Origins of Time Preference,” American
        Economic Review, forthcoming.
Guiso Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales (2006), “Does Culture Affect Economic Outcomes?,”
        The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(2): 23-48.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales (2008), “Social Capital as Good Culture” Journal of the
        European Economic Association 6 (2–3): 295–320.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales (2016), “Long Term Persistence,” The Journal of
        European Economic Association, forthcoming.
Giuliano, Paola (2007), “Living Arrangements in Western Europe: Does Cultural Origin Matter?”
        Journal of the European Economic Association, 5(5): 927-952.
Hanushek, Eric A. and Ludger Woessmann (2010), “The Economics of International Differences in
        Educational Achievement,” IZA Working paper.
Hertz, Tom, Tamera Jayashadera, Patrizio Piraino, Sibel Selcuk, Nicole Smith, and Alina
        Verashchagina (2007), “The Inheritance of Educational Inequality: International Comparisons
        and Fifty-year Trends”, B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 7, article 10.
Hofstede, Geert (1991), Cultures and organizations: software of the mind, McGraw-Hill, London.
Hofstede, Geert, Gert Jan Hofstede, and Michael Minkov (2010), Cultures and organizations: software of
        the mind: intercultural cooperation and its importance for survival, 3rd ed., McGraw-Hill, New York.
Krapohl, E., Rimfeld, K., Shakeshaft, N. G., Trzaskowski, M., McMillan, A., Pingault, J.-B., … Plomin,
        R. (2014) “The high heritability of educational achievement reflects many genetically
        influenced traits, not just intelligence,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
        States of America, 111(42), 15273–15278.
LiCalsi, Christina, Umut Özek, and David Figlio (2016), “The Uneven Implementation of Universal
        School Policies: Maternal Education and Florida’s Mandatory Grade Retention Policy,”
        Northwestern University working paper.



                                                      35
Mischel, Walter, and Ebbe B. Ebbesen (1970) “Attention in delay of gratification,” Journal of Personality
        and Social Psychology, 16(2): 329-337.
Mischel, Walter, Yuichi Shoda, and Philip K. Peake (1988), “The nature of adolescent competencies
        predicted by preschool delay of gratification,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 687–
        696.
Mischel, Walter, Yuichi Shoda, and Monica L. Rodriguez (1989), “Delay of gratification in children,”
        Science, 244, 933–938.
Nunn, Nathan and Leonard Wantchekon (2011), “The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in
        Africa,” American Economic Review, 101(7): 3221-3252.
Özek, Umut and David Figlio (2016) “Cross-Generational Differences in Educational Outcomes in
        the Second Great Wave of Immigration,” NBER working paper.
Reardon, Sean F. and Claudia Galindo (2009), “The Hispanic-White achievement gap in math and
        reading in the elementary grades,” American Educational Research Journal, 46, 853–891.
Rouse, Cecilia Elena and Lisa Barrow (2006) “U.S. Elementary and Secondary Schools: Equalizing
        Opportunity or Replicating the Status Quo?” The Future of Children, Vol. 16 (2): 99-123.
Rothstein, Jesse and Nathan Wozny (2013) “Permanent Income and the Black-White Test Score
        Gap,” Journal of Human Resources 48(3), 510-544.
Sacerdote, Bruce (2005) "Slavery and the Intergenerational Transmission of Human Capital," The
        Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 87 (2): 217-234.
Shoda, Yuichi, Mischel Walter, and Philip K. Peake (1990), “Predicting adolescent cognitive and social
        competence from preschool delay of gratification: Identifying diagnostic conditions,”
        Developmental Psychology, 26, 978–986.
Tabellini, Guido (2008), “The Scope of Cooperation: Values and Incentives,” Quarterly Journal of
        Economics, 123 (3), 905–950.
Voigtlander, Nico and Joachim Voth (2012), “Persecution Perpetuated: The Medieval Origins of Anti-
        Semitic Violence in Nazi Germany,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3): 1339-1392.




                                                     36
                                               Figure 1
                                 Long-Term Orientation, Hofstede (2010)




Note: White areas indicate missing values




                                                  37
                                          Figure 2
          Long-Term Orientation and educational outcomes, raw correlation, FLDOE
                                First generation immigrants




For purposes of confidentiality, we only show data points for countries of origin where we observe at least 50 individuals.




                                                           38
                                        Figure 3
          Long-Term Orientation and educational outcomes, raw correlation, FLDOE
                              Second generation immigrants




For purposes of confidentiality, we only show data points for languages where we observe at least 50 individuals.




                                                           39
                              Figure 4
Long-Term Orientation and educational outcomes, bin-scatters, FLDOE
                    First generation immigrants




                                40
                             Figure 5
Long-Term Orientation and educational outcomes, bin-scatters, FLDOE
                   Second generation immigrants




                                41
                           Figure 6A
  Long-Term Orientation and educational outcomes, FLDOE
       Native, First and Second Generation immigrants




                           Figure 6B
  Long-Term Orientation and educational outcomes, FLDOE
Native, First and Second generation immigrants, Grade A Schools




                              42
                       Figure 7
Long-Term Orientation and educational outcomes, FLDOE
          by Long-Term Orientation quartiles




                         43
                              Figure 8
Long-Term Orientation and educational outcomes, raw correlations, PISA
                    First generation immigrants




                                 44
                             Figure 9
Long-Term Orientation and educational outcomes, raw correlations, PISA
           Second generation immigrants (maternal side)




                                 45
                           Figure 10
Long-Term Orientation and educational outcomes, bin-scatters, PISA
                  First generation immigrants




                               46
                           Figure 11
Long-Term Orientation and educational outcomes, bin-scatters, PISA
         Second generation immigrants (maternal side)




                               47
                                                           Table 1
                             Descriptive statistics, Florida Department of Education Dataset
                                                                                  PANEL A
                                                                   1st generation            2nd generation (extended definition)               2nd generation
                                                          Obs.          Mean      St. dev.     Obs.         Mean       St. dev.        Obs.         Mean       St. dev.

Long-Term Orientation*                                   724,946       0.257      0.200      2,166,731      0.207        0.141      1,023,304       0.213        0.154
Math score, 3rd grade                                    69,652        0.000      1.000       305,382       0.000        1.000       160,763        0.000       1.000
Math score, change 3rd to 8th                            28,046        0.000      0.783       107,053       0.000        0.775        55,880        0.000       0.773
Reading score, 3rd grade                                 69,600        0.000      1.000       305,358       0.000       1.000        160,756        0.000       1.000
Reading score, change 3rd to 8th                         27,931        0.000      0.843       106,543       0.000        0.813        55,586        0.000       0.803
Graduation                                               24,067        0.791      0.407       57,130        0.769       0.421         25,684        0.800       0.400
% Absent Days                                            724,946       0.051      0.070      2,166,731      0.053        0.071      1,023,304       0.045       0.063
Disciplinary Incident                                    451,227       0.173      0.378      1,163,755      0.227        0.419       524,262        0.211       0.408
Retention                                                579,293       0.038      0.190      1,771,660      0.046        0.210       844,819        0.045       0.206
Male*                                                    724,946       0.512      0.500      2,166,731      0.510        0.500      1,023,304       0.505       0.500
Age in months*                                           724,946      148.449    31.452      2,166,731     142.709      30.895      1,023,304      141.271      30.739
Special education*                                       724,946       0.080      0.271      2,166,731      0.143        0.350      1,023,304       0.136       0.343
Free or Reduced Priced Lunch*                            724,946       0.610      0.488      2,166,731      0.709        0.454      1,023,304       0.725       0.446
Enrolled in Limited English proficiency program*         724,946       0.333      0.471      2,166,731      0.159        0.366      1,023,304       0.127       0.333
Enrolled in Limited English proficiency in grade 3        28,046       0.417      0.493       107,053       0.217        0.412        55,880        0.211       0.408
Log GDP pc year 2000 ppp                                 69,649        3.182     0.683        304,449       3.128        0.450       160,241        3.112       0.531
Distance from the US (log)                               69,652        8.390     0.591        305,382       8.260        0.422       160,763        8.232       0.494
Savings over GDP/100                                     69,637        0.215     0.084        304,522       0.209        0.043       160,331        0.205       0.050
Education selection to Florida                           69,031        0.427     0.247        295,119       0.427        0.173       155,048        0.437       0.225
Mean PISA score in Math                                  54,535        4.107     0.477         54,797      4.300         0.493        46,963        4.252       0.454
Mother high school graduate                                 -             -        -          184,331      0.340         0.474           -            -           -
Mother attended some college                                -             -        -          184,331      0.173         0.378           -            -           -
Mother 4yr college graduate                                 -             -        -          184,331      0.136         0.342           -            -           -
Mother teen pregnancy                                       -             -        -          184,331      0.010         0.099           -            -           -
Mother married at time of birth                             -             -        -          184,331      0.630         0.483           -            -           -
Number of older siblings                                    -             -        -          184,331      1.050         1.221           -            -           -
Median income in zipcode of birth (100,000 of $)            -             -        -          184,331      42,199       13,764           -            -           -

                                           PANEL B
                    1st generation + 2nd generation (extended definition)
                                                           Obs.         Mean    St. dev.
Fraction speaking the same language (log)*               384,139       -0.709    1.255
Fraction of advanced classes                             512,070       0.058     0.145
Fraction of advanced classes (scientific subjects)       512,070       0.013     0.054
Math score, 8th grade                                    512,070       0.042    0.982
School Letter Score (from A to F) at t-1, (pre-)
kindergarten                                             243,233       4.119     0.991
School Letter Score (from A to F) at t-1, all grades    3,478,545      4.128     1.012
Gifted in grade 4                                        26,308        0.112     0.316
Futureless Language (Chen)*                             1,942,897       0.019    0.135
Maximum Crop Yield (Galor)*                              373,220        8.593    2.298
Notes. The table reports sample statistics for the FLDOE sample and various country of origin level controls. All the variables, as well as the definitions of first and
second generation immigrants are described in details in the text and the Online Appendix. The statistics marked with an asterisk (*) are calculated based on the
sample used to run the regressions with the dependent variable “% Absent Days” (i.e., the specification where the largest sample is used). The statistics for the
variable “Enrolled in Limited English proficiency in grade 3” are calculated based on the sample used to run the regression on the variable “Math score, change 3rd to
8th”.




                                                                                   48
                                          Table 2
            Long-Term Orientation and school performance in mathematics, FLDOE
                                First generation immigrants

                                                                             Sample: 1st generation
                                                               Whole sample                        Language restriction
                                                      (1)       (2)     (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)
                                                       Math score,       Math score,         Math score,         Math score,
VARIABLES                                               3rd grade     change 3rd to 8th       3rd grade      change 3rd to 8th

Long-Term Orientation                              0.597*** 0.336*** 0.217** 0.217** 0.814*** 0.591*** 0.454*** 0.427***
                                                     (0.136) (0.123) (0.100) (0.091) (0.145) (0.135) (0.119) (0.111)
Male                                                0.081*** 0.121*** -0.015        -0.003 0.078*** 0.116*** -0.006         0.007
                                                     (0.009) (0.006) (0.010) (0.010) (0.011) (0.007) (0.008) (0.008)
Age in months                                      -0.016*** -0.005*** -0.020*** -0.017*** -0.014*** -0.004*** -0.020*** -0.017***
                                                     (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.002) (0.001)
Free or Reduced Priced Lunch                                 -0.202***           -0.069***           -0.191***           -0.068***
                                                              (0.019)              (0.013)            (0.017)              (0.014)
Special education                                            -0.674***           -0.353***           -0.654***           -0.352***
                                                              (0.029)              (0.022)            (0.030)              (0.023)
Enrolled in Limited English proficiency program              -0.660***                               -0.671***
                                                              (0.026)                                 (0.026)
Enrolled in Limited English proficiency in grade 3                                0.120***                                0.099***
                                                                                   (0.020)                                 (0.019)
Math score, 3rd grade                                                  -0.348*** -0.357***                     -0.360*** -0.370***
                                                                        (0.015) (0.017)                         (0.014) (0.016)

Observations                                        81,986    81,977    32,895    32,895    69,659    69,652    28,046    28,046
R-squared                                            0.337     0.441     0.386     0.399     0.353    0.458     0.405     0.417
Year*school FE                                       YES       YES       YES       YES       YES       YES       YES       YES
Dependent Variable (mean)                            0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000    0.000     0.000
Dependent Variable (sd)                              1.000    1.000      0.779     0.779     1.000    1.000     0.783     0.783
Long-Term Orientation (mean)                         0.307     0.307     0.304     0.304     0.255     0.255    0.254     0.254
Long-Term Orientation (sd)                           0.241     0.241     0.236     0.236     0.192    0.192     0.190     0.190
Long-Term Orientation (beta)                         0.144     0.081     0.066     0.066     0.156     0.113    0.110     0.103
N_clust                                                93       93        90        90         89       89        84        84
Notes. The table reports OLS estimates, with standard errors clustered at the country level. The unit of observation is a
student born between 1992 and 2002 and observed during the academic years 2002-2012. In columns 1-4, the sample
includes first generation immigrants defined using the information on the country of origin. In columns 5-8, the sample
includes first generation immigrants defined using both the information on the country of origin and the language spoken at
home (see online Appendix for details). The dependent variables are: students’ Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test
math score in grade 3 (standardized with mean 0 and variance 1) and the change in math score from grade 3 to grade 8.
Individual controls are: age in months, a male dummy, an indicator variable for free or reduced free lunch eligibility, a
dummy indicating if the student is enrolled in a limited English proficiency program and indicator for special education
needs. Columns 3-4, 7-8 also control for the math score in grade 3. The ‘‘Long Term Orientation’’ variable is based on
Hofstede (2010) and is measured on a 0-1 scale. We describe in details all the variables in the online Appendix. ***, **,
and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.




                                                               49
                                             Table 3
                Long-Term Orientation and additional educational outcomes, FLDOE
                                   First generation immigrants
                                                          (1)                (2)             (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)
                                                     Reading score,    Reading score,     Graduation   % Absent    Disciplinary   Retention
VARIABLES                                              3rd grade      change 3rd to 8th                 Days        Incident

Long-Term Orientation                                  0.281***          0.362***         0.092***     -0.024***    -0.125***     -0.018***
                                                        (0.086)           (0.116)          (0.031)       (0.008)     (0.023)        (0.006)
Male                                                   -0.055***         -0.042***        -0.033***    -0.002***     0.090***      0.011***
                                                        (0.007)           (0.011)          (0.004)       (0.000)      (0.006)       (0.001)
Age in months                                          -0.005***         -0.012***        -0.004***     0.001***     0.005***     -0.000***
                                                        (0.001)           (0.002)          (0.001)       (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)
Free or Reduced Priced Lunch                           -0.200***         -0.109***          0.002         -0.003     0.039***      0.005***
                                                        (0.016)           (0.017)          (0.009)       (0.002)      (0.005)       (0.001)
Special education                                      -0.676***         -0.436***        -0.203***     0.009***     0.059***      0.032***
                                                        (0.018)           (0.029)          (0.023)       (0.002)      (0.003)       (0.005)
Enrolled in Limited English proficiency program        -0.839***                          -0.393***     0.007***     0.010**       0.035***
                                                        (0.022)                            (0.015)       (0.001)      (0.005)       (0.003)
Enrolled in Limited English proficiency in grade 3                         0.035
                                                                          (0.023)
Reading score, 3rd grade                                                 -0.446***
                                                                          (0.016)

Observations                                            69,600             27,931           24,067     724,946       451,227      579,293
R-squared                                               0.473              0.426             0.383       0.185        0.123        0.114
Year*school FE                                           YES                YES              YES         YES           YES          YES
Grade FE                                                   -                  -                 -        YES           YES          YES
Dependent Variable (mean)                                0.000              0.000            0.791       0.051        0.173        0.038
Dependent Variable (sd)                                 1.000              0.843             0.407       0.070        0.378        0.190
Long-Term Orientation (mean)                             0.255              0.254            0.262       0.257        0.259        0.256
Long-Term Orientation (sd)                               0.192              0.189            0.203       0.200        0.202        0.197
Long-Term Orientation (beta)                            0.054              0.081             0.046      -0.069        -0.067       -0.019
N_clust                                                   89                 84                88         92            92           92

Notes. The table reports OLS estimates, with standard errors clustered at the country level. The unit of observation is a student born
between 1992 and 2002 and observed during the academic years 2002-2012. The sample includes first generation immigrants defined using
the information on the country of origin and the language spoken at home. The dependent variables are: students’ Florida Comprehensive
Assessment Test reading score in grade 3 (standardized with mean 0 and variance 1), the change in reading score from grade 3 to grade 8,
high school graduation (a dummy for whether the student received a standard diploma within four years after entering the 9th grade for the
first time), absence rates (the percentage of days in which the student is absent during the academic year) and retention (an indicator for
whether the student repeats the same grade at least once) measured in grades 3-12, and disciplinary incidents (a dummy for whether the
student was involved in a disciplinary incident defined as serious offences often leading to suspension) measured in grades 6-12. Individual
controls are the same as in Table 2. In column 2 we also control for the reading score in grade 3. The ‘‘Long Term Orientation’’ variable
is based on Hofstede (2010) and is measured on a 0-1 scale. We describe in details all the variables in the online Appendix. ***, **, and *
indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.




                                                                        50
                                                     Table 4
                            Long-Term Orientation and educational performance, FLDOE
                                          Second generation immigrants
                                                         (1)           (2)             (3)                (4)             (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)
                                                     Math score,   Math score,    Reading score,    Reading score,     Graduation   % Absent    Disciplinary   Retention
VARIABLES                                             3rd grade change 3rd to 8th   3rd grade      change 3rd to 8th                 Days        Incident

Long-Term Orientation                                 0.752***       0.441***        0.494***         0.390***         0.084***     -0.022**      -0.175***    -0.022***
                                                        (0.131)       (0.109)         (0.078)          (0.090)          (0.009)      (0.009)        (0.046)      (0.005)
Male                                                   0.127***      -0.031***       -0.068***        -0.051***        -0.049***      -0.000       0.093***     0.014***
                                                        (0.024)       (0.008)         (0.017)          (0.010)          (0.004)      (0.000)        (0.006)      (0.002)
Age in months                                         -0.012***      -0.018***       -0.014***        -0.013***        -0.006***    0.001***       0.007***    -0.001***
                                                        (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.002)          (0.001)          (0.001)      (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.000)
Free or Reduced Priced Lunch                          -0.241***      -0.056***       -0.245***        -0.090***          -0.008        0.001       0.048***     0.009***
                                                        (0.014)       (0.013)         (0.014)          (0.013)          (0.007)      (0.002)        (0.006)      (0.001)
Special education                                     -0.650***      -0.234***       -0.739***        -0.183***        -0.161***    0.006***       0.027***     0.033***
                                                        (0.027)       (0.009)         (0.023)          (0.012)          (0.003)      (0.000)        (0.003)      (0.001)
Enrolled in Limited English proficiency program       -0.657***                      -0.727***                         -0.304***    0.004***       0.043***     0.069***
                                                        (0.019)                       (0.029)                           (0.019)      (0.001)        (0.006)      (0.004)
Enrolled in Limited English proficiency in grade 3                    -0.029**                        -0.127***
                                                                       (0.014)                         (0.015)
Math score, 3rd grade                                                -0.364***
                                                                       (0.010)
Reading score, 3rd grade                                                                              -0.414***
                                                                                                       (0.009)

Observations                                          160,763         55,880         160,756            55,586           25,684     1,023,304     524,262       844,819
R-squared                                              0.372           0.344          0.386             0.325             0.345        0.224       0.140         0.116
Year*school FE                                         YES             YES            YES                YES              YES          YES          YES           YES
Grade FE                                                  -              -               -                 -                -          YES          YES           YES
Dependent Variable (mean)                              0.000           0.000          0.000              0.000            0.800        0.045       0.211         0.045
Dependent Variable (sd)                                1.000           0.773          1.000             0.803             0.400        0.063       0.408         0.206
Long-Term Orientation (mean)                           0.215           0.218          0.215             0.218             0.216        0.213       0.213         0.213
Long-Term Orientation (sd)                             0.153           0.160          0.153             0.160             0.159        0.154       0.156         0.154
Long-Term Orientation (beta)                           0.115           0.091          0.076             0.078             0.034       -0.054       -0.067        -0.017
N_clust                                                 88              79              88                79               65           88           82            88

Notes. The table reports OLS estimates, with standard errors clustered at the language/country level. The unit of observation is a student born between 1992 and 2002 and
observed during the academic years 2002-2012. The sample includes second generation immigrants (extended definition) defined using the information on the country of
origin of the mother when available (Canada, Mexico, and Puerto Rico), or the language spoken at home for the remaining students for which the country of origin of the
mother is not available. See details in the text and the appendix for how the matching between language and countries has been implemented. The dependent variables are:
students’ Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test math score in grade 3 (standardized with mean 0 and variance 1), change in math score from grade 3 to grade 8, reading
score in grade 3 (standardized with mean 0 and variance 1), change in reading score from grade 3 to grade 8, high school graduation (a dummy for whether the student
received a standard diploma within four years after entering 9th grade for the first time), high school graduation (a dummy for whether the student received a standard
diploma within four years after entering 9th grade for the first time), absence rates (the percentage of days in which the student is absent during the academic year)
disciplinary incidents (a dummy for whether the student was involved in a disciplinary incident defined as serious offences often leading to suspension) measured in grades
6-12, and retention (an indicator for whether the student repeats the same grade at least once) measured in grades 3-12,. Individual controls are the same as in Table 2.
Columns 2 and 4 also control for the math score and reading score in grade 3, respectively. The ‘‘Long Term Orientation’’ variable is based on Hofstede (2010) and is
measured on a 0-1 scale. We describe in details all the variables in the online Appendix. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.




                                                                                      51
                                                        Table 5
                               Long-Term Orientation and educational performance, FLDOE
                                   Second generation immigrants, extended definition
                                                          (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)               (8)
                                                      Math score,      Math score,    Reading score,   Reading score,     Graduation     % Absent Days     Disciplinary       Retention
VARIABLES                                              3rd grade      change 3rd to     3rd grade      change 3rd to                                        Incident


Long-Term Orientation                                  0.769***         0.494***         0.502***         0.447***         0.127***        -0.026***         -0.178***       -0.025***
                                                         (0.120)         (0.100)          (0.059)          (0.087)          (0.019)         (0.008)           (0.037)         (0.003)
Male                                                    0.134***        -0.024***        -0.062***        -0.048***        -0.043***       -0.001***          0.096***        0.014***
                                                         (0.017)         (0.007)          (0.013)          (0.004)          (0.001)          (0.000)           (0.002)         (0.001)
Age in months                                          -0.012***        -0.019***        -0.013***        -0.014***        -0.006***        0.001***          0.007***       -0.000***
                                                         (0.001)         (0.000)          (0.001)          (0.000)          (0.000)          (0.000)           (0.000)         (0.000)
Free or Reduced Priced Lunch                           -0.240***        -0.064***        -0.250***        -0.094***        -0.014***          0.002           0.056***        0.010***
                                                         (0.010)         (0.009)          (0.008)          (0.008)          (0.005)          (0.002)           (0.004)         (0.001)
Special education                                      -0.662***        -0.265***        -0.753***        -0.207***        -0.188***        0.007***          0.035***        0.032***
                                                         (0.017)         (0.008)          (0.020)          (0.007)          (0.006)          (0.000)           (0.002)         (0.001)
Enrolled in Limited English proficiency program        -0.633***                         -0.709***                         -0.322***        0.007***          0.038***        0.052***
                                                         (0.005)                          (0.013)                           (0.005)          (0.001)           (0.004)         (0.003)
Enrolled in Limited English proficiency in grade 3                        0.017                           -0.076***
                                                                         (0.018)                           (0.018)
Math score, 3rd grade                                                   -0.370***
                                                                         (0.007)
Reading score, 3rd grade                                                                                  -0.422***
                                                                                                           (0.005)

Observations                                            305,382          107,053          305,358          106,543          57,130          2,166,731        1,163,755        1,771,660
R-squared                                                0.342            0.310            0.354            0.292            0.344            0.204            0.129            0.094
Year*school FE                                           YES              YES              YES              YES              YES               YES              YES              YES
Grade FE                                                    -                -                -                -               -               YES              YES              YES
Dependent Variable (mean)                                0.000            0.000            0.000            0.000            0.769            0.053            0.227            0.046
Dependent Variable (sd)                                  1.000            0.775            1.000            0.813            0.421            0.071            0.419            0.210
Long-Term Orientation (mean)                             0.209            0.211            0.209            0.211           0.208             0.207            0.206            0.206
Long-Term Orientation (sd)                               0.144            0.147            0.144            0.147            0.142            0.141            0.141            0.141
Long-Term Orientation (beta)                             0.111            0.094            0.072            0.081           0.043             -0.052           -0.060           -0.017
N_clust                                                    93               85               93               85              83                96               92               95
Notes. The table reports OLS estimates, with standard errors clustered at the language/country level. The unit of observation is a student born between 1992 and 2002 and observed
during the academic years 2002-2012. The sample includes second generation immigrants (extended definition) defined using the information on the country of origin of the mother
when available (Canada, Mexico, and Puerto Rico), or the language spoken at home for the remaining students for which the country of origin of the mother is not available. See
details in the text and the appendix for how the matching between language and countries has been implemented. The dependent variables measure students’ Florida Comprehensive
Assessment Test math score in grade 3 (standardized with mean 0 and variance 1), the change in math score from grade 3 to grade 8, reading score in grade 3 (standardized with mean
0 and variance 1), change in reading score from grade 3 to grade 8, high school graduation (a dummy for whether the student received a standard diploma within four years after
entering the 9th grade for the first time), absence rates (the percentage of days in which the student is absent during the academic year), disciplinary incidents (a dummy for whether
the student was involved in a disciplinary incident, defined as serious offences often leading to suspension), and retention (an indicator for whether the student repeats the same
grade at least once). Individual controls are the same as in Table 2. Columns 2 and 4 also control for the math score and reading score in grade 3, respectively. The ‘‘Long Term
Orientation’’ variable is based on Hofstede (2010) and is measured on a 0-1 scale. We describe in details all the variables in the online Appendix. ***, **, and * indicate significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.




                                                                                           52
                                         Table 6
         Long-Term Orientation and educational performance, controlling for maternal
                                 characteristics, FLDOE
                    Second generation immigrants, extended definition
                                                     (1)             (2)        (3)           (4)       (5)         (6)
VARIABLES                                                                     Math score, 3rd grade

Long-Term Orientation                              0.734***        0.757***   0.720***    0.757***    0.750***   0.697***
                                                    (0.128)         (0.125)    (0.123)     (0.123)     (0.122)     (0.124)
Mother high school graduate                        0.107***                                                       0.083***
                                                    (0.021)                                                        (0.020)
Mother attended some college                       0.206***                                                       0.170***
                                                    (0.022)                                                        (0.020)
Mother 4yr college graduate                        0.385***                                                       0.337***
                                                    (0.017)                                                        (0.015)
Mother teen pregnancy                                          -0.132***                                         -0.070***
                                                                (0.019)                                            (0.024)
Mother married at time of birth                                               0.128***                            0.102***
                                                                               (0.011)                             (0.007)
Number of older siblings                                                                  -0.027***              -0.028***
                                                                                           (0.003)                 (0.004)
Median income in zipcode of birth (100,000 of $)                                                      0.297***    0.173***
                                                                                                       (0.028)     (0.026)

Observations                                       206,143         207,509    207,531      204,971    185,595    184,331
R-squared                                           0.361           0.352      0.355        0.353      0.357      0.368
Year*school FE                                      YES             YES        YES          YES        YES        YES
Individual controls                                 YES             YES        YES          YES        YES        YES
Dependent Variable (mean)                           0.000           0.000      0.000        0.000      0.000      0.000
Dependent Variable (sd)                             1.000           1.000      1.000        1.000      1.000      1.000
Long-Term Orientation (mean)                        0.207           0.207      0.207        0.207      0.207      0.207
Long-Term Orientation (sd)                          0.141           0.141      0.141        0.141      0.143      0.143
Long-Term Orientation (beta)                        0.104           0.107      0.102        0.107      0.107      0.100
N_clust                                               91              91         91           91        90         90
Notes. The table reports OLS estimates, with standard errors clustered at the language/country level. The unit of
observation is a student born between 1992 and 2002 and observed during the academic years 2002-2012. The sample
includes second generation immigrants (extended definition) defined using the information on the country of origin of the
mother when available (Canada, Mexico, and Puerto Rico), or the language spoken at home for the remaining students for
which the country of origin of the mother is not available. See details in the text and the appendix for how the matching
between language and countries has been implemented. The dependent variable measures students’ Florida
Comprehensive Assessment Test math score in grade 3 (standardized with mean 0 and variance 1). All the regressions
include the same individual controls described in Table 2 (coefficients not reported). Maternal controls include education
dummies (high school, some college and college graduate; the excluded group is college drop-out), whether the mother
was younger than 16 when she gave birth, the mother’s marital status at time of birth, the number of older siblings, and
the median income in the zip code of the place of residence at time of birth (measured in 1999). The ‘‘Long Term
Orientation’’ variable is based on Hofstede (2010) and is measured on a 0-1 scale. We describe in details all the variables
in the online Appendix. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.




                                                              53
                                        Table 7
 Long-Term Orientation and performance in mathematics, controlling for other country of
                            origin characteristics, FLDOE
                             First generation immigrants
                                       (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)     (5)   (6)     (7)      (8)     (9)      (10)     (11)   (12)
VARIABLES                                             Math score, 3rd grade                        Math score, change 3rd to 8th

Long-Term Orientation               0.562***0.414***0.588***0.553***0.601***0.440***0.413***0.355***0.430***0.431***0.466***0.292***
                                     (0.073) (0.131) (0.129) (0.092) (0.145) (0.129) (0.075) (0.102) (0.114) (0.094) (0.149) (0.093)
Log GDP pc year 2000 ppp            -0.139***                                  -0.147***-0.102***                                 -0.218***
                                     (0.018)                                     (0.038) (0.018)                                   (0.034)
Distance from the US (log)                    0.121**                            -0.009           0.051**                           -0.004
                                              (0.046)                            (0.027)          (0.023)                          (0.025)
Savings over GDP/100                                  -0.182                     -0.240                    0.181                     0.064
                                                      (0.320)                    (0.155)                  (0.173)                  (0.117)
Education selection to Florida                                0.410***          0.286***                          0.213***           0.051
                                                               (0.071)           (0.057)                           (0.049)         (0.055)
Mean PISA score in Math                                                -0.113** 0.101                                      -0.053 0.167***
                                                                        (0.043) (0.063)                                    (0.056) (0.047)

Observations                         69,649 69,652 69,637 69,031 54,535 54,461 28,046 28,046 28,039 27,736 22,799 22,775
R-squared                             0.464 0.461 0.458 0.464 0.464 0.469 0.421 0.417 0.417 0.422 0.434 0.442
Year*school FE                        YES    YES    YES    YES    YES    YES    YES    YES    YES    YES    YES    YES
Individual controls                   YES    YES    YES    YES    YES    YES    YES    YES    YES    YES    YES    YES
Dependent Variable (mean)            0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000
Dependent Variable (sd)               1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000 0.783 0.783 0.783 0.783 0.791 0.791
Long-Term Orientation (mean)          0.255 0.255 0.255 0.252 0.287 0.286 0.254 0.254 0.254 0.251 0.276 0.275
Long-Term Orientation (sd)            0.192 0.192 0.192 0.189 0.177 0.176 0.190 0.190 0.190 0.186 0.174 0.174
Long-Term Orientation (beta)         0.108 0.079 0.113 0.105 0.106 0.077 0.100 0.086 0.104 0.102 0.103 0.064
N_clust                                 88    89     88     76     61     53     84     84     83     73     57     52
Notes. The table reports OLS estimates, with standard errors clustered at the country level. The unit of observation is a student born
between 1992 and 2002 and observed during the academic years 2002-2012. The sample includes first generation immigrants defined using
both the information on the country of origin and the language spoken at home. The dependent variable measures students’ Florida
Comprehensive Assessment Test math score in grade 3 (standardized with mean 0 and variance 1). All the regressions include the same
individual controls described in Table 2 (coefficients not reported). The ‘‘Long Term Orientation’’ variable is based on Hofstede (2010)
and is measured on a 0-1 scale. The additional country-controls and all the remaining variables are described in the online Appendix. ***,
**, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.




                                                                     54
                                        Table 8
 Long-Term Orientation and performance in mathematics, controlling for other country of
                            origin characteristics, FLDOE
                 Second generation immigrants, extended definition
                                 (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)     (5)     (6)      (7)      (8)      (9)      (10)      (11)    (12)
VARIABLES                                       Math score, 3rd grade                            Math score, change 3rd to 8th

Long-Term Orientation          0.728*** 0.612*** 0.723*** 0.918*** 0.529*** 0.383** 0.447*** 0.393*** 0.473*** 0.590*** 0.458*** 0.376**
                                (0.115) (0.174) (0.095) (0.110) (0.145) (0.176) (0.085) (0.105) (0.090) (0.082) (0.099) (0.147)
Log GDP pc year 2000 ppp        -0.079*                                     -0.085***-0.080***                                   -0.131***
                                (0.041)                                       (0.030) (0.026)                                     (0.018)
Distance from the US (log)                0.097                                -0.054          0.063***                            -0.025
                                         (0.076)                              (0.033)           (0.024)                           (0.016)
Savings over GDP/100                              0.714**                    0.881**                     0.244                     0.407
                                                  (0.324)                     (0.423)                   (0.211)                   (0.313)
Education selection to Florida                              0.045            0.285***                            0.084             -0.029
                                                           (0.123)            (0.057)                           (0.055)           (0.082)
Mean PISA score in Math                                              0.072     0.076                                      0.004    0.024
                                                                    (0.051) (0.060)                                      (0.037) (0.040)

Observations                 304,449 305,382 304,522 295,119 54,797         53,916 106,832 107,053 106,696 103,388 17,760          17,438
R-squared                     0.344   0.343   0.342   0.343  0.484          0.488   0.312   0.311   0.310   0.314  0.479           0.485
Year*school FE                YES     YES     YES     YES     YES            YES    YES     YES     YES     YES     YES             YES
Individual controls           YES     YES     YES     YES     YES            YES    YES     YES     YES     YES     YES             YES
Dependent Variable (mean)     0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000  0.000          0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000  0.000           0.000
Dependent Variable (sd)       1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000          1.000  0.775   0.775   0.776   0.777  0.745            0.746
Long-Term Orientation (mean) 0.208    0.209   0.208   0.199  0.339          0.331   0.210   0.211   0.210   0.201  0.353           0.344
Long-Term Orientation (sd)    0.142   0.144   0.143   0.128  0.157          0.147   0.146   0.147   0.146   0.133  0.164           0.154
Long-Term Orientation (beta)  0.103   0.088   0.103   0.118  0.083          0.056   0.084   0.074   0.089   0.101  0.101           0.078
N_clust                         91      93      91      71     48             42     83      85      83      66      46              41
Notes. The table reports OLS estimates, with standard errors clustered at the language/country level. The unit of observation is a
student born between 1992 and 2002 and observed during the academic years 2002-2012. The sample includes second generation
immigrants (extended definition) defined using the information on the country of origin of the mother when available (Canada, Mexico,
and Puerto Rico), or the language spoken at home for the remaining students for which the country of origin of the mother is not
available. See details in the text and the appendix for how the matching between language and countries has been implemented. The
dependent variable measures students’ Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test math score in grade 3 (standardized with mean 0 and
variance 1). All the regressions include the same individual controls described in Table 2 (coefficients not reported). The additional
country-controls are described in the online Appendix. The ‘‘Long Term Orientation’’ variable is based on Hofstede (2010) and is
measured on a 0-1 scale. We describe in details all the variables on the online Appendix. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels.




                                                                    55
                                        Table 9
    Long-Term Orientation and educational performance, robustness to sample selection,
                                       FLDOE
                                                        PANEL A: 1st generation + 2ndplus generation (extended definition)
                                 (1)             (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)              (7)           (8)
                             Math score,     Math score,     Reading    Reading score, Graduation         % Absent       Disciplinary    Retention
                              3rd grade     change 3rd to score,    3rd change 3rd to                       Days           Incident
                                                 8th          grade           8th

Long-Term Orientation         0.747***        0.485***       0.455***         0.451***      0.115***       -0.026***      -0.170***      -0.024***
                               (0.102)         (0.100)        (0.054)          (0.093)       (0.019)        (0.007)        (0.031)        (0.004)

Observations                  375,034          135,100        374,958         134,475        81,197        2,891,677      1,614,982      2,350,953
R-squared                      0.340            0.304          0.352           0.295         0.338           0.189          0.122          0.086
Year*school FE                 YES              YES            YES             YES            YES             YES            YES            YES
Grade FE                          -               -               -              -              -             YES            YES            YES
Individual controls            YES              YES            YES             YES            YES             YES            YES            YES
Dependent Variable (mean)      0.000            0.000          0.000           0.000          0.776          0.052          0.212          0.044
Dependent Variable (sd)        1.000            0.778          1.000           0.828         0.417           0.071          0.409          0.205
Long-Term Orientation
(mean)                          0.218           0.220          0.218           0.220          0.224          0.219          0.221          0.218
Long-Term Orientation (sd)      0.155           0.158          0.155           0.158          0.164          0.160          0.162          0.158
Long-Term Orientation
(beta)                          0.116           0.098          0.070           0.086          0.045         -0.058          -0.067         -0.019
N_clust                          95              90             95              90             92             97              97             97

                                           PANEL B: 1st generation + 2ndplus generation (extended definition), exclusion of Latin America
                                 (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)              (6)             (7)          (8)
                             Math score,     Math score,     Reading     Reading score, Graduation         % Absent        Disciplinary   Retention
                              3rd grade     change 3rd to score,    3rd change 3rd to                         Days           Incident
                                                 8th          grade            8th

Long-Term Orientation         0.458***        0.385***        0.243*          0.367***       0.036**        -0.014         -0.067*         -0.003
                               (0.169)         (0.133)        (0.124)          (0.122)       (0.016)        (0.010)        (0.036)        (0.003)

Observations                   50,814          19,459          50,786          19,397        13,287         420,633        244,772        338,169
R-squared                       0.448           0.463           0.455           0.458         0.365          0.169          0.127          0.134
Year*school FE                  YES             YES             YES             YES           YES            YES            YES            YES
Grade FE                           -              -               -               -             -            YES            YES            YES
Individual controls             YES             YES             YES             YES           YES            YES            YES            YES
Dependent Variable (mean)       0.000           0.000           0.000           0.000         0.883          0.039          0.123          0.022
Dependent Variable (sd)         1.000           0.766          1.000           0.837         0.322           0.063          0.328          0.146
Long-Term Orientation
(mean)                          0.518           0.518          0.518           0.518          0.513          0.517          0.517          0.516
Long-Term Orientation (sd)      0.210           0.209          0.210           0.209          0.206          0.211          0.210          0.209
Long-Term Orientation
(beta)                          0.096           0.105          0.051           0.092          0.023         -0.046          -0.043         -0.005
N_clust                          82              77             82              77             79             84              84             84




                                                                         56
                                     Table 9
 Long-Term Orientation and educational performance, robustness to sample selection
                              (continued), FLDOE
                                               PANEL C: 1st generation + 2ndplus generation (extended definition), exclusion of Asia
                                 (1)             (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)             (6)              (7)            (8)
                             Math score,     Math score,     Reading    Reading score, Graduation         % Absent        Disciplinary     Retention
                              3rd grade     change 3rd to score,    3rd change 3rd to                        Days           Incident
                                                 8th          grade          8th

Long-Term Orientation         0.532***        0.247***       0.385***         0.267***       0.079***         -0.012       -0.114***       -0.022***
                               (0.103)         (0.075)        (0.064)          (0.091)        (0.020)        (0.008)        (0.035)         (0.004)

Observations                  347,049         124,578         346,991         123,998         74,356        2,666,557      1,485,783       2,170,681
R-squared                      0.325           0.300           0.345           0.292           0.338          0.192          0.121           0.088
Year*school FE                 YES             YES             YES             YES             YES             YES            YES             YES
Grade FE                          -              -                -              -               -             YES            YES             YES
Individual controls            YES             YES             YES             YES             YES             YES            YES             YES
Dependent Variable (mean)      0.000           0.000           0.000           0.000           0.765          0.054          0.222           0.046
Dependent Variable (sd)        1.000           0.792           1.000           0.835           0.424          0.072          0.416           0.209
Long-Term Orientation
(mean)                          0.194           0.195          0.194           0.195           0.197          0.194          0.195           0.194
Long-Term Orientation (sd)      0.119           0.121          0.119           0.121           0.126          0.123          0.125           0.122
Long-Term Orientation
(beta)                          0.063           0.038          0.046           0.039           0.024         -0.021          -0.034         -0.013
N_clust                           68              63             68              63             65             70              70             70

                                           PANEL D: 1st generation + 2ndplus generation (extended definition), inclusion of continent FE
                                 (1)             (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)              (6)              (7)           (8)
                             Math score,     Math score,     Reading    Reading score, Graduation          % Absent        Disciplinary    Retention
                              3rd grade     change 3rd to score,    3rd change 3rd to                        Days            Incident
                                                 8th          grade           8th

Long-Term Orientation         0.700***        0.434***        0.419***        0.433***       0.053**        -0.020**       -0.148***       -0.014**
                               (0.096)         (0.081)         (0.084)         (0.086)       (0.022)         (0.009)        (0.038)         (0.005)

Observations                  375,034         135,100         374,958         134,475         81,197        2,891,677      1,614,982       2,350,953
R-squared                      0.343           0.307           0.352           0.296           0.339          0.190          0.124           0.086
Year*school FE                 YES             YES             YES             YES             YES             YES            YES             YES
Grade FE                          -              -                -              -               -             YES            YES             YES
Individual controls            YES             YES             YES             YES             YES             YES            YES             YES
Continent FE                   YES             YES             YES             YES             YES             YES            YES             YES
Dependent Variable (mean)      0.000           0.000           0.000           0.000           0.776          0.052          0.212           0.044
Dependent Variable (sd)        1.000           0.778           1.000           0.828           0.417          0.071          0.409           0.205
Long-Term Orientation
(mean)                          0.218           0.220          0.218           0.220           0.224          0.219          0.221           0.218
Long-Term Orientation (sd)      0.155           0.158          0.155           0.158           0.164          0.160          0.162           0.158
Long-Term Orientation
(beta)                          0.108           0.088          0.065           0.083           0.021         -0.045          -0.059         -0.011
N_clust                           95             90              95             90              92             97              97             97
Notes. The table reports OLS estimates, with standard errors clustered at the language/country level. The unit of observation is a student born
between 1992 and 2002 and observed during the academic years 2002-2012. The sample pools together first generation immigrants defined using
the information on both the country of origin and the language spoken at home, and second generation immigrants (extended definition) defined
using the information on the country of origin of the mother when available (Canada, Mexico, and Puerto Rico), or the language spoken at home
for the remaining students for which the country of origin of the mother is not available. See details in the text and the appendix for how the
matching between language and countries has been implemented. Panel A and Panel D include the overall sample. Panel B excludes immigrants
from Central and Latin America. Panel C excludes immigrants from Asia. The dependent variables are: students’ Florida Comprehensive
Assessment Test math score in grade 3 (standardized with mean 0 and variance 1), the change in math score from grade 3 to grade 8, reading score
in grade 3 (standardized with mean 0 and variance 1), change in reading score from grade 3 to grade 8, high school graduation (a dummy for
whether the student received a standard diploma within four years after entering the 9th grade for the first time), absence rates (the percentage of
days in which the student is absent during the academic year), disciplinary incidents (a dummy for whether the student was involved in a
disciplinary incident, defined as serious offences often leading to suspension), and retention (an indicator for whether the student repeats the
same grade at least once). All regressions include the same individual controls described in Table 2 (coefficients not reported). Panel D also
includes continent fixed effects. Columns 2 and 4 also control for the math score and reading score in grade 3, respectively. The ‘‘Long Term
Orientation’’ variable is based on Hofstede (2010) and is measured on a 0-1 scale. We describe in details all the variables in the online Appendix.
***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.


                                                                         57
                               Table 10
Long-Term Orientation and educational performance, heterogeneity in family
                        characteristics, FLDOE
          Second Generation immigrants, extended definition
                                                           (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)      (7)
 VARIABLES                                                                      Math score, 3rd grade

 Long-Term Orientation (LTO)                            0.891*** 0.699*** 0.637*** 0.696*** 0.752*** 0.666*** 0.818***
                                                          (0.147) (0.124) (0.171) (0.124) (0.211) (0.106) (0.202)
 Mother high school graduate*LTO                          -0.173*                                                    -0.209**
                                                          (0.093)                                                     (0.087)
 Mother attended some college*LTO                       -0.319***                                                   -0.358***
                                                          (0.106)                                                     (0.093)
 Mother 4yr college graduate*LTO                         -0.224**                                                   -0.268***
                                                          (0.108)                                                     (0.099)
 Mother teen pregnancy*LTO                                          -0.534                                           -0.679**
                                                                   (0.329)                                            (0.341)
 Mother married at time of birth*LTO                                          0.074                                   0.145*
                                                                             (0.110)                                  (0.081)
 Number of older siblings*LTO                                                           0.001                          -0.020
                                                                                       (0.025)                        (0.023)
 Median income in zipcode of birth (100,000 of $)*LTO                                             -0.113               -0.022
                                                                                                 (0.277)              (0.204)
 Free or Reduced Priced Lunch*LTO                                                                           0.068      0.039
                                                                                                           (0.092) (0.073)
 Mother high school graduate                             0.116*** 0.083*** 0.083*** 0.083*** 0.083*** 0.083*** 0.122***
                                                          (0.028) (0.020) (0.020) (0.020) (0.020) (0.020) (0.027)
 Mother attended some college                            0.232*** 0.170*** 0.170*** 0.170*** 0.170*** 0.170*** 0.240***
                                                          (0.023) (0.019) (0.020) (0.020) (0.020) (0.019) (0.020)
 Mother 4yr college graduate                             0.381*** 0.337*** 0.337*** 0.337*** 0.337*** 0.338*** 0.390***
                                                          (0.021) (0.015) (0.015) (0.015) (0.015) (0.015) (0.017)
 Mother teen pregnancy                                  -0.065*** 0.020 -0.071*** -0.070*** -0.070*** -0.069*** 0.048
                                                          (0.023) (0.058) (0.024) (0.024) (0.024) (0.024) (0.057)
 Mother married at time of birth                         0.101*** 0.102*** 0.088*** 0.102*** 0.102*** 0.102*** 0.074***
                                                          (0.007) (0.007) (0.019) (0.007) (0.007) (0.007) (0.014)
 Number of older siblings                               -0.027*** -0.028*** -0.028*** -0.028*** -0.028*** -0.028*** -0.024***
                                                          (0.004) (0.004) (0.004) (0.008) (0.004) (0.004) (0.007)
 Median income in zipcode of birth (100,000 of $)        0.172*** 0.173*** 0.172*** 0.173*** 0.198*** 0.173*** 0.177***
                                                          (0.026) (0.026) (0.026) (0.026) (0.062) (0.026) (0.048)
 Free or Reduced Priced Lunch                           -0.155*** -0.154*** -0.154*** -0.154*** -0.154*** -0.169*** -0.163***
                                                          (0.009) (0.008) (0.008) (0.008) (0.008) (0.017) (0.014)

 Observations                                            184,331 184,331 184,331 184,331 184,331 184,331 184,331
 R-squared                                                0.368   0.368   0.368   0.368   0.368   0.368   0.369
 Year*school FE                                           YES     YES     YES     YES     YES     YES     YES
 Individual controls                                      YES     YES     YES     YES     YES     YES     YES
 Dependent Variable (mean)                                0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   0.000
 Dependent Variable (sd)                                  1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
 Long-Term Orientation (mean)                             0.207   0.207   0.207   0.207   0.207   0.207   0.207
 Long-Term Orientation (sd)                               0.143   0.143   0.143   0.143   0.143   0.143   0.143
 Long-Term Orientation (beta)                             0.127   0.100   0.091   0.100   0.108   0.095   0.117
 N_clust                                                    90     90      90      90      90      90      90
 Notes. The table reports OLS estimates, with standard errors clustered at the language/country level. The unit of
 observation is a student born between 1992 and 2002 and observed during the academic years 2002-2012. The sample
 includes second generation immigrants (extended definition) defined using the information on the country of origin of
 the mother when available (Canada, Mexico, and Puerto Rico), or the language spoken at home for the remaining
 students for which the country of origin of the mother is not available. See details in the text and the appendix for how
 the matching between language and countries has been implemented. See details in the text and the appendix for how
 the matching between languages and countries has been implemented. The dependent variable measure students’
 Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test math score in grade 3 (standardized with mean 0 and variance 1). All the
 regressions include the same individual controls described in Table 2 (coefficients not reported). Maternal controls are
 the same as in Table 6. The ‘‘Long Term Orientation’’ variable is based on Hofstede (2010) and is measured on a 0-1
 scale. We describe in details all the variables in the online Appendix. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%,
 and 10% levels.

                                                            58
                                                                           Table 11
                                                        Long-Term Orientation and school composition,
                                                 First and second generation (extended definition) immigrants
                                                           (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)            (5)           (6)        (7)          (8)          (9)          (10)
                                                        Math score,         Math score,         Reading score,       Reading score,       Graduation   % Absent    Disciplinary   Retention
VARIABLES                                               3rd grade        change 3rd to 8th        3rd grade         change 3rd to 8th                   Days        Incident

Long-Term Orientation (LTO)                              0.662***     0.478***      0.522***       0.378**       0.490***      0.509***    0.069***    -0.025**     -0.108**       -0.006*
                                                           (0.197)     (0.132)       (0.161)       (0.147)        (0.128)       (0.161)     (0.022)      (0.012)     (0.047)       (0.003)
Fraction speaking the same language (log)*LTO             0.169***                   0.159**        0.070                        0.133       0.023     -0.009***    -0.029**        -0.002
                                                           (0.057)                   (0.064)       (0.046)                      (0.081)     (0.014)      (0.003)     (0.012)       (0.001)
Fraction speaking the same language (log)                -0.101***                  -0.088***     -0.063***                     -0.071*      -0.013     0.005***    0.020***       0.002**
                                                           (0.028)                   (0.031)       (0.019)                      (0.037)     (0.008)      (0.002)     (0.006)       (0.001)
Fraction speaking the same language (log) in grade 3*                  0.142***                                   0.147**
                                                                        (0.048)                                   (0.061)
Fraction speaking the same language (log) in grade 3                  -0.079***                                  -0.093***
                                                                        (0.024)                                   (0.028)

Observations                                              47,992       17,945         17,945       47,963         17,876        17,876      11,369     384,139       219,673      307,507
R-squared                                                  0.453        0.458          0.458        0.460          0.451         0.451       0.377      0.180         0.129        0.136
Year*school FE                                             YES          YES            YES          YES            YES           YES         YES         YES           YES          YES
Grade FE                                                     -            -               -           -              -             -           -         YES           YES          YES
Individual controls                                        YES          YES            YES          YES            YES           YES         YES         YES           YES          YES
Dependent Variable (mean)                                 0.000        0.000          0.000        0.000          0.000         0.000       0.878       0.040         0.126        0.023
Dependent Variable (sd)                                   1.000        0.766          0.766        1.000          0.840         0.840       0.328       0.063         0.332        0.151
Long-Term Orientation (mean)                               0.528        0.531          0.531        0.528          0.532         0.532      0.535       0.531         0.532        0.530
Long-Term Orientation (sd)                                 0.204        0.204          0.204        0.204          0.204         0.204      0.204       0.206         0.206        0.205
Long-Term Orientation (beta)                               0.135        0.128          0.139        0.077          0.119         0.124       0.043      -0.082        -0.067       -0.008
N_clust                                                     91           83             83           91             83            83          83          95            93           94
Notes. The table reports OLS estimates, with standard errors clustered at the language/country level. The unit of observation is a student born between 1992 and 2002 and observed
during the academic years 2002-2012. The sample pools together first generation immigrants defined using the information on both the country of origin and the language spoken at home
and second generation immigrants (extended definition) defined using the information on the country of origin of the mother when available (Canada, Mexico, and Puerto Rico), or the
language spoken at home for the remaining students for which the country of origin of the mother is not available. See details in the text and the appendix for how the matching between
language and countries has been implemented. The dependent variables measure students’ Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test math score in grade 3 (standardized with mean 0 and
variance 1), the change in math score from grade 3 to grade 8, reading score in grade 3 (standardized with mean 0 and variance 1), change in reading score from grade 3 to grade 8, high
school graduation (a dummy for whether the student received a standard diploma within four years after entering the 9th grade for the first time), absence rates (the percentage of days in
which the student is absent during the academic year), disciplinary incidents (a dummy for whether the student was involved in a disciplinary incident, defined as serious offences often
leading to suspension), and retention (an indicator for whether the student repeats the same grade at least once). Fraction of students speaking the same language is the ratio of students
speaking a given language in a given year in a given school divided by the school population (including natives). Students speaking English, Spanish, or Haitian are not included in our
regressions (but are still part of the denominator). All the regressions include the same individual controls described in Table 2 (coefficients not reported). Columns 2 and 4 also control
for the math score and reading score in grade 3, respectively. The ‘‘Long Term Orientation’’ variable is based on Hofstede (2010) and is measured on a 0-1 scale. We describe in details all
the variables on the online Appendix. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.

                                                                                                59
                                           Table 12
       Enrollment in advanced classes, school choice and participation in gifted program
                                                     (1)                   (2)                   (3)                (4)                (5)
                                                 Fraction of          Fraction of       School Letter Score School Letter Score Gifted in grade 4
                                               advanced classes    advanced classes (from A to F) at t-1, (from A to F) at t-1,
VARIABLES                                                         (scientific subjects) (pre-) kindergarten     all grades

Long-Term Orientation                             0.081***            0.032***             0.377***             0.328***            0.095***
                                                    (0.018)            (0.007)               (0.126)             (0.109)              (0.017)
Male                                              -0.016***           -0.002***               -0.003              -0.001               0.002
                                                    (0.001)             (0.000)              (0.002)             (0.002)              (0.004)
Age in months                                        0.000             0.000***             0.007***            -0.006***           -0.003***
                                                    (0.000)             (0.000)              (0.001)             (0.001)              (0.001)
Free or Reduced Priced Lunch                      -0.017***           -0.004***            -0.435***            -0.382***            0.025***
                                                    (0.002)             (0.001)              (0.041)             (0.037)              (0.007)
Special education                                  0.010***            0.005***             0.060***              0.014
                                                    (0.002)             (0.001)              (0.010)             (0.016)
Enrolled in Limited English proficiency prog       0.012***            0.007***            -0.066***            -0.095***             0.005
                                                    (0.002)             (0.001)              (0.013)             (0.018)             (0.011)
Math score, 8th grade                              0.046***            0.013***
                                                    (0.005)             (0.002)

Observations                                       512,070             512,070             243,233              3,478,545            26,308
R-squared                                           0.336               0.215               0.208                 0.246               0.419
Year*school FE                                      YES                 YES                   -                      -                YES
District FE                                            -                   -                YES                    YES                  -
Year FE                                                -                   -                YES                    YES                  -
Grade FE                                            YES                 YES                   -                    YES                  -
Dependent Variable (mean)                           0.058               0.013               4.120                 4.128               0.112
Dependent Variable (sd)                             0.145               0.054               0.991                 1.012               0.316
Long-Term Orientation (mean)                        0.222               0.222               0.217                 0.220               0.276
Long-Term Orientation (sd)                          0.162               0.162               0.152                 0.160               0.205
Long-Term Orientation (beta)                        0.090               0.096               0.058                 0.052               0.062
N_clust                                               94                  94                 92                     97                 88
Notes. The table reports OLS estimates, with standard errors clustered at the language/country level. The unit of observation is a
student born between 1992 and 2002 and observed during the academic years 2002-2012. The sample pools together first generation
immigrants defined using the information on both the country of origin and the language spoken at home and second generation
immigrants (extended definition) defined using the information on the country of origin of the mother when available (Canada, Mexico,
and Puerto Rico), or the language spoken at home for the remaining students for which the country of origin of the mother is not
available. See details in the text and the appendix for how the matching between language and countries has been implemented. In
columns (1) and (2) the sample is restricted to the students enrolled in grades 9th to 12th and the dependent variables are respectively
the fraction of advanced classes (AP, IB, and/or AICE) taken by the student over the total number of classes taken by the student
during a given academic year, the fraction of advanced classes in scientific or math subjects (AP, IB, and/or AICE) taken by the
student over the total number of classes taken by the student during a given academic year. In column 3 the sample includes students
enrolled the first time they enter the school system either in Kindergarten or pre-Kindergarten class and the dependent variables is the
score earned by their school in year t-1. In column (4) the sample includes students in all grades and the dependent variable is the
score earned by their school in year t-1. These school scores are calculated by the Florida Department of Education to measure
schools’ quality. In column (5) the sample includes all students who were present in the data both in grade 3rd and 4th, were not
enrolled in a gifted program in 3rd grade, and were top performers in FCAT math and reading in third grade. The dependent variable is
equal to one if the student is enrolled in a gifted program in grade 4 and equal to zero otherwise. All the regressions include the same
individual controls described in Table 2. Columns 1 and 2 also control for the math score in grade 8. The ‘‘Long Term Orientation’’
variable is based on Hofstede (2010) and is measured on a 0-1 scale. We describe in details all the variables on the online Appendix.
***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.




                                                                        60
                                         Table 13
   Educational performance and alternative measures of Long-Term Orientation, FLDOE

                                                         PANEL A: 1st generation + 2nd generation (extended definition)
                                 (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)            (6)             (7)           (8)
                             Math score,   Math score,    Reading score, Reading score, Graduation        % Absent        Disciplinary   Retention
                              3rd grade change 3rd to 8th 3rd grade change 3rd to 8th                        Days          Incident


Futureless Language (Chen)    0.473***        0.327***        0.307***        0.279***       0.066***      -0.020***       -0.086***     -0.011***
                               (0.122)         (0.105)         (0.057)         (0.092)        (0.014)       (0.005)         (0.022)       (0.002)

Observations                  273,133         128,372         273,100         127,793         51,476        1,942,897      1,045,004     1,584,804
R-squared                      0.345           0.302            0.360          0.295           0.344           0.202          0.126         0.093
Year*school FE                  YES            YES              YES            YES             YES             YES            YES           YES
Grade FE                          -               -                -             -               -             YES            YES           YES
Individual controls             YES            YES              YES            YES             YES             YES            YES           YES
Dependent Variable (mean)      -0.035          0.000           -0.021          0.000           0.771           0.054          0.217         0.044
Dependent Variable (sd)        0.983           0.774            0.972          0.826           0.420           0.071          0.412         0.206
Futureless Language (mean)     0.019           0.022            0.019          0.022           0.019           0.019          0.019         0.019
Futureless Language (sd)       0.138           0.147            0.138          0.147           0.137           0.135          0.135         0.135
Futureless Language (beta)     0.066           0.062            0.043          0.050           0.022          -0.037         -0.028        -0.007
N_clust                          74              74               74            74              67              76             74            76

                                                                         PANEL B: 1st generation
                                 (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)               (6)             (7)           (8)
                             Math score,   Math score,   Reading score, Reading score, Graduation          % Absent       Disciplinary   Retention
                              3rd grade change 3rd to 8th 3rd grade change 3rd to 8th                        Days          Incident

Futureless Language (Chen)    0.310***        0.264***        0.130***        0.193***         0.001         -0.005*       -0.042***     -0.003**
                               (0.045)         (0.098)         (0.024)         (0.061)        (0.018)        (0.003)        (0.008)       (0.002)

Observations                   81,369          32,670          81,319          32,553         27,980        838,059         521,296      668,646
R-squared                       0.458           0.413           0.473           0.422          0.384          0.188           0.125        0.108
Year*school FE                  YES             YES             YES             YES            YES            YES             YES          YES
Country FE                      YES             YES             YES             YES            YES            YES             YES          YES
Grade FE                           -               -               -              -               -           YES             YES          YES
Individual controls             YES             YES             YES             YES            YES            YES             YES          YES
Dependent Variable (mean)       0.000           0.000           0.000           0.000          0.803          0.050           0.169        0.036
Dependent Variable (sd)         1.000           0.779           1.000           0.842          0.398          0.070           0.375        0.185
Futureless Language (mean)      0.025           0.023           0.025           0.023          0.027          0.028           0.029        0.026
Futureless Language (sd)        0.156           0.151           0.156           0.150          0.161          0.164           0.167        0.159
Futureless Language (beta)      0.048           0.051           0.020           0.034          0.000         -0.012          -0.019       -0.003
N_clust                           78              71              78             71              69            85              82           83




                                                                         61
                                  Table 13 (continued)
   Educational performance and alternative measures of Long-Term Orientation, FLDOE

                                 PANEL C: 1st generation + 2nd generation (extended definition), excluding the Americas
                                  (1)           (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)            (6)          (7)             (8)
                              Math score,   Math score,    Reading score, Reading score, Graduation             % Absent    Disciplinary     Retention
                               3rd grade change 3rd to 8th 3rd grade change 3rd to 8th                            Days       Incident

Maximum Crop Yield (Galor      0.042***         0.030***        0.025***        0.031***         0.004**      -0.002***      -0.010***         -0.000
                                (0.010)          (0.008)         (0.008)         (0.008)         (0.002)       (0.001)        (0.002)         (0.000)

Observations                     45,262          17,062          45,238          17,001          11,552        373,220        216,428         298,977
R-squared                         0.464           0.474           0.470           0.469           0.375          0.178          0.131           0.141
Year*school FE                    YES             YES             YES             YES             YES            YES            YES             YES
Grade FE                             -               -               -              -                -           YES            YES             YES
Individual controls               YES             YES             YES             YES             YES            YES            YES             YES
Dependent Variable (mean)         0.000           0.000           0.000           0.000           0.883          0.038          0.120           0.022
Dependent Variable (sd)           1.000           0.764           1.000           0.834           0.321          0.062          0.325           0.147
Maximum Crop Yield (mean)         8.601           8.610           8.602           8.607          8.593           8.593          8.588           8.592
Maximum Crop Yield (sd)           2.298           2.261           2.298           2.263          2.262           2.298          2.283           2.281
Maximum Crop Yield (beta)         0.097           0.089           0.058           0.085           0.029         -0.089         -0.067          -0.004
N_clust                             81              76              81             76               78            83              83              83
Notes. The table reports OLS estimates, with standard errors clustered at the language/country level. The unit of observation is a student born
between 1992 and 2002 and observed during the academic years 2002-2012. In Panel A the sample pools together first generation immigrants defined
using the information on both the country of origin and the language spoken at home and second generation immigrants (extended definition) defined
using the information on the country of origin of the mother when available (Canada, Mexico, and Puerto Rico), or the language spoken at home for the
remaining students for which the country of origin of the mother is not available. See details in the text and the appendix for how the matching
between language and countries has been implemented. In Panel B the sample includes first generation immigrants defined using the information on
the country of origin. Panel C is equal to the sample in Panel A with the exclusion of the immigrants from the American continent. The dependent
variables measure students’ Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test math score in grade 3 (standardized with mean 0 and variance 1), the change in
math score from grade 3 to grade 8, reading score in grade 3 (standardized with mean 0 and variance 1), change in reading score from grade 3 to grade
8, high school graduation (a dummy for whether the student received a standard diploma within four years after entering the 9th grade for the first
time), absence rates (the percentage of days in which the student is absent during the academic year), disciplinary incidents (a dummy for whether the
student was involved in a disciplinary incident, defined as serious offences often leading to suspension), and retention (an indicator for whether the
student repeats the same grade at least once). All the regressions include the same individual controls described in Table 2 (coefficients not reported).
In Panel A and Panel B futureless language is a dummy variable equal to 1 for “futureless” languages (languages that do not require “obligatory future
time reference use in prediction-based contexts”) from Chen (2013). The specification in Panel B includes country of origin fixed effects. In Panel C
maximum crop yield is a historical measure of crop yield constructed based on data from the Global Agro-Ecological Zones (GAEZ) project of the
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and taken from Galor and Ozak (2016). We describe in details all the variables in the online Appendix. ***,
**, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.




                                                                           62
                                              Table 14
               Program for International Student Assessment (PISA): sample statistics
                                                             1st generation   2nd generation (mother)   2nd generation (father)
                                                         Obs. Mean St. dev.    Obs. Mean St. dev.        Obs. Mean St. dev.
Math                                                    27,649 0.000 1.000    45,884 0.000 1.000        45,340 0.000 1.000
Reading                                                 27,649 0.000 1.000    45,884 0.000 1.000        45,340 0.000 1.000
Science                                                 27,649 0.000 1.000    45,884 0.000 1.000        45,340 0.000 1.000
Retention                                               17,229 0.158 0.365    30,135 0.144 0.351        29,735 0.143 0.350
Truancy                                                  7,918 0.136 0.343    13,810 0.120 0.325        13,346 0.120 0.325
Male                                                    27,649 0.505 0.500    45,884 0.495 0.500        45,340 0.496 0.500
Age of student (in years)                               27,649 15.775 0.288   45,884 15.778 0.289       45,340 15.781 0.288
Grade 7                                                 27,649 0.034 0.181    45,884 0.018 0.132        45,340 0.017 0.130
Grade 8                                                 27,649 0.140 0.347    45,884 0.091 0.288        45,340 0.092 0.288
Grade 9                                                 27,649 0.376 0.484    45,884 0.423 0.494        45,340 0.419 0.493
Grade 10                                                27,649 0.344 0.475    45,884 0.404 0.491        45,340 0.410 0.492
Grade 11                                                27,649 0.102 0.302    45,884 0.062 0.242        45,340 0.059 0.236
Grade 12                                                27,649 0.004 0.065    45,884 0.002 0.048        45,340 0.003 0.050
Grade 13                                                27,649 0.000 0.006    45,884 0.000 0.000        45,340 0.000 0.000
Parents' education level: none                          27,649 0.033 0.178    45,884 0.035 0.184        45,340 0.035 0.183
Parents' education level: primary                       27,649 0.081 0.272    45,884 0.084 0.277        45,340 0.084 0.277
Parents' education level: lower secondary               27,649 0.157 0.364    45,884 0.186 0.389        45,340 0.187 0.390
Parents' education level: upper secondary               27,649 0.083 0.275    45,884 0.105 0.306        45,340 0.110 0.313
Parents' education level: post-secondary non-tertiary   27,649 0.200 0.400    45,884 0.231 0.421        45,340 0.229 0.420
Parents' education level: first stage of tertiary       27,649 0.128 0.334    45,884 0.137 0.343        45,340 0.139 0.346
Parents' education level: second stage of tertiary      27,649 0.319 0.466    45,884 0.223 0.416        45,340 0.216 0.412
Wealth                                                  22,734 -0.319 1.049   39,041 -0.241 0.940       38,033 -0.233 0.934
Notes. The table reports the sample statistics of the PISA sample (waves 2003, 2006, 2009 and 2012). Math, Reading and
Science scores are respectively the averages of the 5 plausible values for math, reading and science tests. Retention is a
dummy variable equal to 1 if a student repeated at least one year during his/her school career (PISA waves 2003, 2009 and
2012). Truancy is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the student, when asked “In the last two full weeks of school, how many
times did you skip a whole school day?” ticked one of the following answers: “one or two times”, “three or four times”, “five
or more times”; equal to 0 if s/he ticked the answer “none” (PISA wave 2012). Male is a dummy equal to one if the student
is a boy. Age is the age of the student expressed in years. Grades= 7-13 are dummy variables equal to 1 if the student is in
the corresponding grade. Parents’ education variables are dummy variables for different level of educations (more details in
the online Appendix). Wealth is an index of family wealth possessions built by OECD – PISA based on the student’s
responses to several questions regarding specific items in the student’s home (PISA waves 2006, 2009 and 2012). More details
on these variables are contained in the online Appendix.




                                                             63
                                             Table 15
                       Long-Term Orientation and educational outcomes, PISA
                                  First generation immigrants
                                  (1)       (2)     (3)      (4)      (5)             (6)      (7)     (8)      (9)      (10)
VARIABLES                        Math     Reading Science Retention Truancy          Math    Reading Science Retention Truancy

Long-Term Orientation          0.655*** 0.434** 0.616***       -0.065**   -0.124*** 0.709*** 0.505** 0.676***     -0.061**   -0.124***
                                 (0.155) (0.213) (0.219)        (0.027)    (0.034) (0.136) (0.204) (0.216)         (0.025)    (0.034)
Male                            0.142*** -0.343*** 0.030       0.017***     0.010 0.143*** -0.349*** 0.028        0.013**      0.010
                                 (0.011) (0.026) (0.019)        (0.004)    (0.009) (0.013) (0.026) (0.023)         (0.006)    (0.010)
Age of student                 -0.144*** -0.126*** -0.125***   0.190***     0.021 -0.163*** -0.154*** -0.155***   0.193***     0.021
                                 (0.036) (0.028) (0.031)        (0.024)    (0.015) (0.033) (0.030) (0.033)         (0.028)    (0.015)
Wealth                                                                              0.048*** 0.031** 0.027**        -0.000     0.004
                                                                                     (0.017) (0.014) (0.012)       (0.004)    (0.004)

Observations                     27,649   27,649    27,649     17,229      7,918    22,734    22,734   22,734     13,371      7,899
R-squared                         0.371    0.341     0.341      0.314      0.080     0.380     0.344   0.348      0.337       0.081
Year FE                           YES      YES       YES        YES           -      YES       YES      YES        YES           -
Grade FE                          YES      YES       YES        YES         YES      YES       YES      YES        YES         YES
Parents' education FE             YES      YES       YES        YES         YES      YES       YES      YES        YES         YES
Country of destination FE         YES      YES       YES        YES         YES      YES       YES      YES        YES         YES
Dependent Variable (mean)         0.000    0.000     0.000      0.158      0.136     0.000     0.000   0.000       0.159      0.136
Dependent Variable (sd)           1.000    1.000     1.000      0.365      0.343     1.000     1.000   1.000       0.366      0.343
Long-Term Orientation (mean)      0.590    0.590     0.590      0.570      0.561     0.591     0.591   0.591       0.566      0.561
Long-Term Orientation (sd)        0.253    0.253     0.253      0.259      0.267     0.258     0.258   0.258       0.268      0.266
Long-Term Orientation (beta)      0.166    0.110     0.156     -0.046      -0.097    0.183     0.131   0.175      -0.045      -0.097
N_clust                             63      63        63         63          54       58        58       58         52          54

Notes. The table reports OLS estimates, with standard errors clustered at the country of origin level. The unit of observation
is a first generation immigrant student from one of the 63 countries residing in one of the 37 countries surveyed in PISA for
which information about country of origin of the respondent is available (4 waves from 2003 to 2012 depending on whether
the variables used in the regression are all available – details are in the online Appendix). The dependent variables are Math,
Reading, and Science scores calculated according to the description on the online appendix, retention (a dummy variable
equal to 1 if a student repeated at least one year during his/her school career), and truancy (a dummy variable equal to 1 if
the student skipped at least one full day of school in the previous two weeks). The ‘‘Long Term Orientation’’ variable is
based on Hofstede (2010) and is measured on a 0-1 scale. Individual controls are: male (a dummy equal to one if the student
is a boy), age (the age of the student expressed in years), dummies for student grade and for parents’ education, wealth (an
index of family wealth possessions built by OECD – PISA). We describe in details all the variables (and their availability in
different PISA waves) in the online Appendix. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.




                                                                64
                                              Table 16
                        Long-Term Orientation and educational outcomes, PISA
                            Second generation immigrants (maternal side)
                                   (1)       (2)     (3)      (4)      (5)            (6)       (7)     (8)      (9)      (10)
VARIABLES                         Math     Reading Science Retention Truancy         Math     Reading Science Retention Truancy

Long-Term Orientation           0.745*** 0.680*** 0.808*** -0.081***     -0.081**   0.787*** 0.725*** 0.855*** -0.080*** -0.082**
                                  (0.201) (0.193) (0.206) (0.024)         (0.036)     (0.195) (0.192) (0.203) (0.023) (0.035)
Male                             0.193*** -0.322*** 0.079*** 0.007         -0.009    0.197*** -0.323*** 0.078*** 0.006      -0.009
                                  (0.017) (0.036) (0.019) (0.007)         (0.010)     (0.018) (0.036) (0.021) (0.007) (0.010)
Age of student                  -0.216*** -0.196*** -0.172*** 0.272***   0.030**    -0.220*** -0.200*** -0.180*** 0.293*** 0.030**
                                  (0.033) (0.036) (0.034) (0.035)         (0.014)     (0.035) (0.040) (0.039) (0.032) (0.014)
Wealth                                                                                 0.006    -0.008    -0.018   0.001    0.005
                                                                                      (0.014) (0.012) (0.012) (0.004) (0.006)

Observations                      45,884    45,884   45,884    30,135    13,810      39,041   39,041    39,041   24,292   13,775
R-squared                          0.382     0.348    0.354     0.483     0.108       0.393   0.356     0.362    0.492    0.108
Year FE                            YES       YES      YES       YES         -         YES      YES       YES      YES        -
Grade FE                           YES       YES      YES       YES       YES         YES      YES       YES      YES      YES
Parents' education FE              YES       YES      YES       YES       YES         YES      YES       YES      YES      YES
Country of destination FE          YES       YES      YES       YES       YES         YES      YES       YES      YES      YES
Dependent Variable (mean)         0.000      0.000   0.000     0.144     0.120       0.000    0.000     0.000    0.154    0.120
Dependent Variable (sd)           1.000      1.000    1.000    0.351     0.325       1.000    1.000     1.000    0.361    0.325
Long-Term Orientation (mean)      0.646      0.646   0.646     0.643     0.631       0.647    0.647     0.647    0.642    0.631
Long-Term Orientation (sd)        0.227      0.227    0.227    0.227     0.231       0.231    0.231     0.231    0.233    0.231
Long-Term Orientation (beta)      0.169      0.155    0.184    -0.052    -0.058      0.182    0.168     0.198    -0.052   -0.059
N_clust                              60        60      60         58       56          58       58        58       53       56
Notes. The table reports OLS estimates, with standard errors clustered at the country of origin level. The unit of observation
is a second generation immigrant student on the maternal side from one of the 63 countries residing in one of the 37 countries
surveyed in PISA for which information about the country of origin of the parents is available (4 waves from 2003 to 2012
depending on whether the variables used in the regression are all available – details are on the online Appendix). The
dependent variables are Math, Reading, Science scores calculated according to the description on the online appendix,
retention (a dummy variable equal to 1 if a student repeated at least one year during his/her school career), and truancy (a
dummy variable equal to 1 if the student skipped at least one full day of school in the previous two weeks). The ‘‘Long Term
Orientation’’ variable is based on Hofstede (2010) and is measured on a 0-1 scale. Individual controls are: male (a dummy
equal to one if the student is a boy), age (the age of the student expressed in years), dummies for student grade and for
parents’ education, wealth (an index of family wealth possessions built by OECD – PISA). We describe in details all the
variables (and their availability in different PISA waves) on the online Appendix. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels.




                                                               65
             Web Appendix for


Long-Term Orientation and Educational
           Performance


                 David Figlio
          Northwestern University and NBER

               Paola Giuliano
                  UCLA and NBER

                 Umut Ozek
           American Institutes for Research

               Paola Sapienza
          Northwestern University and NBER




        (NOT FOR PUBLICATION)


                  AUGUST 2016




                          1
A1. Introduction
        This appendix accompanies “Long Term Orientation and Educational Performance” by
David Figlio, Paola Giuliano, Umut Ozek, and Paola Sapienza. Section A2 provides further details
of the data used in the paper, as well as the definition of variables. Section A3 reports additional
tables discussed in the body of the paper, but not reported there explicitly.


A2. Data and Their Sources
        In this section we describe in more details of some of the variables used in the analysis. We
also describe some additional technical details to understand the construction of the data and the
regression analysis.
A.2.1. Long-Term Orientation
        Hofstede et al. (2010) constructed the measure of Long-Term Orientation through a factor
analysis of the following variables, taken from the WVS (latest data available for each country in
the 1995-2004 period): 1. Thrift as a desirable trait for children (percentage of people in a country
choosing “thrift" as one of the answers to the question: “Here is a list of qualities that children can
be encouraged to learn at home. Which, if any, do you consider to be especially important? Please
choose up to five.” The list included: independence, hard work, feeling of responsibility,
imagination, tolerance and respect for other people, thrift (saving money and things), determination
(perseverance), religious faith, unselfishness, obedience.) 2. National pride (percentage of people in
a country choosing "very proud” as answer to the following question: “How proud are you to be -
name of your nationality-?” Possible answers included: “very proud,” “quite proud,” “not very
proud,” “not at all proud”) 3. Importance of service to others (percentage of people in each
country choosing “very important” as answer to the following question: “For each of the
following, indicate how important it is in your life—very important, rather important, not very
important, or not at all important: family, friends, leisure time, politics, work, religion, service to
others.”1 We downloaded the actual variable from the website www.geerthofstede.nl/dimension-
data-matrix in the spreadsheet "Six dimensions for website.xls (version 2015 12 08)" with the
addition of the data "NonOfficial VSM08 scores" for Nepal and Sri Lanka, for which we take the
value corresponding to "Sri Lanka-General population." The Long-Term Orientation variable
ranges from 0 to 100. In our data it was rescaled as a 0-1 variable.

1Because service to others had some missing values, linear regression on the two other variables was used to
predict the missing factor scores.
                                                     2
A.2.2. Description of variables for the Florida analysis


Dependent variables
Name of the variable   Description                                             Source (and when possible and useful name of
                                                                               the raw variable)
Math score             Development scale score in the Mathematics              Source: FLDOE
                       section of the FCAT. The scores are standardized        Created using raw variables:
                       by subtracting the mean test score in the sample        DEV_SCALE_SCORE,
                       used for the analysis and by dividing them by the       SUBTEST_ID,
                       standard deviation in the sample, for each test grade   TEST_GRADE_LEVEL,
                       level-year combination.                                 CURRENT_ACADEMIC_YEAR
Math score, change     Difference between the standardized math score in       Source: FLDOE
3rd to 8th             grade 8 and the standardized math score in grade 3.     Created using raw variables:
                       The standardization is done within each sample by       DEV_SCALE_SCORE,
                       subtracting the mean test score in the sample (for      SUBTEST_ID,
                       each grade) and by dividing them by the sample          TEST_GRADE_LEVEL,
                       standard deviation.                                     CURRENT_ACADEMIC_YEAR
Reading score          Development scale score in the Reading section of       Source: FLDOE
                       the FCAT. The scores are standardized by                Created using raw variables:
                       subtracting the mean test score in the sample used      DEV_SCALE_SCORE,
                       for the analysis and by dividing them by the            SUBTEST_ID,
                       standard deviation in the sample, for each test grade   TEST_GRADE_LEVEL,
                       level-year combination.                                 CURRENT_ACADEMIC_YEAR
Reading score,         Difference between the standardized reading score       Source: FLDOE
change 3rd to 8th      in grade 8 and the standardized reading score in        Created using raw variables:
                       grade 3. The standardization is done within each        DEV_SCALE_SCORE,
                       sample by subtracting the mean test score in the        SUBTEST_ID,
                       sample (for each grade) and by dividing them by the     TEST_GRADE_LEVEL,
                       sample standard deviation.                              CURRENT_ACADEMIC_YEAR

Graduation             Dummy variable equal to 1 if a student obtained a       Source: FLDOE
                       standard diploma within 4 years after entering grade    Created using raw variables:
                       9 for the first time.                                   ENROLLMENT_YEAR,
                                                                               WITHDRAWAL_REASON_CD,
                                                                               GRADE_LVL_ID
% Absent Days          Percentage of absent days during the year calculated    Source: FLDOE
                       as a fraction of absent days over the sum of absent     Created using raw variables:
                       and present days.                                       ABSENT_DAYS_NBR,
                                                                               PRESENT_DAYS_NBR
Disciplinary           Dummy variable equal to 1 if the student was            Source: FLDOE
Incident               involved in a disciplinary incident during the year,    Created using raw variables:
                       equal to 0 if s/he was not involved in any              STUDENT_REFERRAL_ACTION_
                       disciplinary incident. A disciplinary incident is a     CD
                       serious offense that usually results in suspension.
Retention              Dummy variable equal to 1 in year t if the student      Source: FLDOE
                       attends the same grade in year t and in year t+1, and   Created    using raw             variables:
                       equal to 0 if the student attends a higher grade in     ENROLLMENT_YEAR,
                       year t+1.                                               GRADE_LVL_ID



                                                      3
Gifted in grade 4       Dummy variable equal to 1 if the student is                Source: FLDOE
                        classified as gifted in grade 4 and zero otherwise.        Created using raw variables:
                                                                                   PRIMARY_EXCPT_IND

School letter score     School letter scores are recoded into a numerical          Source: FLDOE
at year t-1             scale ranging from 1 to 5, where a letter grade of         Created using raw variables: School
                        “F” corresponds to 1, “D” corresponds to 2, “C”            grade variable in the 2013-14 school
                        corresponds to 3, “B” corresponds to 4, “A”                grades spreadsheet.
                        corresponds to 5. We assign to each school the
                        score it earned in year t-1, that is the year before the
                        student attends the school. Source:
                        http://schoolgrades.fldoe.org (we took the
                        information from the 2013-2014 School Grades
                        spreadsheet)
Fraction of             Number of IB, AICE or AP classes taken during              Source: FLDOE
advanced classes        the academic year over the total number of classes         Created using raw variables:
                        taken. Advanced classes are identified using               COURSE_NUMBER
                        FLDOE’s course code directory for each school
                        year
                        (http://www.fldoe.org/policy/articulation/ccd).
Fraction of             Number of IB, AICE or AP classes taken during              Source: FLDOE
advanced classes        the academic year in Math, Computer Science, or            Created using raw variables:
(scientific subjects)   Natural Sciences over the total number of classes          COURSE_NUMBER
                        taken. More specifically, "Scientific advanced
                        classes" are all those classes whose course numbers
                        are between 200000-300000 (Computer Science),
                        1200000-1300000 (Mathematics) or 2000000-
                        2100000 (Sciences: Biology, Environmental
                        Sciences, Chemistry, Physics and Design
                        Technology). Source:
                        http://www.fldoe.org/policy/articulation/ccd/arch
                        ive/2005-2006-course-directory.stml
Individual controls
Name of the variable    Description                                                Source

Age in months           Assuming the school year starts on Sep 1st, the            Source: FLDOE
                        variable is calculated as: Academic year*12+8-             Created using raw variables:
                        Student year of birth*12-student month of birth.           STUDENT_BIRTH_MONTH,
                                                                                   STUDENT_BIRTH_YEAR,
                                                                                   ENROLLMENT_YEAR
Male                    A dummy for whether the student is a boy.                  Source: FLDOE
                                                                                   Created     using    raw     variables:
                                                                                   GENDER_CD
Free or Reduced         A dummy equal to 1 if the student/year is eligible         Source: FLDOE
Priced Lunch            for free lunch, reduced-price lunch or attends a           Created using raw variables:
                        “provision 2” school and zero otherwise (either the        LUNCH_STATUS
                        student did not apply or he/she applied but she/he
                        was not eligible).
Enrolled in Limited     A dummy variable equal to 1 if the student is Source: FLDOE
English proficiency     enrolled in a limited English proficiency program Created using raw variables:
program                 and zero otherwise.                                 LIMITED_ENGLISH_PROFIENC

                                                         4
                                                                              Y_CD

Special Education    A dummy variable equal to 1 if the variable if the       Source: FLDOE
                     student has special education needs and zero             Created using raw variables:
                     otherwise. Gifted students are classified as zero.       PRIMARY_EXCPT_IND
Mother’s             We define three dummies for the maternal level of        Source: birth certificate
educational          education: high school graduate (years of education
dummies              is equal to 12), some college (years of education
                     greater than 12 and strictly smaller than 16) and
                     college graduate (years of education greater or equal
                     than 16). The mother’s years of education variable
                     is taken from the birth certificates.
Mother teen          A dummy equal to 1 if mother’s age at time of birth      Source: birth certificate
pregnancy            is smaller or equal than 16 years, equal to 0 if it is
                     greater than 16 years. Mother’s age at time of birth
                     is constructed starting from mother's month and
                     year of birth (both provided in the birth certificate)
                     and children's month and year of birth (provided by
                     FLDOE). Mother's age is set to missing if it is less
                     than 12 or greater than 50. This variable is obtained
                     from the birth certificates.
Mother married at    A dummy variable equal to 1 if the mother is             Source: birth certificate
time of birth        married at time of giving birth.
Number of older      The number of older siblings. This variable is           Source: birth certificate
siblings             obtained from the birth certificates.
Median income in     We match the zip code at time of birth (provided         Source: birth certificate and Census
zip code of birth,   by the birth certificates) with zip code income in
(100,000 of $)       1999, obtained from the Census bureau.
Fraction speaking    Number of students who speak the same language           Source: FLDOE
the same language    of the student over total number of students in the      Created using raw variables:
(log)                school she/he attends, in the given year, multiplied     LANGUAGE_HAVE_PARENTS_S
                     by 100, of which we then computed the logarithm.         PEAKING, INSTITUTION_ID,
                                                                              ENROLLMENT_YEAR
Continent            In Table 9 we pooled together first and extended         Source: FLDOE
dummies              version of second generation immigrants and test         Created using raw variables:
                     the robustness of the results to the exclusion of the    LANGUAGE_HAVE_PARENTS_S
                     Latin American continent and the Asian continent.        PEAKING
                     Since we merge immigrants using both a definition        COUNTRY_CD_BORNED_IN
                     based on the country of origin and definition based
                     on the language, the continent dummy needs to
                     combine both elements. For first generation the
                     dummy is equal to one if the country belongs to a
                     given continent. As for language, we adopted the
                     following rule: a language is assigned to a given
                     continent if among the sample of 1st generation
                     migrants who speak that language (and from which
                     we built the weights), at least 50% come from that
                     specific continent. For instance, in the case of
                     Portuguese, if among the first generation migrants
                     60% of the Portuguese speakers come from Brazil
                     and 40% come from Portugal, the language-level

                                                     5
                       continent dummy assigned to Portuguese will be
                       "Americas". Note that we define "Latin America"
                       as all countries located in the Americas with the
                       exclusion of Canada and the US.
Country controls
Name of the variable   Description                                              Source
Distance from the      Log (distance in km) between the most populated          Source:
US (log)               city in the country of origin of the immigrant and       http://www.cepii.fr/CEPII/en/bdd_
                       the most populated city in the United States. For        modele/presentation.asp?id=6
                       Serbia and Montenegro, we use the value assigned
                       to "Yugoslavia."
Log GDP pc year        Log per capita GDP (PPP converted relative to the        Source:
2000, ppp              United States, G-K method, at current prices) for        http://www.rug.nl/research/ggdc/dat
                       the year 2000. We take the logarithm of this             a/pwt/pwt-7.0
                       value+1.
Mean PISA score        Mean score in Mathematics (weighted average using        Source: https://www.oecd.org/pisa/
in Math                population weights of the individual values,
                       calculated as averages of the 5 Plausible Values
                       provided in the dataset). Average across all available
                       years (2003 to 2012) for the given country.
Education selection    Calculated as the net difference index used by           Sources: www.ipums.org,
to Florida             Feliciano (2005) and proposed by Lieberson (1976).       http://data.uis.unesco.org;
                       It is a comparative measure of immigrants' and           http://www.barrolee.com
                       non-immigrants’ educational attainment (adjusted
                       for age) along several points of the education
                       distribution (no schooling; primary education;
                       secondary education; tertiary education). For the
                       exact formula see Feliciano (2005). Educational
                       attainment of the migrants is obtained from the
                       Census 2000, looking at 1st generation migrants
                       aged 25 years old or older, who live in Florida, and
                       who migrated to the US at an age equal or higher
                       than 18 years old
                       The educational attainment from the country of
                       origin is taken from Barro-Lee (“Educational
                       Attainment Data For The Population Aged 25
                       Years And Older) and it is augmented with data for
                       Puerto Rico obtained from UNESCO for year
                       2012.
Savings over           Savings rate/GDP for the year 2000.                      Source:
GDP/100                                                                         http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/
                                                                                NY.GDS.TOTL.ZS
Maximum Crop           A historical measure of crop yield constructed           Source: http://ozak.github.io/Caloric-
Yield (Galor)          based on data from the Global Agro-Ecological            Suitability-Index/
                       Zones (GAEZ) project of the Food and Agriculture         Created using the variable:
                       Organization (FAO). The measure is constructed           post1500maximumcalories0mean_aa
                       under low level of inputs and rain-fed agriculture.      divided by 1,000
                       For details see Galor et Ozak (2016).




                                                       6
Futureless            Dummy variable equal to 1 for “futureless”             Source:
Language (Chen)       languages (languages that do not require “obligatory   http://www.anderson.ucla.edu/faculty
                      use in prediction-based contexts”). We recoded         /keith.chen/datafilm.htm.
                      Chen (2013) accordingly.                               Created using the raw variable:
                                                                             prediction_ftr




A.2.3 Description of the samples in Florida Analysis and other technical details
        Sample of first generation immigrants. In our regressions we use two samples of first generation
immigrants. For the first sample, we define this group using the country of origin of the children.
For the second sample, we define this group using the country of origin of the children and also
impose the additional restriction that they speak at home one of the main languages spoken in their
country of birth (the list of the main languages spoken in a country is taken from the 17th version
of the Ethnologue.)
        Sample of second generation immigrants: We use two samples of second generation immigrants.
The first one includes US born children whose mothers were born abroad. In the birth certificates
of children born in Florida it is indicated whether the mother is born in the US or abroad. For a
subset of countries or territories (Canada, Cuba, Guam, Mexico, Puerto Rico, US, and Virgin
Islands) the place of birth of the mother is also indicated.2 For all the other foreign born mothers
we know the mother was born abroad but do not have a country of birth. To construct the sample
of second generation immigrants we use the information on the country of origin of the mother
when available (Mexico, Puerto Rico and Canada) or the language spoken at home for individuals
whose mother was born abroad but we do not have a country of origin. As we have birth
certificates only for children born in Florida and the maternal place of birth is listed in the birth
certificates, this group includes only children born in Florida. The second sample includes the
group defined above along with all children born in the US (including children born outside
Florida) and who speak a language different than English at home.3 We refer to the former sample
as “2nd generation”, and to the latter as “2nd generation, extended definition”.
        Matching languages and countries. For some students to identify the country of origin we use
the language spoken at home. To create a match between languages and countries of origin we

2 We use the information of the foreign countries or territories only for mothers born in Canada, Mexico,
and Puerto Rico for which we have the Long Term Orientation variable. We drop all the students whose
mothers are born in Cuba, Guam, and Virgin Islands and speak a language associated with these countries.
3 This second sample of extended generation students can be second generation immigrants on the mother

side if they are born outside Florida or on the father side, or they can be third generation immigrants.
                                                     7
proceed as follows. For most languages there is a one to one association between language and
country of origin. For languages spoken in multiple countries (for example Portuguese) we
calculate the Long-Term Orientation cultural variable as a weighted average of the Long-Term
Orientation of all the countries in which Portuguese is the main language spoken in the country.
We use as weights the fraction of first generation immigrants in our sample speaking that language
and born in a country where the language is indeed one of the spoken languages.
        Construction of the clusters for standard errors. In all the regression we cluster the standard errors
to account for correlation within the country of origin/language depending on whether we
attribute the Hofstede variable using country of origin or language of origin. When we pool
together first and second generation in the same regression to create parsimonious clusters and to
avoid creating a separate cluster country and language (for example “China” and “Chinese”) we use
the following methodology. Whenever at least 60% of the 1st generation speakers of a given
language come from one specific country, we attribute that language to the cluster dimension
corresponding to that country. This happens in all cases but for Arabic, Croatian, French, and
Spanish (when we are not able to identify the country of origin to the mother). In these cases, since
it would be hard to map the language to a unique country of origin, we treat these languages as
having their own cluster.


A.2.2. Description of variables for the Program for International Student Assessment

        In reporting the test score in mathematics, reading and science, PISA assigns a probability
distribution to each possible response pattern in each test to describe the ability associated with
that pattern. From this distribution, PISA draws a set of five values associated with each student.
These values are called plausible values because they represent alternative estimates of the student
ability that could have been obtained. In our specification, we report the regressions for the average
of the plausible values. We cluster the standard errors by country of origin. We also test the
robustness of our results to the procedure recommended by the OECD, where we estimate one
regression for each set of plausible values and report the arithmetic average of these estimates. For
this procedure, we also apply the Fay’s Balanced Repeated Replicated methodology, which
estimates the standard errors taking into account PISA’s stratified, two-stage sample design.4


4 PISA’s stratification consists in selecting randomly the school in the first stage. In the second stage,
students in each school are randomly assigned to carry out the test in all three subjects.
                                                        8
Dependent variables
Name of the variable   Description                                         Source
Math score             Average of the 5 plausible values for Math.         Created using variables
                       This variable is present in the 2003, 2006, 2009,   PVMATH1 through
                       and 2012 PISA waves.                                PVMATH5
Reading score          Average of the 5 plausible values for Reading.      Created using variables
                       This variable is present in the 2003, 2006, 2009,   PVREAD1 through
                       and 2012 PISA waves.                                PVREAD5
Science score          Average of the 5 plausible values for Science.      Created using variables
                       This variable is present in the 2003, 2006, 2009,   PVSCIE1 through PVSCIE5
                       and 2012 PISA waves.
Retention              A dummy variable equal to 1 if a student         It is calculated starting from
                       repeated at least one year during his/her school questions ST22Q01, ST22Q02
                       career. This variable is present in the 2003,    and ST22Q03 in wave 2003,
                       2009, and 2012 PISA waves.                       questions ST07Q01,
                                                                        ST07Q02, ST07Q03 in wave
                                                                        2009, questions ST07Q01,
                                                                        ST07Q02, ST07Q03 in wave
                                                                        2012
Truancy                A dummy variable equal to 1 if the student, Calculated using variable
                       when asked “In the last two full weeks of ST09, present only in wave
                       school, how many times did you skip a whole 2012.
                       school day?” ticked one of the following
                       answers: “one or two times”, “three or four
                       times”, “five or more times”; equal to 0 if s/he
                       ticked the answer “none”. This variable is
                       present only in the 2012 PISA wave.
Individual controls
Name of the variable   Description                                         Source
Male                   A variable equal to one if the student is a boy     Calculated using variable
                                                                           ST03Q01 in wave 2003 and
                                                                           variable ST04Q01 in wave
                                                                           2006, 2009, 2012.
Age                    Age expressed in years.                             Corresponds to the variable
                                                                           AGE
Grade                  School grade                                        Corresponds to the variable
                                                                           ST01Q01

Parents’ education     The variable takes values which correspond to       Constructed using the variable
                       the following education levels: none; primary       HISCED
                       education (ISCED 1); lower secondary
                       education (ISCED 2); upper secondary
                       education (ISCED 3B, C); post-secondary non-
                       tertiary education (ISCED 3A, 4); first stage of
                       tertiary education (ISCED 5B); second stage of
                       tertiary education (ISCED 5A, 6). In all the
                       regressions which control for this set of



                                                  9
         variables "none" is the omitted category.

Wealth   Wealth is an index of family wealth possessions Corresponds to the variable
         built by OECD – PISA based on the student’s WEALTH
         responses to several questions asking whether
         there are specific items in the student’s home.
         Such items vary across waves, and some of
         them are specific of the country where the test
         is administered. This variable is present in the
         2006, 2009, and 2012 PISA waves. For details
         see: https://www.oecd.org/pisa/.




                                   10
A.3. Additional Tables

                                           Table A1
     List of countries, first generation immigrants, unrestricted and restricted sample
                                  1st generation,    1st generation,                              1st generation, 1st generation,
      COUNTRY                      no language          language       COUNTRY                     no language       language
                                    restriction        restriction                                  restriction     restriction

      Albania                           388                339         Korea, Republic of               639            388
      Argentina                       3,754               3,631        Lithuania                         91             81
      Australia                         172                151         Malaysia                          71             52
      Austria                           70                             Mexico                         15,750          15,133
      Bangladesh                        342                271         Morocco                          132            117
      Belgium                           115                 33         Nepal                             40
      Bosnia and Herzegovina            369                327         Netherlands                      154            66
      Brazil                          3,028               2,511        New Zealand                       45            34
      Bulgaria                          182                114         Nigeria                          204            179
      Canada                          2,312               1,782        Norway                            59
      Chile                             786                721         Pakistan                         495            477
      China                           1,421                492         Peru                            3,368          3,197
      Colombia                        10,387              9,856        Philippines                     1,697          1,603
      Croatia                           71                  55         Poland                           188            134
      Czech Republic                     35                            Portugal                          99            47
      Denmark                           40                             Puerto Rico                    7,640           7,610
      Dominican Republic              2,342               2,329        Romania                          287            154
      Egypt                             246                190         Russia                          1,250           469
      El Salvador                     1,017                960         Saudi Arabia                     302            69
      Estonia                            30                            Singapore                         69            53
      Finland                           69                 49          South Africa                     288            254
      France                            503                381         Spain                            687            482
      Germany                         2,657                512         Sri Lanka                         38             35
      Ghana                              52                46          Sweden                           161             88
      Greece                            220                 72         Switzerland                       86             30
      Hong Kong                          48                 38         Taiwan                            75             47
      Hungary                           141                 85         Tanzania, United Rep. of          37
      Iceland                            77                            Thailand                         240            144
      India                            1,380              1,322        Trinidad and Tobago              513            508
      Indonesia                          69                 35         Turkey                           196            114
      Iran                              111                 76         Ukraine                          612            321
      Iraq                               56                 51         United Kingdom                  2,366          2,103
      Ireland                            76                67          Uruguay                         1,120          1,084
      Israel                            514                481         Venezuela                       6,453          6,071
      Italy                             656                178         Vietnam                          773            659
      Japan                            1,562               223         Zimbabwe                          44            39
      Jordan                            144                121         Non-disclosed countries          275            318

                                                                       Total                          81,986          69,659
      Notes. The table reports the number of observations by country of origin for both the unrestricted and restricted
      definition of first generation immigrants. The unit of observation is a student born between 1992 and 2002 and
      observed during the academic years 2002-2012. To identify unrestricted first generation immigrants we use only the
      information on the country of origin of the student. We also use a restricted definition of first generation immigrant
      when we restrict our analysis to those students who speak at home one of the languages spoken in their country of
      origin (we eliminate first generation immigrants who do not speak at home one the languages of their country of
      origin). The total in column 1 refers to the sample used to run the regression shown in Table 2, column (2). The
      total in column 2 refers to the sample used to run the regression shown in Table 2, column (5). For confidentiality
      reasons with the FLDOE, we cannot report the number of observations for groups whose size is smaller than 30.
      We refer to the sum of all of them, as Non-disclosed countries. See the text of this Appendix for details.


                                                                 11
                                         Table A2
    List of languages, second generation immigrants, restricted and extended definition
        LANGUAGE (or                             2nd generation,        LANGUAGE (or
                                                                                                     2nd generation,
  MATERNAL COUNTRY             2nd generation       extended       MATERNAL COUNTRY 2nd generation
                                                                                                   extended definition
          OF BIRTH)                                definition              OF BIRTH)
Afrikaans                                              59          Korean                    428           784
Akan                                                   43          Lao                       304           497
Albanian                             208               426         Lithuanian                              57
Amharic                               50               79          Malay                      88           152
Arabic                              1,878             3,205        Malayalam                 127           265
Armenian                              36               68          Marathi                                  49
Bengali                              412               624         Mexico (country)        34,556        34,556
Bulgarian                             43               70          Nepali                                   50
Chinese                             1,830             3,153        Norwegian                                52
Croatian                              50               83          Panjabi                    41            72
Czech                                 78               116         Persian, Iranian          232           372
Canada (country)                    3,769             3,769        Polish                    349           690
Danish                                                 45          Portuguese               2,294         3,965
Dutch                               143                224         Puerto Rico (country)   13,391        13,391
Estonian, Standard                   69                105         Romanian                  191           304
Finnish                              46                 96         Russian                   528          1,134
French                             1,668              2,858        Serbian                   314           507
German                              369                752         Slovak                     37            63
Greek                               180                658         Spanish                 65,294       187,672
Gujarati                            401                801         Swahili                                  30
Haitian                            24,527            30,914        Swedish                    97           154
Hausa                                57                 77         Tagalog                   928          1,714
Hebrew                              302                643         Tamil                      91           189
Hindi                               368                676         Telugu                    163           331
Hmong                                                  131         Thai                      202           303
Hungarian                            118               208         Turkish                   122           236
Italian                              210               684         Ukrainian                  44           114
Japanese                             178               340         Urdu                      854          1,339
Kanjobal                                                90         Vietnamese               2,500         4,442
Kannada                                                 46         Yoruba                     62           116
Khmer                                213               461         Not-disclosed languages   323           278

                                                                                              160,763          305,382
Notes. The table reports the number of observations by language spoken at home. The unit of observation is a student born
between 1992 and 2002 and observed during the academic years 2002-2012. To identify “2nd generation” immigrants we
include all children born in Florida whose mothers were born abroad. If the country of origin of the mothers is indicated in
the birth certificate (Canada, Mexico, Puerto Rico) we attribute the corresponding country to the student. If the birth
certificate indicates only that the mother was born abroad, we use the language spoken at home to attribute the Long Term
Orientation variable. To identify “2nd generation, extended definition” immigrants we consider in addition to the “2nd
generation” immigrants every other student who speaks a language different from English at home. We match the language
with the LTO variable according to the procedure explained in this Appendix. For confidentiality reasons with the FLDOE,
we cannot report the number of observations for groups whose size is smaller than 30. We refer to the sum of all of them,
as Non-disclosed languages.




                                                            12
                                      Table A3
Descriptive statistics of students attending public and private schools in Florida,
               Natives, First and Second Generation Immigrants
                              Panel A: Enrollment in Public School
                                 Natives         1st generation    2nd generation
                              Obs. Mean         Obs. Mean          Obs.    Mean

                                       Census 2000 (5%)

            Kindergarten      6,415   82.29%      646    84.83%      2,582   81.14%
            Grade 1 to 4     26,500   86.69%     3,279   93.44%      9,438   86.76%
            Grade 5 to 8     26,581   87.86%     4,477   93.52%      8,244   87.58%
            Grade 9 to 12    21,813   90.58%     5,289   93.67%      6,576   87.61%

            Overall sample 81,309 87.77%         13,691 93.15%      26,840 86.68%

                                       Census 2010 (1%)

            Kindergarten     1,147    82.65%       91    74.73%       632 83.23%
            Grade 1 to 4     4,556    85.45%      557    89.77%      2,301 88.57%
            Grade 5 to 8     5,047    85.56%      855    90.64%      2,036 87.18%
            Grade 9 to 12    4,726    87.85%     1,114   92.91%      1,861 88.07%

            Overall sample 15,476 86.01%         2,617 90.87%        6,830   87.53%

                                Panel B: Family Income (USD)
                                Natives          1st generation      2nd generation
                              Obs. Mean          Obs. Mean           Obs.    Mean

                                       Census 2000 (5%)

            Public school    71,364 55,838       12,648 43,526      23,264 52,842
            Private school   9,945 102,409        928 86,163        3,576 106,669

            Overall sample 81,309 61,534         13,576 46,441      26,840 60,014

                                       Census 2010 (1%)

            Public school    13,311 71,906       2,372 54,343        5,978 65,630
            Private school   2,165 123,921        238 115,190         852 136,119

            Overall sample 15,476 79,183           2,610 59,892       6,830 74,423
            Notes. The table reports the fraction of students by grade and family
            income enrolled in public and private schools in Florida. The data are
            based on Census 2000 and 2010 and report the statistics for natives, first
            generation immigrants and second generation immigrants. "2nd
            generation" is identified as having at least the mother or the father born
            abroad.


                                               13
                                         Table A4
        Long-Term Orientation and maternal characteristics, extended second generation
                                                                (1)           (2)            (3)              (4)        (5)                     (6)           (7)            (8)
                                                             Math score,  Math score,   Reading score, Reading score, Graduation              % Absent     Disciplinary    Retention
VARIABLES                                                    3rd grade change 3rd to 8th 3rd grade     change 3rd to 8th                        Days        Incident

Long-Term Orientation                                        0.697***        0.449***         0.452***         0.377***           0.024       -0.020**      -0.139***      -0.016***
                                                               (0.124)        (0.117)           (0.071)         (0.101)          (0.014)        (0.008)       (0.036)        (0.003)
Mother high school graduate                                   0.083***        0.022**          0.089***          0.032*           0.013          -0.001      -0.021**      -0.009***
                                                               (0.020)        (0.010)           (0.019)         (0.018)          (0.008)        (0.001)       (0.009)        (0.002)
Mother attended some college                                  0.170***       0.052***          0.177***        0.067***           0.018          -0.001     -0.028***      -0.013***
                                                               (0.020)        (0.015)           (0.014)         (0.015)          (0.018)        (0.002)       (0.009)        (0.002)
Mother 4yr college graduate                                   0.337***       0.153***          0.317***        0.175***         0.049***       -0.006**     -0.051***      -0.016***
                                                               (0.015)        (0.008)           (0.011)         (0.016)          (0.010)        (0.002)       (0.010)        (0.002)
Mother teen pregnancy                                        -0.070***         0.003             -0.019          -0.053           0.042       0.012***       0.049***         0.005
                                                               (0.024)        (0.036)           (0.027)         (0.049)          (0.031)        (0.002)       (0.010)        (0.003)
Mother married at time of birth                               0.102***       0.056***          0.084***        0.048***         0.037***      -0.007***     -0.058***      -0.008***
                                                               (0.007)        (0.005)           (0.005)         (0.008)          (0.008)        (0.000)       (0.005)        (0.001)
Number of older siblings                                     -0.028***       -0.012***        -0.039***          -0.008        -0.005***      0.003***       0.021***       0.003***
                                                               (0.004)        (0.003)           (0.006)         (0.005)          (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)
Median income in zipcode of birth (100,000 of $)              0.173***         0.002           0.143***         0.044**         0.064***          0.004      -0.039**      -0.011***
                                                               (0.026)        (0.032)           (0.013)         (0.018)          (0.019)        (0.003)       (0.017)        (0.002)
Male                                                          0.128***       -0.047***        -0.067***        -0.067***       -0.042***          0.000      0.096***       0.013***
                                                               (0.020)        (0.008)           (0.017)         (0.008)          (0.007)        (0.000)       (0.005)        (0.002)
Age in months                                                -0.010***       -0.016***        -0.012***        -0.011***          0.001       0.001***       0.007***      -0.001***
                                                               (0.001)        (0.001)           (0.001)         (0.001)          (0.002)        (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)
Free or Reduced Priced Lunch                                 -0.154***       -0.035***        -0.163***        -0.064***        -0.018**          0.000      0.037***       0.006***
                                                               (0.008)        (0.008)           (0.009)         (0.008)          (0.008)        (0.002)       (0.003)        (0.000)
Special education                                            -0.658***       -0.233***        -0.753***        -0.187***       -0.173***      0.006***       0.017***       0.037***
                                                               (0.022)        (0.006)           (0.024)         (0.008)          (0.012)        (0.000)       (0.002)        (0.001)
Enrolled in Limited English proficiency program              -0.612***                        -0.689***                         -0.204**        0.002**      0.046***       0.070***
                                                               (0.005)                          (0.011)                          (0.080)        (0.001)       (0.005)        (0.003)
Enrolled in Limited English proficiency program in grade 3                     -0.005                          -0.114***
                                                                              (0.015)                           (0.012)
Math score in grade 3                                                        -0.368***
                                                                              (0.008)
Reading score in grade 3                                                                                       -0.417***
                                                                                                                (0.006)

Observations                                                  184,331          62,005          184,309          61,668           6,623         960,054       425,110        762,581
R-squared                                                      0.368            0.334           0.379           0.319            0.324          0.182         0.150          0.121
Year*school FE                                                 YES              YES             YES              YES             YES            YES           YES            YES
Grade FE                                                         -                -                -               -               -            YES           YES            YES

Dependent Variable (mean)                                      0.000           0.000            0.000            0.000           0.874          0.045         0.208          0.042
Dependent Variable (sd)                                        1.000           0.778            1.000            0.809           0.332          0.057         0.406          0.200
Long-Term Orientation (mean)                                   0.207           0.209            0.207            0.210           0.214          0.206         0.206          0.206
Long-Term Orientation (sd)                                     0.143           0.149            0.143            0.149           0.158          0.144         0.146          0.144
Long-Term Orientation (beta)                                   0.100           0.086            0.065            0.070           0.011         -0.049         -0.050         -0.011
N_clust                                                          90              79               90               79              58             90            82             90
Notes. The table replicates the results in Table 6 for the following dependent variables: students’ Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test reading score in grade 3 (standardized
with mean 0 and variance 1), the change in reading score from grade 3 to grade 8, high school graduation (a dummy for whether the student received a standard diploma within
four years after entering the 9th grade for the first time), absence rates (the percentage of days in which the student is absent during the academic year) and retention (an indicator
for whether the student repeats the same grade at least once) measured in grades 3-12, and disciplinary incidents (a dummy for whether the student was involved in a disciplinary
incident defined as serious offences often leading to suspension) measured in grades 6-12.. The table reports OLS estimates, with standard errors clustered at the
language/country level. The unit of observation is a student born between 1992 and 2002 and observed during the academic years 2002-2012. The sample includes the extended
version of second generation immigrants defined using the information on the country of origin of the mother when available (Canada, Mexico, and Puerto Rico), or the language
spoken at home for the remaining students for which the country of origin of the mother is not available. See details in the text and this Appendix for how the matching between
languages and countries has been implemented. Individual controls are: age in months, a male dummy, an indicator variable for free or reduced free lunch eligibility, a dummy
indicating if the student is enrolled in a limited English proficiency program and indicator for special education needs. Maternal controls include education dummies (high
school, some college and college graduate; the excluded group is college drop-out), whether the mother was younger than 16 when she gave birth, the mother’s marital status at
the time of birth, the number of older siblings, and the median income in the zip code of the place of residence at the time of birth (measured in 1999). The ‘‘Long Term
Orientation’’ variable is based on Hofstede (2010) and is measured on a 0-1 scale. We describe in details all the variables in this Appendix. ***, **, and * indicate significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.




                                                                                         14
                                   Table A5
Educational outcomes and long term orientation, robustness to country controls, first
                            generation immigrants
   PANEL A
                                        (1)            (2)             (3)          (4)             (5)          (6)           (7)           (8)
                                    Math score,    Math score,       Reading   Reading score,    Graduation   % Absent     Disciplinary   Retention
   VARIABLES                         3rd grade    change 3rd to   score,   3rd change 3rd to                    Days        Incident

   Long-Term Orientation             0.515***       0.442***        0.251***      0.408***        0.086***    -0.028***     -0.109***     -0.017***
                                      (0.079)        (0.066)         (0.058)        (0.054)        (0.025)      (0.005)       (0.018)      (0.004)
   Log GDP pc year 2000 ppp          -0.095***      -0.117***        -0.030*      -0.120***         -0.002     0.010***      0.027***       0.001
                                       (0.020)       (0.023)         (0.016)        (0.021)        (0.006)      (0.002)       (0.004)      (0.001)
   Distance from the US (log)           0.027         -0.014          0.001        -0.041**         -0.004      0.004**        -0.005       0.001
                                       (0.047)       (0.022)         (0.036)        (0.019)        (0.011)      (0.002)       (0.009)      (0.002)
   Savings over GDP/100                 0.072        0.301**          -0.113        0.208*          0.014        0.003        -0.059*       0.002
                                       (0.217)       (0.149)         (0.158)        (0.124)        (0.059)      (0.008)       (0.033)      (0.008)
   Education selection to Florida     0.213***         0.031        0.269***      0.163***        0.132***       0.004         -0.010     -0.027***
                                       (0.079)       (0.051)         (0.060)        (0.060)        (0.027)      (0.005)       (0.013)      (0.005)

   Observations                       69,028         27,736          68,976        27,623          23,801      718,016       446,741       573,480
   R-squared                           0.466          0.425           0.477         0.434           0.387        0.191        0.126         0.115
   Year*school FE                      YES            YES             YES           YES             YES          YES           YES           YES
   Grade FE                              -               -              -             -                -         YES           YES           YES
   Individual controls                 YES            YES             YES           YES             YES          YES           YES           YES
   Dependent Variable (mean)           0.000          0.000           0.000         0.000           0.790        0.051        0.172         0.038
   Dependent Variable (sd)             1.000          0.783           1.000         0.843           0.407        0.070        0.378         0.190
   Long-Term Orientation (mean)        0.252          0.251           0.252         0.251           0.259        0.255        0.257         0.253
   Long-Term Orientation (sd)          0.189          0.186           0.189         0.186           0.200        0.198        0.200         0.195
   Long-Term Orientation (beta)        0.098          0.105           0.047         0.090           0.042       -0.080        -0.058        -0.017
   N_clust                              75              73             75            73               75           75           75            75

   PANEL B
                                       (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)          (6)           (7)           (8)
   VARIABLES                        Math score,    Math score,      Reading     Reading score,   Graduation   % Absent     Disciplinary   Retention

   Long-Term Orientation             0.440***       0.292***       0.293***       0.281***          0.028        -0.011     -0.076***       -0.016*
                                       (0.129)       (0.093)         (0.100)       (0.080)         (0.034)      (0.008)      (0.027)        (0.009)
   Log GDP pc year 2000 ppp          -0.147***      -0.218***         -0.048      -0.196***       -0.023**     0.011***      0.033***        0.002
                                       (0.038)       (0.034)         (0.030)       (0.024)         (0.009)      (0.001)       (0.004)       (0.002)
   Distance from the US (log)           -0.009        -0.004         -0.043*      -0.041***         -0.008        0.001        -0.003       0.003**
                                       (0.027)       (0.025)         (0.023)       (0.013)         (0.006)      (0.001)       (0.006)       (0.001)
   Savings over GDP/100                 -0.240         0.064       -0.323***        0.011        -0.130***       -0.005        -0.038        0.013
                                       (0.155)       (0.117)         (0.112)       (0.120)         (0.041)      (0.007)       (0.039)       (0.008)
   Education selection to Florida     0.286***         0.051        0.357***      0.202***        0.159***        0.005       -0.026*      -0.030***
                                       (0.057)       (0.055)         (0.041)       (0.065)         (0.019)      (0.003)       (0.013)       (0.005)
   Mean PISA score in Math              0.101       0.167***          0.033       0.146***        0.053***     -0.009***    -0.026***        -0.003
                                       (0.063)       (0.047)         (0.052)       (0.035)         (0.013)      (0.002)       (0.010)       (0.004)

   Observations                       54,461         22,775          54,439        22,672          18,399      553,225       342,551       445,604
   R-squared                           0.469          0.442           0.485         0.448           0.393        0.195        0.125         0.128
   Year*school FE                      YES            YES             YES           YES             YES          YES           YES           YES
   Grade FE                              -               -              -             -                -         YES           YES           YES
   Individual controls                 YES            YES             YES           YES             YES          YES           YES           YES
   Dependent Variable (mean)           0.000          0.000           0.000         0.000           0.808        0.049        0.164         0.035
   Dependent Variable (sd)             1.000          0.791           1.000         0.847           0.394        0.069        0.370         0.184
   Long-Term Orientation (mean)        0.286          0.275           0.286         0.275           0.294        0.293        0.295         0.289
   Long-Term Orientation (sd)          0.176          0.174           0.176         0.174           0.191        0.187        0.190         0.183
   Long-Term Orientation (beta)        0.077          0.064           0.052         0.058           0.014       -0.031        -0.039        -0.016
   N_clust                              53              52             53            52               53           53           53            53
   Notes. The table replicates the results in Table 7 for first generation immigrants, defined using the information on the country of origin and the
   language spoken at home. The table reports OLS estimates, with standard errors clustered at the country level. The unit of observation is a student
   born between 1992 and 2002 and observed during the academic years 2002-2012. The dependent variables are: students’ Florida Comprehensive
   Assessment Test reading score in grade 3 (standardized with mean 0 and variance 1), the change in reading score from grade 3 to grade 8, high
   school graduation (a dummy for whether the student received a standard diploma within four years after entering the 9th grade for the first time),
   absence rates (the percentage of days in which the student is absent during the academic year) and retention (an indicator for whether the student
   repeats the same grade at least once) measured in grades 3-12, and disciplinary incidents (a dummy for whether the student was involved in a
   disciplinary incident defined as serious offences often leading to suspension) measured in grades 6-12. The regressions also include the same
   individual controls reported in Table A4 (coefficients not reported). The additional country-controls are described in this Appendix. Panel B
   specification includes in addition to the standard country controls, also a control for the mean PISA score in Math in the country of origin. The
   ‘‘Long Term Orientation’’ variable is based on Hofstede (2010) and is measured on a 0-1 scale. We describe in details all the variables on this
   Appendix. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.



                                                                           15
                                     Table A6
Educational outcomes and long term orientation, robustness to country controls, second
                    generation immigrants, extended definition
                                         (1)            (2)             (3)          (4)             (5)           (6)            (7)            (8)
                                     Math score,    Math score,       Reading   Reading score,    Graduation    % Absent      Disciplinary    Retention
    VARIABLES                         3rd grade    change 3rd to   score,   3rd change 3rd to                     Days         Incident

    Long-Term Orientation             0.688***       0.454***        0.502***        0.405***      0.136***     -0.042**        -0.119**      -0.022***
                                        (0.113)       (0.069)         (0.089)         (0.063)       (0.038)      (0.016)         (0.048)       (0.006)
    Log GDP pc year 2000 ppp          -0.100***      -0.111***         -0.022        -0.095***       -0.006     0.012***       0.027***          0.001
                                        (0.025)       (0.016)         (0.019)         (0.013)       (0.010)      (0.003)         (0.009)        (0.001)
    Distance from the US (log)           -0.003       -0.032*          -0.025          -0.021        -0.012      0.011*           -0.026        -0.001
                                        (0.061)       (0.017)         (0.048)         (0.015)       (0.010)      (0.006)         (0.025)        (0.003)
    Savings over GDP/100               1.527***      0.938***        0.822***        0.636***        0.031        0.045        -0.435***        -0.022
                                        (0.324)       (0.240)         (0.248)         (0.212)       (0.135)      (0.061)         (0.163)        (0.017)
    Education selection to Florida       0.066         0.032          0.182**           0.047       0.050**       0.007            0.045       -0.009*
                                        (0.131)       (0.049)         (0.080)         (0.036)       (0.023)      (0.011)         (0.062)        (0.005)

    Observations                      295,119        103,388         295,103         102,892        55,274      2,095,753      1,126,026      1,714,203
    R-squared                          0.345          0.315           0.354           0.296         0.344          0.210          0.132          0.095
    Year*school FE                     YES            YES             YES             YES            YES           YES            YES            YES
    Grade FE                              -              -               -               -             -           YES            YES            YES
    Individual controls                YES            YES             YES             YES            YES           YES            YES            YES
    Dependent Variable (mean)          0.000          0.000           0.000           0.000         0.766          0.053          0.229          0.047
    Dependent Variable (sd)            1.000          0.777           1.000           0.815         0.423          0.071          0.420          0.211
    Long-Term Orientation (mean)       0.199          0.201           0.199           0.201         0.198          0.197          0.196          0.197
    Long-Term Orientation (sd)         0.128          0.133           0.128           0.133         0.129          0.127          0.126          0.127
    Long-Term Orientation (beta)       0.088          0.078           0.064           0.066         0.041         -0.075         -0.036         -0.013
    N_clust                             71              66             71               66            65            73              70            72
    PANEL B
                                         (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)            (8)
                                     Math score,    Math score,       Reading    Reading score,   Graduation    % Absent      Disciplinary    Retention
                                      3rd grade    change 3rd to   score,    3rd change 3rd to                    Days         Incident
    VARIABLES                                           8th            grade          8th

    Long-Term Orientation              0.383**        0.376**        0.290**         0.469***       0.072       -0.015**         -0.020         -0.005
                                        (0.176)       (0.147)         (0.139)         (0.119)      (0.055)       (0.007)        (0.026)        (0.005)
    Log GDP pc year 2000 ppp          -0.085***      -0.131***         -0.004        -0.115***      0.001       0.009***       0.023***          0.000
                                        (0.030)       (0.018)         (0.018)         (0.021)      (0.010)       (0.001)        (0.004)        (0.001)
    Distance from the US (log)           -0.054        -0.025       -0.067***          -0.021       -0.001         0.001         -0.004         -0.000
                                        (0.033)       (0.016)         (0.023)         (0.021)      (0.010)       (0.001)        (0.005)        (0.001)
    Savings over GDP/100               0.881**          0.407          0.338           -0.165       0.114       -0.084***      -0.382***        -0.001
                                        (0.423)       (0.313)         (0.341)         (0.312)      (0.125)       (0.015)        (0.071)        (0.012)
    Education selection to Florida     0.285***        -0.029        0.401***          -0.070      0.053**      0.011***       -0.031***      -0.020***
                                        (0.057)       (0.082)         (0.043)         (0.058)      (0.026)       (0.002)        (0.010)        (0.003)
    Mean PISA score in Math              0.076          0.024          0.062           -0.003      0.026*         -0.000         -0.012       -0.005***
                                        (0.060)       (0.040)         (0.040)         (0.038)      (0.014)       (0.001)        (0.007)        (0.001)

    Observations                       53,916         17,438          53,911          17,420        7,620        329,514        164,259        267,566
    R-squared                           0.488          0.485           0.513           0.473        0.431          0.248          0.166          0.166
    Year*school FE                      YES            YES             YES             YES          YES            YES            YES            YES
    Grade FE                               -              -               -               -            -           YES            YES            YES
    Individual controls                 YES            YES             YES             YES          YES            YES            YES            YES
    Dependent Variable (mean)           0.000          0.000           0.000           0.000        0.800          0.045          0.185          0.042
    Dependent Variable (sd)             1.000          0.746           1.000           0.794        0.400          0.065          0.388          0.200
    Long-Term Orientation (mean)        0.331          0.344           0.331           0.344        0.369          0.344          0.353          0.345
    Long-Term Orientation (sd)          0.147          0.154           0.147           0.154        0.164          0.155          0.159          0.155
    Long-Term Orientation (beta)        0.056          0.078           0.043           0.091        0.030         -0.036         -0.008         -0.004
    N_clust                              42              41             42               41          38             43              41            42
    Notes. The table replicates the results in Table 7 for the extended definition of second generation immigrants (see this Appendix for details). The
    table reports OLS estimates, with standard errors clustered at the country level. The unit of observation is a student born between 1992 and 2002 and
    observed during the academic years 2002-2012. The dependent variables are: students’ Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test reading score in
    grade 3 (standardized with mean 0 and variance 1), the change in reading score from grade 3 to grade 8, high school graduation (a dummy for whether
    the student received a standard diploma within four years after entering the 9th grade for the first time), absence rates (the percentage of days in
    which the student is absent during the academic year) and retention (an indicator for whether the student repeats the same grade at least once)
    measured in grades 3-12, and disciplinary incidents (a dummy for whether the student was involved in a disciplinary incident defined as serious
    offences often leading to suspension) measured in grades 6-12. The regressions also include the same individual controls reported in table A4
    (coefficients not reported). The additional country-controls are described in this Appendix. The additional country-controls are described in this
    Appendix. Panel B specification includes in addition to the standard country controls, also a control for the mean PISA score in Math in the country
    of origin. The ‘‘Long Term Orientation’’ variable is based on Hofstede (2010) and is measured on a 0-1 scale. We describe in details all the variables
    on this Appendix. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.


                                                                                16
                                     Table A7
Educational outcomes and long term orientation, robustness to country controls, second
                              generation immigrants
                                     (1)               (2)             (3)                  (4)             (5)          (6)            (7)           (8)
                                  Math score,      Math score,    Reading score,      Reading score,     Graduation   % Absent      Disciplinary   Retention
 VARIABLES                        3rd grade     change 3rd to 8th   3rd grade        change 3rd to 8th                  Days         Incident

 Long-Term Orientation             0.343***        0.403***          0.190**            0.628***          0.127***    -0.052***         0.001        0.000
                                     (0.106)        (0.064)          (0.086)             (0.063)           (0.034)      (0.016)       (0.026)       (0.002)
 Log GDP pc year 2000 ppp          -0.075***       -0.114***           0.007            -0.138***         -0.023**     0.011***        0.015*        -0.000
                                     (0.028)        (0.015)           (0.025)            (0.020)           (0.011)      (0.004)       (0.008)       (0.001)
 Distance from the US (log)         0.161***         -0.001          0.126***           -0.085***           0.013       0.016*       -0.085***     -0.013***
                                     (0.046)        (0.025)           (0.036)            (0.031)           (0.012)      (0.009)       (0.013)       (0.001)
 Savings over GDP/100               1.384***       0.735***          0.552**             0.333*             -0.126        0.029      -0.344***       -0.010
                                     (0.299)        (0.184)           (0.230)            (0.195)           (0.104)      (0.042)       (0.072)       (0.007)
 Education selection to Florida       0.064        0.175***          0.193**              0.035             -0.012       -0.018       0.069**       -0.006*
                                     (0.104)        (0.056)           (0.088)            (0.083)           (0.048)      (0.018)       (0.030)       (0.003)

 Observations                      140,071           49,526          140,057              49,314           30,474     1,108,495       620,147       898,797
 R-squared                          0.380             0.368           0.387                0.355            0.375        0.213         0.135         0.103
 Year*school FE                     YES               YES             YES                  YES              YES          YES           YES           YES
 Grade FE                             -                 -               -                    -                -          YES           YES           YES
 Individual controls                YES               YES             YES                  YES              YES          YES           YES           YES
 Dependent Variable (mean)          0.000             0.000           0.000                0.000           0.741         0.060         0.243         0.048
 Dependent Variable (sd)            1.000             0.782           1.000                0.826           0.438         0.077         0.429         0.214
 Long-Term Orientation (mean)       0.193             0.193           0.193                0.193            0.192        0.192         0.191         0.191
 Long-Term Orientation (sd)         0.116             0.115           0.116                0.116           0.111         0.113         0.111         0.112
 Long-Term Orientation (beta)       0.040             0.060           0.022                0.088            0.032       -0.077         0.000         0.000
 N_clust                             65                57              65                   57               60           69            66            66
 PANEL B
                                     (1)               (2)             (3)                  (4)             (5)          (6)            (7)           (8)
                                  Math score,      Math score,    Reading score,      Reading score,     Graduation   % Absent      Disciplinary   Retention
 VARIABLES                        3rd grade     change 3rd to 8th   3rd grade        change 3rd to 8th                  Days         Incident

 Long-Term Orientation               0.303          0.343**             0.181            0.443**           0.072        -0.013         -0.006       -0.007*
                                    (0.184)         (0.129)           (0.182)            (0.168)          (0.064)      (0.008)        (0.022)       (0.004)
 Log GDP pc year 2000 ppp          -0.077**        -0.116***           -0.011           -0.101***          0.012      0.008***        0.023***       0.000
                                    (0.033)         (0.024)           (0.022)            (0.025)          (0.011)      (0.001)         (0.005)      (0.001)
 Distance from the US (log)          -0.030          -0.010            -0.051             -0.012           0.006        -0.000          -0.007       -0.000
                                    (0.037)         (0.023)           (0.031)            (0.025)          (0.013)      (0.002)         (0.005)      (0.001)
 Savings over GDP/100                0.424            0.260            0.349              -0.333           0.096      -0.082***      -0.246***      0.023**
                                    (0.535)         (0.278)           (0.463)            (0.432)          (0.168)      (0.015)         (0.079)      (0.011)
 Education selection to Florida    0.319***          -0.048          0.407***             -0.007          0.082**     0.008***       -0.032***     -0.015***
                                    (0.065)         (0.094)           (0.045)            (0.098)          (0.032)      (0.003)         (0.008)      (0.003)
 Mean PISA score in Math            0.121*            0.050           0.100*               0.010           0.026        -0.001       -0.020***     -0.006***
                                    (0.064)         (0.042)           (0.052)            (0.046)          (0.021)      (0.002)         (0.006)      (0.001)

 Observations                       46,514           14,774           46,507              14,755           5,941       271,969        131,968       221,020
 R-squared                           0.494            0.499            0.521               0.488           0.464         0.263         0.175         0.177
 Year*school FE                      YES              YES              YES                 YES             YES           YES            YES           YES
 Grade FE                              -                -                -                   -                -          YES            YES           YES
 Individual controls                 YES              YES              YES                 YES             YES           YES            YES           YES
 Dependent Variable (mean)           0.000            0.000            0.000               0.000           0.784         0.045         0.196         0.046
 Dependent Variable (sd)             1.000            0.756            1.000               0.792           0.412         0.065         0.397         0.209
 Long-Term Orientation (mean)        0.302            0.313            0.302               0.313           0.326         0.308         0.313         0.309
 Long-Term Orientation (sd)          0.124            0.134            0.124               0.134           0.143         0.130         0.134         0.131
 Long-Term Orientation (beta)        0.038            0.061            0.022               0.075           0.025        -0.025         -0.002        -0.004
 N_clust                              39               38               39                  38               28           39             38            39
 Notes. The table replicates the results in Table 7 for the second generation immigrants, identified as those who were born in Florida and whose mothers
 were born abroad (see the text in this Appendix). The Table reports OLS estimates, with standard errors clustered at the country level. The unit of
 observation is a student born between 1992 and 2002 and observed during the academic years 2002-2012. The dependent variables are: students’ Florida
 Comprehensive Assessment Test reading score in grade 3 (standardized with mean 0 and variance 1), the change in reading score from grade 3 to grade 8,
 high school graduation (a dummy for whether the student received a standard diploma within four years after entering the 9th grade for the first time),
 absence rates (the percentage of days in which the student is absent during the academic year) and retention (an indicator for whether the student repeats
 the same grade at least once) measured in grades 3-12, and disciplinary incidents (a dummy for whether the student was involved in a disciplinary incident
 defined as serious offences often leading to suspension) measured in grades 6-12. The regressions also include the same individual controls reported in
 Table A4 (coefficients not reported). The additional country-controls are described in this Appendix. Panel B specification includes in addition to the
 standard country controls, also a control for the mean PISA score in Math in the country of origin. The ‘‘Long Term Orientation’’ variable is based on
 Hofstede (2010) and is measured on a 0-1 scale. We describe in details all the variables in this Appendix. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%,
 and 10% levels.



                                                                                17
                                          Table A8
        Long-Term Orientation and educational outcomes, Heterogeneous effects, second
                               generation (extended definition)
                                                            (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)             (5)          (6)           (7)         (8)
                                                        Math score,       Math score,       Reading score,    Reading score,     Graduation   % Absent     Disciplinary Retention
VARIABLES                                                3rd grade     change 3rd to 8th      3rd grade      change 3rd to 8th                  Days        Incident

Long-Term Orientation (LTO)                              0.818***          0.448***           0.437***           0.353**            -0.057    -0.035**      -0.270***   -0.035**
                                                           (0.202)          (0.164)             (0.111)           (0.173)          (0.075)     (0.018)        (0.099)     (0.014)
Mother high school graduate*LTO                           -0.209**           -0.064              -0.027            -0.120           0.090        0.017       0.126**       0.013
                                                           (0.087)          (0.074)             (0.064)           (0.093)          (0.072)     (0.012)        (0.049)     (0.010)
Mother attended some college*LTO                         -0.358***         -0.258***             -0.047           -0.190*            0.090      0.024*       0.170***    0.025**
                                                           (0.093)          (0.093)             (0.065)           (0.100)          (0.081)     (0.014)        (0.047)     (0.010)
Mother 4yr college graduate*LTO                          -0.268***           -0.092              0.051             -0.176           -0.000     0.031**       0.202***    0.024***
                                                           (0.099)          (0.112)             (0.081)           (0.134)          (0.054)     (0.014)        (0.044)     (0.009)
Mother teen pregnancy*LTO                                 -0.679**           -0.025           -0.877***            -0.199           -0.356       0.030         0.202     0.138***
                                                           (0.341)          (0.488)             (0.277)           (0.373)          (0.495)     (0.021)        (0.162)     (0.041)
Mother married at time of birth*LTO                        0.145*             0.103              0.002           0.274***           0.133        0.001         -0.007      0.001
                                                           (0.081)          (0.095)             (0.063)           (0.089)          (0.106)     (0.005)        (0.032)     (0.006)
Number of older siblings*LTO                                -0.020           -0.046              -0.024            -0.051           0.008        0.001         -0.019      -0.002
                                                           (0.023)          (0.032)             (0.032)           (0.033)          (0.013)     (0.003)        (0.013)     (0.003)
Median income in zipcode of birth (100,000 of $)*LTO        -0.022            0.224              0.042             -0.001         -0.212**      -0.008         0.083       0.012
                                                           (0.204)          (0.144)             (0.144)           (0.174)          (0.098)     (0.013)        (0.078)     (0.010)
Free or Reduced Priced Lunch*LTO                             0.039          -0.109*              0.048             -0.066           0.021       -0.005       -0.051**      -0.005
                                                           (0.073)          (0.058)             (0.066)           (0.068)          (0.038)     (0.007)        (0.021)     (0.003)
Mother high school graduate                              0.122***           0.033*             0.094***            0.055*           -0.005      -0.005      -0.044***   -0.011***
                                                           (0.027)          (0.019)             (0.028)           (0.030)          (0.015)     (0.003)        (0.010)     (0.004)
Mother attended some college                             0.240***          0.103***            0.187***          0.105***           -0.000      -0.006      -0.061***   -0.018***
                                                           (0.020)          (0.025)             (0.022)           (0.028)          (0.028)     (0.004)        (0.009)     (0.004)
Mother 4yr college graduate                              0.390***          0.169***            0.304***          0.210***         0.053***    -0.012***     -0.094***   -0.022***
                                                           (0.017)          (0.025)             (0.022)           (0.032)          (0.010)     (0.004)        (0.008)     (0.002)
Mother teen pregnancy                                        0.048            0.008            0.128***            -0.021           0.102        0.006         0.013    -0.019***
                                                           (0.057)          (0.088)             (0.041)           (0.065)          (0.067)     (0.005)        (0.031)     (0.007)
Mother married at time of birth                          0.074***           0.037**            0.084***            -0.003           0.012     -0.007***     -0.055***   -0.008***
                                                           (0.014)          (0.018)             (0.012)           (0.020)          (0.023)     (0.001)        (0.006)     (0.001)
Number of older siblings                                 -0.024***           -0.004           -0.035***            0.002          -0.007**    0.003***       0.024***    0.004***
                                                           (0.007)          (0.008)             (0.011)           (0.008)          (0.003)     (0.001)        (0.002)     (0.001)
Median income in zipcode of birth (100,000 of $)         0.177***            -0.049            0.134***            0.043          0.113***       0.006        -0.057*   -0.013***
                                                           (0.048)          (0.048)             (0.029)           (0.038)          (0.031)     (0.005)        (0.029)     (0.004)
Free or Reduced Priced Lunch                             -0.163***           -0.012           -0.174***         -0.050***          -0.022*       0.001       0.049***    0.007***
                                                           (0.014)          (0.013)             (0.014)           (0.015)          (0.012)     (0.003)        (0.004)     (0.001)

Observations                                              184,331           62,005             184,309            61,668           6,623       960,054       425,110    762,581
R-squared                                                  0.369             0.334              0.379              0.319           0.325         0.183        0.151      0.121
Year*school FE                                             YES               YES                YES                YES              YES          YES           YES        YES
Grade FE                                                      -                 -                  -                 -                -          YES           YES        YES
Individual controls                                        YES               YES                YES                YES              YES          YES           YES        YES
Dependent Variable (mean)                                  0.000             0.000              0.000             0.000            0.874         0.045        0.208      0.042
Dependent Variable (sd)                                    1.000            0.778               1.000             0.809            0.332         0.057        0.406      0.200
Long-Term Orientation (mean)                               0.207             0.209              0.207             0.210            0.214         0.206        0.206      0.206
Long-Term Orientation (sd)                                 0.143             0.149              0.143             0.149            0.158         0.144        0.146      0.144
Long-Term Orientation (beta)                               0.117             0.086              0.062             0.065            -0.027       -0.088        -0.097     -0.025
N_clust                                                      90                79                 90                79               58            90           82         90
Notes. The Table repeats the same analysis reported in Table 10 for the following dependent variables: students’ Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test reading score in grade
3 (standardized with mean 0 and variance 1), the change in reading score from grade 3 to grade 8, high school graduation (a dummy for whether the student received a standard
diploma within four years after entering the 9th grade for the first time), absence rates (the percentage of days in which the student is absent during the academic year) and
retention (an indicator for whether the student repeats the same grade at least once) measured in grades 3-12, and disciplinary incidents (a dummy for whether the student was
involved in a disciplinary incident defined as serious offences often leading to suspension) measured in grades 6-12. The table reports OLS estimates, with standard errors
clustered at the language/country level. The unit of observation is a student born between 1992 and 2002 and observed during the academic years 2002-2012. The sample includes
the extended version of second generation immigrants defined using the information on the country of origin of the mother when available (Canada, Mexico, and Puerto Rico) or
the language spoken at home for individuals whose mother was born either in the US or abroad (when the country of origin of the mother is not available). See details in the text
and the appendix for how the matching between languages and countries has been implemented. The regressions also include the same individual controls reported in Table A4
(coefficients not reported). Maternal controls are also described in the note of Table A4. The ‘‘Long Term Orientation’’ variable is based on Hofstede (2010) and is measured on
a 0-1 scale. We describe in details all the variables in this Appendix. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.




                                                                                       18
                                                      Table A9
                               Futureless language (Chen) and educational outcomes,
                                       robustness to the exclusion of Spanish
                                                   PANEL A: 1st generation + 2nd generation (extended definition), exclusion of Spanish speakers
                                   (1)               (2)             (3)              (4)                 (5)               (6)              (7)          (8)
                                Math score,      Math score,    Reading score,   Reading score,      Graduation % Absent Days Disciplinary             Retention
VARIABLES                       3rd grade     change 3rd to 8th   3rd grade    change 3rd to 8th                                          Incident

Futureless Language (Chen)       0.302***          0.216**         0.172***           0.182**            0.028**        -0.012**        -0.047**        -0.003**
                                  (0.107)          (0.093)          (0.053)           (0.085)            (0.011)         (0.006)         (0.022)         (0.001)

Observations                       67,788           26,033          67,757             25,964            18,646         581,789         343,900         465,393
R-squared                           0.405           0.422           0.417               0.420             0.353          0.168           0.119           0.114
Year*school FE                      YES              YES             YES                YES               YES             YES             YES             YES
Grade FE                               -               -               -                   -                 -            YES             YES             YES
Individual controls                 YES              YES             YES                YES               YES             YES             YES             YES
Dependent Variable (mean)           0.000            0.000           0.000              0.000             0.877          0.042           0.133           0.023
Dependent Variable (sd)             1.000            0.766           1.000              0.844             0.328          0.064           0.339           0.149
Futureless Language (mean)          0.108            0.110           0.108              0.109             0.093          0.102           0.100           0.101
Futureless Language (sd)            0.310            0.312           0.310              0.312             0.291          0.303           0.300           0.301
Futureless Language (beta)          0.094            0.088           0.053              0.067             0.025          -0.055          -0.042          -0.006
N_clust                               80              73              80                  73                70             85              83              84

                                                                     PANEL B: 1st generation, exclusion of Spanish speakers
                                   (1)               (2)             (3)              (4)                 (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)
                                Math score,      Math score,    Reading score,  Reading score,        Graduation % Absent Days        Disciplinary     Retention
VARIABLES                       3rd grade     change 3rd to 8th   3rd grade    change 3rd to 8th                                       Incident

Futureless Language (Chen)       0.305***          0.237**         0.110***           0.161**             0.004          -0.005*       -0.037***        -0.003*
                                  (0.050)          (0.104)          (0.038)           (0.069)            (0.018)         (0.003)        (0.007)         (0.001)

Observations                       30,274           11,985          30,261             11,947            11,392         321,798         204,298         253,240
R-squared                           0.529           0.566           0.536               0.565             0.400          0.213           0.145           0.150
Year*school FE                      YES              YES             YES                YES               YES             YES             YES             YES
Country FE                          YES              YES             YES                YES               YES             YES             YES             YES
Grade FE                               -               -               -                   -                 -            YES             YES             YES
Individual controls                 YES              YES             YES                YES               YES             YES             YES             YES
Dependent Variable (mean)           0.000            0.000           0.000              0.000             0.867          0.045           0.133           0.024
Dependent Variable (sd)             1.000            0.782           1.000              0.862             0.339          0.067           0.340           0.155
Futureless Language (mean)          0.067            0.063           0.067              0.063             0.066          0.072           0.073           0.068
Futureless Language (sd)            0.250            0.244           0.250              0.243             0.248          0.258           0.260           0.252
Futureless Language (beta)          0.076            0.074           0.027              0.045             0.003          -0.020          -0.028          -0.005
N_clust                               77              70              77                  70                68             84              81              82
Notes. The table repeats the same analysis as Table 13, Panel A and B in the text excluding students speaking Spanish. The unit of observation is a student born
between 1992 and 2002 and observed during the academic years 2002-2012. In Panel A, the sample pools together first generation immigrants defined using the
information on both the country of origin and the language spoken at home and the extended version of second generation immigrants defined using the
information on the country of origin of the mother when available (Canada) or the language spoken at home for individuals whose mother was born either in the
US or abroad (when the country of origin of the mother is not available). See details in the text and this Appendix for how the matching between languages and
countries has been implemented. Panel B includes only first generation immigrants. The dependent variables are: students’ Florida Comprehensive Assessment
Test math score in grade 3 (standardized with mean 0 and variance 1), the change in math score from grade 3 to grade 8, reading score in grade 3 (standardized
with mean 0 and variance 1), change in reading score from grade 3 to grade 8, high school graduation (a dummy for whether the student received a standard
diploma within four years after entering the 9th grade for the first time), absence rates (the percentage of days in which the student is absent during the academic
year), disciplinary incidents (a dummy for whether the student was involved in a disciplinary incident, defined as serious offences often leading to suspension),
and retention (an indicator for whether the student repeats the same grade at least once). The regressions also include the same individual controls reported in
Table A4 (coefficients not reported). Futureless language is a dummy variable equal to 1 for “futureless” languages (languages that do not require “obligatory
future time reference use in prediction-based contexts”) from Chen (2013). We describe in details all the variables in this Appendix. ***, **, and * indicate
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.




                                                                               19
                                           Table A10
List of countries of origin, PISA, first and second generation (mother side and father side)
                                           2nd          2nd                                              2nd          2nd
                                1st                                                         1st
COUNTRY                                 generation   generation COUNTRY                               generation   generation
                             generation                                                  generation
                                         (mother)     (father)                                         (mother)     (father)

Albania                        1,187       375         347          Macedonia               40            37           35
Argentina                       217         93          85          Malaysia                119           71           61
Australia                       368        189         151          Montenegro              17            88           79
Austria                          71        273         198          Morocco                 15           190           206
Bangladesh                        7         13          11          Netherlands             306          262           308
Belarus                          42        554         509          New Zealand             776          938           945
Belgium                         155        307         271          Nigeria                   4           0              2
Bosnia and Herzegovina          804       2,331       2,063         Pakistan                 76          236           266
Brazil                          331        225         207          Philippines             339          518           213
Bulgaria                          9         36          20          Poland                  159          359           279
Canada                            5          2           2          Portugal               1,722        3,034         2,866
Chile                            19         77          61          Republic of Korea       293           48            49
China                          6,987      15,456      14,637        Romania                 58            69           75
Colombia                          9          6           7          Russian Federation      893         1,556         1,604
Croatia                         147        254         212          Saudi Arabia              0           0              1
Czech Republic                   80        223         195          Serbia                  804         1,002          611
Denmark                          37         84         113          Singapore               16            9            10
Egypt                           952        769         715          Slovakia                172          582           690
Estonia                         136         88          59          Slovenia                13            15           18
France                         1,079      1,364       1,171         South Africa            418          114           116
Georgia                           1          0           0          Spain                   85           376           466
Germany                        1,363      1,384       1,147         Sweden                  276          396           307
Great Britain                  2,686      4,330       4,396         Switzerland             172          116            99
Greece                           25        101         165          Taiwan                   22           28            11
Hong Kong-China                 378        255         475          Tanzania                 0            1             0
Hungary                          17         20          18          Thailand                37            15             2
India                           281        240         247          Turkey                  589         3,194         3,497
Iran (Islamic Republic of)        8          7          12          Ukraine                 133          566           607
Iraq                            213        128         178          United States          1,409         489           636
Italy                           383       1,754       3,029         Uruguay                  16           97            85
Japan                             2          2           0          Viet Nam                76           351           346
Jordan                          592        187         149          Zambia                   1            0             0
Lithuania                         2          0           0
                                                                    Total                 27,649        45,884       45,340
Notes. The table reports the number of observations by country of origin for both first and second generation immigrants in the
PISA sample. The observations for second generation students are calculated based both on mothers’ or fathers’ countries of
origin. See the text of this Appendix for details.




                                                               20
                                       Table A11
    Number of first and second generation immigrants, by country of destination, PISA

                                     2nd          2nd                                           2nd          2nd
                        1st                                                       1st
COUNTRY                           generation   generation COUNTRY                            generation   generation
                     generation                                                generation
                                   (mother)     (father)                                      (mother)     (father)

Argentina                 68          235          192     Latvia                  242         2,032         2,200
Australia               3,070        5,411        5,453    Liechtenstein           239          279           247
Austria                  773         1,340        1,310    Luxembourg             1,906        3,357         3,463
Belgium                 1,375        1,221        1,256    Mauritius                3            19            12
China                   2,971       10,082        9,466    Mexico                 1,162         253           400
Costa Rica                 9           6            7      Moldova                 80           192           178
Croatia                  633         1,698        1,616    Montenegro              956         1,421          779
Czech Republic           269          684          800     Netherlands             160          542           590
Denmark                  233          962         1,033    New Zealand            1,567         951          1,012
Finland                  688          614          469     Norway                  133          231           228
Germany                  277         1,173        1,244    Portugal                190           64            65
Great Britain            385          496          458     Qatar                  1,544         956           863
Greece                   770          207          178     Serbia                   13           84            75
Hong Kong-China         3,773        5,063        5,162    Slovak Republic          74          213           185
Indonesia                 72           18           19     Slovenia                12            11            16
Ireland                 1,080         850          699     Switzerland            1,937        4,426         4,988
Israel                   487          351          316     Turkey                   74          111            61
Korea                      7           16           1      Uruguay                 330          193           181
Kyrgyzstan                87          122          118
                                                          Total                    27,649      45,884        45,340
Notes. The table reports the number of observations of immigrants students (first and second generation) by country of
destinations in the PISA sample. The observations for second generations students are calculated based both on
mothers’ or fathers’ countries of origin.




                                                          21
                                             Table A12
                        Long-Term Orientation and educational outcomes, PISA
                            Second generation immigrants (paternal side)
                                         (1)      (2)     (3)      (4)      (5)           (6)       (7)     (8)      (9)      (10)
VARIABLES                               Math    Reading Science Retention Truancy        Math     Reading Science Retention Truancy

Long-Term Orientation                  0.697*** 0.669*** 0.767*** -0.080***    -0.073** 0.747*** 0.708*** 0.823*** -0.086***     -0.074**
                                        (0.205) (0.188) (0.204) (0.021)         (0.031) (0.211) (0.198) (0.213) (0.019)           (0.031)
Male                                   0.188*** -0.327*** 0.076*** 0.011*        -0.010 0.196*** -0.324*** 0.078*** 0.009          -0.010
                                        (0.016) (0.035) (0.019) (0.006)         (0.008) (0.015) (0.033) (0.019) (0.006)           (0.008)
Age of student                        -0.213*** -0.199*** -0.181*** 0.271***   0.046*** -0.222*** -0.205*** -0.187*** 0.291***   0.047***
                                        (0.032) (0.033) (0.034) (0.035)         (0.012) (0.035) (0.038) (0.040) (0.034)           (0.012)
Wealth                                                                                    -0.002 -0.018* -0.025** 0.005            0.004
                                                                                         (0.012) (0.009) (0.010) (0.004)          (0.003)

Observations                           45,340    45,340   45,340     29,735    13,346    38,033   38,033    38,033    23,448     13,314
R-squared                               0.365     0.338    0.342      0.478     0.104    0.378    0.347     0.352      0.490     0.104
Year FE                                 YES       YES      YES        YES       YES       YES      YES       YES       YES        YES
Grade FE                                YES       YES      YES        YES       YES       YES      YES       YES       YES        YES
Parents' education FE                   YES       YES      YES        YES       YES       YES      YES       YES       YES        YES
Country of destination FE               YES       YES      YES        YES       YES       YES      YES       YES       YES        YES
Dependent Variable (mean)               0.000     0.000    0.000      0.143     0.120     0.000    0.000     0.000     0.156      0.120
Dependent Variable (sd)                 1.000     1.000    1.000      0.350    0.325     1.000    1.000     1.000     0.363      0.324
Long-Term Orientation (mean)            0.643     0.643    0.643      0.639     0.617     0.642    0.642     0.642     0.634      0.617
Long-Term Orientation (sd)              0.223     0.223    0.223      0.224     0.230     0.228   0.228     0.228      0.231     0.230
Long-Term Orientation (beta)            0.156     0.149    0.171     -0.051    -0.052     0.170    0.161     0.187    -0.055     -0.052
N_clust                                  60         60      60          57        55       57       57        57        53         55
Notes. The table reports OLS estimates, with standard errors clustered at the country of origin level. The unit of observation is a
second generation immigrant student on the paternal side from one of the 63 countries residing in one of the 37 countries surveyed
in PISA for which information about the country of origin of the parents is available (4 waves from 2003 to 2012 depending on
whether the variables used in the regression are all available – details are on the online Appendix). The dependent variables are
Math, Reading, Science scores calculated according to the description on the online appendix, retention (a dummy variable equal to
1 if a student repeated at least one year during his/her school career), and truancy (a dummy variable equal to 1 if the student
skipped at least one full day of school in the previous two weeks). The ‘‘Long Term Orientation’’ variable is based on Hofstede
(2010) and is measured on a 0-1 scale. Individual controls are: male (a dummy equal to one if the student is a boy), age (the age of
the student expressed in years), dummies for student grade and for parents’ education, wealth (an index of family wealth
possessions built by OECD – PISA). We describe in details all the variables (and their availability in different PISA waves) on the
online Appendix. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.




References

Chen, Keith M. (2013), “The Effect of Language on Economic Behavior: Evidence from Savings
          Rates, Health Behaviors, and Retirement Assets,” American Economic Review, 103(2): 690-731.
Feliciano, Cynthia (2005), “Does Selective Migration Matter? Explaining Ethnic Disparities in
        Educational Attainment among Immigrants' Children,” The International Migration Review,
        Vol. 39, No. 4, pp. 841-871.



                                                                22
Galor, Oded and Omer Ozak (2016), “The Agricultural Origins of Time Preference,” American
       Economic Review, forthcoming.
Lieberson, S. (1976), “Rank-sum Comparisons between Groups”, Sociological Methodology, 7: 276-291.




                                               23
