NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT GOES ON UNDER THE HOOD? HOW ENGINEERS INNOVATE IN THE
AUTOMOTIVE SUPPLY CHAIN
Susan Helper
Jennifer Kuan
Working Paper 22552
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22552

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016

The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the US Department of Labor under
grant RES115881. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Susan Helper and Jennifer Kuan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

What Goes on Under the Hood? How Engineers Innovate in the Automotive Supply Chain
Susan Helper and Jennifer Kuan
NBER Working Paper No. 22552
August 2016
JEL No. D2,L23,L62
ABSTRACT
The questions addressed in this volume are motivated by the recognition that engineers play an
important role in generating innovation and economic growth. In this chapter, we seek to offer
some description of engineering work by looking in detail at a specific manufacturing industry—
firms that supply automakers—to gain insight into how engineers create innovation. Autos
account for 5% of US GDP and in 2011, 70% of auto suppliers contributed design effort, a task
typically performed by engineers, making the auto supply chain an important context in which to
study engineering and innovation.
Some highlights from our original survey data include a wide range in terms of size and strategies
of supply chain companies; a majority was small- to medium-sized, often family-owned. We
observed barriers to patenting for manufacturing firms developing process rather than product
innovations. And interviews revealed the importance of customers for the innovative efforts of
supplier firms. Certain Japanese customers were preferred because they shared expertise and
helped suppliers improve, while other, American, customers were viewed as having unreasonable
demands for regular, incremental price reductions and did not offer technical or organizational
support.

Susan Helper
Weatherhead School of Management
Case Western Reserve University
11119 Bellflower Rd
Cleveland, OH 44106-7235
and NBER
susan.helper@case.edu
Jennifer Kuan
Tulane University
A. B. Freeman School of Business
Goldring/Woldenberg Hall
7 McAlister Dr.
New Orleans, LA 70115-5698
jkuan1@tulane.edu

What Goes on Under the Hood?
How Engineers Innovate in the Automotive Supply Chain
I. Introduction
The questions addressed in this volume are motivated by the recognition that engineers
play an important role in generating innovation and economic growth. In this chapter, we
seek to offer some description of engineering work by looking in detail at a specific
manufacturing industry—firms that supply automakers—to gain insight into how
engineers create innovation. Autos account for 5% of GDP (U.S. Dept. of Commerce
2011), and have undergone significant innovation and improvement; over the period 1980
to 2004, average horsepower nearly doubled. 1 At the same time, the locus of engineering
work has changed significantly. For example, in 2011, 70% of auto suppliers contributed
effort design effort (a task typically performed by engineers), compared with 48% in
1989. 2 All of this makes the auto supply chain an important context in which to study
engineering and innovation.
Our study also revisits themes from an earlier literature on incremental innovation that
focused on manufacturing. Rosenberg (1963) describes 19th century equipment makers,
who began inside manufacturing firms, but eventually spun out and helped spread
technological change. Clark, Chew and Fujimoto (1987) survey automakers about
product development projects, and find differences in the way firms from the US, Japan,
and Germany utilize suppliers when introducing new car models. Levin et al. (1987) take
care to distinguish process innovation from product innovation in their survey of large
industrial firms, and uncover different strategies for appropriating returns to innovation.
All of this incremental improvement in processes and in product quality accumulates to
produce economically significant change. Rosenberg and Steinmueller (2010) examine
engineering practices in aircraft and chemicals industries and point out that Douglas
Aircraft's DC-3, which served 95% of US air traffic, was "the product of innumerable
small modifications and design improvements," (p. 15).
In the spring of 2011, we conducted a nation-wide survey of thousands of firms in the
supply chain. To design the survey, our research team performed dozens of detailed
interviews, aiming for a broad picture of the industry. Thus, the plants varied by size,
geographic location, and industry. We spoke with engineers, production workers, plant
managers, sales managers, and human resources managers, and visited large and small
firms, both in the Midwest, the traditional center of the auto industry, and the Southeast,
an up and coming center of U.S. auto manufacturing. Industries also varied, including
metal-working, assembly, chemicals, rubber, and electronics. Plant visits were

1

From 1980 to 2004, average horsepower for new passenger cars and light-duty trucks increased by 80%
and 99%, respectively. Knittel (2012) estimates that fuel economy could have increased by 60% during this
period had performance been held constant.
2

Data for 2011 comes from the survey described below; for 1989 data, see Helper (1994)
(Technovation). In the earlier period, it was much more common for suppliers to produce
parts designed entirely by their customers, the automakers.
Susan Helper & Jennifer Kuan

1

April 3, 2015

indispensable in providing a sense of the type of innovative activities that engineers and
others were engaged in, as well as of the language for inquiring about such activity.
The size and strategies of supply chain companies varied tremendously. However, a
majority is small- to medium-sized, often family-owned firms. (Data from our survey
suggests that firms with fewer than 500 employees account for about one-third of
employment in the auto supply chain.) We also observed barriers to patenting for
manufacturing firms developing process rather than product innovations. This
encouraged us to expand our definition and measurement of innovation to capture a more
complete picture of innovative activity taking place in manufacturing firms. We thus
hope to contribute to a more recent literature, which focuses on innovative, patentintensive industries such as information and communications technology (i.e., computers,
software, telecommunications) or biotechnology and pharmaceuticals, with additional
measures of innovation. Interviews also revealed the importance of customers for the
innovative efforts of supplier firms. Certain Japanese customers were preferred because
they shared expertise and helped suppliers improve, while other, American, customers
were viewed as having unreasonable demands for regular, incremental price reductions
and did not offer technical or organizational support.
The organization of this chapter is as follows. We first present an overview of our survey
and respondent firms. Next, we describe the types of innovative activities performed by
engineers and others inside those firms. This is followed by a discussion of the survey
data about the workers engaged in this activity, and engineering tasks we measured.
Finally, a brief description of customer effects concludes.
II. Overview of Survey and Respondent Firms
In order to survey the auto supply chain, we first had to identify firms in the supply chain,
which extends several levels from automakers such as Toyota, GM, and Ford. Thus one
contribution of this study is to flesh out in a comprehensive fashion the reach of
automotive manufacturing in the US. We find an industry dominated by a few enormous
firms, supported by thousands of small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs); our
median respondent had about 100 employees. Another contribution of our survey is
therefore a detailed view inside small manufacturing firms, for which very little public
data exist. In this section, we describe the process we used to identify firms in the auto
supply chain, and then provide a broad overview of those firms.
A. Identifying auto supply chain firms
A problem that has plagued research on the auto supply chain is that publicly available
data do not provide a good picture of which establishments are currently in the auto
supply chain. Many firms that supply the auto industry are not classified as auto parts
manufacturers (3363, in the North American Industry Classification System, or NAICS),
sometimes because they supply other industries and so do not self-identify as auto
suppliers. At the same time, many firms than are in NAICS 3363 no longer supply the
auto industry, because managers of establishments bear the main responsibility for

Susan Helper & Jennifer Kuan

2

April 3, 2015

classifying themselves into NAICS codes, and typically do not update these codes very
often, even when their markets shift. Thus, in order to survey the automotive supply
chain, we first had to determine which firms might be auto suppliers.
We assembled a list of candidate firms and establishments from 11 sources including
ELM International, the Analyst Resource Center (ARC), the Michigan Manufacturing
Technology Center (MMTC), the Original Equipment Suppliers Association (OESA), the
Precision Metalforming Association (PMA), the Industrial Fasteners Institute (IFI),
Ohio’s Manufacturing Advocacy and Growth Network (MAGNET), the Automotive
News Top 150 Suppliers list, Polymer Ohio, and the Michigan Automotive Research and
Development Facilities Directory.
This last directory was particularly useful in identifying firms that specialize in
automotive research and development (R&D) because establishments performing R&D
are classified in NAICS 54171, which at the most detailed category includes "R&D in the
physical, engineering, and life sciences." Thus, it would be very difficult to extract from
such a large class of firms those whose output is used primarily by the auto industry. A
conservative count of establishments from this directory yields 25,000 employees in
Michigan alone. A strictly NAICS-based analysis of the auto supply chain would fail to
capture these highly skilled workers, and underestimate the employment, wages, and skill
level of automotive production.
From the National Establishment Time Series (NETS) database, we selected firms that
were in the auto supply chain using NAICS codes associated with the auto industry
(C.A.R. 2010). In addition to 3363, these include functional specialties involved in auto
manufacturing, such as metal stamping, plastics manufacturing, and equipment
producers, or those performing automotive-related R&D.
Both manual and automated procedures were used to eliminate duplicate listings. Each of
the firms was phoned and asked if they currently supply the auto industry. When called,
over half of the establishments listed as NAICS 3363 said that they no longer supplied
the auto industry; another one-third were out of business. Table 1 summarizes the
outcome of this process. About 20% of our original list, or 3800 firms, were likely
automotive suppliers and only 37 % of the sample was in NAICS 3363 (“Motor vehicle
parts manufacturing”).
Three surveys were sent to each firm by e-mail, web link, and mail, each one requiring
different expertise: sales, plant management, and personnel. Unfortunately, while the
quality of responses received is likely to be high, because respondents were likely to be
knowledgeable about their particular area, the share of firms returning all three surveys
was relatively low. Out of 1411 responses (a response rate of 37%), only 98 returned all
three surveys. Consequently, in our descriptive statistics, the number of respondents
varies.
B. Description of auto supply chain

Susan Helper & Jennifer Kuan

3

April 3, 2015

The geographical distribution of respondent firms and likely auto suppliers (candidate
firms on our list that did not respond to the survey) are similar. Map 1 shows the
locations of all plants in our sampling frame in green and respondent plants in red. The
greatest concentration of auto supply chain firms is in Michigan, Ohio and Indiana;
similarly, nearly two-thirds of our respondents are from this tri-state region.
While the survey was distributed to all firms identified as likely automotive suppliers,
these firms fall into "tiers", with "tier-1" firms supplying automakers directly and tier-2
firms supplying tier-1 suppliers, and so on. Some mega-suppliers, such as Visteon,
Delphi, Magna, Lear, and Johnson Controls, have many billions of dollars in annual
sales, almost all of which come from direct dealings with automakers. Tier-1 suppliers
comprise just under 25% of our sample. Lower tier firms tend to be smaller and more
numerous. Figure 1 shows the distribution of respondents by number of employees. A
majority of firms had less than 50 employees, and another 40% of respondents had fewer
than 500. We estimate that about 30 percent of the automotive supply chain employment
is at firms with fewer than 500 employees. About 40% of respondents were single-plant
firms, and only 7.8% of respondents are unionized.
The average age of respondent firms was 32 years, with almost 60% of firms more than
25 years old. Figure 2 shows the age distribution of the 202 firms that gave their founding
year. This suggests that while firms may not be entering the automotive business in large
numbers, incumbent firms are robust to the ups and downs of the auto industry. Some of
the strategies used by firms to stay afloat resulted in little investment in human or
physical capital; one-fourth of them had no engineers at all. Several firms we visited had
very little debt, owning their land and equipment outright, which allowed them to slow
down operations during the recession through employee furloughs until business picked
up again. One firm took the opportunity to purchase used equipment inexpensively from
plants that were downsizing or closing.
While we surveyed only firms operating in the US, a number of firms are foreign-owned.
In particular, many foreign automakers operate manufacturing plants in the US and
source components from American firms as well as foreign suppliers operating in the US.
Table 2 shows the top three countries represented in the data. Most, 84%, are American,
10.5% are Japanese, and 5.5% are German. The survey asks only about the component
that accounts for the largest share of automotive sales for a supplier; Table 2 shows the
country of origin of suppliers’ main automotive customer.
III. Types of Engineering Activity
What do engineers do? One way of categorizing their activities is in terms of job function
within a firm, such as R&D, product design, process engineering. In a large firm, these
might be departments, but in smaller firms, which we targeted for our interviews because
most of the firms in our sampling frame are privately owned SMEs, the picture was quite
different. We found that a company's only engineer might engage in one or more of these
categories of activity in a single day. Some firms were so small that individuals
performing these activities identified themselves as manager or owner. Indeed, some

Susan Helper & Jennifer Kuan

4

April 3, 2015

firms did not view their innovative activity as "R&D" or even "innovation". This
diversity of activities and fluidness of responsibilities within small firms makes
measurement problematic.
Measuring activity by job function is a challenge that draws upon an existing literature,
and that we hope our survey can contribute to. For example, in measuring R&D, the
literature has measured spending and patents, in large part because these data are publicly
available. Cohen and Klepper (1996) review the literature on R&D spending, which
focuses on large publicly traded firms, and Cohen (2010) reviews the empirical literature
measuring innovation, including patenting. We inquired about patenting at smaller
manufacturing firms. Even though patenting is an important measure of innovative
activity or output, prior studies suggest that patents reflect an appropriability strategy,
i.e., more patents do not necessarily mean more invention, particularly when comparing
across industries (Cohen 2010, Boldrin et al 2011). Our interviews and survey data were
consistent with this notion of variable effectiveness of patents: certain types of firms
engaged in patenting more than others, but over all, only 3% of our respondents applied
for patents.
For product design, the literature has looked at new product introductions as a measure.
This literature has the benefit of extending the large-firm analyses described above by
including and even targeting smaller firms. Acs and Audretsch (1988, 1990) use product
announcements to measure innovation by smaller firms, and Pavitt et al (1987) analyze
British data on “significant” new products or processes, many of which are produced by
small firms. Process engineering activity has tended not to be the focus of measurement,
but a similar study by Leiponen (2005) examines manufacturing firms in Finland (many
of which are SMEs) and finds that more-skilled workers are more innovative. In our
study, cost reductions are one measure of process engineers' efforts, particularly in a
period of rising material costs.
Below, we discuss these categories of engineering activity, describing some context from
our interviews and results from our respondents.
A. New Products
Measuring new product introductions can be an interesting indication of dynamism and
change, even for a set of firms that sells products specified by their customer, because
turning over products frequently requires flexibility and nimbleness. We asked, "What
percent of your sales come from products which you did not make 4 years ago?”
At one factory we visited, an engineer had created a machine out of parts from two
disused machines. The new machine was used to produce an item that had been produced
by a Chinese competitor but at higher quality and faster delivery than the version
overseas.
Another low-tech solution to a customer's problem was found at a chemical company.
While this rubber industry firm had several patents for rubber additives and had recently

Susan Helper & Jennifer Kuan

5

April 3, 2015

begun hiring chemists with doctoral degrees from a local university, one of its more
profitable areas was its "cake mix" product line. Managers at the firm had noticed its
customers buying the same combinations of chemicals and having to measure and mix
them. They had the idea to make easy-to-use, pre-mixed packages, which would make
their customers' outcomes more consistent and result in higher profits for the firm.
The introduction of new products designed by clever engineers is clearly a useful form of
innovation. This does not mean that slow product turnover implies uninventive engineers.
Rather, the frequent change in product line may be a distinct innovation strategy. Figure 4
shows the frequency of our responses. About a third introduced a new product at least
every year, if not more.
B. Design
In a manufacturing supply industry, engineers often take completed designs from their
customers and produce them exactly as specified. In such cases, no additional design
work is involved. On the other hand, the "cake mix" products described above are
designed entirely by supplier firm managers, albeit with considerable input from and
observation of their customers. Because "design" is to some extent an innovative activity,
we ask, "In the past year, roughly what percent of your plant's sales were from jobs where
your firm designed the part or assembly?"
Figure 5 shows the considerable heterogeneity of responses to our question. A third of
respondents fit the traditional model of supplier firm, producing only products designed
by their customers. But about 15% produce parts that they design themselves. The rest, a
majority of firms, fall somewhere in between these two extremes.
C. Innovative contribution
Our broadest innovation question asks, "What percent of your sales come from products
where you innovated in some way? By 'innovated', we mean that your business unit
designed a product with improved features compared to what the market had seen before,
or that you used a novel process to make the product."
This is a somewhat catch-all question, but it is meant to encourage respondents to
consider process innovations as well as product innovations when assessing their
innovative contribution. One metal stamping firm we visited was continually developing
and extending its process capability, constantly creating new "know-how". For example,
the owner of the firm worked with engineers to refine processes to accommodate very
thin material, including plastics. This enabled the firm to serve an East Coast customer
producing electric generators, a customer outside the usual geographical region and
customer industry.
Even with our liberal definition of innovation, almost 42% of respondents report
contributing little or no innovation to the products they make. At the other end of the
spectrum, about 15% contributed some innovation to half their products or more.

Susan Helper & Jennifer Kuan

6

April 3, 2015

D. Cost reduction
Manufacturing cost reductions are often associated with economies of scale—as
production quantities increase, the average cost goes down as a fixed component of cost
is spread over more units. But process improvements can also generate cost reductions,
for example through fewer errors or more reliable equipment. We observed efforts in
both of these directions on our plant visits.
There were also clever applications of existing processes to reduce the cost of a
component. A process engineer could help its firm win new business by extending and
applying its process capabilities. For instance, one metal stamper we visited bought a
large press capable of stamping inch-thick material, which was much thicker than the
sheet metal that their current machinery was capable of punching through. This stamper
was able to produce a part that had previously been produced by casting, a much more
costly and energy-intensive process that involves pouring molten metal into a mold.
At another firm, process engineers added welding capability to the firm's production
technologies. This allowed the firm to make a part using two stamped pieces that were
joined together by welding. The welded assembly replaced a more costly cast part that its
customer was importing from a low-wage country.
Figure 3 shows responses to our question about cost reduction. About 15% of firms
reduced their costs, with another 40% maintaining cost levels. These responses are
particularly interesting during our survey period because commodity prices were
increasing. Thus cost reductions, and even holding costs level, are likely the result of
successful engineering efforts. Note that at some firms, customers demand a schedule of
price reductions. These price reductions might be accompanied by incremental process
improvements, but if not, they could be met by a reduction in the firm's profits. Our
question allows us to distinguish price reductions from cost reductions.

While these types of innovations produced by engineers at manufacturing firms seem
minor, incremental innovations that reduce cost and create value for customers constitute
a phenomenon of economic importance when aggregated across the thousands of firms
that make up the auto industry. However, because each incremental innovation might
seem unimportant, even to the engineer, measuring and valuing this activity can be
difficult. Small firms rarely measure R&D spending, and their engineers tend to perform
a variety of tasks, including innovation-related tasks. Many of the firms we interviewed
eschewed the very term “innovation” as too sophisticated to describe their on-going
efforts to reduce cost and remain competitive. The experiments and development of new
processes are carried out by the same engineers and technicians that maintain existing
production lines and develop its traditional tooling, which helps explain why many firms
lack careful formal accounting of R&D as a separate activity. We hope our additional
measures can help overcome some of these issues for SMEs in manufacturing.

Susan Helper & Jennifer Kuan

7

April 3, 2015

IV. Engineering Interactivity
In the previous section, we categorized engineering activities in terms of function within
a firm. In this section, we consider a different type of categorization: interactivity, with
customers and with other functions inside the firm. We have described a work
environment for manufacturing engineers of diverse activities, including maintaining
existing processes on a daily basis but also developing new processes, refining and
extending old processes, and solving customer problems to win new business. Amidst
this mix of activities, we also examine how, and how much, engineers interact with
others. First, we look at interaction with customers, using questions in our survey about
certain investments and communications patterns. We then look at how much overlap
there is between engineering tasks and the tasks of other types of workers, including
skilled trades, production workers, and managers.
A. Interaction with customers
The literature has long considered demand for a product to be relevant to innovation;
Schmookler (1966) argued that innovation would be greater for goods that had a large
market. In the context of a supply chain, demand considerations focus attention on buyersupplier relationships, especially in the auto industry, with its oligopsonistic buyers.
Outside of the corporate venture capital literature (e.g., Benson and Ziedonis 2009),
relatively little research has been done on innovation by firms that sell to a few large
customers.
Our interviews suggest wide variation among customers, including a distinct preference
for Japanese customers, who were valued for their fairness and for their willingness to
invest in suppliers. One steel maker credited its Japanese customer for helping it improve
so much that, rather than go out of business, it was able to compete even in a downturn.
The literature on Japanese sourcing practices show Japanese automakers providing
training and management assistance to suppliers (MacDuffie and Helper 1997), as well as
their efficient organization of operations (Womack, Roos and Jones 1990). 3 German
customers were also viewed as fair by our interviewees, but less involved in the
improvement and investment of their suppliers. 4
To see how customer collaboration and communication benefited suppliers, we asked
firms about "useful information that personnel at your plant have received on new
products your firm might introduce and new processes your firm might adopt." Figure 8
shows respondents obtaining both types of information, but slightly more product
3

Some of this may be a result of practices in Japan where regular employees receive extensive on-the-job
training, and employment norms have made it difficult for regular workers to change companies midcareer. This reduced labor mobility affects appropriability among Japanese firms, as company-trained
employees are unlikely to take their skills with them to a competitor, or inventive employees take
inventions to another firm.
4
As with Japanese customers, German customers might be affected by practices in their home country.
There, automakers use small supplier firms, aided by nationally subsidized training systems that produce
highly skilled shop-floor employees who cooperate in R&D activities (Ezell and Atkinson 2011).

Susan Helper & Jennifer Kuan

8

April 3, 2015

information than process information. Indeed only 10-20% of firms were getting no ideas
from their customers.
We also asked about several specific engineering methods that we thought might be
broadly representative of two different customer-service strategies: finite element
analysis and value analysis/ value engineering.
Finite element analysis (FEA) is the assessment of a component's suitability for its
operating environment. Engineers use costly specialized software that incorporates
scientific knowledge to evaluate an auto part's strength and durability in a given situation.
For example, an engineer performing FEA on an engine component would use his
software tools to judge whether the part was capable of withstanding the pressure, heat,
impact, and other known environmental stresses, and whether the part could perform at
the desired level of reliability and durability. The use of FEA tools requires that an
engineer have specific training, as well as general scientific knowledge. However, this
analysis can be performed as an independent task with a minimum of interaction with the
customer.
By contrast, value analysis/ value engineering (VAVE) involves extensive interaction
between customer and supplier on a variety of design and manufacturing decisions. The
purpose of VAVE is for suppliers to improve "value" to customers, which is defined as
performance divided by cost. Engineers therefore make an effort to learn about their
customer's needs broadly, and work with their customer to design a product or process.
The chemical company that produced "cake-mix" products is one example of this type of
customer-oriented approach, but efforts vary depending on the type of supplier firm and
the extent of customer interaction. By contrast, a more conventional, non-VAVE
approach to supplying components would take a customer's design as complete. The
supplier would produce the part without modification or input, and many of our survey
respondents take this more traditional approach.
Comparing the two, FEA involves an investment in equipment and engineers with
specialized knowledge and skills, whereas VAVE requires engineers to spend time
interacting with customers and to think broadly about customer problems and solutions.
Thus, FEA and VAVE represent different strategies for investment and skills. However,
they are not really polar opposites; some firms do both. Table 3 shows the breakdown of
the 474 firms that responded to our questions about the use of FEA and VAVE, and we
see that a majority of firms that provide VAVE services also provide FEA. Despite the
proven effectiveness of both techniques, they remain rare in the U.S. industry; only 1/3 of
respondents practiced VAVE, and only ¼ had implemented FEA.
VAVE is only one measure of customer interaction. While a majority of firms, 60% of
respondents, reported using neither FEA nor VAVE, some of these firms collaborate with
customers outside of a VAVE framework. Table 4 shows responses to more general
questions about customer interactions. We ask whether the supplier conducts regular or
occasional visits with their customers, and more specifically, with their customer's
engineers. The responses to both questions are almost identical; a majority of firms visit

Susan Helper & Jennifer Kuan

9

April 3, 2015

at least occasionally, with 30% visiting regularly. The engineering intensiveness of a
firm's strategy is also reflected in employment data. Figure 7 shows the highly skewed
distribution of engineering employment at our respondent firms. Over 20% of the 647
firms that listed employment numbers had no engineers at all, and nearly one-third had
just one to three engineers on staff. The picture that emerges is of a spectrum of firms
ranging from low engineering-intensity and low customer engagement to high
engineering-intensity and customer collaboration. Firms that perform VAVE had an
average of 7.24 engineers on staff, compared with 4.76 for firms that do not perform
VAVE. Similarly, firms that make regular visits with customer engineers had an average
of 6.21 engineers compared with 4.06 for firms that do not make regular visits.
B. Interaction with other workers
Within a firm, engineers may interact with other workers, especially skilled workers and
unskilled production workers. We measure engineers' interaction with production work
by asking whether non-engineers perform the following six engineering tasks: set up
machines, modify programs on computerized equipment, diagnose equipment problems
inspect work in progress, use quality assurance data to recommend improvements, meet
with customer personnel and use a computer. Our idea is that the more "task overlap"
there is, the more interaction non-engineering workers have with engineers.
Because one feature of Japanese manufacturing organization is close interaction between
engineers and production workers, we compare task overlap at US firms and Japanese
firms. Table 5 shows much greater task overlap between skilled workers and engineers
than unskilled workers and engineers, not surprisingly. There is also a slightly higher rate
of overlap for both types of workers within Japanese-owned firms in the US. Out of six
tasks we asked about, skilled workers and engineers overlapped on 4.8 of them in
Japanese-owned firms, and 4.5 in US-owned firms.
Table 6 shows regression results for how overlapping of duties, or interaction between
engineers and production workers, is associated with value-added per employee. Overlap
with production workers is positive and significant. However, as the second column
shows, this coefficient is no longer significant once we control for size, as represented by
sales. This result is somewhat surprising, because one might think that a larger size would
allow more division of labor (rather than task overlap). Engineering intensity (number of
engineers/total employment) is not significant, nor is the country of ownership (with US
omitted).

VI. Discussion & Conclusion
An economically important industry that has produced significant gains in product
performance, the auto industry increasingly relies on suppliers not only for manufacturing
but also for innovation. Engineers at supplier firms contribute innumerable incremental
gains, that they themselves deem unworthy of the term "innovation". Nevertheless, skills

Susan Helper & Jennifer Kuan

10

April 3, 2015

and customer collaboration generates a steady improvement in price, performance, or
both.
We hope our study contributes to an extensive and varied literature on engineering and
innovation by providing insight and detail about how engineers generate innovation,
especially in a manufacturing context where patenting is uncommon. Our survey provides
a variety of ways to inquire about and measure innovative output, in addition to patenting
or R&D spending. A correlation matrix of these measures shows how uncorrelated these
additional measures are from the standard variables standard in the literature (Table 7).
This is partly because of inadequate measurement, with engineers wearing many hats and
not getting accounted for as R&D investment, but also because patenting is not suitable
for much of the innovative output at these firms.
Finally, our interviews serve to illustrate how diverse engineering activity can be.
Engineers produce new chemical compounds but also "cake-mixes"; they build complex
dies and stamping processes but also cobble together two old machines. The application
of formal training and on-the-job know-how seems to characterize firms that survive
wide swings in demand and move technology forward.

Susan Helper & Jennifer Kuan

11

April 3, 2015

References
Acs, Zoltan J. and David B. Audretsch, "Innovation in Large and Small Firms: An
Empirical Analysis," AER 78, 4 (1988): 678-690.
----- , Innovation and Small Firms (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1990).
Benson, David and , “Corporate Venture Capital and the Returns to Acquiring Portfolio
Companies,” Journal of Financial Economics 98, 3 (2010): 478-499.
C.A.R., Contribution of the Automotive Industry to the Economies of All Fifty States and
the United States (Center for Automotive Research, Ann Arbor, 2010).
Clark, Kim B., Bruce W. Chew, and Takahiro Fujimoto, "Product Development in the
World Auto Industry," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 3 (1987): 729-781.
Cohen, Wesley M., “Empirical Studies of Innovative Activity and Performance,” in
Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, Volume 1 (Handbooks in Economics), edited
by Bronwyn Hall and Nathan Rosenberg. Elsevier, 2010.
----- and Stephen Klepper, “A reprise of size and R&D,” Economic Journal 106 (1996):
925-951.
Ezell, Stephen J. and Robert D. Atkinson, International Benchmarking of Countries’
Policies and Programs Supporting SME Manufacturers (Information Technology and
Innovation Foundation, 2011).
Levin, R. C., A. K. Klevorick, R. R. Nelson, and S. G. Winter, "Appropriating the
Returns from Industrial Research and Development," Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 3 (1987): 783-820.
Knittel, Christopher R, "Automobiles on Steroids: Product Attribute Trade-Offs and
Technological Progress in the Automobile Sector," AER 101 (2012): 3368-3399.
Leiponen, Aija, “Skills and innovation,” International Journal of Industrial
Organization, 23 (2005): 303-323.
MacDuffie, John Paul and Susan Helper, "Creating Lean Suppliers: Diffusing Lean
Production Through the Supply Chain," California Management Review 39, 4 (1997):
118-151.
Pavitt, K., M. Robson, and J. Townsend, "The size distribution of innovating firms in the
UK: 1945-1983," Journal of Industrial Economics 35 (1987): 297-316.
Rosenberg, Nathan, "Technological Change in the Machine Tool Industry, 1840-1910,"
Journal of Economic History. 23, 4 (1963): 414-443.

Susan Helper & Jennifer Kuan

12

April 3, 2015

---------, and Edward Steinmueller, "Engineering Knowledge," SIEPR Discussion Paper
no. 11-022 (2010), Stanford University.
Schmookler, J., Invention and Economic Growth. (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1966).
International Trade Administration, Office of Transportation and Machinery, On the
Road: U.S. Automotive Parts Industry Annual Assessment (United States Department of
Commerce, 2011).
http://www.trade.gov/mas/manufacturing/oaai/build/groups/public/@tg_oaai/documents/
webcontent/tg_oaai_003748.pdf
Womack, James P., Daniel Roos and Daniel T Jones, The Machine that Changed the
World: The Story of Lean Production (New York: Scribner, 1990).

Susan Helper & Jennifer Kuan

13

April 3, 2015

Table 1: Construction of Survey Sample

NAICS

Candidate Firms by NAICS Code

Percent

3363

Motor vehicle parts manufacturing

37.1%

333514

Special die and tool, die set, jig, and fixture manufacturing

14.3%

326199

All other plastics product manufacturing

12.8%

332116

Metal stamping

1.4%

332710

Machine shops

1.1%

326220

Rubber and plastics hose and belting manufacturing

0.9%

336211

Motor vehicle body manufacturing

0.2%

Other industries

32.3%

Total

N
3646
11,363
130
3828

100.0%

Reason for Elimination from Sample
Out of business

19.2%

Not in auto industry

59.9%

Duplicates

0.7%

Total Remaining

20.2%

Table 2: Country of origin, customers and suppliers

US supplier
Japanese supplier
German supplier

US
customer
307
13
14

Japanese
customer
129
41
7

German
customer
27
4
9

Total

% of total

463
58
30

84%
10.5%
5.5%

Table 3: Use of FEA and VAVE

FEA
No FEA

VAVE
17%
15%

No VAVE
8%
59%

Susan Helper & Jennifer Kuan

14

April 3, 2015

Table 4: Visits with customers
Customer
None
Occasional
Regular

47%
22%
31%

Customer's
engineers
41%
28%
31%

Table 5: Number of Tasks Overlapping with Engineers by US and Japan
US
Unskilled/
Semi-skilled

Skilled

Average
(std. dev.)

2.25
(1.80)

Range

0–6

Average
(std. dev.)

4.51
(1.31)

Range

0-6
404

N

Japan
2.74
(1.39)
0–6
4.81
(1.28)
0-6
31

Table 6: Value added per employee and engineering intensity, country and skill overlap
(OLS)
Ln(value-added)
Engineering intensity
Japanese supplier
German supplier
Other supplier
Unskilled overlap
Skilled overlap

(1)
0.61
(1.09)
-0.27
(0.48)
0.59
(0.75)
0.26
(0.31)
0.13**
(0.06)
-0.02
(0.08)

Size (ln sales)
R2
N

Susan Helper & Jennifer Kuan

0.06
94

(2)
1.04
(1.02)
-0.68
(0.46)
-0.41
(0.75)
-0.09
(0.31)
0.06
(0.06)
-0.06
(0.08)
0.23***
(0.06)
0.20
94

15

April 3, 2015

Table 7: Correlaction matrix: innovation variables

R&D
spending
R&D
spending

New
products

Innovated
products

Cost
reduction
(1 year)

Cost
reduction
(4 years)

Patents

1

New products
Innovated
products
Cost
reduction
(1 year)
Cost
reduction
(4 years)

0.09

1

0.33***

0.26***

1

0.11**

-0.01

0.03

0.05

0.00

-0.00

0.64***

Patents

0.03

-0.01

0.00

0.01

1
1

-0.01

1

Figure 1: Survey respondents by number of employees

Susan Helper & Jennifer Kuan

16

April 3, 2015

Figure 2: Age distribution of supply chain firms

Figure 3: "What has been the average annual percent change in your unit costs?"

Susan Helper & Jennifer Kuan

17

April 3, 2015

Figure 4: What percent of your sales come from products which you did not make 4 years
ago?”

Figure 5: In the past year, roughly what percent of your plant's sales were from jobs
where your firm designed the part or assembly?

Susan Helper & Jennifer Kuan

18

April 3, 2015

Figure 6: "What percent of your sales come from products where you innovated in some
way? By 'innovated', we mean that your business unit designed a product with improved
features compared to what the market had seen before, or that you used a novel process to
make the product."

Figure 7: Number of engineers employed by firms (top coded at 100+)

Susan Helper & Jennifer Kuan

19

April 3, 2015

Figure 8: Product and process information from customers

Figure 9: Customers as a source of new information for products and process
(scale: 1 = no new information – 5 = a lot of new information)

Susan Helper & Jennifer Kuan

20

April 3, 2015

Figure 10: Proportion of firms anticipating difficulty finding workers with indicated skills
by job classification

Map 1: Location of Survey Respondents

Susan Helper & Jennifer Kuan

21

April 3, 2015

