                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   THE EFFECTS OF THE EARLY RETIREMENT AGE ON RETIREMENT DECISIONS

                                    Dayanand S. Manoli
                                      Andrea Weber

                                    Working Paper 22561
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w22561


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2016




We are grateful to many conference and seminar participants for insightful comments and
suggestions. Day Manoli acknowledges funding from the Social Security Administration through
the NBER RRC. This project received funding from the Austrian Science Fund (NRN Labor
Economics and the Welfare State). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Dayanand S. Manoli and Andrea Weber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of the Early Retirement Age on Retirement Decisions
Dayanand S. Manoli and Andrea Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 22561
August 2016
JEL No. H55,J21,J26

                                          ABSTRACT

We present quasi-experimental evidence on the effects of increasing the Early Retirement Age
(ERA) on older workers' retirement decisions. The analysis is based on social security reforms in
Austria in 2000 and 2004, and administrative data allows us to distinguish between pension
claims and job exits. Using a Regression Kink Design, we estimate that, within a birth cohort, a
1.0-year increase in the ERA leads to a 0.4-year increase in the average job exiting age and a 0.5-
year increase in the average pension claiming age. When the ERA increases, many older workers
remain in their jobs longer.


Dayanand S. Manoli
Department of Economics
University of Texas at Austin
2225 Speedway Stop C3100
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
dsmanoli@austin.utexas.edu

Andrea Weber
Vienna University of Economics and Business
Economics Department
Welthandelsplatz 1
1020 Vienna
Austria
andrea.weber@wu.ac.at
1         Introduction
Countries around the world are facing increasing pressure for social security reforms due
to demographic transition and generosity of government-provided pension systems. To
restore financial balance and increase labor force participation of older workers, researchers
and policy makers are seeking to understand how social security systems affect individuals’
retirement decisions. A central aspect of social security systems is the Early Retirement
Age (ERA), or Early Entitlement Age, which is the earliest age at which individuals can
claim social security retirement benefits. Generous retirement benefits and low ERAs
can create incentives for early exits from the labor force and low labor force participation
rates at older ages. Thus, many potential social security reforms consider increasing ERAs
(see for example Congressional Budget Office, 2012; OECD, 2015). In this context, it is
important to answer the question: how does increasing the ERA influence retirement and
labor supply decisions?
        In this paper we address this question by studying a series of pension reforms in
Austria in 2000 and 2004. The reforms introduced a step-wise increase in the ERA
over multiple birth cohorts and provide a clean quasi-experimental setting to study the
effects of the ERA on retirement decisions for several reasons. First, similar to other
countries, the ERA is a highly salient factor in individual retirement decisions in Austria
as there are high rates of retirement at the ERA for each birth cohort. Second, detailed
administrative data from Austria allow us to examine a large sample and observe two
margins of retirement: pension claims, which are mechanically related to changes in the
ERA and job exits, which reflect individuals’ labor supply decisions. Third, it is plausible
to consider observed changes in retirement decisions in Austria as being driven only by
the changes in the ERA since other adjustments in the social security benefit system were
highly complicated and hence difficult for individuals to respond to.1
        We show that the main features of the Austrian setting can be captured by a simple
static lifecycle labor supply model with a kink in the budget set due to the implicit tax
on earnings after the ERA. This model predicts bunching of retirements at the ERA and
shifts in bunching as the ERA increases. In the case of exact shifts in bunching, we show
that the magnitude of the effect of the ERA increase on average retirement ages should
    1
   Furthermore, Brown et al. (2016) present evidence on individuals’ cognitive difficulties in valuing
annuities.



                                                  1
be directly related to the pre-reform share of bunching at the ERA.
   The first part of our empirical analysis presents graphical evidence on labor supply
responses to the pension reforms. In line with prior studies that highlight shifts in bunch-
ing in response to social security or retirement policy changes (Behaghel and Blau, 2012;
Brown, 2013), we find precise shifts in bunching at cohort specific ERAs for both pension
claims and job exits in Austria. This finding is entirely consistent with the predictions of
the static labor supply model, and it relates to the recent literature on bunching (Brown,
2013; Kleven, 2016; Seibold, 2016). The parallel response in job exits and pension claims
indicates that the reforms did not lead to increased substitution to other benefit programs
such as unemployment insurance or sick leave. There is also no evidence of increased en-
try into disability pensions prior to the ERA in response to the reforms. The lock-step
shift in job exits with the increase of the ERA suggests that the cost of adjustment in
retirement decisions is low. We show that an important channel of adjustment is that
affected individuals keep their jobs longer.
   We further point out that it is important to disentangle the precise incentives from the
pension reform for different groups of individuals. In particular, we distinguish between
individuals who are directly affected by the ERA increase, and a second group of indi-
viduals who have the potential of reaching an exemption from the reforms by remaining
continuously employed up to the pre-reform ERA at which they can still claim benefits.
We find that individuals with the potential of reaching the exemption respond to the
pension reform by reducing their job exits and disability claims prior to the pre-reform
ERA.
   To quantify the effects of the ERA increase on the average job exit and pension
claiming age, the second part of our empirical analysis applies a Regression Kink (RK)
design (Card et al., 2015b). The research design exploits the kinked schedule by which
the reforms increase the ERA by quarterly birth cohorts and relates these increases in the
ERA to changes in average retirement ages due to the shifts in bunching. We estimate
that a one year increase in the ERA leads to a 0.4 year increase in the average job exiting
age and a 0.5 year increase in the average pension claiming age within a birth cohort.
   This paper contributes to the retirement literature by providing quasi-experimental
evidence on the effects of increasing the ERA on retirement decisions and on the mecha-
nisms behind these labor supply responses. Due to lack of policy variation, prior studies



                                               2
have been forced to rely on out-of-sample predictions and model simulations. Conclusions
on the impacts of increasing the ERA strongly depend on model assumptions. Regression
based models typically rely on exogenous age effects to explain bunching in retirements
at the Normal (or Full) Retirement Age (NRA) and ERA (Gruber and Wise, 2007; Panis
et al., 2002)). Simulations of responses to increases in the ERA based on these models
either assume fixed age effects or shifting age effects, whereby individuals either stick with
pre-reform retirement ages or delay their exits when the ERA increases.
    Dynamic lifecycle models also form different predictions regarding labor supply re-
sponses to increases in the ERA. Models focusing on exogenous age effects, heterogeneous
preferences, borrowing or health insurance constraints to explain retirements at the ERA
and NRA, predict some labor supply response to changes in the ERA (see Burtless, 1986;
Gustman and Steinmeier, 1985, 2005; Mitchell and Phillips, 2000; Rust and Phelan, 1997).
Other dynamics models that emphasize health shocks and savings decisions predict little
to no labor supply responsiveness to changes in the ERA (see French, 2005).2
    Our empirical analysis relates to prior studies of changes in the NRA (Behaghel and
Blau, 2012; Mastrobuoni, 2009). These studies highlight bunching at the NRA in the
United States as well as shifts in bunching and changes in average retirement ages as the
NRA increases, which is in line with our findings. Another strand of empirical studies
exploiting policy variation focuses on employment effects (Giesecke and Kind, 2013) or
substitution between social insurance programs (Duggan et al., 2009; Inderbitzin et al.,
2016; Staubli and Zweimüller, 2013) as opposed to changes in retirement ages and job
durations.3
    This paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we discuss the institutional
background of the Austrian pension system and the pension reforms. Section 3 formalizes
a static lifecycle labor supply model, discusses predictions on bunching and implications
   2
     In simulations of increases in the ERA (or Early Entitlement Age) in the United States (such as
Congressional Budget Office, 2012; French, 2005; Panis et al., 2002), lifetime social security benefit in-
come remains roughly constant. This is because the benefit schedule is such that benefits increase to
compensate for having less time to receive benefits when the ERA increases. This is not the case in the
Austrian context we study. In the Austrian context, when the ERA increases, benefits do not increase
to compensate for having less time to receive benefits. Thus, lifetime social security benefit income de-
creases when the ERA increases in Austria. This point is highlighted in the institutional background and
theoretical model that we discuss below.
   3
     Staubli and Zweimüller (2013) study the same Austrian pension reform as we do. Their analysis is
based on a different population of individuals who are less attached to the labor market and they estimate
the effect of the ERA increase on the probability of being employed, unemployed, or receiving disability
benefits.




                                                    3
for average retirement ages. In Sections 4 and 5, we present the data and the graphical
analysis of changes in job exits and pension claims by birth cohorts. Sections 6 and 7
present the RK estimation strategy and results. The final section concludes.


2         Institutional Background
2.1        The Austrian Pension System Before 2000

Austria has a universal government provided pension system that automatically enrolls
every worker who is employed in the private sector. This system is operated as a tradi-
tional pay-as-you-go system. Social security contributions along with unemployment and
health insurance contributions are withheld from the worker’s salary up to a contribution
cap. Throughout the working life an individual accumulates insurance years either in the
form of contribution years by actively contributing to the system when employed, or in
the form of additional qualifying years that accrue due to unemployment, military service,
parental leave, or sickness leave. At the end of the working life a worker receives pension
benefits from the system.
        Eligibility for pension benefits depends on age at retirement and a minimum number
of insurance years. The normal retirement age (NRA) at which individuals with at least
15 insurance years become eligible for the old age pension is 65 for men and 60 for women.
The system also allows access to pension benefits through an early retirement pathway.
The early retirement age (ERA) is 60 for men and 55 for women. Early retirement
pensions can either be accessed if an individual has 35 or more insurance years or if she
is long-term unemployed with at least 15 insurance years. In addition, an individual with
health problems can access benefits through the disability pension. Access depends on a
severe health impairment that lasts for at least 6 months and a reduced work capacity
of at least 50% in any occupation. Starting with age 57 the eligibility criterion applies
only to the individual’s last occupation, which implies that at this age a wider group of
individuals become eligible for DI.4
        Pension benefits are determined by an individual’s revaluated average gross earnings
over a baseline period of 15 years with earnings qualifying for social security contributions.
    4
    The pension reform in 1996 increased this age threshold from 55 to 57. The first cohort affected by
the reform in the disability pension are individuals born in the last quarter of 1941, who turned 55 after
September 1996. Staubli (2011) studies the effects of the 1996 reform in disability pensions. See ? for a
discussion of changes in DI benefit generosity over multiple reforms.



                                                    4
This assessment basis is multiplied by the pension coefficient, which depends on age at
retirement and the number of insurance years. The maximum pension coefficient is 0.8,
which implies that the maximum pension benefit amounts to 80% of the average gross
earnings over 15 years. Although small penalties applied for claiming benefits prior to
the NRA, the system was not actuarially fair before 2000.5 The 2000 and 2004 pension
reforms introduced more severe penalties for early retirement raising the average penalty
for each year of early retirement to about 8 - 9% bringing the system closer to actuarial
fairness.
      Individuals receiving pension benefits pay contributions to health insurance and the
pension is subject to income tax. The resulting net replacement rate is roughly 75% on
average, which makes the pension the major source of income of retired individuals and
private pensions play a minor role. Labor earnings of individuals receiving early retirement
benefits are taxed at 100%, if they exceed a low threshold (376 Euro per month in 2012).
Employment protection, which tends to be high for older workers, is discontinued at the
NRA and workers can be laid off by their employers at age 65 (60) without cause.

2.2       Pension Reforms in 2000 and 2004

Budgetary problems and projections indicating serious long-term problems with the fiscal
sustainability of the Austrian pension system led the government to implement pension
reforms in 2000 and 2004. The main aim of these reforms was to raise the effective retire-
ment age, increase labor force participation of older workers, and reduce the generosity of
the benefit system. For a detailed overview of the reforms and a discussion of the fiscal
implications see Knell et al. (2006). Here we focus on components of the reforms that are
relevant for labor supply decisions, namely the increase in the ERA and changes in the
pension benefit formula.

Increase in the Early Retirement Age

Throughout the late 1990s, there was public discussion of possible reforms to the pen-
sion system. Several components of the reform package that was implemented in 2000
were already passed into law in late 1996. However, the increases in the ERA from the
pension reform in 2000, and the exact schedule by which it was rolled out, were mostly
unexpected. The pension reform in 2000 was passed in parliament in August 2000, and
  5
      For information see Appendix Section A1.


                                                 5
the implementation of the increases in the ERA started immediately after the law passed.
The first cohort of affected workers were those who became eligible for early retirement
under the old rule in October 2000.
      The reform scheduled an increase in the ERA from age 60 to 61.5 for men and from
55 to 56.5 for women. It was implemented based on quarterly birth cohorts starting with
men born in the fourth quarter of 1940 and with women born in the fourth quarter of
1945. For these individuals, the ERA was increased to 60 and 2 months (men) and 55 and
two months (women). The ERA for each subsequent quarterly birth cohort was raised by
an additional 2 months. In August 2003 an extension of the ERA increase was passed.
This extension continued the cohort-wise increase up to age 62 for men and 57 for women.
For subsequent cohorts the increase in ERA slowed down to 1 month by quarterly cohort.
We refer to this second part of the ERA increase as the 2004 reform. The overall schedule
of the increases in the ERA leads to an elimination of the early retirement option by
2017, when the ERA equals the NRA for both men and women. The green squares in
Figure 1 show the reformed ERA schedule by cohort in Panels A and B for women and
men, respectively. Horizontal red lines mark the initial cohorts affected by the increases
from the 2000 and 2004 reforms.
      There are two exemptions from the increases in the ERAs, which are also shown in
Figure 1. First shown by blue triangles in the figure, the corridor pension was introduced
in 2004 as an element of a newly established retirement corridor around the NRA of
65. This corridor pension allows men to access early retirement at age 62, if they have
accumulated at least 37.5 insurance years. Second, to acknowledge “hard workers” who
have contributed to the social security system throughout their careers, an exemption for
individuals with long contribution years was introduced. It applied to men with at least 45
contribution years and women with at least 40 contribution years. These individuals were
be exempt from the increased, cohort-specific ERAs and could access early retirement at
age 60 (men) or 55 (women) or once they reached the required number of contribution
years, shown by the red squares in Figure 1. We note that this exemption was only relevant
for individuals who had entered the labor market at age 15 and remained continuously
employed (with limited interruptions only for military service or parental leave) since only
these individuals could potentially reach the contribution year thresholds by age 60 or
55.6 Initially in 2000, this exemption was planned for only few birth cohorts, but the
  6
      The majority of each cohort in our sample period left school at age 14 and entered the labor market


                                                    6
exemption was subsequently extended and stayed in place until 2011.
   The access to early retirement for individuals who are long-term unemployed was
closed in 2004. Consequently only individuals with at least 35 insurance years can draw
early retirement pensions, if they did not qualify for disability. Rules for access to DI
remained unchanged until 2014.7

Changes in Benefits and Penalties for Early Retirement

In addition to increasing the ERAs for men and women, a second component of the
2000 pension reform aimed at reducing benefit generosity and increasing penalties for
early retirement. The changes started with a simplification of the formula defining the
pension coefficient, and were implemented in January 2000. The overall reform process
was designed to establish a new pension account system that reshapes the defined benefit
model and increases the assessment basis from 15 years to 40 years. The roll-out of
benefit adjustments toward this goal were implemented over an extended period and in
many small steps, partly to avoid abrupt benefit changes across cohorts and groups. For
example, a set of caps on benefit losses with respect to prior regulations were introduced.
The main benefit adjustments are explained in detail in Appendix Section A1. In the
Appendix we also show that due to benefit adjustments the pension coefficients stayed
roughly constant across reform and non-reform cohorts, which implies that lifetime benefit
income was decreasing with the reform. We further provide evidence that the timing of
pension benefit changes did not coincide with the cohort-wise reform in the ERA.
   Most importantly, the reform process made changes in benefits over time and across
cohorts extremely opaque. Complicated rules, uncertainty over future adjustments, and
some retroactive changes made strategic planning of retirement entries based on expected
benefits virtually impossible, at least over the period which is the focus of our analysis.
By 2014 the benefit system along with rules for future changes has stabilized and the
government has started sending out information on pension contributions and expected
benefits to the insured.
directly or via the apprenticeship system. In both cases they start contributing to the social security
system. Labor force participation below age 20 is high in Austria compared to other countries.
   7
     We have examined aggregate counts of DI pensions and applications by calendar year, and these
accounts appear stable across the years of the 2000 and 2004 pension reforms (results are available on
request). We have not been able to gain access to individual-level data on DI applications. For more
details see Staubli (2011); ?.




                                                  7
Incentives from the pension reforms

As explained above, the reformed ERA schedule based on birth cohorts sets very clear in-
centives for individual retirement decisions. On the other hand, the reforms to the benefit
schedule were highly complicated and uncertain. Non-actuarially-fair benefit adjustments
prior to the pension reform and the risk of benefit cuts imposed on new pension entrants
over the roll-out of the reform result in a high “perceived” implicit tax rate on working
once an individual reaches eligibility for early retirement. Due to the opaqueness of the
benefit schedules, we cannot credibly measure or model the precise financial incentives.
However, we can clearly measure responses to the ERA increases in terms of pension
claims and job exits. Our empirical strategy thus focuses on changes in the two retire-
ment margins over birth cohorts and we interpret them as responses to the changes in the
ERA.
       To understand the changes in incentives on pension claim and job exit decisions, it
is important to distinguish between 2 groups of individuals based on the eligibility for
the exemption of the ERA increase. Once an individual learns about the change in their
ERA, she either (i) has not accumulated sufficient contribution years to have any potential
to be exempt from the cohort-specific increases in the ERA, or (ii) she has accumulated
sufficient contribution years so that there is potential to be exempt from the cohort-
specific increases in the ERA by age 60 (men) or 55 (women) if she remains continuously
employed. We refer to individuals in the first group as individuals with short contribution
years, and the second group as individuals with long contribution years (see section 4 for
detailed definitions in our data).
       The pension reforms differentially impact individuals in the two groups. For individ-
uals with short contribution years, the reforms create incentives to delay job exits until
they reach eligibility for early retirement benefits at the new ERAs. For individuals with
long contribution years, the reforms create incentives to delay job exits until age 60 (men)
or 55 (women) when they have accumulated sufficient contribution years to qualify for the
exemption and can thus claim early retirement benefits.8 The comparison of incentives
for the two groups clarifies that the setup of the Austrian pension reform does not provide
an untreated comparison group, but two groups who experience different treatments.
   8
     As explained in Appendix Section A1 the pension reform 2004 also lifted all penalties on early
retirement benefits of individuals who claim with 45(40) contribution years, which further increases the
financial incentives to remain employed and accumulate long contribution years.



                                                   8
3     A Model of Retirement Decisions
This section presents a static model of retirement decisions in the presence of a binding
Early Retirement Age (ERA), which captures the main features of the Austrian pension
system and reforms. It further provides a simple framework to interpret the patterns we
observe in the data and to motivate the empirical analysis based on a RK design. The
model is common to both the public finance and the retirement literature. In public
finance, the setting is a standard static labor supply model (for examples, see Kleven,
2016; Kleven and Waseem, 2013; Saez, 2010); in the retirement literature, it is a standard
lifetime budget constraint model (see Brown, 2013).
    We start by describing the model of retirement decisions with a fixed ERA and then
consider responses to a reform that increases the ERA. We aim to illustrate the key
intuitions of responses to the ERA with the simplest framework, so we abstract from
uncertainty and time discounting and assume that individuals live for T periods with
complete certainty. We assume that each individual decides on labor supply over the
life-cycle be choosing his or her retirement age R to maximize utility. The individ-
ual’s utility function is defined over life-time consumption C and the retirement age as
U (C, R) = u(C) − φ(θ, R), where φ(θ, R) denotes the disutility from working R years and
the parameter θ reflects heterogeneity in the tastes for work across the population. Hence
individuals with different levels of θ choose different retirement ages.
    Consumption is based on total lifetime income from wages w while working and pension
benefits while retired. The pension system is defined around the ERA denoted by R0 .
We assume pension benefits are a function of age so that for ages prior to the ERA,
benefits are 0, and for ages at the ERA and higher, pension benefits are positive. Benefits
are taxed at 100% if an individual stays employed after the ERA, and for simplicity, we
assume that benefits are set at a constant level b after the ERA. Given our assumptions,
                                                               RT
the individual’s budget constraint is then given by C = wR + R [b ∗ 1(t ≥ R0 )] dt.
    The budget constraint, illustrated in Figure 2 panel A, shows a kink at the ERA .
At ages below the ERA, the slope of the budget constraint equals w as each additional
year of work increases income by w. Individuals who remain employed beyond the ERA
forgo a year of pension benefits, thus the slope in the budget set above the ERA is
reduced to w − b. The implicit tax rate on working can be seen as the tax rate τ that
                                   b
solves w(1 − τ ) = w − b, or τ =   w
                                     .   In the Austrian setting the kink in the budget set


                                              9
results from actuarially unfair benefit adjustments prior to the reform and uncertainty
over benefit adjustments during the reform period.9             10


    A key prediction of this model is that there will be bunching of retirements at R0
as a result of the kink in the budget constraint. Individuals who would have chosen a
retirement age above R0 under a linear budget constraint in absence of the implicit tax
due to the ERA, find it optimal to reduce their retirement age to R0 when they are faced
with the kink.
    Next, we present the model predictions for responses to the changes introduced by
the 2000 and 2004 pension reforms. As discussed above, the reforms provided different
incentives for individuals with short contribution and long contribution years. Thus we
consider both types of incentives within our model framework.

Increase in the ERA: Shifting kinks

For individuals with short contribution years, the Austrian pension reforms increased the
ERA across birth cohorts. To capture this in the model, we consider a policy change that
increases the ERA from R0 to R1 .11 The increase in the ERA lowers lifetime income, as
the pension benefit can only be consumed for the shorter period from R1 to T . Figure 2,
panel B illustrates the change in the budget constraint, which moves from the solid line
to the dashed line. The plot highlights that the increase in the ERA shifts the kink point
from R0 to R1 , and above R1 the budget set remains unchanged.
    Relative to the pre-reform case with the ERA at R0 , the model predicts that bunching
shifts from the original ERA, R0 , to the new ERA, R1 . Specifically, individuals who
brought their retirements forward in response to the pre-reform kink will now shift their
retirements to the new kink at R1 . In addition, the reduction in lifetime income may
induce some individuals who chose to retire prior to R0 before the reform, to work longer
and delay their retirements relative to pre-reform the scenario. In absence of adjustment
    9
      Although it is not possible to measure the magnitude of the kink, there are several arguments that
the kink that is perceived by decision makers is large. First, there is uncertainty over benefit cuts for
new pension claimants. Second, labor earnings are taxed at nearly 100% for individuals claiming early
retirement benefits. Third, survey and experimental evidence shows that individuals have problems
understanding annuities and making rational decisions when they are faced with complicated benefit
schedules (Brown et al., 2016).
   10
      While this simplification is appropriate for the Austrian context that we study, we note that other
social security benefit systems, such as the system in the United States, may be such that benefits increase
with retirement age so that lifetime benefit income does not decrease when individuals claim benefits at
later ages.
   11
      The simple model considers only one retirement margin, and we thus abstract from considering the
effects of increases in the ERA on substitution to other retirement margins or programs such as UI.


                                                    10
costs or frictions, the model thus predicts a shift in bunching from R0 to R1 .
   To motivate the RK analysis below and to provide some intuition for the interpretation
of the estimation results, we consider the model’s predictions for the impacts of the
increases in the ERA on average retirement ages. For illustrative purposes, we assume
that the share of the population that bunches at the ERA does not change as the ERA
increases, which should hold for small adjustments in the ERA. With this assumption
in mind, we use s to denote the share of a cohort that bunches at the ERA. We further
assume that the share of individuals retiring after the ERA is negligible. For a fixed ERA
prior to the reform, the average retirement age within a given cohort can be approximated
by R̄ = R̄l ∗ (1 − s) + R0 ∗ (s) where R̄l denotes the average retirement ages of individuals
retiring prior to the ERA. In the absence of wealth effects, an increase in the ERA should
have no effect on R̄l . Thus, when the ERA increases from R0 to R1 , the change in the
average retirement age can be approximated as

      ∆R = [R̄l ∗ (1 − s) + R1 ∗ (s)] − [R̄l ∗ (1 − s) + R0 ∗ (s)] = [R1 − R0 ] ∗ s.

The approximation highlights that the effect of an increase in the ERA on the average
retirement is directly proportional to the share of individuals bunching at the ERA. In the
case of Austria, where we observe about half of each pre-reform cohort bunching at the
ERA, i.e. s = 0.5, we can thus expect that the average retirement age rises roughly half
as fast as the ERA over the reform period. Depending on the share of bunchers in other
settings, the effect on the average retirement ages should be higher or lower. Structural
models of retirement decisions could be calibrated to match this approximation and the
reduced form effects we describe below.

Individuals with Long Contribution Years: Notches

Now we turn to individuals with long contribution years who are potentially eligible
for the exemption from the ERA increase. As illustrated in Figure 2, panel C these
individuals face a change in their budget set to the left of R0 . If they retire before
they have accumulated sufficient contribution years to qualify for the exemption, their
budget set shifts downward to the dashed line due to the decrease in lifetime income. If
they accumulate sufficient contribution years and retire at R0 their budget set remains
unchanged at the solid line. The resulting upward notch in the budget set of post-
reform birth cohorts, creates incentives to delay retirement until R0 to qualify for the

                                              11
exemption. As illustrated in the figure, the model thus predicts an increase in bunching
at R0 among individuals with long contribution years in the post-reform cohorts and a
reduction in retirements before R0 . Moreover, we note that the size of the notch in the
budget line increases, if the ERA increases to higher ages. Thus, we expect that bunching
of individuals with long contribution years at R0 increases as R1 increases.


4        Data and Sample Definition
Our empirical analysis is based on administrative data from the Austrian Social Security
Database (ASSD, see Zweimüller et al. (2009)). The records are collected with the main
aim of verifying individual pension claims and computing individuals’ pension benefits.
For research they provide unique longitudinal information for the universe of private
sector workers throughout their working lives. In particular, we observe employment and
earnings careers at a daily level along with information on other insurance states that are
relevant for social security such as military service, unemployment, maternity leave and
sick leave. At retirement information on spells with receipt of benefits in disability, early
retirement, and old age pensions is recorded.
       For the analysis of the 2000 and 2004 pension reforms we focus on men born between
1930 and 1948 and women born between 1935 and 1952, and we restrict our sample to
workers who are still employed at age 53. We choose age 53, because we want to fix the
age at which we start following workers to observe their retirement decisions. As we will
see in the next section, age is an important determinant of job exits and pension claims.
Therefore it is important to hold age constant when comparing retirement decisions across
birth cohorts. Note that with this definition some individuals in our sample are already
older than 53 when the first ERA reform is announced in August 2000. We will keep this
in mind when interpreting our results.
       Using data on individual labor market careers, we can compute the accumulated in-
surance and contribution years at age 53 along with other characteristics of the earnings
and employment careers.12 Starting at age 53, we follow the individuals until the day
when they (i) exit the labor market, (ii) start claiming pension benefits, or (iii) reach
  12
    Some data limitations are due to changes in the recording in the ASSD. Insurance careers of men
in the older birth cohorts are recorded from retrospective records in the years before 1972 and thus less
precise than information from later years. For women born in 1938 and earlier we do not observe full
information on maternity leave spells as child care times were not taken into account in the computation
of pension benefits before 1993.


                                                   12
age 70. The observation period in the data ends in 2012, and thus we have virtually no
censored observations.
       To identify individuals who are potentially eligible for the exemption from the ERA
increase, we distinguish between two groups based on their contribution years at age
53. The first group is individuals with long contribution years. These individuals are
defined based on having accumulated 38 or more contribution years at age 53.13 (Having
accumulated 38 or more contribution years at age 53 essentially requires individuals to
have been continuously employed from age 15, which is the end of compulsory schooling,
through age 53.) If these individuals remain employed until age 60 (55) they are exempt
from the ERA increase with the 2000 pension reform. The second group is individuals
with short contribution years. These individuals are defined based on having accumulated
less than 38 contribution years at age 53. Thus, these individuals cannot be eligible for
the exemption at age 60 or 55.
       Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for the female and male samples. We distinguish
between individuals with short contribution years and the full sample. In total we have
357,147 observations for women and 386,830 for men. Individuals with short contribution
years account for 80% of the full sample of women, but only for 60% of men. As expected,
individuals with short contribution years have less stable employment careers and lower
earnings than the average individual in the full sample. The pathways to retirement also
differ by gender. Only 10% of women retire through disability, but the share is almost
40% among men.14


5        Job Exits and Pension Claims After Age 53
This section presents graphical evidence on employment and claiming responses to the
increases in the ERAs, which can be interpreted in the light of the model described in
Section 3. We start by plotting survival curves from age 53 until job exits and pension
claims for selected birth cohorts with increasing ERAs in Figures 3 and 4 for women and
men, respectively. In these graphs, the red lines indicate survival rates until job exits and
the blue dashed lines show survival rates until pension claims.15 Vertical lines indicate
  13
     Contribution time is time spent in employment, voluntary insurance, education, up to 2.5 years of
military service, and up to 5 years of maternity leave.
  14
     The share of early retirement is under-reported, especially among men, as the ASSD records do not
distinguish between different types of pension benefits before the year 1993.
  15
     Pension claims include old age pension, early retirement and disability pensions.


                                                 13
age 55 (women) or 60 (men) and the cohort specific ERA.
   The first two panels in Figure 3 show cohorts of men born in 1938 and 1940, who are
not yet affected by the ERA increase. For both cohorts, the patterns are very similar.
Labor force participation steadily declines from age 53 to age 60 and a gap opens up
between job exits and pension claims during these ages as some individuals exit their
jobs prior to claiming pensions at age 60. Before age 60, about 42% of men are claiming
disability benefits and roughly 62% of men have exited their jobs. There is a noticeable
drop in the job exit and pension claim survival functions at the ERA of 60, and very low
shares of individuals remain in employment. By the NRA of 65, virtually all individuals
have left the labor market. The drop in survival rates at age 60 is consistent with the
model prediction of bunching at the ERA explained in Section 3.
   Turning to cohorts affected by the 2000 and 2004 pension reforms, there are noticeable
shifts in the survival curves. We see pronounced drops in survival rates on both margins
that move along with the cohort specific ERAs. In addition, there are still drops in the
survival rates at age 60, but the drops are smaller in magnitude than in the pre-reform
cohorts since only men with long contribution years become eligible for early retirement
benefits. Comparing across cohorts, the share of men who exit their jobs prior to age 60
and who claim disability pensions declines substantially to almost half of the pre-reform
share. Overall, there is no evidence of widening gaps between job exits and pension claims
across cohorts. This indicates that substitution with other social insurance programs such
as UI or sick leave is not a major response to the increases in the ERAs for individuals
who are still employed at age 53. If the would still exit their jobs at younger ages and
move to other programs before they become eligible to claim benefits at the post-reform
ERAs, we would see a widening of the gaps, which does not appear to be the case.
   Figure 4 shows the corresponding graphs for women. Among the pre-reform cohorts
born in 1943 and 1945, about 25% leave their jobs before age 55, and at age 55 another
25% exit. Pension claims are initially close to zero and there is a large drop of about 40%
at the ERA of 55. After age 55 participation gradually decreases, and the gap between
the red and blue lines is small, indicating that individuals who exit their jobs at these
ages claim benefits without long delays. The remaining women exit the labor market and
claim pensions at the NRA of 60.
   Similar to the graphical evidence for men, we see pronounced shifts in the survival



                                            14
curves of women born in cohorts affected by the 2000 and 2004 pension reforms. The
major drops in job exits and pension claims move to the higher cohort-specific ERAs
indicated by the vertical lines. There are smaller drops at age 55 which are due to
individuals with long contribution years. The job exit rate before age 55 strongly declines
and is less than 10% for the cohort born in 1953. The share of women remaining in the
labor force past the ERA until age 60 is also increased over the cohorts. While 20% of
the 1943 cohort has not claimed a pension by age 60, this share is almost twice as high
in the 1951 cohort.
   Next, we investigate differences in survival curves by the potential eligibility for the
exemption from the ERA increase, comparing individuals with long insurance years and
individuals with short contribution years. Figure 5 shows cohort specific survival graphs
for men and women with long contribution years born in pre-reform cohorts 1940 and 1945
and post-reform cohorts 1948 and 1951, respectively. Among men, shown in panels A and
B, we see sharp declines in survival rates at age 60 in both cohorts. The survival rates do
not drop to zero after age 60 in the post-reform cohort, as some of the individuals with
long contribution years fail to qualify for the exemption at age 60 due to interruptions of
their employment careers between age 53 and 60. Nonetheless, there is a sharp increase
in survival rates up to age 60 for both job exits and pension claims between the cohorts.
While 63% of men in the 1940 cohort with long contribution years have exited their jobs
prior to age 60 and 43% are claiming disability pensions, the corresponding numbers are
less than half for the 1948 cohort (28% exits and 20% claims). Panels C and D shows
similar patterns for women with long contribution years. Across cohorts, we see drops
in survival rates for job exits and pension claims at age 55. However, the gap between
the red and blue lines that is visible in the pre-reform cohort prior to age 55 essentially
vanishes in the post-reform cohort. This evidence indicates that individuals with long
contribution years are delaying job exits and pension claims until age 60 or 55 in order
to qualify for the exemption from the ERA increases.
   Figure 5 confirms the model predictions from Section 3 for individuals with long con-
tribution years. The reduction in retirements prior to age 60 across cohorts of males with
long contribution years can be explained by two factors. First the notch in the budget
line increases as life-time income drops with the ERA increases. Second, the announce-
ment date of the reform creates adjustment problems for individuals in post-reform birth



                                            15
cohorts who have already exited their jobs between age 53, when we measure contribution
years, and August 2000, when the reform is announced. For younger cohorts the time
between age 53 and August 2000 decreases and hence they are less and less affected by
the adjustment problem.
   To see whether responses in Figures 3 and 4 prior to the ERA are driven exclusively by
individuals potentially exempt from the reform, we separately investigate survival patterns
in the group of individuals with short contribution years for whom the ERA increases are
binding. We present graphical evidence on these individuals in a slightly different format.
In particular, the graphs in Figure 6 show survival curves for different cohorts aligned
at the cohort specific ERAs, denoted by the value zero on the horizontal axis. Panels A
and B show survival rates until pension claims and until job exits, respectively, for men.
Panels C and D show the corresponding figures for women. For men, we see that survival
patterns around the ERA are almost identical across cohorts with big drops in pension
claims and job exits at the ERA. For women, we see parallel shifts in survival curves at
the cohort specific ERAs.
   The patterns in Figure 6 panel A, for males with short contribution years also confirms
the model predictions from Section 3. The figure shows almost identical drops in the
survival curves at the ERA across cohorts, which correspond to precise shifts in bunching
and suggest that frictions or adjustment costs play a minor role for older workers to remain
in the labor force (Kleven, 2016). This is in stark contrast with empirical evidence of the
problems, which older workers face when they try to re-enter the labor market after job
displacement.
   In summary, the descriptive evidence indicates three main responses to the 2000 and
2004 pension reforms. First, individuals who are directly affected by the ERA (i.e. those
with short contribution years) shift pension claims and job exits to the increased ERAs.
Second, individuals who are potentially exempt from the reform (i.e. those with long
contribution years) delay job exits and pension claims until age 60 or 55 to take advantage
of the exemption. Third, there is no is no indication of increased substitution to other
benefit programs. Job exits and pension claims move more or less in parallel leaving
little room for substitution with sickness leave or unemployment insurance programs. In
addition, we do not find evidence of increased inflows into disability pensions prior to the
ERA. For individual with short contribution years, men in particular, entry rates into



                                            16
disability pension claims, shown in Figure 6, are parallel across cohorts in the years prior
to the ERA, while entries into disability pensions before age 60 decline for men among
men with long contribution years. For a detailed graph of male disability entries prior to
the ERA see Appendix Figure A.6.


6     Empirical Strategy
The graphical evidence in section 5 shows clear responses to the reformed ERA schedule in
terms of exit and claiming ages. To quantify the overall response to the pension reform, we
exploit the kinked reform schedule that links quarterly birth cohorts and early retirement
ages in Figure 1. In particular, the green lines that show the changes in ERAs without
exemptions, feature two kinks where the slope between birth cohort and ERA changes:
the first at the onset of the 2000 pension reform and the second at the 2004 reform. We
will exploit both kinks to measure the average response of the exit and claiming ages to
the ERA.
    Our strategy is to use corresponding kinks in the relationship between birth cohorts
and individual exit and claiming ages and relate slope changes in the outcome relationship
to slope changes in the policy rule defined by the pension reforms using a regression kink
(RK) design. Since the ERA is a function of birth date, it is likely to be correlated with
other characteristics that determine labor supply and retirement decisions. The regres-
sion kink design circumvents this endogeneity problem by using the quasi-experimental
variation induced by the pension reforms.16
    To define the estimator formally, we let Y be the outcome of interest, i.e. claiming
age or age at exit from the labor force, ERA the early retirement age as determined by
the policy rule, and V the birth date. Card et al. (2015b) show that under smoothness
conditions, the RK estimand


                        dE[Y |V =v]                   dE[Y |V =v]
                lim         dv
                                             − lim−       dv
               v0 →0+                 v=v0    v0 →0                 v=v0
      β=                                                                                             (1)
                    dE[ERA|V =v]                      dE[ERA|V =v]
             lim+        dv
                                             − lim−        dv
            v0 →0                     v=v0    v0 →0                   v=v0

    identifies a weighted average of the marginal effects of the ERA on Y . The iden-
tification assumptions in Card et al. (2015b) give rise to the testable implication that
   16
      The empirical methods used in this paper relate to a literature that applies RKD to estimate causal
effects. See also Card et al. (2015a); Gelber et al. (2016); Landais (2015); Manoli and Turner (2014);
Marx and Turner (2015).

                                                        17
the distribution of V and the conditional expectation function of any pre-determined
characteristics are continuously differentiable at V = 0.
       In a sharp RK design, the ERA is directly linked to the birth date and thus a deter-
ministic function of V . In this case the denominator of equation (1) is a known constant.
In our application we choose a fuzzy RK design and estimate the slope change of the first
stage function E [ERA|V = v] to account for variation in the eligibility for early retire-
ment pensions at the individual level, which depends on age and the number of insurance
and years.17
       For estimation we follow Card et al. (2015b) and adopt local polynomial estimators
for the slope changes in the numerator and denominator of equation (1). We present local
linear estimates using alternative bandwidths, as well as the bias-corrected estimates per
Calonico et al. (2014). However, we cannot make the bandwidth arbitrarily small, as the
policy formula is not continuous but defined at the quarterly level.
       To define the individual ERA according to the reform schedules in the 2000 and 2004
reforms we apply the following procedure. We assume that eligibility for different types
of ERA’s – early retirement with long insurance years or the corridor pension – are
determined by an individual’s insurance career at age 53 and that every individual stays
employed from age 53 until the exit from their last job. We thus set the ERA equal to
the gender and cohort specific ERA and we define the ERA as 62, the corridor pension
age, for men with more than 29.5 insurance years at age 53. To individuals with long
contribution year we assign the cohort specific ERA, indicating the age at which they can
claim benefits if they fail to accumulate 45(40) contribution years.

Tests for validity of the RK design

Before we discuss estimation results, we check the validity of the design via the testable
implications on identifying assumptions. First, the identifying assumptions in Card et al.
(2015b) imply a continuously differentiable density of the running variable V following
the argument that endogenous sorting would invalidate this assumption. In our case, the
ERA is defined by birth cohort, which is exogenous and not subject to manipulation for
individuals close to retirement. As the pension reforms are implemented with a long-run
  17
     Specifically, we code the ERA variable as the cohort-specific ERA illustrated in Figure 1 (ERA
series), but for men with with high contribution years and in post-1943 birth cohorts, we code the ERA
as age 62 because of the availability of corridor pensions for these individuals. See Section 7.




                                                 18
perspective it is also not plausible that policy makers would have chosen particular cohorts
to start the reform. Nonetheless, we plot the frequency of observations by birth cohorts in
Appendix Figure A.1 for four samples, women and men with short contribution years, and
the full samples of women and men. The patterns in these figures do not appear smooth
around the vertical lines marking the 2000 and 2004 pension reforms, but the fluctuations
in our sample directly mirror patterns by birth cohorts in the overall population, as
shown in Appendix Figure A.2. These patterns in the birth rates are driven by strong
fluctuations around World War II and are independent of the pension reforms we study.
    As second check we assess the smoothness of pre-determined covariates around the
cutoff birth dates. Appendix Table A1 shows estimation results of local linear regressions
for a set of observable characteristics. Most of the coefficient estimates are insignificant
indicating no slope changes in the relationship between individual characteristics and birth
dates, which is supports our assumptions. To combine multiple covariates we estimate
composite covariate indices by predicting the individual claiming and exit ages based on
rich information on employment and earnings histories up to age 53. For some samples –
men around the 2000 kink and women around the 2004 kink – the coefficient estimates in
Table A1 indicate significant kinks in the relationship between birth dates and predicted
claiming or exiting ages. However, the coefficients are very small, an order of magnitude
smaller than the actual claiming and exiting ages which are presented below. Therefore we
conclude that kinks in covariates are not driving the main results. Appendix Figures A.3
and A.4 provide a graphical confirmation of the smoothness of predicted exit and claiming
ages around the reform cutoffs.


7     RK Analysis
7.1    Graphical Evidence

We first present graphical results of the RK analysis showing the first stage and reduced
forms for exiting and claiming ages, respectively, and turn to the regression analysis in
the next section. Each figures plots average outcomes by quarterly birth cohorts over
the full range of birth cohorts, showing the kinks due to the pension reforms. The green
lines show linear fits for each of policy regime, the pre-reform, the 2000, and 2004 pension
reform, respectively.
    The first stage plots in Figure 7 illustrate changes in the average ERAs by quarterly


                                            19
birth cohorts for women and men. For women, shown in panel A the average ERA changes
directly follow the legislated ERA schedule. For men, we also take into account eligibility
for the corridor pension at age 62, which is first available for men born in the first quarter
of 1944. The share of men eligible for the corridor pension is larger in the full sample
than in the sample with short contribution years, which explains the explains the bigger
reduction in the slope after the 2004 kink.
       Figures 8 and 9 show reduced form results for average exit ages and pension claiming
ages by quarterly birth cohort. Each figure presents results for women and men with short
contribution years, who are directly affected by the increase in the ERA, in the panels
on the left and results for the full sample of women and men, in the right hand side
panels. Figure 8, plotting average job exiting ages, shows kinked patterns in the outcome
variable that closely follow the kinks in legislated ERA schedules. While among pre-reform
cohorts the average job exiting ages are almost flat, we see a pronounced linear increase
after the 2000 reform kink and a further decrease in the slope at the 2004 reform kink.
The increases in average job exit ages are slightly smaller in the full samples than among
individuals with short contribution years, but the difference is not large. Figure 9 shows
very similar patterns for claiming ages by birth cohort. Interestingly the linear increase
in average claiming and exiting ages persists for all cohorts beyond the kink point. This
indicates immediate adjustments in retirement decisions with the announcement of the
reform, that do not change for cohorts for whom the retirement date is further away.18

7.2       Estimation Results

We present the main RK results for estimates with a symmetric bandwidth of 2.75 years
around each kink point in Table 2 and Table 3, presenting reduced form and fuzzy es-
timates respectively. Estimates based on the full range of birth cohorts are shown in
Appendix Tables A2 and A3, and Table A4 presents further robustness checks based on
alternative estimators and bandwidths.
       Regression results in Table 2 quantify the changes in the slopes of the average ERAs,
exiting ages and claiming ages across birth cohorts for the four samples illustrated in the
figures in the previous section. Panel A presents estimates around the kink generated
  18
    Appendix Figure A.5 shows average job exit and pension claiming ages by birth cohort for individuals
with long contribution years for whom the kinked ERA schedule does not apply. This figure confirms
that the kinked pattern in the outcome variables by birth cohorts is similar among individuals with long
contribution years.


                                                  20
by the 2000 pension reform and panel B shows corresponding estimates around the 2004
reform kink. In panel A, estimates for individuals with short contribution years document
that the ERA increases according to the reform schedule by two thirds of a year per annual
birth cohort, while the average exit age increases by 0.26 years for women and 0.24 years
for men per annual birth cohort. The average increase in the pension claiming age is
slightly larger with 0.36 years or about 4 months per annual birth cohort for both men
and women. If we compare the increases in average job exiting and pension claiming
ages in the full sample, which includes individuals with long contribution years who are
potentially exempt from the ERA increase, we see that they are roughly comparable
in magnitude to the increases among individuals with short contribution years. This
documents that the incentives for individuals with long contribution years, as discussed
in section 3, are substantial and contribute to increases in the pension claiming and job
exiting ages in the overall population.
   The reduced form results in panel B of Table 2 highlight the effects from reducing the
slope of the ERA per quarterly birth cohort by half, as can be seen from the coefficient
for women with short contribution years. For men the slope decreases effectively by more
than 50%, because a large share are eligible for the corridor pension at age 62. In line
with the first stage relationship, the increase in job exiting and pension claiming ages is
also slowed down. The absolute size of the coefficient estimates for women with short
contribution years is a bit larger than 50% of the kink 2000 estimates, which indicates
larger responses to the 2004 reform than to the 2000 reform. For the full samples, we also
see declines in the slopes of job exit ages and pension claiming ages. However, all of the
coefficients are smaller in absolute value than the 2000 reform coefficients, which indicates
that on average, job exit ages and pension claiming ages keep rising as the cohort-specific
ERA continues to rise.
   We now turn to the fuzzy RK estimates in Table 3 to present the estimated effects
of changes in the ERAs on average exiting and claiming ages for individuals with short
contribution years. The fuzzy RK estimates are based on the ratio of reduced form and
first stage estimates and thus reflect the impact of increasing the ERA by 1 year on
average exiting and claiming ages. Focusing on the results from the 2000 pension reform
and individuals with short contribution years, we find that a 1-year increase in the ERA
increases exiting ages by roughly 0.4 years and claiming ages by roughly 0.5 years. These



                                             21
effects are very similar for men and women.19 The results for the 2004 pension reform
are less precisely estimates with standard errors that are about twice as large. According
to these estimates the effects at the 2004 kink are larger for women and smaller for men
than around the 2000 kink. But the magnitude of the 2004 estimates is still in the same
ball-park.
       Turning to the results for the full sample, we find effects from a one year increase in
the ERA that are very similar to the effects among individuals who are directly affected
by the ERA increase. This implies that incentives for individuals with long contribution
years to delay their job exits and pension claims are substantial and lead to similar effects
as those for individuals with short contribution years. Moreover, these effects persist also
among younger cohorts, who have more time to adjust to the announcement of the reform.

7.3       Adjustment Mechanisms

The results in the previous section show strong effects from raising the ERA on job exits
and pension claims. These effects appear to be constant across affected cohorts. Relative
to previous evidence from the bunching literature (Kleven, 2016), our findings indicate
that adjustment costs or frictions play a minor role. How do individuals adjust to the
increase in the ERA? One possible explanation is that they stay in their pre-retirement
jobs longer. Another explanation would be that they switch to temporary jobs in which
they can work until older ages.
       To shed some light on the adjustment mechanisms, we examine durations of jobs held
at age 53. Figure 10 presents graphical evidence indicating that many individuals are able
to respond to the increased ERAs by remaining in their jobs longer rather than finding
new jobs. These graphs plot the average duration of jobs held at age 53 by quarterly
birth cohort. The plot for women with short insurance years demonstrates that, starting
exactly for the cohorts first affected by the 2000 pension reform, average job durations
begin to increase and the increases continue across cohorts with rising ERAs. The plot
for the full sample of women shows a similar pattern. The plots for men show kinks
in average job durations for the cohorts affected by the 2000 and 2004 pension reforms.
Overall the graphs closely follow the same patterns as the earlier graphical evidence on
average exiting and claiming ages.
  19
    Interestingly, we do not find any evidence for heterogeneous effects along other characteristics such
as health and income, either. See Appendix Table A6.



                                                   22
   Appendix Table A5 reports the corresponding RK estimates. The results imply that,
around the 2000 kink, the increase in job durations per quarterly birth cohort can account
for about two thirds of the increase in the average job exit age and for more than half of
the increase in the average pension claiming age for both men and women and for both
individuals with short contribution years and the full sample.
   In thinking about the mechanisms, we also examine the relative importance of income
versus substitution effects in the overall observed labor supply responses. The bunching
literature typically estimates compensated elasticities, arguing that income effects are
negligible in applications with small kinks, i.e. due to nonlinearities in tax schedules (Saez,
2010). In the current Austrian setting, the RK estimates are driven by marginal increases
in the ERA across birth cohorts (increases of 1 or 2 months per quarterly birth cohorts).
Since these changes in the ERA across successive quarterly birth cohorts are relatively
small, it is plausible that the income effects are negligible and hence substitution effects
may drive the estimated increases in the average retirement ages. Nonetheless, while
the observed responses are consistent with a model with no income effects, we note that
responses to relatively large increases in the ERA (for example a 2 year increase across
successive birth cohorts or eliminating the kink at the ERA completely) could still be
driven by a combination of income and substitution effects. As Kleven (2016) points out,
large kinks can produce responses from individuals whose counterfactual choices under a
linear budget constraint are located relatively far away from the kink, and in this case,
bunching will be driven by a combination of income and substitution effects. The Austrian
pension schedule creates large kinks in individuals’ budget constraints at the ERA, and we
observe significant bunching at the ERA. Overall, while we do not have sufficient evidence
to rule out income effects for relatively large changes to the ERA, we conclude based on
the results that the local increases in the ERA reduced the tax force to retire and hence
reduced unused labor capacity at older ages (Gruber and Wise, 2007), and these responses
to marginal increases in the ERA might primarily reflect substitution effects.
   Additionally, relative to cohorts immediately affected by the ERA increases, we note
the persistence in the labor supply responses to the ERA increases for more recent co-
horts who had more time to adjust their savings decisions. This persistence suggests two
insights. First, the inability to adjust savings does not appear to have been a main driver
for the labor supply responses of cohorts immediately affected by the ERA increases.



                                              23
Second, many individuals may have preferred to adjust their job durations rather than
adjust their savings decisions.


8     Conclusion
The objective of social security reforms implemented in many countries has been to in-
crease labor force participation of older workers and delay retirement entries (OECD,
2015). An important policy towards achieving this goal is restricting access to early
retirement either by increasing the early retirement age or by increasing the required in-
surance period. In this paper we evaluate Austrian pension reforms that implemented
both measures for separate groups of individuals. The pension reforms in 2000 and 2004
step-wise increased the ERA over several cohorts and introduced an ”exemption” for indi-
viduals who reached a high threshold of contribution years and could thus claim benefits
at an unchanged ERA.
    We provide quasi-experimental evidence showing that the reforms increased pension
claiming ages and job exit ages in both groups. For a given birth cohort, a one year
increase in the ERA leads to a 0.4 year increase in the average job exiting age and a 0.5
year increase in the average pension claiming age. Our estimates are similar in magnitude
to the effects from raising the NRA from 65 to 66 in the US reported by (Mastrobuoni,
2009). An important adjustment mechanism leading to increased employment is that
individuals kept their pre-retirement jobs longer.
    We emphasize that in the Austrian setting we observe responses a policy parameter
that is well understood. While policy changes in the ERA and eligibility conditions
were highly salient, financial incentives from benefits were unclear because of complexity
and unannounced adjustments. Our results highlight that the ERA potentially is an
important reference point for retirement decisions, especially in an environment with lack
of information on financial incentives.
    The results in this paper can inform models of retirement decisions with respect to
importance of taking into account interactions between different incentives of the social
security system as well as the degree of information about policy parameters.




                                            24
References
Behaghel, L., Blau, D., 2012. Framing social security reform: Behavioral responses to
  changes in the full retirement age. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4 (4),
  41 – 67.

Brown, J. R., Kapteyn, A., Luttmer, E. F., Mitchell, O. S., 2016. Cognitive constraints
  on valuing annuities. Journal of the European Economic Socienty, forthcoming.

Brown, K. M., 2013. The link between pensions and retirement timing: Lessons from
  california teachers. Journal of Public Economics 98, 1–14.

Burtless, G., 1986. Social security, unanticipated benefit increases, and the timing of
  retirement. The Review of Economic Studies 53 (5), 781–805.

Calonico, S., Cattaneo, M. D., Titiunik, R., 2014. Robust nonparametric confidence in-
  tervals for regression-discontinuity designs. Econometrica 82 (6), 2295 – 2326.

Card, D., Johnston, A., Mas, A., Leung, P., Pei, Z., 2015a. The effect of unemployment
  benefits on the duration of unemployment insurance receipt: New evidence from a
  regression kink design in missouri, 2003 – 2013. American Economic Review 105 (5),
  126–30.

Card, D., Lee, D. S., Pei, Z., Weber, A., 2015b. Inference on causal effects in a generalized
  regression kink design. Econometrica 83 (6), 2453 – 2483.

Congressional Budget Office, 2012. Raising the ages of eligibility for medicare and social
  security. Issue Brief.
  URL        https://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/112th-congress-2011-2012/
  reports/01-10-2012-Medicare_SS_EligibilityAgesBrief.pdf

Duggan, M., Singleton, P., Song, J., 2009. Aching to retire? The rise in the full retirement
  age and its impact on the social security disability rolls. Journal of Public Economics
  91 (7-8), 1327–1250.

French, E., 2005. The effects of health, wealth, and wages on labor supply and retirement
  behavior. Review of Economic Studies 72, 395–427.



                                             25
Gelber, A., Moore, T., Strand, A., 2016. The effect of disability insurance payments on
  beneficiaries earnings. Working Paper 21851, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Giesecke, M., Kind, M., 2013. Bridge unemployment in Germany: Response in labour
  supply to an increased early retirement age. Ruhr Economic Papers 410.

Gruber, J., Wise, D. A., 2007. Social security programs and retirement around the world.
  University of Chicago Press.

Gustman, T., Steinmeier, L. T., 1985. The 1983 social security reforms and labor supply
  adjustments of older individuals in the long run. Journal of Labor Economics 3 (2),
  237–253.

Gustman, T., Steinmeier, L. T., 2005. The social security early entitlement age in a
  structural model of retirement and wealth. Journal of Public Economics 89, 441–463.

Inderbitzin, L., Staubli, S., Zweimüller, J., 2016. Extended unemployment benefits and
  early retirement: Program complementarity and program substitution. American Eco-
  nomic Journal: Economic Policy 8, 253–88.

Kleven, H., 2016. Bunching. Annual Review of Economics, forthcoming.

Kleven, H., Waseem, M., 2013. Using notches to uncover optimization frictions and struc-
  tural elasticities: Theory and evidence from pakistan. Quarterly Journal of Economics
  128, 669–723.

Knell, M., Köhler-Töglhofer, W., Prammer, D., 2006. The Austrian pension system - how
  recent reforms have changed fiscal sustainability and pension benefits. Monetary Policy
  & the Economiy Q2/06, 69–93, OeNB.

Landais, C., 2015. Assessing the welfare effects of unemployment benefits using the re-
  gression kink design. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7 (4), 243–278.

Manoli, D. S., Turner, N., 2014. Cash-on-hand & college enrollment: Evidence from
  population tax data and policy nonlinearities. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic
  Research.




                                           26
Marx, B. M., Turner, L. J., 2015. Borrowing trouble? student loans, the cost of borrowing,
  and implications for the effectiveness of need-based grant aid. Tech. rep., National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Mastrobuoni, G., 2009. Labor supply effects of the recent social security benefit cuts:
  empirical estimates using cohort discontinuities. Journal of Public Economics 93, 1224–
  1233.

Mitchell, O. S., Phillips, J. W., 2000. Retirement responses to early social security benefit
  reductions. Working Paper 7963, National Bureau of Economic Research.

OECD, 2015. Pensions at a glance 2015.
  URL /content/book/pension_glance-2015-en

Panis, C., Hurd, M., Loughran, D., Zissimopoulos, J., Haider, S., Clair, P. S., Bugliari, D.,
  Ilchuk, S., Lopez, G., Pantoja, P., et al., 2002. The effects of changing social security
  administrations early entitlement age and the normal retirement age. Santa Monica,
  CA: RAND.

Rust, J., Phelan, C., 1997. How social security and medicare affect retirement behavior
  in a world of incomplete markets. Econometrica 65 (4), 781–831.

Saez, E., 2010. Do taxpayers bunch at kink points? American Economic Journal: Eco-
  nomic Policy 2, 180–212.

Seibold, A., 2016. Statutory ages and retirement: Evidence from Germany.

Staubli, S., 2011. The impact of stricter criteria for disability insurance on labor force
  participation. Journal of Public Economics 95 (9-10), 1223–1235.

Staubli, S., Zweimüller, J., 2013. Does raising the early retirement age increase employ-
  ment of older workers? Journal of Public Economics 108, 17–32.

Zweimüller, J., Winter-Ebmer, R., Lalive, R., Kuhn, A., Wuellrich, J.-P., Ruf, O., Büchi,
  S., 2009. Austrian Social Security Database. NRN: The Austrian Center for Labor
  Economics and the Analysis of the Welfare State Working Paper 0903.




                                             27
                              Table 1: Summary Statistics


                                                 Women                                  Men

                                 Short Contr. Years      Full Sample   Short Contr. Years        Full Sample

Continuously Employed
Age 50 - 53                              0.71                0.75               0.68                 0.76
                                        (0.45)              (0.43)             (0.47)               (0.42)
Any sick leave                           0.15                0.14               0.17                 0.16
                                        (0.64)              (0.65)             (0.62)               (0.63)
Av Annual Earnings                      20610               21852              30978                32244
                                       (10594)             (10787)            (99276)              (92323)
Unemployment Age 43 - 53                 0.51                0.42               0.50                 0.33
(in years)                              (1.12)              (1.02)             (1.13)               (0.91)
Childcare up to Age 53                   3.43                3.14
(in years)                              (2.46)              (2.42)
Exits from Job held at 53                0.79                0.81               0.65                0.69
                                        (0.41)              (0.39)             (0.48)              (0.46)
Qualifies for early retirement
due to unemployment                      0.92               0.93                0.95                0.97
                                        (0.28)             (0.25)              (0.21)              (0.17)
with long insurance years                0.41               0.53                0.75                0.85
                                        (0.49)             (0.50)              (0.43)              (0.36)
First Pension Claim
Disabilitiy                              0.10               0.09                0.39                0.38
                                        (0.30)             (0.28)              (0.49)              (0.49)
Early Retirement                         0.44               0.51                0.33                0.41
                                        (0.50)             (0.50)              (0.47)              (0.49)
Exit Age                                57.07              56.74               58.91               58.78
                                        (2.40)             (2.33)              (2.94)              (2.73)
Claim Age                               57.62              57.23               59.72               59.51
                                        (2.08)             (2.08)              (2.75)              (2.54)
Gap bw Exit and Claim                    0.67               0.60                0.83                0.77
(in years)                              (1.15)             (1.07)              (1.44)              (1.39)

Number of observations                 282,298             357,147            229,915              386,830


  Note: Sample includes birth cohorts 1930 - 1948 for men and 1935 - 1953 for women;
  individuals still employed at age 53. Sample with short contribution years is defined as
  having accumulated 38 contribution years at age 53. Individuals qualify for early retirement
  due to unemployment if they have accumulated at least 20 insurance years, and for early
  retirement with long insurance years if they have accumulated at leas 35 insurance years.
                                            28
  We proxy the qualification with insurance years accumulated at 53 and assume individual
  stays continuously employed.
      Table 2: Reduced Form Estimates, Maximum Symmetric Bandwith


                                Short Contribution Years      Full Sample

                                Women          Men         Women      Men

 A. Kink Pension Reform 2000

 Early Retirement Age             0.665        0.666        0.665     0.666
                                 (0.003)      (0.004)      (0.003)   (0.004)

 Exit Age                         0.259        0.239        0.260     0.213
                                 (0.041)      (0.032)      (0.033)   (0.020)

 Claim Age                        0.359        0.359        0.330     0.309
                                 (0.039)      (0.033)      (0.032)   (0.021)

 Observations                    83,575       71,880       110,897   133,334


 B. Kink 2004

 Early Retirement Age             -0.333       -0.533       -0.333    -0.580
                                 (0.003)      (0.016)      (0.003)   (0.019)

 Exit Age                         -0.182       -0.104       -0.174    -0.079
                                 (0.040)      (0.040)      (0.031)   (0.032)

 Claim Age                        -0.342       -0.263       -0.287    -0.212
                                 (0.044)      (0.042)      (0.031)   (0.030)

 Observations                    84,336       57,642       109,819   112,857

Note: Maximum symmetric bandwidth equals 2.75 years. Standard errors are clustered
based on quarterly birth cohort.




                                      29
  Table 3: Fuzzy Regression Kink Estimates, Maximum Symmetric Bandwith


                                Short Contribution Years      Full Sample

                                Women          Men         Women      Men

 A. Kink Pension Reform 2000

 Exit Age                         0.390        0.358        0.391     0.320
                                 (0.062)      (0.047)      (0.050)   (0.030)

 Claim Age                        0.540        0.539        0.496     0.464
                                 (0.059)      (0.049)      (0.048)   (0.031)

 Observations                    83,575       71,880       110,897   133,334


 B. Kink Pension Reform 2004

 Exit Age                         0.548        0.195        0.522     0.136
                                 (0.121)      (0.077)      (0.095)   (0.056)

 Claim Age                        1.028        0.492        0.863     0.366
                                 (0.136)      (0.082)      (0.094)   (0.051)

 Observations                    84,336       57,642       109,819   112,857

Note: Maximum symmetric bandwidth equals 2.75 years. Standard errors are clustered
based on quarterly birth cohort.




                                      30
Figure 1: Changes in the Early Retirement Age in the 2000 and 2004 Pension Reforms


                                                       Early Retirement Age by Cohort
                                                                                                    A. Women




             53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64
                      Early Retirement Age




                                                      1941             1943             1945             1947              1949             1951
                                                                                                   Birth Cohort

                                                                                          ERA                   Long Contr. Years
                                                      Note: Vertical lines mark the beginning of the 2000 and 2004 pension reforms



                                                                                                      B. Men
             53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65
                      Early Retirement Age




                                                      1936             1938             1940             1942              1944             1946
                                                                                                   Birth Cohort

                                                                       ERA                   Corridor Pension                        Long Contr. Years
                                                      Note: Vertical lines mark the beginning of the 2000 and 2004 pension reforms




                                                                                                    31
                  Figure 2: Optimal Retirement Ages




         *D
              E$2,&$/,(
              !)056/C&$)0




                              ="
                                            =,&$%,/,0& *.,

         #D
              E$2,&$/,(
              !)056/C&$)0




                                        =,&$%,/,0&(*.,

          !D
                E$2,&$/,(
                !)056/C&$)0




                              ="   =>
                                            =,&$%,/,0& *.,




Notes:


                                   32
                                                          Figure 3: Survival in the labor market after age 53, Men


                                                                                 Men Full Sample
                                                 Men, Cohort 1938                                                              Men, Cohort 1940




                       1
                                                                                                     1




                       .8
                                                                                                     .8




                         .6
                                                                                                       .6




                 .4
                                                                                               .4




              Survival Function
                                                                                            Survival Function




                       .2
                                                                                                     .2




                       0
                                                                                                     0
                                  54   56   58                60            62    64   66                       54   56   58                60            62   64   66
                                                        Age                                                                           Age

                                             Pension Claims         Job Exits                                              Pension Claims         Job Exits



                                                 Men, Cohort 1942                                                              Men, Cohort 1944




                       1
                                                                                                     1




33
                       .8
                                                                                                     .8




                         .6
                                                                                                       .6




                 .4
                                                                                               .4




              Survival Function
                                                                                            Survival Function




                       .2
                                                                                                     .2




                       0
                                                                                                     0
                                  54   56   58                60            62    64   66                       54   56   58                60            62   64   66
                                                        Age                                                                           Age

                                             Pension Claims         Job Exits                                              Pension Claims         Job Exits



                                                 Men, Cohort 1946                                                              Men, Cohort 1948




                       1
                                                                                                     1




                       .8
                                                                                                     .8




                         .6
                                                                                                       .6




                 .4
                                                                                               .4




              Survival Function
                                                                                            Survival Function




                       .2
                                                                                                     .2




                       0
                                                                                                     0




                                  54   56   58                60            62    64   66                       54   56   58                60            62   64   66
                                                        Age                                                                           Age

                                             Pension Claims         Job Exits                                              Pension Claims         Job Exits




     Notes: Survival rates until pension claims and job exits for selected birth cohorts. Vertical lines mark age 60 and the cohort specific ERA.
                                                       Figure 4: Survival in the labor market after age 53, Women


                                                                                Women Full Sample
                                            Women, Cohort 1943                                                            Women, Cohort 1945




                       1
                                                                                                     1




                       .8
                                                                                                     .8




                         .6
                                                                                                       .6




                 .4
                                                                                               .4




              Survival Function
                                                                                            Survival Function




                       .2
                                                                                                     .2




                       0
                                                                                                     0
                                  54   56   58                60           62     64   66                       54   56   58                60           62   64   66
                                                        Age                                                                           Age

                                             Pension Claims        Job Exits                                               Pension Claims        Job Exits



                                            Women, Cohort 1947                                                            Women, Cohort 1949




                       1
                                                                                                     1




34
                       .8
                                                                                                     .8




                         .6
                                                                                                       .6




                 .4
                                                                                               .4




              Survival Function
                                                                                            Survival Function




                       .2
                                                                                                     .2




                       0
                                                                                                     0
                                  54   56   58                60           62     64   66                       54   56   58                60           62   64   66
                                                        Age                                                                           Age

                                             Pension Claims        Job Exits                                               Pension Claims        Job Exits



                                            Women, Cohort 1951                                                            Women, Cohort 1953




                       1
                                                                                                     1




                       .8
                                                                                                     .8




                         .6
                                                                                                       .6




                 .4
                                                                                               .4




              Survival Function
                                                                                            Survival Function




                       .2
                                                                                                     .2




                       0
                                                                                                     0




                                  54   56   58                60           62     64   66                       54   56   58                60           62   64   66
                                                        Age                                                                           Age

                                             Pension Claims        Job Exits                                               Pension Claims        Job Exits




     Notes: Survival rates until pension claims and job exits for selected birth cohorts. Vertical lines mark age 60 and the cohort specific ERA.
                                        Figure 5: Survival in the labor market after age 53, Individuals with long contribution years


                                                 A. Men, Cohort 1940                                                        B. Men, Cohort 1948




                        1
                                                                                                      1




                        .8
                                                                                                      .8




                          .6
                                                                                                        .6




                  .4
                                                                                                .4




               Survival Function
                                                                                             Survival Function




                        .2
                                                                                                      .2




                        0
                                                                                                      0
                                   54      56        58        60   62             64   66                       54   56        58        60   62             64   66
                                                            Age                                                                        Age




35
                                                 Pension Claims        Job Exits                                            Pension Claims        Job Exits



                                                C. Women, Cohort 1945                                                      D. Women, Cohort 1951




                        1
                                                                                                      1




                        .8
                                                                                                      .8




                          .6
                                                                                                        .6




                  .4
                                                                                                .4




               Survival Function
                                                                                             Survival Function




                        .2
                                                                                                      .2




                        0
                                                                                                      0




                                   54      56        58        60   62             64   66                       54   56        58        60   62             64   66
                                                            Age                                                                        Age

                                                 Pension Claims        Job Exits                                            Pension Claims        Job Exits




     Notes: Survival rates until pension claims and job exits for selected birth cohorts. Vertical lines mark age 60 and the cohort specific ERA.
                                 Figure 6: Survival in the labor market relative to ERA, Individuals with short contribution years


                                              A. Pension Claims, Men                                                                    B. Job Exits, Men




                1
                                                                                                        1




                       .8
                                                                                                               .8




                .6
                                                                                                        .6




        .4
                                                                                                .4




     Survival Function
                                                                                             Survival Function




                .2
                                                                                                        .2




                0
                                                                                                        0
                                         -2              0             2                 4                                     -2                0            2                 4
                                                    Time to ERA                                                                             Time to ERA




36
                                   Cohort 1938          Cohort 1940        Cohort 1942                                   Cohort 1938            Cohort 1940       Cohort 1942
                                   Cohort 1944          Cohort 1946        Cohort 1948                                   Cohort 1944            Cohort 1946       Cohort 1948



                                          C. Pension Claims, Women                                                                     D. Job Exits, Women




                1
                                                                                                        1




                       .8
                                                                                                               .8




                .6
                                                                                                        .6




        .4
                                                                                                .4




     Survival Function
                                                                                             Survival Function




                .2
                                                                                                        .2




                0
                                                                                                        0




                            -2           -1              0             1                 2                          -2         -1                0            1                 2
                                                    Time to ERA                                                                             Time to ERA

                                   Cohort 1943          Cohort 1945        Cohort 1947                                   Cohort 1943            Cohort 1945       Cohort 1947
                                   Cohort 1949          Cohort 1951        Cohort 1953                                   Cohort 1949            Cohort 1951       Cohort 1953




                                     Notes: Horizontal axis shows time in years relative to the cohort specific ERA.
                Figure 7: Early Retirement Age by Quarterly Birth Cohort




Notes: Early Retirement Age by quarterly birth cohorts.




                                                 37
                                                                          Figure 8: Exit Age from the Labor Force



                                                                                    Reduced Form
                                              Women -- Short Contribution Years                                                                   Women -- Full Sample




              58.5
                                                                                                            58.5




              58
                                                                                                            58




              57.5
                                                                                                               57.5




     57
                                                                                                      57




     Age in years
                                                                                                      Age in years




              56.5
                                                                                                            56.5




38
              56
                                                                                                            56
                         1935   1937   1939    1941    1943     1945    1947     1949   1951   1953                   1935   1937   1939   1941      1943     1945    1947   1949   1951   1953
                                                         Birth Cohort                                                                                  Birth Cohort


                                               Men -- Short Contribution Years                                                                     Men -- Full Sample
                                                                                                            60




              60
                                                                                                            59.5




                  59.5
                                                                                                           59




        59
     Age in years
                                                                                                      Age in years
                                                                                                            58.5




              58.5
              58
                                                                                                            58




                         1930   1932   1934    1936    1938     1940    1942     1944   1946   1948                   1930   1932   1934   1936      1938     1940    1942   1944   1946   1948
                                                         Birth Cohort                                                                                  Birth Cohort



                                       Notes: Average by quarterly birth cohort.
                                                                             Figure 9: Pension Claiming Age



                                                                                Reduced Form
                                          Women -- Short Contribution Years                                                                   Women -- Full Sample




           59
                                                                                                        59
                                                                                                        58.5




           58.5
                                                                                                           58




               58
      Age in years
                                                                                                  Age in years
                                                                                                  57.5




     57.5
                                                                                                        57




           57




39
                                                                                                        56.5




           56.5
                     1935   1937   1939    1941    1943     1945    1947     1949   1951   1953                   1935   1937   1939   1941      1943     1945    1947   1949   1951   1953
                                                     Birth Cohort                                                                                  Birth Cohort


                                           Men -- Short Contribution Years                                                                     Men -- Full Sample




           61.5
                                                                                                        61.5
                                                                                                        61




           61
                                                                                                           60.5




              60.5
                                                                                                   60




      60
     Age in years
                                                                                                  Age in years
                                                                                                        59.5




           59.5
                                                                                                        59




           59
                     1930   1932   1934    1936    1938     1940    1942     1944   1946   1948                   1930   1932   1934   1936      1938     1940    1942   1944   1946   1948
                                                     Birth Cohort                                                                                  Birth Cohort



                                   Notes: Average by quarterly birth cohort.
                                                              Figure 10: Remaining Duration of Job Held at 53


                                                         Remaining Duration of Job Held at 53
                                        A. Women -- Short Contribution Years                                                        B. Women -- Full Sample




                                                                                                       4.5




             4.5
                                                                                                       4.2




             4.2
                                                                                                       3.9




          3.9
                                                                                               3.6




     Years
                                                                                               Years




             3.6
                                                                                                       3.3




             3.3
                                                                                                       3




40
             3
                   1935   1937   1939      1941   1943     1945    1947   1949   1951   1953                 1935   1937   1939   1941      1943     1945    1947   1949   1951   1953
                                                    Birth Cohort                                                                              Birth Cohort


                                         C. Men -- Short Contribution Years                                                              D. Men -- Full Sample
                                                                                                       5.5




             5.5
                                                                                                       5.2




             5.2
                                                                                                       4.9




             4.9
     Years
                                                                                               Years
                                                                                                       4.6




             4.6
                                                                                                       4.3




             4.3
             4
                                                                                                       4




                   1930   1932   1934      1936   1938     1940    1942   1944   1946   1948                 1930   1932   1934   1936      1938     1940    1942   1944   1946   1948
                                                    Birth Cohort                                                                              Birth Cohort



                                 Notes: Average job duration in years by quarterly birth cohort.
Appendix – Not for publication
A1       Additional Information on the Austrian Pension
         System over Time
A1.1      Pension Reform in the 1990’s

Several pension reforms over the 1990’s targeted the pension coefficient rather than the
assessment basis. Up to 1993, the pension coefficient was not age dependent, it increased
by 2 percentage points for each insurance year. A worker reached the maximum pen-
sion coefficient with 40 insurance years and was not able to increase the pension benefit
by working longer. A reform in 1993 introduced penalties for retiring before the NRA
by making the pension coefficient age dependent. The average penalty for one year of
early retirement ranged between 2% and 4%, but the maximum pension coefficient of 0.8
still applied such that individuals with more than 40 insurance years faced the smallest
penalties for early retirement. The pension coefficient was slightly adjusted by a pension
reform in 1996 that lowered the average penalty for early retirement. The 2000 and 2004
pension reforms introduced more severe penalties for early retirement raising the average
penalty for each year of early retirement to about 8 - 9 % bringing the system closer to
actuarial fairness.

A1.2      Pension Reform 2000 and 2004
Changes in Penalties for Early Retirement

The second component of the 2000 pension reform aimed at reducing benefit generosity
and increasing penalties for early retirement. With January 2000 the formula defining the
pension coefficient was simplified. Each insurance year counts for two percentage points
of the pension coefficient. Individuals drawing pension benefits before the NRA face a
penalty of 2 percentage points for each year of early retirement with a maximum penalty
of 10 percentage points. A second cap states that the reduction can be at most 15% of
the pension coefficient before penalty. With the increase in the ERA starting in October
2000, the penalty was adjusted to the step-wise schedule, such that the maximum penalty
for retiring at the cohort-specific ERA remains at 10 percentage points. For example,
for the cohort with ERA of 61 the penalty for each year of early retirement amounts to
10/4 = 2.5 percentage points. However, the cap at 15% still applies, which is particularly


                                           41
relevant for individuals with high pension coefficients.
   In 2004 the formula for the pension coefficient was changed again and a system with
penalties and bonuses for retirements earlier or later than the NRA was introduced. The
factor for each insurance year is reduced from 2 to 1.78 percentage points, such that
45 insurance years are now required to reach the maximum pension coefficient. Each
year of early retirement before the NRA lowers this pension coefficient by 4.2 percent
with a maximum penalty of 15%. In order to avoid too abrupt changes in the benefit
formula an additional cap was introduced at a fixed fraction of the pension coefficient
computed according to the pre 2004 formula. For individuals first becoming eligible for
pension benefits in 2004 this fraction was 95% and it was decreased in the subsequent
years. Interestingly, the discounted pension coefficient according to the pre-2004 formula
is higher than the pension coefficient computed with the reformed 2004 formula for most
individuals who first become eligible for early retirement benefits from 2006 onwards.
   The pension coefficient for men retiring under the corridor pension at age 62 is com-
puted by the pre-2004 formula and applies two sets of penalties. First, a penalty of 2
percentage points for each year of retiring before the NRA is deducted. Second, a penalty
of 2.1% for each year of retirement before the cohort specific ERA is applied.
   Appendix Figure A.7 shows the pension coefficients for retiring at the cohort specific
ERA for the female and male samples of individuals with short contribution years. The
figure shows that, due to benefit adjustments, the pension coefficients stayed roughly
constant across cohorts. This implies that with rising Early Retirement Ages lifetime
pension benefits were decreasing with the pension reform.
   To visualize the change in financial incentives by birth cohort, Panels A and C in
Appendix Figure A.8 plot the percent increase in the pension coefficient from retiring
at the cohort specific ERA versus retiring one year after the ERA for women and men
who do not qualify for the exemption due to long contribution years. The means by
quarterly cohort in the figure are based on observations of individual insurance years in our
analysis sample (see section 4 for details). Even though the rules for computing benefits
are identical for women and men, women have on average accumulated fewer insurance
years than men due to their lower ERAs. The figure shows that before 2000 penalties for
early retirement were slightly higher for women and benefits increased between 3 and 5
percent for one year of delayed retirement, which is below the actuarially fair rate. With



                                             42
the 2000 pension reform penalties started to rise; initially more so for women than for
men, for whom the caps in penalties applied. The 2004 pension reform raised penalties
significantly bringing the gain in benefits for one year of delayed retirement up to 8-9%,
which is close to actuarially fair.
    Individuals with long contribution years, who qualify for the exemption from the ERA
increase after the reform, face different financial incentives for early retirement. Men with
45 contribution years always reach the maximum pension coefficient of 0.8 even after
accounting for penalties. For women with 40 contribution years penalties for retiring at
age 55 apply with the 2000 pension reform. However, the pension reform 2004 eliminated
penalties from early retirement for both men and women with long contribution years.
For individuals who hit the maximum pension coefficient, financial incentives to delay
retirement beyond age 60 (55) are zero. In contrast, leaving the labor force at ages younger
than 60 or 55 and claiming benefits at the ERA had minor effects on the pension coefficient
before 2000, which created a strong incentive for individuals with long contribution years
to exit the labor force before the ERA. The 2000 pension reform changed this incentive,
it allowed individuals to claim benefits at ate 60 (55) if they reach 45 (40) contribution
years, which essentially requires that they stay employed as any job interruption does
not count as contribution time. To visualize how financial incentives for exiting before
age 60 change over cohorts for individuals with long contribution years, Panels B and
D of Appendix Figure A.8 plot the benefit increase of exiting the labor market with 44
(39) contribution years and claiming at the cohort specific ERA versus claiming benefits
at age 60 (55) with 45 (49) contribution years for women and men, respectively.20 The
figure shows that before 2000 the financial incentives of exiting at the ERA are very low,
individuals who exited one year early only faced a benefit cut of around 2%.21 This basic
pattern did not change with the 2000 reform. The reason is that even though penalties
for early retirement were increased, caps on the maximum penalties applied to individuals
  20
     We consider as alternatives to either remain employed until age 60 and claim benefits with 45 contri-
bution year or to exit employment at age 59 with 44 contribution years. Individuals choosing this second
option are eligible to claim UI benefits for up to 12 months and they can apply for disability benefits.
However, because eligibility for disability depends on health this option is not open to everybody. We
therefore assume that the earliest age at which they can claim pension benefits is the cohort specific
ERA. With the 2000 reform benefit cuts would be higher for individuals claiming before the ERA, be-
cause higher penalties apply. Large gender differences only 2.4% of women with long contribution years
claim disability benefits.
  21
     The figure is based on the assumption that individuals who exit with 44 contribution years cannot
accumulate additional insurance years, say by registering as unemployed. For those individuals the gain
in benefits would be zero.



                                                   43
with long contribution years. In 2004 all penalties for retiring at 60 with long contribution
years were abolished and the pension coefficient for retiring at 60 was set to 0.8 for both
men and women. Individuals with 44 contribution years retiring at their cohort specific
ERA still were subject to increased penalties, which raised the cost of choosing this option
to about 7% for men and to 12% for women. In addition to benefit cuts, these individuals
also faced increasingly long waiting times from age 59 (54) until the cohort specific ERA
as the ERA reform schedule progressed.
   Overall, Appendix Figure A.8 illustrates that financial incentives to delay retirement
around the ERA increased over the cohorts affected by the 2000 and 2004 pension re-
forms. There changes do not follow the kinked schedule of the ERA reform in Figure 1,
however. Our empirical strategy is to identify responses to the ERA around the kinks
in the schedule. If we compare incentives from the ERA schedule change and financial
incentives due to the changes in the pension coefficient, we argue that the ERA schedule
is much more transparent and easier to understand than the benefit adjustments. Eligi-
bility for ERA is only based on birth cohort, while benefits depend on several factors. The
formulas are complex, many different caps apply, and in most cases computations across
multiple regimes have to be compared before the final benefit is determined. Furthermore,
changes in benefit formulas were introduced repeatedly and with short notice. In several
cases the formula was even changed retroactively. For example, the 2004 reform originally
stipulated penalties for early retirement at age 60 for individuals with long contribution
years (by a law passed in August 2003). However, in December 2004 a new law overruled
this regulation, penalties were dropped and benefits for individuals retiring in 2004 had to
be re-computed. Another example is the computation of the corridor pension, which was
changed in 2007. Given these information problems, it was hard for retirees to optimally
respond to financial incentives. Individuals planning to retire at a certain age did not have
sufficient information about benefits they would receive at alternative retirement dates.
We will therefore attribute the observed changes in exit and claiming ages in the data to
changes in ERA rather than financial incentives, also assumed by Staubli and Zweimüller
(2013).

Components of the 2004 pension reforms with long-run perspective

The pension reform passed in 2004 also included steps that aimed at the long-run sus-
tainability of the Austrian pension system and affects cohorts born in 1955 and later.

                                             44
The main components include the scheduled increase in the statutory retirement age for
women from 60 to 65 between 2024 and 2034 in half-year steps and the introduction of
pension corridor around the uniform NRA of 65. Individuals are free to choose the age
at which they start claiming benefits in a 6 year window around age 65, with penalties
for early retirement before 65 and bonuses for delayed retirement between 65 and 68.
By age 68 all workers are supposed to leave labor force and employment protection is
discontinued at this age.
   A further change concerns the establishment of a new pension account system that
reshapes the defined benefit model. The new system is based on individual accounts and
lifelong assessment periods. To phase-in this adjustment, the assessment basis is raised
from 15 years to 40 years, starting in 2004 with an increase by one year for each annual
cohort.




                                          45
                                                            Table A1: Covariates, Reduced Form

                                                            Kink Pension Reform 2000                       Kink Pension Reform 2004

                                                  Short Contribution Years     Full Sample       Short Contribution Years     Full Sample

                                                  Women          Men         Women      Men      Women          Men         Women      Men

                 Predicted Exit Age                0.007         -0.058       0.011     -0.045    0.050         -0.011       0.049     -0.003
                                                  (0.008)       (0.009)      (0.008)   (0.006)   (0.008)       (0.010)      (0.008)   (0.007)

                 Predicted Claim Age               0.007         -0.055       0.017     -0.044    0.050         -0.007       0.041     0.000
                                                  (0.008)       (0.009)      (0.009)   (0.007)   (0.008)       (0.010)      (0.009)   (0.007)


                 Age 50 - 53
                 Days Employed                     -3.79         -8.30        -3.65     -8.74    12.91          -0.14        9.55      -0.91
                                                  (3.29)        (3.42)       (2.56)    (1.96)    (3.16)        (4.11)       (2.49)    (2.26)




46
                 Av Annual Earnings                216          -1049         237      -1012      199           -221         114       -174
                                                  (92.7)        (90.1)       (81.8)    (60.1)    (85.1)        (101.6)      (76.0)    (64.7)

                 Any sick leave                    -0.002        0.008        -0.002    0.008     -0.014        0.004        -0.012    0.001
                                                  (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.003)   (0.002)   (0.003)       (0.004)      (0.002)   (0.003)

                 Childcare up to Age 53            -0.007                     -0.003              -0.072                     -0.034
                                                  (0.020)                    (0.017)             (0.019)                    (0.016)

                 Insurance years at 53             -0.149        -0.355       -0.183    -0.439    -0.417        -0.020       -0.395    -0.116
                                                  (0.062)       (0.069)      (0.056)   (0.046)   (0.060)       (0.078)      (0.054)   (0.049)

                 Qualifies for early retirement    -0.007        -0.006       -0.005    -0.004    -0.008        -0.005       -0.007    -0.003
                 from unemployment                (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)   (0.001)   (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)   (0.001)

                 Qualifies for early retirement    -0.005        -0.020       -0.005    -0.019    -0.020        0.002        -0.018    -0.002
                 with long insurance years        (0.004)       (0.004)      (0.004)   (0.002)   (0.004)       (0.004)      (0.004)   (0.002)


                 Observations                     83,575        71,880       110,897   133,334   91,330        63,223       119,052   123,683

     Note: Reduced form estimates with maximum symmetric bandwidth equal 2.75 years. Sample includes birth cohorts 1930 - 1948 for men and 1935
     - 1953 for women .
                   Table A2: Reduced Form Estimates, Global


                                  Short Contribution Years       Full Sample

                                  Women           Men         Women      Men

 A. Kink Pension Reform 2000

 Early Retirement Age              0.665         0.665         0.665     0.665
                                  (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.001)

 Exit Age                          0.297         0.426         0.350     0.343
                                  (0.020)       (0.023)       (0.022)   (0.017)

 Claim Age                         0.405         0.607         0.433     0.450
                                  (0.022)       (0.027)       (0.024)   (0.017)

 Observations                     188,498       169,846       240,735   270,249


 B. Kink Pension Reform 2004

 Early Retirement Age              -0.332        -0.595        -0.332    -0.640
                                  (0.000)       (0.002)       (0.000)   (0.001)

 Exit Age                          -0.254        -0.266        -0.177    -0.173
                                  (0.013)       (0.021)       (0.011)   (0.013)

 Claim Age                         -0.354        -0.456        -0.233    -0.316
                                  (0.010)       (0.018)       (0.010)   (0.012)

 Observations                     137,428        94,002       173,908   182,069

Note: Estimates based on global sample including birth cohorts 1930 - 1948 for men and
1935 - 1953 for women. Standard errors are clustered based on quarterly birth cohort.




                                        47
              Table A3: Fuzzy Regression Kink Estimates, Global


                                  Short Contribution Years       Full Sample

                                  Women           Men         Women      Men

 A. Kink Pension Reform 2000

 Exit Age                          0.447         0.641         0.526     0.515
                                  (0.030)       (0.035)       (0.033)   (0.026)

 Claim Age                         0.609         0.914         0.652     0.677
                                  (0.033)       (0.041)       (0.036)   (0.026)

 Observations                     188,498       169,846       240,735   270,249


 B. Kink Pension Reform 2004

 Exit Age                          0.729         0.448         0.534     0.270
                                  (0.116)       (0.048)       (0.074)   (0.035)

 Claim Age                         1.066         0.766         0.702     0.493
                                  (0.103)       (0.053)       (0.068)   (0.035)

 Observations                     137,428        94,002       173,908   182,069

Note: Estimates based on global sample including birth cohorts 1930 - 1948 for men and
1935 - 1953 for women. Standard errors are clustered based on quarterly birth cohort.




                                        48
                                                           Table A4: Alternative Estimators and Bandwidths

                                                               Kink Pension Reform 2000                                                    Kink Pension Reform 2004

                                                      Women                                    Men                                 Women                                   Men
                                         Exit Age         Claim Age               Exit Age           Claim Age          Exit Age       Claim Age              Exit Age           Claim Age

     Default CCT (with regularization)
     Main Bandwidth (Pilot)              0.50 (1.18)            0.67 (1.41)       0.41 (0.94)        0.81 (1.57)        0.62 (1.19)        0.73 (1.46)        0.52 (1.04)        0.76 (1.46)
     Estimated Kink                      1.73                       0.77              0.24               0.61               0.95               1.44               0.99               0.49
     (conventional standard error)       (0.39)                    (0.28)            (0.72)             (0.23)             (0.53)             (0.61)             (0.47)             (0.44)
     Bias-corrected Estimate             2.20                       0.97              0.93               0.62               1.37               2.39               0.53               0.50
     robust conf. Interval               [ 1.12 , 3.29 ]      [ 0.07 , 1.87 ]   [ -0.90 , 2.75 ]   [ -0.09 , 1.34 ]   [ -0.36 , 3.10 ]   [ 0.60 , 4.19 ]    [ -0.92 , 1.98 ]   [ -0.36 , 1.36 ]

     CCT with no regularization
     Main Bandwidth (Pilot)              2.07 (1.55)           1.84 (1.81)        0.54 (1.04)        1.12 (1.86)        1.04 (1.52)        1.13 (1.53)        1.80 (1.36)        1.04 (1.64)
     Estimated Kink                      0.27                      0.33               1.41               0.65               0.46               0.53               1.14               0.48
     (conventional standard error)       (0.05)                   (0.07)             (0.34)             (0.14)             (0.23)             (0.27)             (0.09)             (0.26)




49
     Bias-corrected Estimate             0.19                      0.43               1.75               0.84               0.19               1.10               0.80               0.21
     robust conf. Interval               [ -0.63 , 1.01 ]    [ -0.18 , 1.04 ]   [ 0.65 , 2.85 ]    [ 0.31 , 1.38 ]    [ -0.85 , 1.23 ]   [ -0.26 , 2.46 ]   [ -0.45 , 2.05 ]   [ -0.88 , 1.30 ]

     Fuzzy CCT (no regularization)
     Main Bandwidth (Pilot)              1.54 (3.01)           1.42 (1.71)        0.58 (1.09)        1.06 (1.98)        1.03 (1.53)        0.74 (1.44)        1.17 (1.34)        1.24 (3.21)
     Estimated Kink                      0.23                      0.36               1.30               0.63               0.46               0.61               0.99               0.46
     (conventional standard error)       (0.08)                   (0.10)             (0.31)             (0.15)             (0.23)             (2.35)             (0.15)             (0.20)
     Bias-corrected Estimate             0.15                      0.21               1.58               0.84               0.19               2.39               0.84               0.21
     robust conf. Interval               [ -0.10 , 0.39 ]    [ -0.42 , 0.84 ]   [ 0.54 , 2.63 ]    [ 0.34 , 1.34 ]    [ -0.85 , 1.23 ]   [ 0.60 , 4.19 ]    [ -0.14 , 1.82 ]   [ -0.31 , 0.73 ]

     Fuzzy IK (no regularization)
     Main Bandwidth (Pilot)              2.34 (2.67)            2.01 (2.19)       1.23 (1.87)        4.14 (1.99)        1.32 (1.86)        1.17 (1.55)        0.77 (1.97)        1.73 (1.69)
     Estimated Kink                      0.31                       0.34              0.19               0.62               0.39               0.37               0.33               0.51
     (conventional standard error)       (0.04)                    (0.06)            (0.10)             (0.03)             (0.17)             (0.23)             (0.27)             (0.11)
     Bias-corrected Estimate             0.01                       0.79              -0.01              1.22               0.44               0.88               0.50               0.66
     robust conf. Interval               [ -0.27 , 0.28 ]     [ 0.35 , 1.22 ]   [ -0.43 , 0.41 ]   [ 0.34 , 2.09 ]    [ -0.34 , 1.22 ]   [ -0.39 , 2.15 ]   [ -0.18 , 1.19 ]   [ -0.21 , 1.53 ]

     FG
     Main Bandwidth (Pilot)              0.92 (5.60)            1.63 (3.45)       0.74 (2.53)        0.95 (2.10)        0.72 (2.15)        1.30 (3.00)        0.51 (1.35)        1.67 (4.69)
     Estimated Kink                      0.22                       0.47              0.78               0.55               0.31               0.31               0.99               0.62
     (conventional standard error)       (0.16)                    (0.09)            (0.23)             (0.17)             (0.40)             (0.21)             (0.47)             (0.12)
     Bias-corrected Estimate             0.19                       0.44              0.53               0.77               0.43               0.23               0.96               0.37
     robust conf. Interval               [ -0.16 , 0.54 ]     [ 0.16 , 0.72 ]   [ 0.04 , 1.02 ]    [ 0.29 , 1.26 ]    [ -0.46 , 1.32 ]   [ -0.35 , 0.81 ]   [ -0.18 , 2.10 ]   [ -0.03 , 0.77 ]
       Note: Estimations based on short contribution year sample, birth cohorts 1930-1948 for men and 1935 - 1953 for women. Conventional point
       estimates and standard errors are obtained from 2SLS regressions described in Card et al. (2012). The default CCT bandwidth, CCT with no
                Table A5: Mechanism: Duration of Job at Age 53


                                    Short Contribution Years        Full Sample

                                    Women           Men          Women       Men

 A. Kink Pension Reform 2000

 Job Duration                        0.173         0.157          0.189     0.127
                                    (0.040)       (0.041)        (0.033)   (0.031)

 Observations                       84,336         57,642        109,819   112,857


 B. Kink Pension Reform 2004

 Job Duration                        -0.106        -0.158         -0.120    -0.106
                                    (0.045)       (0.053)        (0.035)   (0.039)

 Observations                       83,575         71,880        110,897   133,334

Note: Reduced form estimates with maximum symmetric bandwidth equal 2.75 years. Stan-
dard errors are clustered based on quarterly birth cohort. Job duration is measured as the
remaining duration from age 53 of the job held at age 53.




                                         50
                           Table A6: Effect Heterogeneity


               Any Sick Leave Age 40-53    Earnings Bottom Quartile   Earnings Top Quartile

               Women          Men          Women            Men       Women        Men

Kink Pension Reform 2000


Exit Age        0.482         0.684         0.446        0.685         0.666       0.437
               (0.069)       (0.152)       (0.084)      (0.057)       (0.130)     (0.155)

Claim Age       0.745         0.948         0.650        0.954         0.681       0.842
               (0.077)       (0.177)       (0.067)      (0.082)       (0.097)     (0.111)

Observations   16,453        20,488            27,741   33,253        27,447      28,272


  Note: Fuzzy RKD estimates with maximum symmetric bandwidth equal 2.75 years. Sample
  includes birth cohorts 1930 - 1948 for men and 1935 - 1953 for women .




                                          51
                                                                                    Figure A.1: Distribution of birth cohorts


                                                                   Frequency of Obervations by Birth Cohort
                                                       A. Women -- Short Contribution Years                                                                     B. Women -- Full Sample




                  6000
                                                                                                                          6000




                           5000
                                                                                                                                 5000




               4000
                                                                                                                       4000




       Number of Observations
                                                                                                                Number of Observations




     3000
                                                                                                              3000




52
                  2000
                                                                                                                          2000
                                  1935   1937   1939      1941   1943     1945    1947   1949   1951   1953                              1935   1937   1939   1941      1943     1945    1947   1949   1951   1953
                                                                   Birth Cohort                                                                                           Birth Cohort


                                                        C. Men -- Short Contribution Years                                                                           D. Men -- Full Sample




                  8000
                                                                                                                          8000




       4000 5000 6000 7000
                                                                                                               4000 5000 6000 7000




     Number of Observations
                                                                                                              Number of Observations




                  3000
                                                                                                                          3000




                  2000
                                                                                                                          2000




                                  1930   1932   1934      1936   1938     1940    1942   1944   1946   1948                              1930   1932   1934   1936      1938     1940    1942   1944   1946   1948
                                                                   Birth Cohort                                                                                           Birth Cohort



                                                Notes: Number of observations by quarterly birth cohort.
                       Figure A.2: Population by Birth Year in Austria


                    Austrian resident population by birth year
                                 Austrian citizenship Oct 31 2006
   60000
   50000
   40000
   30000
   20000




           1930           1935                1940                1945                 1950
                                               birthyear

                                            Male                 Female


Notes: Resident population with Austrian citizenship on October 31, 2006 by year of birth.




                                                 53
                                                                       Figure A.3: Predicted job exits by cohort


                                                                               Predicted Exit Age
                                         C. Men -- Short Contribution Years                                                                    D. Men -- Full Sample




           60
                                                                                                         60




           59.5
                                                                                                         59.5




     59
                                                                                                   59




     Age
                                                                                                   Age




           58.5
                                                                                                         58.5




54
           58
                                                                                                         58
                  1930   1932    1934      1936   1938     1940      1942   1944   1946     1948                1930   1932    1934     1936      1938     1940    1942   1944   1946     1948
                                                    Birth Cohort                                                                                    Birth Cohort


                                        A. Women -- Short Contribution Years                                                              B. Women -- Full Sample




           58.5
                                                                                                         58.5




           58
                                                                                                         58




           57.5
                                                                                                         57.5




     Age
                                                                                                   Age




           57
                                                                                                         57




           56.5
                                                                                                         56.5




           56
                                                                                                         56




                  1938    1940     1942        1944       1946       1948   1950     1952                       1938    1940     1942      1944         1946       1948   1950     1952
                                                      Birth cohort                                                                                  Birth cohort



                                 Notes: Number of observations by quarterly birth cohort.
                                                                     Figure A.4: Predicted pension claims by cohort


                                                                              Predicted Claim Age
                                         C. Men -- Short Contribution Years                                                                     D. Men -- Full Sample




           61.5
                                                                                                          61.5




           61
                                                                                                          61




           60.5
                                                                                                          60.5




     Age
                                                                                                    Age




           60
                                                                                                          60




           59.5
                                                                                                          59.5




55
           59
                                                                                                          59
                  1930   1932    1934      1936   1938     1940       1942   1944   1946     1948                1930   1932    1934     1936      1938     1940    1942   1944   1946     1948
                                                    Birth Cohort                                                                                     Birth Cohort


                                        A. Women -- Short Contribution Years                                                               B. Women -- Full Sample




           59
                                                                                                          59




           58.5
                                                                                                          58.5




           58
                                                                                                          58




     Age
                                                                                                    Age




           57.5
                                                                                                          57.5




           57
                                                                                                          57




           56.5
                                                                                                          56.5




                  1938    1940     1942        1944        1946       1948   1950     1952                       1938    1940     1942      1944          1946      1948   1950     1952
                                                      Birth Cohort                                                                                   Birth Cohort



                                 Notes: Number of observations by quarterly birth cohort.
                                         Figure A.5: Exit Age from the Labor Force, individuals with long insurance years


                                                        Individuals with Long Contribution Years
                                                  A. Women -- Exit Age                                                                  B. Women -- Claim Age




             56.5
                                                                                                         56.4
                                                                                                         56.2




             56
                                                                                                     56




     Years
                                                                                                 Years
                                                                                                         55.8




             55.5
                                                                                                         55.6




56
             55
                                                                                                         55.4
                    1935   1937   1939     1941     1943     1945    1947   1949   1951   1953                  1935   1937   1939   1941     1943     1945    1947   1949   1951   1953
                                                      Birth Cohort                                                                              Birth Cohort


                                                   C. Men -- Exit Age                                                                       D. Men -- Claim Age




             60
                                                                                                         60




             59.5
                                                                                                         59.5




        59
     Years
                                                                                                 Years
                                                                                                         59




             58.5
             58
                                                                                                         58.5




                    1930   1932   1934     1936     1938     1940    1942   1944   1946   1948                  1930   1932   1934   1936     1938     1940    1942   1944   1946   1948
                                                      Birth Cohort                                                                              Birth Cohort



                                  Notes: Average by quarterly birth cohort.
              Figure A.6: Disability pension claims prior to the ERA for men




Notes: Survival rates age 53 to 60 in the top graph and survival rates in years before the cohort specific
ERA in the bottom graph.




                                                   57
                                                        Figure A.7: Pension coefficient at the ERA


                              Pension coefficient at cohort specific ERA
                                                                  A. Women -- Short Contribution Years




                   58         60 64    62
                  Percent of Assessment Basis




58
                                 56
                                                 1939   1941   1943         1945           1947     1949   1951   1953
                                                                                   Birth Cohort


                                                                      C. Men -- Short Contribution Years




                           68    74 70      72
                   Percent of Assessment Basis
                  66             64
                                                 1934   1936   1938         1940           1942     1944   1946   1948
                                                                                   Birth Cohort


     Notes: Panels A and C show the average pension coefficient at the cohort specific ERA. The pension
     benefit is defined by the pension coefficient times the revaluated average annual income over 15 years.
     The number of years over which the average is taken increases step-wise from 15 to 40, starting 2004.
                                                              Figure A.8: Increases in Benefits at the ERA


                                                               Benefit Increase at the ERA
                                   A. Women -- Short Contribution Years                                               B. Women -- Long Contribution Years




         .09
                                                                                                  .15




         .08
         .07
                                                                                                  .1




           .06
      Percent
                                                                                        Percent




     .05
                                                                                                  .05




         .04
         .03




59
                                                                                                  0




         .02
                 1939   1941       1943     1945      1947      1949      1951   1953                   1939   1941   1943    1945      1947      1949      1951   1953
                                               Birth Cohort                                                                      Birth Cohort


                                    C. Men -- Short Contribution Years                                                 D. Men -- Long Contribution Years




         .09
                                                                                                  .15




         .08
         .07
                                                                                                  .1




           .06
      Percent
                                                                                        Percent




     .05
                                                                                                  .05




         .04
         .03
                                                                                                  0




         .02
                 1934   1936       1938     1940      1942      1944      1946   1948                   1934   1936   1938    1940      1942      1944      1946   1948
                                               Birth Cohort                                                                      Birth Cohort


                               Notes: Panels A and C show the benefit increase from retiring at the cohort specific ERA versus retiring
                               one year after the ERA for women and men who do not qualify for the exemption based on long contribu-
                               tion years. Panels B and D show the benefit increase of exiting the labor market with 44 (39) contribution
