NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FUTURE SOCIAL SECURITY FINANCING
ALTERNATIVES AND NATIONAL SAVING

Michael J. Boskin

Working Paper No. 2256

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1987

I would like to thank Douglas Puffert and Jessica Prirnoff for valuable
research assistance, John Shoven for helpful comments, and the Stanford
University Center for Economic Policy Research for financial support. The
intergenerational transfers corresponding to the alternatives discussed
herein are estimated in Boskin and Puffert (1987). The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research prociram in Taxation. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2256
May 1987

Future Social Security Financing Alternatives and National Saving

ABSTRACT
While the short-run financial status of Social Security is secure, its
long-run financial status is very uncertain. The retirement and disability
part of the system (OASDI) is projected to be in long-run actuarial deficit
under the Social Security Administration's intermediate economic and
demographic forecasts. Hospital Insurance (HI) is projected to run a large
deficit, beginning in the 1990s. OASDI is projected to accrue a very large
surplus over the next thirty years, peaking at almost 30% of CNP. Social
Security has never accrued a surplus this large; it may well be dissipated
for other purposes, such as to bail out HI, fund other programs, raise
benefits, or cut taxes. These alternatives may affect net national saving,
directly because Social Security surpluses or deficits are part of
government sector saving and indirectly through effects on private saving
or the non-Social Security part of the federal government budget.
This paper documents how various systematic deviations from, or return
to, pay-as-you-go finance of the Social Security system may affect net
national saving. For example, under base case assumptions with respect to
the non-Social Security deficit, a constant net private saving rate of 6%,
and long-run budget balance in the state and local government sector, the
Social Security deficit offsets 40% of other net national saving over the
Social Security Administration's 75-year projection period. In the first
25-year sub-period, the Social Security surplus adds one-sixth to other net
national saving; in the second, it offsets almost one-half; and in the
third, it offsets five-sixths of other net national saving.
Of course, private saving may respond to changes in Social Security's
funding as may the non-Social Security balance in the federal budget. The
paper presents several alternative scenarios such as benefits increasing or
taxes falling during the OASDI surplus period, various stylized rules
concerning the non-Social Security budget deficit, and separate balancing
of HI via outlay reductions or tax increases. The results indicate that
OASDI may effect net national saving substantially. For example, if
benefits ratchet up during what would have been the period of the OASDI
surplus, the OASDI system may subsequently offset virtually all of
remaining net national saving. On the other hand, if HI is brought into
balance and the OASDI surplus is allowed to accrue, Social Security will
offset only about 4% of other net national saving.
Changes in private saving may accentuate or ameliorate the swings in
the net national saving rate generated by the future financing of OASDHI,
but the alternative financing options will be important determinant of net
national saving, and therefore of private domestic investment and
international capital flows.
Michael J. Boskin
NBER, 204 Junipero Serra Blvd.
Stanford, CA 94305
(415) 326-7160

1.

Introduction
While the short-run financial status of Social Security is quite

secure, its long-run financial status is very uncertain. First, future
economic and demographic trends will heavily affect revenues and outlays.
Second, except under the Social Security Administration's optimistic
economic and demographic scenario, the retirement and disability part of

the system (OASDI) is projected to be in long-run actuarial deficit: small
under the intermediate assumptions; large under pessimistic ones.
Hospital Insurance (HI) is projected to run a large deficit beginning in

the l990s. Finally, the OASDI system is projected to accrue (under the
intermediate assumptions) a very large surplus over the next thirty years.
This surplus is projected to cumulate to almost 30% of GNP, close to the

current national debt to GNP ratio. This surplus is "designed" to reduce
the need for still larger tax increases or benefit reductions during the

baby boom generation's retirement. Figure 1 presents estimates of these
average annual (not cumulative) surpluses and deficits in Social Security,
including and excluding HI, over the next 75 years to highlight this
projected movement away from pay-as-you-go finance.

We have never been able to accrue a surplus this large in Social

Security; the retirement surplus may well be dissipated for other purposes
(to bail out HI, fund other programs, raise benefits, cut taxes, etc.).

These possibilities involve major inter-cohort transfers relative to
accruing the surplus, as do, of course, the alternative methods of dealing

with the long-run deficit (see Boskin (1986)). They also involve
potentially major effects on net national saving in the United States,

directly because of the role Social Security surpluses or deficits will
play in government sector saving or borrowing and indirectly via whatever
effects they have on private saving or the non-Social Security part of the

1

federal government budget.

The purpose of this paper is to present calculations of the financial
status of Social Security and its impact on net national saving under
alternative economic, demographic, and future financing assumptions.

Thus, the paper is organized as follows: the next section describes our
methodology and data, and briefly discusses related analyses. Section 3
presents estimates under alternative economic and demographic assumptions

of the long-run actuarial status of OASI. They indicate how the long-run
financial status may vary from very large surpluses to very large deficits.
Section 4 estimates the implications of alternative uses of the large

surplus which is projected to accrue in OASI's trust fund: what difference
it makes in the aggregate if the surplus is used to raise benefits or
reduce taxes, or is spent on other programs.

Section 5 turns to the potential implications of these alternative

scenarios for the level and time pattern of net national saving. The
status of the Social Security system may affect the net national saving

rate in several ways. First, the surplus (or deficit) in any year
contributes directly to that year's net government saving (or dissaving).
Second, a Social Security surplus or deficit may affect the surplus or

deficit in the remainder of the federal government budget. Third, the
status of Social Security may affect private saving. This paper
concentrates on the first two avenues through which Social Security affects

national saving. While I believe the weight of the evidence is that Social
Security's expected evolution will affect private saving as well, this
effect is somewhat more controversial and its magnitude subject to much
dispute (while much important work has been done since then, the classic

debate on the subject remains Barro and Feldstein (1978)). Thus, the

2

results reported in this paper should be considered a large part of, but

not the entire, story. The results are striking: alternative scenarios
with respect to accruing or dissipating the surplus have major effects on

the net national saving rate. Under the Social Security Administration's
intermediate assumptions, Social Security's long-term deficit (including

HI) offsets almost 40% of the remaining net national saving. The time

pattern is equally interesting: a surplus adding one-sixth to net national
saving in the 1986-2010 period, but a deficit offsetting one-half of all

other net national saving in 2011-2035 and five-sixths in 2036-2060. With
tax increases and/or outlay reductions to cover the HI deficit, the surplus
adds one quarter to net national saving in the 1986-2010 period.
Section 6 discusses some of the implications of these results for
investment, international capital flows, trade, and productivity growth.

Section 7 presents a brief conclusion which offers a short summary and
repeats some caveats concerning interpretation of the results.

2.

Data, Method, and Cursory Literature Review
Several studies analyze the long-run financial solvency of Social

Security under alternative economic and demographic assumptions. The
most important, of course, are the annual Social Security trustees'
reports (formally, the Annual Reports cf the Board of Trustees of the
Old Age and Survivors Insurance and Disability Insurance Trust Funds).
They present both short-and long-terni actuarial projections of Social

Security trust fund finances under alternative assumptions. The reports
certainly have valuable information, but these data are presented only
as fractions of taxable payroll (except, in one table, as fractions of

GNP); dollar figures (whether discounted or not) are not presented for
long-term projections. More importantly, the reports do not in fact

3

consider what the state of the retirement (OASI) trust fund might be at

the end of the report's 75 year horizon. Rather, it presents the simple
average, over 75 years, of each year's surplus or deficit (that is, tax
receipts minus benefit payments) as a fraction of that year's taxable

payroll. The calculation considers neither the increase over time in
taxable payroll nor the interest earned on the cumulated trust fund

surplus. Thus, the 1986 report's claim that the OASI trust fund is in
"close actuarial balance" because the average annual deficit is only
0.29 percent of taxable payroll is based on a fundamental

misunderstanding of what that figure means. The report presents no
sufficient basis for evaluating the long-run financial solvency of Old
Age and Survivors Insurance.1
Boskin's (1986) estimates of the long-run financial solvency of OASI
avoid these inadequacies by considering annual flows of dollars and by
projecting the actual accumulation and decumulation of the OASI trust fund.
He also considers what will happen if the expected cumulative surplus of
the next three decades is dissipated (for example, by raising benefits) or
if reforms are instituted in retirement age and other features.

The results presented here are based partly on computer simulations of
present and future families covered by the Social Security system, and

1. In fact, if the report were to present the correct calculation, based on
the report's own assumptions and methodology, the resulting figures would
be more optimistic under each of the four sets of assumptions used. A
comparison of Tables 10 and F2 in the 1986 report shows that taxable
payroll is projected to rise at a rate slightly below the assumed interest
rate (under each alternative set of assumptions). This means that the
earlier positive annual balances should be given greater weight than the
later negative annual balances. Thus, the long-run actuarial balance
should be reported as a little higher.

4

partly on the SSA projections discussed above. Our main simulation derives
figures for annual income to and expenditure from the Social Security
Administration's retirement (that is, OASI) trust fund over the next 75
2

years.

This simulation begins with earnings records and other data concerning

Social Security participants who were surveyed in l973. For
subsequent years we estimate participants' earnings based on demographic
characteristics, we derive benefits based on legislated benefit formulae,

and we determine each participant's year of death through a random process
based on mortality tables published by the Social Security

Administration.4
Cohorts born beginning in 1953 are simulated differently. In
considering typical male and female wage earners born each year, we derive
their expected tax and benefit futures based on mortality probabilities and
the proportion that can be expected to marry. We multiply by the number
born each year (plus the number born that year who later immigrate as
children) who will enter covered employment and thus derive figures for

entire cohorts. To derive income and expenditure for the trust fund as a
whole we make a further adjustment for taxes paid and benefits received by
adult immigrants.

2. For further information on this simulation, or rather on an earlier version
of it, see Boskin, Avrin, and Cone (1983).
3. The 1975 Social Security Exact Match File merged individual records from
the 1973 Current Population Survey with records of covered earnings.
4. Social Security Administration, Actuarial Study No. 92 (1984).

5

The discussion is based on a version of our simulation which assumes

the tax law effective at the time of the Trustees' Report. Results
presented below use the recently enacted income-tax law.5
In the main simulation we rely on Social Security Administration
projections for the proportion of Social Security benefits which are

recovered for the trust fund through income taxation. These estimates are
that this proportion will rise from less than two percent in 1986 to about

five percent in the mid-twenty-first century. Because legislated marginal
tax rates have been reduced since the Social Security Administration made
its projections we assume that, from 1988 on, 20 percent less will be

collected in taxes on benefits. In 1987, the transition year, we assume
that 10 percent less will be collected.
This simulation is paraineterized by economic, demographic, and legal

assumptions. The most important economic assumption is future growth of
real wages. The chief demographic assumptions are mortality probabilities
by age and fertility rates. The legal assumptions are payroll tax rates
and formulae for the calculation of benefits. In the scenarios below we
consider the alternative economic and demographic assumptions that the
Social Security Administration itself uses for the scenarios in its annual

5. Our calculation is certainly rougher than that undertaken by the actuarial
staff of the Social Security Administration. As a result, we generate
projections of aggregate taxes and benefits which vary from those of the
1986 Trustee's Report. Between now and 2010 we derive less in annual and
cumulative surpluses (due to deriving less in tax receipts) than what the
Trustee's Report suggests is likely. Our figures are close to those of the
Trustee's Report in the early 2OlOs but thereafter until about 2040 we
derive greater annual surpluses or lower deficits than those projected in
the Trustee's Report. After 2040 we again generate higher annual deficits.

6

trustees' reports,6 and we consider fixed multiples of the payroll taxes
and and the benefits currently legislated.

3.

Long-Run Financial Status of OASI Under Alternative Economic
and Demographic Assumptions
Table 1 presents the results of the main simulation using the

Trustees' Report's intermediate assumptions about future economic and

demographic trends. It shows the basic trends, well known by now, that are
expected to develop in the finances of the OASI trust fund. This trust
fund will accumulate a substantial surplus over the next 25 years while the

baby-boom generation is in its peak earnings years. In the following 25
years (more precisely, in the mid 2020s) when the baby-boom generation

retires, benefit payments will begin to exceed payroll-tax revenues. In
the third 25-year period there will be a still higher proportion of
retirees to workers, and annual deficits will equal a fourth of tax
receipts, or a fifth of net benefits.

For the whole 75-year period we project a deficit of nearly $500

billion in 1986 dollars discounted to 1986. This is equal to about 0.44
percent of (discounted) taxable payroll.7 Thus a rise in the Social

6. We do not consider alternative assumptions for unemployment, female labor
force participation, immigration or real interest rates.
7. This is slightly more than the 0.29 percent long-term actuarial deficit
presented in the Trustees' Report. We discussed above how the latter
figure is not very meaningful, and how a calculation comparable to ours
would yield a deficit that is lower in magnitude. A further difference is
that our calculation assumes the new, lower marginal tax rates. Under the
old tax law our simulated deficit is about 0.34 percent of taxable payroll.
Finally, it should noted that we make no effort to calculate the future
deficit in disability insurance (DI). The Social Security Administration

7

Security payroll tax rate of a little less than 0.44 percent effective now,
or substantially more later, would be needed to close the long-run OASI
trust fund deficit if the intermediate assumptions prove to be the case.

It is worth noting at this point why we present our figures in

discounted terms. First, this enables us to consider the present value
of potential futures of the OASI trust fund. This is especially
valuable as we compare scenarios with different time paths of surpluses

and deficits. Secondly, it obviates the need to give explicit
consideration to the interest received (or paid out) by the trust fund
on its calculated surplus (or deficit), if we assume that the interest

and discount rates are identical. Of course, individual participants
might value their benefits at more than the expected present value, as

they are paid as inflation-indexed life annuities. The present (1986)
value of the surplus or deficit through 2060 will equal the sum of the

present values of annual surpluses and deficits until then. As a
corollary, it becomes very simple to compute how taxes or benefits can
or must be changed to bring the trust fund into actuarial balance.

The system finances are also presented in Figure 2, where the
discounted surplus both annually and on a cumulative basis for the system

are shown. On a cumulative basis the system starts to run a deficit
(assuming the surplus accrues and real interest is 2 percent) around 2048,

and on an annual basis, around 2025. We present below some hypothetical

calculates this deficit as averaging 0.15 percent of taxable payroll, or
half as large as the OASI deficit. The Social Security Administration
total projected OASDI deficit is thus 0.44 percent of taxable payroll. The
projected deficit in Hospital Insurance is another 3.5 percent.

8

scenarios of the surplus being dissipated or alternative economic and
demographic projections which alter these conclusions substantially.

The Social Security Administration's intermediate economic and
demographic assumptions are perhaps as reasonable as any, but we can be

sure that they will not be realized with great accuracy.8 It is thus
important to consider the impacts of a range of possible futures on the
Social Security system's finances.

Table 2 summarizes the effects of using the Social Security
Administration's optimistic and pessimistic assumptions for future wage
growth, future mortality (and hence, life expectancy), future fertility and

various combinations of these parameters. Wide variations exist in
results for the financial solvency of the retirement trust fund. The
present (1986) value of the trust fund surplus (or deficit) through 2060
ranges from +$3.4 trillion to -$2.6 trillion, for the combined

optimistic and pessimistic assumptions respectively.9 We see in the
column headed "year annual deficit begins" that only when the optimistic
assumptions are combined do tax receipts exceed benefit expenditures in

each year through 2060; otherwise current-flow deficits begin between
2014 and 2030. In the next column we see that the cumulative surplus
suffices, however, to cover benefit expenditures until 2024 in the most

8. For an analysis of the inaccuracy of the economic and demographic
assumptions used in the past, see United States General Accounting Office
(1986).

9. Undiscounted, but still in 1986 dollars, the respective figures are +$14.7
trillion and -$11.1 trillion. Subsequent figures are also presented in
discounted terms. To remove discounting, multiply by 4.33.

9

pessimistic scenario and beyond 2060 in several of the optimistic
scenarios.

The Social Security Administration's intermediate (Il-B) assumption
for growth in real wages, used in our base case, is that there will be an
annual gain of one and one-half percent (with some fluctuation in the very

short-run). The optimistic assumption considers a gain of two and one-half
percent annually, and the pessimistic assumption considers a gain of one
percent.

Interestingly, higher wage growth is better both for the system's

finances and for participants in the system. An increase in the trust
fund's annual surplus (taxes minus benefits) proves consistent with a

higher ratio of benefits received to taxes paid for the participants. The
reason for this is that increases in taxes, which vary with total wages,

precede the increases in benefits to which wage growth leads. The wage
index is used in the formula for determining benefits, and so a faster rise

in this index provides a higher rate of return for participants. What
"balances the books" is a growth in the unfunded liabilities of the

retirement trust fund. These liabilities could become quite burdensome if
wage growth slows in the future.

We see in Table 2 that variation in wage growth changes taxes and
benefits in the same direction, but that taxes change to a greater extent.
High wage growth increases the long-run surplus by $1.37 trillion, more than

offsetting the long-run deficit expected under the base case. Low wage
growth deepens the long-run deficit by about $450 billion.

In assumptions about mortality, what is "optimistic" for the solvency
of the retirement trust is "pessimistic" for participants, and vice versa.
The trust fund is more solvent when people die sooner and collect less in

10

benefits. Table 2 shows that under the Social Security Administration's
high mortality (low life expectancy) assumption the trust fund is better
off by $963 billion over the 75-year horizon, but that under the low
mortality assumption, the system is worse off by $1.20 trillion.

Alternative assumptions about fertility matter only for those cohorts

not yet born. However, because Social Security participants begin paying
taxes some forty years before they receive benefits, fertility rates will

have a big impact on trust fund finances in the next century)° Indeed,
today's low fertility rates are the most widely cited source of probable

future problems in Social Security finance. Current fertility rates are
about 1.9 children per woman over her child-bearing years. The Social
Security Administration's intermediate assumption is that this will rise
within the next two decades to 2.0 children per woman. The optimistic and
-

-

.
11
pessimistic assumptions are 2.3 and 1.6 respectively.
-

The results of our

simulation, shown in Table 2, are that high fertility would add $694
billion to the trust fund surplus, more than eliminating what is otherwise
a deficit, while low fertility would add $837 billion to the deficit.

Under the combined optimistic and pessimistic assumptions for trust
fund finances the differences from the intermediate scenario for long-run

surplus are +$3.88 trillion and -$2.07 trillion (Table 3). The present

10. The level of immigration, especially of young people, will have an impact
for the same reason. We leave this matter for future investigation.
11. In our simulation we use the Social Security Administration's figures for
numbers of births each calendar year, which are derived from these
fertility rates. It should be noted that the fertility rates used by the
Social Security Administration refer to the "average number of children who
would be born to a woman in her lifetime if she were to experience the
birth rates by age observed in, or assumed for, the selected year and if
she were to survive the entire child-bearing period."

11

value of taxes differs between these extreme scenarios by a factor of
nearly two, while benefits vary by a factor of about 1.3.

Figure 3 shows how the size of the accumulated trust fund varies over
the next 75 years for the overall optimistic, intermediate (base case), and

pessimistic scenarios. Note that the continuing increase in the trust fund
occurs only when all of the optimistic assumptions occur simultaneously.
For any one of the optimistic assumptions alone, interest on the trust fund
is eventually insufficient to cover the difference between current benefits
and current taxes, and the principal itself is exhausted before 2090 (Table
3, last column).

4.

Financial Impact of Alternative Uses of the Potential OASDI Trust Fund
Surplus
We noted in the previous section that only under the combined

optimistic assumptions for wage growth, mortality and fertility can we
hope that the retirement trust fund will take in at least as much each

year in taxes as it pays out in benefits. In all other cases an
accumulation in the trust fund is necessary in order to forestall the

time when taxes must be raised or benefits reduced.12 Under intermediate
assumptions, for example, an annual deficit will begin in 2025 but the
accumulated surplus will keep the trust fund solvent until 2048.

12. Of course, the consumption of the economy as a whole is limited by what is
produced by those still working. Thus, in some sense Social Security
benefits must always be funded at the time they are paid. Still, the
method of financing Social Security determines who has what claims, and
this has important implications both for equity and efficiency.

12

It has always proved difficult to accumulate a large trust fund

surplus. It is in the interest. of each session of Congrsss, andeach
administration, to raise benefits (or perhaps to lower taxes, although that

has not yet been tried) if possible. Raising benefits conveys transfers to
those receiving, or soon to receive, benefits while imposing much of the

cost of the action on future generations which do not vote yet. Lowering
taxes, similarly, helps a current generation of workers while requiring
higher taxes from future generations than would otherwise be necessary.
The situation is now particularly acute for a major demographic

reason: in less than 30 years the baby-boom generation will begin to
retire. If we do not accumulate a trust fund surplus before then,
future adjustments in payroll tax rates or in benefits will have to be
much greater than would otherwise be necessary.
Figure 4 depicts the combined (employer and employee) tax rates which
would be required each year to fund currently-legislated benefits (given
intermediate assumptions) without adding to or drawing upon an accumulated

surplus. Until 202513 tax rates could be lower than those currently
legislated, but thereafter they would rise drastically.

Conversely, Figure 5 shows the level of benefits which could be funded

by each year's tax receipts. This level is presented in the form of a
ratio to benefits as provided for under current legislation. We see that
benefits could be raised intermittently through 2009, to a level 30 percent

13. The higher tax rate shown for 2022 is a quirk resulting from the way our
simulation handles the rise in retirement age, from 66 to 67, which occurs
around that time. We simulate the change as occurring all at once rather
than phased in over several years.

13

higher than that now legislated, but that thereafter they must either
decline or, perhaps more plausible politically, be maintained through

increases in payroll tax rates. The tax rates required to finance these
increased benefits are depicted in the broken line of Figure 4.

Table 3 summarizes the financial impacts of several ways of
dissipating the trust fund surplus which is projected to grow over the next

35 to 40 years. "Pay-as-you-go tax rates" considers the scenario in which,
beginning in 1990, tax rates are set each year at a level which exactly

covers that year's benefit payments. Similarly, "pay-as-you-go benefits"
considers, also for 1990 on, the adjustment of benefit levels to match

projected tax receipts. The tax rates and benefit levels of these
scenarios thus follow the heavy lines depicted in Figures 4 and 5
respectively.

The "benefit ratchet" scenarios consider the cases in which benefits
rise to their pay-as-you-go peak in 2009 but do not subsequently decline.
The first of these scenarios notes the enormous deficit ($3.69 trillion)
generated when the higher benefit level is not funded with taxes, while the
second considers the case of taxes rising, in a pay-as-you-go fashion, to
fund the increased benefits.

The last two of these scenarios consider what will happen if the
surplus which would accumulate over the next forty years is dissipated, or

directed to other purposes. Two very plausible possibilities for this are
that the surplus could be used to cover some of the massive deficit in
Social Security's Hospital Insurance fund which (absent a major reform) will
develop within a few years,14 or that the surplus will, in the face of

14

federal budget deficits, be used to fund other expenditures. The first of
these scenarios raises taxes in a pay-as-you-go fashion from 2025 on: Thus
these scenarios are equivalent to the earlier pay-as-you-go scenarios from

2025 on; they only lack the period in which tax or else benefit levels are
more favorable for participants than the levels currently legislated. The
chief result for system finances (Table 3) under all these scenarios

except,

of course, the unfunded ratcheting of benefits -

- is

-

-

that the long-

run surplus is, by construction, essentially zero.

5.

Projections of Net National Saving and Its Components Under
Alternative Hypothetical Scenarios
We turn now to estimates of net national saving and its components

under alternative hypothetical scenarios concerning the future of Social

Security financing and various other factors. Before turning to the
results, we reiterate that these are meant only to be simple simulations
designed to highlight some emerging national policy issues. They are not
meant to be taken as a thorough analysis of the likely evolution of any of

the components, let alone all of them. Nor do they exhaust the various
interesting alternative scenarios. In these calculations, we use the SSA
projections, which differ slightly for OASI from my own, as discussed
above.

14. In practice, it is more likely that a portion of OASDI's payroll tax will be
reallocated to HI. The analysis of OASI finances would then be similar to
that of the pay-as-you-go tax rate scenario.

15

Note that net national saving, which we label total saving, TS, is the

sum

of

private saving, PS (gross private saving, net of depreciation, the

sum

of

personal and business saving), state and local government saving,

SLS (traditionally measured by the state and local surplus, although the
simultaneously accruing liabilities in the pension funds are not properly
accounted for nor is net state and local capital formation), and federal
government saving, FS (traditionally measured by the federal government
surplus, although the simultaneously accruing future pension liabilities
and federal government capital formation are not appropriately treated
either).

(1)

15

Thus,

TS =

PS + SLS

+ FS.

We decompose the federal government surplus, FS, into the federal
surplus excluding Social Security, FSXS, and the OASDI surplus and HI

surplus. Thus,

(2)

FS =

FSXS + OASDIS

+ HIS.

Before turning to the basic simulation results, it is worth
anticipating the discussion in the next section concerning the importance
of net national saving for investment and international capital flows by
recalling from the national income identity that

15. See Boskin, Robinson and Huber (1987) for a discussion of federal, state
and local government saving when account is taken of capital formation, as
well as a number of other factors.

16

(3)

FS =

I

-

PS

-

SLS +

NFl,

where I is domestic investment and NFl is net foreign investment. Holding
national income constant, changes in FS must be matched by corresponding

changes in PS, I, SLS, and/or NFl. Once we establish the likely effects on
national saving in this section, we will discuss the implications for
investment and net foreign investment in the next section.

We start out with some particular ttbase case" assumptions. For
simplicity, we assume in most, but not all, of the calculations that the
net private saving rate is constant at 6% of GNP, close to its historical

average. We discuss below cases in which "Denison's Law" holds, in which
the gross private saving rate is constant. In that case, the growth of the
capital consumption allowance will decrease net private saving. We also
discuss a simple conservative calculation of the impact of changing

demography on the saving rate through time. But in the remaining cases,
the net private saving rate is assumed constant at 6%. The state and local
surplus, according to the Commerce Department, has been abnormally high for
the last several years, in part due to funding issues in their pension

systems. It is presumed to run 1% of GNP for the next five years, then to
decline for the following ten years, until it reaches budget balance and

remains there from the turn of the century onward. This leaves us with
federal government saving, the non-Social Security surplus or deficit, and

the OASDI and HI surplus or deficit. We consider several alternatives for
the non-Social Security deficit. In the base case, we have the non-Social
Security deficit evolve to keep the national debt/GNP ratio constant at

current levels. Holding constant the ratio of national debt to CNP, we
ignore except in one scenario where we explicitly model a balanced primary

17

budget, the distinction between the primary budget deficit and interest
payments.

We consider various alternative scenarios or rules with respect to the
remainder of the budget, either explicitly or implicitly, via rules on the
overall budget. For example, we examine net national saving under GraimnRudnian with and without HI balanced, a balanced budget from the year 2000

onward, continuing federal government deficits, the optimistic and
pessimistic SSA assumptions, a zero primary deficit, pay-as-you-go OASDI,
and benefits ratcheting up in the era of the OASDI surplus.
The results of the simulation are portrayed in Figures 6 - 18.

Net

national saving and its components are plotted for the 75 year projection
period usually employed by the Social Security Administration, in this

case, 1986 to 2060. A variety of interesting features emerges from these
graphs. For example, consider Figures 6 and 7 which estimate net national
saving under Granun-Rudman plus the remaining assumptions described above.

The net national saving rate rises abruptly from its current 2% to about 7%
by 1991, due largely to the substantial decrease in the federal government

budget deficit. It then gradually declines to 6% around the turn of the
century for about a decade, then declines sharply to under 4% after 2026.
Importantly, the comparison of Figures 6 and 7 reveals that by moving HI
into budget balance we would raise the net national saving rate by about

two percentage points in the period after the turn of the century. We do
not discuss here what combination of tax increase and/or benefit reduction

is used to balance HI; it is assumed that it occurs in a manner that does
not affect the other components.
Figure 8 presents net national saving under a balanced federal budget

for the year 2000 and thereafter. This might be thought of as simulating a
strict balance budget requirement, such as that advocated by a

18

constitutional amendment.

As can be seen, net national saving rises

substantially, then gradually falls, reflecting the surplus turning to

deficit in OASDI and the HI deficit. The budget is required to be in
balance for the non-Social Security part of the budget.

In what might be thought of as a base case, with the debt/GNP ratio
(excluding Social Security) held constant, Figures 9 and 10 project net
national saving with federal and OASDI deficits, and correspondingly, with

HI in budget balance. The net national saving rate falls precipitously,
beginning about the year 2005, and in the base case, falls to under 1% of

GNP by the year 2030. HI budget balance, as can be seen, adds the usual
couple of percentage points to the net national saving rate early in the
next century.
Figures 11 and 12 use the base case assumptions for PS and SLS, but
replace the intermediate SSA assumptions by the optimistic and pessimistic

ones, respectively. They also allow the non-Social Security budget deficit
to evolve based on the alternative assumptions on GNP growth, etc. Net
national saving is substantially higher under the optimistic Social
Security assumptions, as the status of the OASDI fund and HI fund improve
enormously, as does, to a lesser extent, the non-Social Security deficit.
In fact, net national saving not only declines much less to slightly under
4% in the peak of the baby-boom's retirement, but begins to rise above 4%

later on. Under the pessimistic assumptions, as expected, net national
saving takes a nose dive, turning negative about 2015. This is due to the
very large deficits in HI, cumulating by then, and the fact that OASDI will

have turned to deficit about five years earlier, thereby offsetting all of
private saving.
Figure 13 portrays net national saving under a zero primary deficit,

19

i.e., the federal budget net of interest payments. As can be seen, net
national saving falls, but remains positive, if paltry, by the first
quarter of the next century.
Figures 14 - 16 highlight some potential reactions to the building of

the OASDI surplus. Figure 14 portrays net national saving and its
components under pay-as-you-go OASDI, assuming either the tax increase to
finance deficits, and the benefit decreases during the period of OASDI
surpluses do not affect the other components of net national saving.
Dissipating the early surplus, compared to the base case, lowers net
national saving substantially in the first three decades of the projection.

Net national saving falls to 3% by the turn of the century, and eventually

declines still further to about 2% of GNP. Note, however, that net
national saving under pay-as-you-go OASDI, while substantially lower for
the next thirty years or so, eventually is higher, partially offsetting
base case projections of subsequent large OASDI surplus.

Figure 15 presents net national saving under the alternative described
in detail in Section 4 concerning the possibility of benefits ratcheting up
during the period of the OASDI surplus and remaining at those higher levels
thereafter. Net national saving plunmiets as in the previous case for the
next thirty years, and then declines precipitously, becoming negative about

2016, and falling to -5% of CNP by about 2030. Undoubtedly, well before
such a national catastrophe occurred, various alternative policies would be

adopted. This is the flip side of the $3.7 trillion deficit estimated for
this case in Section 4. Note that were we to add a tax increase and/or
benefit cuts in the HI system to this case, that net national saving would
rise about 2 percentage points, as seen in Figure 16.

Figures 17 and 18 estimate the impact of dissipation of the OASDI
surplus (assuming HI is balanced) by using it to finance the general

20

federal deficit and to increase spending, respectively. The impact of the
dissipation of the surplus, and how the funds are used, is substantial.
Finally, we present in Figures 19 and 20 two simplistic scenarios

where the private saving rate varies: First, because of changes in the age
structure of the population and second because of the alleged constancy of

the gross private saving rate, "Denison's Law". In Figure 19, we have

allowed the net private saving rate to vary with the age structure. We use
SSA projections of the fractions of the population in the three age
cohorts, 20-44, 45-64, and 65-and-over, in the future, assume that the
relative incomes per household of the three groups remain as estimated in
1984 (see Boskin, Kotlikoff and Knetter (1985)), and, for simplicity, that
the saving rate of people in their peak earning years is twice that of

younger workers, whereas the saving rate of the elderly is -3%. The rates
are calibrated so that the overall rate in 1984 is 6%. There is
substantial controversy concerning whether the elderly save or dissave
during retirement, at what rate, and the implications this may have for a

number of important aspects of saving behavior. We remain agnostic on this
issue in this particular paper, and merely present this as one hypothetical

situation which might result in saving rates changing. As can be seen in
Figure 19, however, the saving rate merely varies from 5.8% to 6.2%. We
would need either a much more dramatic change in the relative incomes or a
substantially greater variation in the saving rates by age for large

variations in the private saving rate to occur. Of course, this is
possible if the elderly do dissave and/or if relative incomes change so as
to change dramatically the relative income weighting underlying Figure 19.
In any event, relative to the base case, the variations are quite modest.
Not so modest are the implications of "Denison's Law", which asserts

21

that the gross private saving rate is constant. Ignoring any feedback from
changes in the net saving rate to the rate of investment, capital
formation, and depreciation, we simulate a simple scenario in which the
capital formation process in the economy results in a gradual rise in the

capital consumption allowance over the next forty years. We presume this

rise is about 2 percentage points. Clearly with the gross private saving
rate constant, the net private saving rate must decline by two percentage

points in this case. Under the other assumptions of the base case
scenario, net national saving, as depicted in Figure 20, declines by 2

percentage points, holding all of the other components constant. In this
case, national saving turns negative by 2016, as it falls continuously from
1991 on, the year in which we begin the simulation of the gradual rise in

the capital consumption allowance. There is no particular reason other
than simplicity why we have chosen this form, nor would we expect the
capital consumption allowance necessarily to move at this rate or to remain

constant after 2020; we present these results because of the strong belief
held by some in "Denison's Law".

Tables 4, 5 and 6 highlight some of the important results on the

effects of Social Security on national saving. Table 4 projects net
national saving and its components as a percentage of GNP for the 75 year

period and for each of the usual 25 year sub-periods for the base case with
and without HI balanced. As can be seen, the total national saving rate is
a little over 2% for the entire period in the base case, and 3.33% when HI

is balanced. These 75 year averages are composed of a small OASDI deficit,
a federal deficit of 2.33% of GNP, a very small state and local surplus, a
constant 6% private saving rate, and the HI deficit in the base case and HI

budget balance from 1991 in the second case. The three sub-periods show
interesting variations. The net national saving rate is substantially

22

higher in the first 25 year period, averaging slightly over 4%. In the
second period, the net national saving rate falls to 1.7% and 3.1%

respectively. In the third 25 year period, the corresponding net national
saving rates are 0.5% and 2.8%. Given the other assumptions, the primary
difference revolves around the OASDI and HI surplus/deficit pattern.
Table 5 presents estimates of net national saving averaged over each
of the three twenty-five periods and the entire seventy-five year period

for various alternative future financing scenarios. It reveals the
substantial impact alternative Social Security financing alternatives may

have on net national saving. For example, consider the period 1986-2010.
Moving from the base case with accumulation of the OASDI surplus to pay-asyou-go OASDI (i.e., tax rate cuts to match outlays) reduces net national

saving by 20%, from 4.0% to 3.2.% of CNP. Still more dramatic changes
occur with other financing scenarios and in the later periods.
Table 6 presents an alternative method of viewing how quantitatively
important the Social Security surplus or deficit will be as a percentage of
other net national saving over the 75 year horizon and in each of the 25

year periods. For the base case, over the 75 year horizon, the Social
Security deficit, including the HI deficit offsets 38% of all other net
national saving. This decomposes into, adding 17% in the first 25 years,
offsetting almost one-half in the second 25 years, and over four-fifths,

in the third 25 year period. In the case where HI is balanced, by whatever
combination of tax increases and benefit reductions, Social Security

offsets substantially less of other net national saving. The Gramm-Rudman
cases demonstrate substantially higher other net national saving, and
therefore, the Social Security surplus or deficit offsetting a more modest

fraction of net national saving. The other cases indicate just how much

23

may be at stake in net national saving in alternative future Social

Security financing policies. For example, in the case where benefits rise
during the years which otherwise would have had a surplus, and then remain
elevated, over three-fourths of all other net national saving will be
offset by the OASDI deficit, starting with a small offset the first 25

years and then offsetting all other saving. Clearly, in such a case,
there would undoubtedly be some adjustment in taxes and/or the remainder of
the budget to compensate.

We have outlined the results nGt just to present an array of
alternative potential scenarios nor to present estimates of net national
saving which should be viewed in any way other than hypothetical, but to

highlight how important the direct effects of Social Security can be on net

national saving. That effect clearly can be enormous in any year, in each
of the twenty-five subperiods considered, as well as in the 75 year

projection period of the SSA. Assumptions concerning the other components
of net national saving will affect the level of net national saving but
still leave the situation where the status of the future financing of OASDI

will have an enormous direct impact on net national saving in the United

States. Of couse, the direct impact may be offset or accentuated by the
impact of OASDI on private saving and/or other components of government
saving and borrowing.

6.

Implications For Investment, International Capital Flows, Trade,
Productivity Growth
The results reported above were designed to highlight the potentially

significant impact that alternative policy options with respect to
accumulation or dissipation of the OASDI surplus will have on the net

24

national saving rate. Net national saving is important for a variety of
reasons. Saving is the method by which individual households transfer
resources from one part of their lifetime to another, e.g., from their peak

earnings years to retirement. Government sector saving or borrowing, among
other things, is the method by which the public sector attempts to transfer

resources, at least tax burdens, intertemporally. More directly, net
national saving is available to finance domestic investment or net foreign

investment. A higher net national saving rate may help increase the level
of domestic capital formation, or decrease the need for imports of foreign

capital. The simplistic analyses we usually teach our graduate students
suggest that a high rate of capital formation will temporarily increase the
rate of economic growth and will lead permanently to a higher level of
income by making labor more productive due to the higher capital labor

ratio. In a closed economy, a higher saving rate will be invested in the
long-run.

In an open economy, a higher saving rate will increase U.S.

capital flows abroad and/or decrease foreign capital flows into the United

States. As discussed above, in recent years, the United States has been a
substantial importer of foreign capital. These imports have become
significant enough to make the U.S. a net debtor, at least if the books are
taken at face value (U.S. assets overseas are usually treated at historic

cost). Thus, each year the United States imports large amounts of foreign
capital, despite the short-run benefits, results in an annual stream of
claims against that investment in the future as interest, dividends and

rents to foreigners. Ultimately, the only way to pay those returns is for
the United States to export more than it imports. For example, in 1986 the
United States imported $144 billion of net capital from abroad. For
simplicity, if we assume a return of 10 percent, this would commit the

25

United States to an increase of net exports of $14 billion a year.

Thus, a low net national saving rate will either be matched by a low
domestic rate of capital formation or if investment in the United States
exceeds net national saving, continued foreign capital inflows into the
United States.

The extent to which the United States must ultimately finance its
domestic capital formation from its own

saving

is uncertain. While recent

declines in net national saving have been substantially offset by importing
foreign capital, there is no convincing example in economic history of an
advanced economy financing its long-term development by continuing to rely

on foreign capital to finance its investment. The success stories of
external finance assisted growth have been of less developed countries,

whether recently or historically, such as the U.S. and Canada in the 19th

Century. Feldstein and Horioka (1980) and Summers (1986) present evidence
which suggests that domestic investment at least in the long-run must be

financed by domestic saving. While the subject is far from closed, no one
can be sure how long foreign investors will be willing to pour several
percent of GNP into the United States annually.

Eventually foreign

portfolios will become less and less diversified as the share of their
assets in dollar-denominated securities grows to significant proportions.

They would thus demand higher returns to compensate for this increased
risk.

Even if we conclude that in the long-run domestic capital formation
must be financed by national saving, the contribution of capital formation
to economic growth with respect to the magnitude and time frame is a source

of some controversy. Recent studies, for example, by Denison (1985) and
Jorgenson, Fraumeni, and Gallop (1987), come to quite different conclusions
with respect to the quantitative significance of capital formation in post-

26

war economic growth and in the productivity slowdown of the 1970s.
While no precise quantitative estimate can be given detailing the
impact of changes in the rate of net national saving upon domestic capital
formation and international capital flows, and correspondingly on
productivity growth and/or future trade patterns, the qualitative patterns

are clear, and the quantitative impact is likely to be important: low
rates of net national saving are likely to lead to low rates of domestic
investment in the long-run and substantial international capital flows into

the United States in the short-run. Thus, the policy options with respect
to Social Security have substantial ramifications for the future
performance of the economy well beyond the importance that they rightfully
deserve in terms of the retirement income security of current and future
retired persons.

7.

Conclusion
This paper has documented how the systematic deviation from pay-as-

you-go finance of the Social Security system is planned to result in

signficant surpluses for the next several decades in OASDI. Subsequently,

OASDI will run large deficits. HI is projected to run large and growing
deficits beginning in the 1990s.

Unless offset by changes in private saving or non-Social Security
budget deficits, these deviations from pay-as-you-go finance will cause

substantial systematic swings in the net national saving rate. Alternative
scenarios with respect to the disposition of the OASDI surplus over the
next three decades lead to important changes in the net national saving

rate. These swings are likely to be significant enough to cause

27

quantitatively important changes in the level of domestic investment which
can be financed internally and/or the patterns of net foreign investment.
Thus, future trade patterns and productivity growth will be affected,
perhaps substantially.

The paper thus highlights the important role Social Security's future
financing patterns will have on the course of the economy quite independent

of whether or not they affect private saving behavior. The potential
interaction of Social Security and private saving, and the potential
interaction of the state of the Social Security surplus (or perhaps more
accurately, its expected state) and the federal government's deficit in the

remainder of the budget will be important as well. The paper has
demonstrated the substantial reduction in the net national saving rate
which will occur if the OASDI surplus of the next three decades does not
accrue and is used instead to raise benefits, reduce taxes, or fund other

government programs (the most likely candidate being the HI deficit). The
likely response of private saving to the various alternative scenarios is a
source of controversy, partly because there is a major debate concerning
the methods by which the Social Security system may affect private saving, as
well as concerns about the quantitative magnitudes of any impact that may

have occurred historically. Changing demography, patterns of risk and
risk-bearing in the economy, household formation and dissolution, and
perceptions of the risks involved in "Social Security wealth" as opposed to
other types of assets may also make extrapolations from earlier studies
somewhat hazardous (see Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987) for some interesting
simulation results with respect to changes in demography).

However, it might generally be thought that if Social Security OASDI
surpluses are used to raise benefits substantially, this may well lead to a
decrease in saving for those then in their peak earning years, who expect

28

to receive higher benefits without having to pay higher taxes subsequently
(netting out any private intrafamily intergenerational transfers offsetting
this effect, assuming that they are far less than dollar for dollar).
Other methods of dissipating the surplus would have analogous results,

depending upon the time pattern of changes in expected benefits and taxes

for persons of various ages. There is also the important fact that the
growth of Social Security, changing demography and changes in financial
markets, along with the deviations from pay-as-you-go finance, alter the
perceived risk attached to any potential claims to future Social Security

benefits. For example, well-off current prime age earners may believe that
Social Security will be means-tested at an income level below their
expected other resources when they reach old age in order to finance any

deficits that result. One might expect these perceived risks also to
affect private saving behavior.

Of course, changes in net national saving may directly affect interest
rates which may in turn affect desired private saving, contributions to
defined benefit pension plans, the valuation of existing stocks of wealth,

etc. While the short-run openness of the economy to international flows of
capital might be expected to mitigate any effect on interest rates, all of
the advanced economies will be aging rapidly and may experience reductions
in private saving and pressure on their public budgets.

Finally, there is an additional important channel by which private

saving behavior may be altered. In response to the pressures involved in
financing future Social Security benefits for the baby-boom generation, it
may well be that the remainder of the federal budget and/or public policy
with respect to private saving, such as rules governing pension plans, the
taxation of saving, etc., may respond in an attempt to encourage private

29

saving. Of course, the extent to which they would be successful in doing
so raises a host of other questions to which only imprecise answers can be
given.

In conclusion, this paper should be viewed as highlighting the
important role that Social Security's future financing pattern may have on
net national saving, directly through the accumulation of a surplus and
subsequent larger deficit, and indirectly through the potential interaction
of Social Security and private saving, and the potential interaction of the
state of the Social Security system's finances and the federal government's

deficit in the remainder of the budget. The numerous caveats concerning
the direct calculation discussed above, as well as the issues concerning
the response of private saving, should be borne in mind in interpreting the
results.

30

References

Auerbach, A. and L. Kotlikoff, Dynamic Fiscal Policy, Cambridge
University Press, 1987.
Barro, R. J. and M. Feldstein (1978), "The Impact of Social Security on
Private Saving: A Debate," monograph, American Enterprise Institute.

Boskin, M. J. (1986), Too Many Promises; Ih Uncertain Future
Security, Homewood, IL: Dow Jones-Irwin.

Social

Boskin, M. J., M. Avrin and K. Cone (1983), "Modeling Alternative
Solutions to the Long-Run Social Security Funding Problem," in M.
Feldstein (ed.), Behavioral Simulation Methods
Policy Analysis,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Boskin, M. J., L. J. Kotlikoff, M. Knetter, (1985), "Changes in the Age
Distribution of Income in the United States 1968-1984," NBER Working
Paper No. 1766, November.
Boskin, M. J., L. J. Kotlikoff, D. J. Puffert, and J. B. Shoven (1987),
"Social Security: A Financial Appraisal Across and Within Generations,"
National I Journal, March.

Boskin, M. J., L. J. Kotlikoff, and J. B. Shoven (1985), "Personal
Security Accounts: A Proposal for Fundamental Social Security Reform,"
Policy Paper, Center for Economic Research, Stanford University,
September.
Boskin, M. J. and D. J. Puffert, (1987), "The Financial Impact of Social
Security by Cohort," Mimeo.
Boskin, M. J. and D. J. Puffert, (1987), "Social Security and the
American Family," NBER Working Paper No. 2117, January.
Boskin, M. J.., M. S. Robinson and A. Huber, (1987) "Government Saving
Capital Formation and Wealth in the United States, 1947-1985," Mimeo.

Denison, E., Trends in American Economic Growth. 1929-1982, Brookings,
1982.

Feldstein, M. and C. Horioka, "Domestic Savings and International
Capital Flows," Economic Journal, June 1980.
Jorgenson, D., B. Fraumeni and F. Gallop, Productivity Growth .jii
United States, Harvard University Press, 1987.

Summers, L., "Issues in National Savings Policy," inC. Adams and S.
Wachter, eds., Saving and Caiital Formation: Th Policy Ottions, D.C.
Heath, 1986.
Thompson, L. H. (1983), "The Social Security Reform Debate," Journal
Economic Literature, 21(4), December.

United States General Accounting Office, (1986), Social Security: Past
Projections and Future Financing Concerns, Washington, D.C., March.

Table 1
Base Case (Intermediate Assumption)

A. FINANCIAL FLOWS OF OASI TRUST FUND
1986 $BILLIONS, DISCOUNTED TO 1986
SURPLUS /

TIME PERIOD
1986
2011
2036
1986

TO 2010
TO 2035
TO 2060
TO 2060

PAYROLL

TAXES

BENEFITS

39584
38540
34460
112584

4366
4232
3784
12381

3997
4422
4925
13344

BEN TAXESa
114
158
196

468

(141)
(198)
(244)
(584)

SURPLUS

PAYROLL

483

1.22%
-0.08%
-2.74%
-0.44%

-31
-946
-495

*12,267
*14,743
*13,365

*10,170
*12,306
*12,522
*13,095
*11,516

*19,177

*9,644

Low Wage Growth

High Mortality

Low Mortality

High Fertility

Low Fertility

Overall Optimistic
for Trust Fund

Overall Pessimistic
for Trust Fund

*Remains Positive Indefinitely.

*11,516

*18,021

High Wage Growth

*12,653

*16,376

*13,315

*17,781

*13,344

*12,381

Base Case

Benefits

Taxes

Scenarios

*441

*587

*467

*469

*521

*429

*398

*639

*468

Benefit
Taxes

—*2,567

*3,389

—*1,332

*199

*1,700

*468

—*948

*878

—*495

Surplus

By 2080
2040

2026
2021

—*2,072

—2.93

1.94%

—1.27%

—*837

+*3,884

0.17%

+694

2014

•

2035

2018

1.49%

—*1,205

2024

*

By 2080

2027

0.42%

+*963

2035

By 2090

2030
2020

2048

2025

—1.03%

0.54%

—0.44%

Year Auni Year Cumu.
Deficit
Deficit
Begins
Begins

—*453

+*1,373

0

Variation
Surplus as
of Surplus % of Tax.
fr Base Case
Payroll

Demographic Scenarios — 75 Year Totals (1986—2060)
System Finances, Various Economic
(1986 *billions, discounted to 1986)

Table 2

*12,381

*12,868

*12,381

*12,381

*16,064

*13,565

*12,381

Base Case

Pay—As—You—Go
Tax Rates

Pay—As—You—Go
Benefits

Benefit Ratchet,
Unfunded

Benefit Ratchet,
Funded by taxes

Surplus Dissipated
Funded by taxes

Surplus Dissipated
Adjusted benefits
*12,112

*13,344

*16,662

*16,662

*12,832

*13,344

*13,344

Benefits

*420

*468

*591

*591

*443

*468

*468

Benefit
Taxes

a*689 billion surplus through 2025 has been dissipated.

Taxes

Scenarios

0a

0a

—*8

—*3,690

—*8

—*8

—*495

+*495

+*495

+*487

—*3195

÷*487

+*487

0

of Surplus
fr Base Case

SurplusJ Variation

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

—3.28%

0.00%

0.00%

—0.44%

Surplus as
of Tax.
Payroll

%

Various Scenarios for Trust Fund Surplus — 75 Year Totals (1986—2060)
(1986 *billions, discounted to 1986)

Table 3

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

2010

n.a.

n.a.

2025

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

2010

n.a.

n.a.

2048

Year Annl Year Cumu.
Deficit
Deficit
Begins
Begins

Table 4
Projected Net National Saving & Its Components
As A Percentage of Projected ON?

Base Case
Total
OASDI
Private
HI
Federal

State/Local
Base Case - HI Balanced
Total
OASDI
Private
HI
Federal

State/Local

1986-2060

1986-2010

2011-2035

2036-2060

2.1
-0.1

4.0
0.9

6.0

6.0
-0.3

0.6
-1.0
6.0
-1.9
-2.5

-3.0

1.8
-0.3
6.0
-1.3
-2.5

0.1

0.4

0.0

0.0

2.5
-0.1

4.3

3.1
-0.3
6.0
0.0
-2.5

2.5
-1.0
6.0
0.0
-2.5

0.0

0.0

-1.2
-2.7

0.9

6.0
0.0

0.0

-2.7

-3.0

0.1

N.B. Data are simple averages of annual total.

6.0

0.4

Table 5

Projected Net National Saving
As a Percentage of Projected GNP

Scenario

1986-2060

1986-2010

20l1-Z035

2036-2060

Grainm - Rudman

4.5

5.9

4.3

3.1

Gramm-Rudn1an(HI balanced)

5.5

5.9

5.5

5.0

Balanced Federal Budget
(2000 and after)

4.2

5.3

4.3

3.1

Base Case

2.1

4.0

1.8

0.6

Base Case, HI Balanced

3.3

4.3

3.1

2.5

Optimistic SSA Assumptions

4.6

5.1

4.5

4.3

Pessimistic SSA Assumptions

-1.3

2.9

.1.7

-5.0

Zero "Primary" Fed. Deficit

2.7

4.5

2.3

1.1

Pay-As-You-Go OASDI

2.3

3.2

2.2

1.6

OASDI Benefit Ratchet

0.8

3.2

0.2

-1.1

OASDI Benefit Ratchet,
HI Balanced

1.9

3.5

1.5

0.8

OASDI Surplus Finances Fed.
Deficit, HI Balanced

3.3

4.3

3.1

2.5

OASDI Surplus Spent,
HI Balanced

3.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

Private Saving Varies With
Age Structure

2.0

4.1

1.7

0.1

-0.1

3.2

-1.0

-2.4

Denison's Law

Table 6
Percentage Change In Net National Saving Due to Social Security Surplus
or Deficit, By Period, For Alternative Financing Scenarios

Scenario

1986-2060

1986-2010

2011-2035

2036-2060

j

Gramm-Rudman

-21.4

11.3

-27.8

-47.6

-1.0

18.8

-5.4

-16.3

-20.5

14.0

-27.8

-47.6

-38.0

17.0

-47.0

-82.0

Base Case, HI Balanced

-3.7

26.8

-9.9

-28.1

Optimistic SSA Assumptions

20.7

37.2

16.0

8.9

Pessimistic SSA Assumptions

-137.9

-10.8

-41.7

-71.4

Zero "Primary" Fed. Deficit

-32.7

15.0

-151.9

-251.0

Pay-As-You-Go OASDI

-32.4

-5.2

-38.1

-53.9

OASDI Benefit Ratchet

-77.5

-6.4

-94.6

-131.4

OASDI Benefit Ratchet,
HI Balanced

-43.5

3.4

-56.6

77.4

-3.7

26.8

-9.9

-28.1

OASDI Surplus Spent,
HI Balanced

-12.9

3.9

-14.5

-28.1

Private Saving Varies With
Age Structure

-43.4

16.5

-50.5

-96.2

-302.4

23.5

-335.8

-594.8

Granini-Rudman(HI balanced)

lanced Federal Budget
(2000 and after)

Base Case

OASDI Surplus Finances Fed.
Deficit, HI Balanced

Denison's Law

N.B. Data are simple averages of annual total.

>

Taxable

Income

Surplus (Deficit) as

1986

2011

Projected

I

tir

I

yei r

2036

2061

I

Social Security Finances

(Deficit) as a
of Taxable

(including HI)

Payroll

Surplus
(Deficit) as Z
of Taxable

Payroll

z

Surplus

-

I

of $

là

IIH flhIHf

I.

9•

I

Annual and

N

Base Case

I

Cumulative

— Annual

Year

H

III

2051 2856

RTfl Ir11-t+4-H-4-LLLjjjj H IH HHHH rtIH HH

Cumulative

—

1986 1991 1996 2081 2806 2811 2016 2021 2026 2831 2836 2841 2846

—688

—480

—288

488

608..

Billions

Figure 2

Discouited Surplus
—

1986

—3880

—2888

—1886

B

1688

2888

3888

4886

1991

Billions of $

1996 2061

Base

2886 2811

"" Optlrilstic

— Pessiptistic

Year

2616 2821 2626

2631 2836 2841 2846

Discounted Cumulative Surplus For
Alternative Scenarios

Figure 3

2651

2856

—

:iI1'..
—

...

to

Pay

Current

Law

Benefit Ratchet

Tax Rates

Rates

.4.

f or

Pay—As—You—Go Tax

4t4••

,.

________________________

Pay—As— You—Go

Year

11111 I I I I I I I 11111 I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 1111111 I I I I I I I I I I H
1986 1991 1996 2861 2866 2811 2616 2821 2626 2631 2836 2841 2846 28S1 2856

8

2

4.

6

8 -.

16

18

28

of Taxable Payroll

4

Tax Rates, Current Law and

Figure

8.6

III

III

liii

I

I

III IIIII III IIII

Year

I_I__t_1 II
I I I
I I
I II I I I
++ II II II II II II 11111
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 11 I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I
1986 1991 1996 2061 2086 2811 2016 2621 2626 2831 2636 2841 2646 2651 2856

8.8

I

1.2

5

Benefit Ratio, Given

Figure
Taxes, To Maintain Annual Balance

Pay—As—You—Go

I

—8
1986

—6

—2

111111111.

—

.
National Saving Under GranM—Rudvlan

1991

1996

2861 2686

&

Local Govt Surplus

st

Fed Surplus (ex—SSec)

OASDI Surplus

HI Surplus

Saving

Private Saving

Total

Year

2611 2816 2821 2626 2631 2636 2841 2846 2851 2856

—

I.IIIII.III''—...—
4+4.I..I.;..I..iJ..rD..i-HHIli-IJ..LJ.4LIirrH...L.JHIIHHHHHIHIHHHIHHHHIIH

TII

16

.GNP

Net

Figure 6.

•••I•Ifl.)i
'"••..•

—

-•

I

I

I

1111111 11111

II I I

I

I

I

I I I I

HI Surplus

•

Private Saving

I

OASDI Surplus

II I

Total Stuing

..a.......

I

-..

I

11111111

Year

Fed Surplus (ex—SSec)
St & Local Govt Surplus
—8
1986 1991 1996 2001 2086 2011 2016 2021 2026 2831 2836 2041 2846 2851 2056

—6

2

2

4.

6

B.

10

7.

Net National Saving Under Granm—Rudman (HI Trust Fund Balance)

FIgure

I

—8'
1986

—6

—4,

—2

8

2

4

6

8'

18

'.GNP

I

I

a

I

I

.I

—

I

i
U
U

, i , i
I I
I
a

•

.

.

I
p

p

a

a

•

m.•

•

.

I

a

.
I
I

a

I

p

p

I I

p

I

••_•fl,...

.
I

I

Fed Surplus (ex—SSec)

Private Saving

— Total Saving

•

.....i ,
a

I

I

I

I

I

U

U

iI i

a

I I

a

U

a

I

a

iI

I

a

i

I

I

a

•

II
a

a

I I

i

.
I

I

I

& Local Govt Surplus

HI Surplus

OASDI Surplus

I

— St

I

Year

2081 2886 2811 2016 2821 2826 2831 2036 2841 2846 2051 2856

ISV!

..

iP_j jI iI iI

1991 1996

I

8.

Net National Saving Under Balanced Federal Budget (2808 and after)

Figure

I

I1

____________________________________________

St & Local Govt Surplus
Fed Surplus (ex—SSec)

OASDI Surplus
HI Surplus

Saving

PrIvateSaving

— Total

Net National Saving Under Federal and OASDHI Deficits (Base Case)

9.

1986 1991 1996 2001 2686 2811 2016 2821 2026 2031 2036 2041 2046 2051 2056
1ear

—8

—6

4

6

B

10••

'.GNP

Figure

1986

—B..

19•

'.GNP

1991

HI Surplus

St & Local Govt Surplus

Fed Surplus Cex—SSec)

OASDI Surplus

::::::::: ::::::::: :::::::: ::::::::

Private Saving

— Total
Saving

:I::::('r—l—•:..L.LJ.::::

HI Budget Balance

Year

1996 2081 2006 2811 2016 2021 2026 2031 2036 2041 2046 2051 2856

::::i:::

Net National Saving Under

Figure 10.

1986

—8

—6

—4

—2

a

2

4

6

8

10

'.GNP

i

i

: fl r
:

:

H
:

:

i

—

: i

i

:

:

:

::::

St & Local Govt Surplus

::

Fed Surplus (ex—SSec)

OASDI Surplus

i: :::

HI Surplus

Saving

i

Private Saving

Total

i

.....—.fl......ubs....

Year

1991 1996 2801 2886 2811 2816 2021 2826 2831 2036 2841 2046 2051 2056

i

— —
:

Net National Saving Under Optimistic Social Security
Assumptions

Figure 11.

1991 1996

...—.-

.

.. ..

—

':
:

:

:

:

. ....

—._._,...
..

:1: :11:1:1:

:

:1

.

..

:

.. •.. . .

i

:::: ::::::

....

..-------------------,--

.—.

St & Local Govt Surplus
..

Fed Surplus (ex—SSec)
..

HI Surplus

Private Saving
..

OASDI Surplus

Total Saving

Year

2661 2886 2811 2816 2621 2826 2831 2036 2841 2046 2051 2056

—Jtc:.i::I...i:f_i._rbi.i.:r.i__t_.l

1986

—8

—6

—2

6

2

4,

6

8

16

GNP

Net National Saving Under Pessimistic Social Security
Assumptions

Figure 12.

1986

—8-

—6

4

—2

8

10

,

I

1991

— St

& Local Govt Surplus

HI Surplus

OASDI Surplus

Year

1996 2001 2086 2011 2816 2821 2826 2031 2036
2041 2046 2851 2056

Fed Surplus (ex—SSec)

Private Saving

— Total
Saving

!111111'r1—:..L_L.J..1..111IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII11111111

Net National Saving Under Zero "Priiary' Federal
Deficit

Figure 13.

•

—

•

—6
1986 1991 1996

—6•

—2

:

6

8

16

.GNP

-....-

HI Surplus
St & Local Govt Surplus

Private Saving
Fed Surplus (ex—SSec)

III 1111111111111111

OASDI Surplus

I

Total Saving

.

111111111111111111111111111111

..

Pay—As—you—Go OASDI

2681 2886 2811 2816 2821 2026 2031 2836 2041 2846 2051 2856
Year

..

Net National Saving Under

Figure 14.

•

1986

—8

—6•

6

8

1B•

S'.GNP

1991

1996

St & Local Govt Surplus

Fed Surplus (ex—SSec)

Year

2681 2886 2811 2816 2021 2826 2831 2836 2641 2646 2651 2056

HI Surplus

OASDI Surplus

Private Saving

— Total
Saving

IJLIIIIIIIIIIII

Net National Saving Under OASDI Benefit Ratchet

Figure 15.

H

1986

—8

—6

—2

o
1

111

i

:

:i

:

:

Govt Surplus

st & Local

:1:

Fed Surplus (ex—SSec)

:::

HI Surplus

i

Private Saving

ii

OASDI Surplus

:1:

Total Saving

::::::

Year

1991 1996 2881 2886 2811 2816 2821 2826 2831 2036 2041 2846 2851 2056

/

:1

.

:i::

:

::

2T

8

18•

GNP

Net National Saving Under OASDI Benefit Ratchet and HI Balance

Figure 16.

•

11111
I
I

..LW1I liii
III

Private Saving
Fed Surplus (ex—SSec)

— Total
Saving

I

I

I

III

St & Local Govt Surplus

HI Surplus

OASDI Surplus

11111111
11(1111111111111111111111

Year

2681 2886 2811 2016 2621 2026 2031 2836 2041 2846 2851 2056

f1+•H•H••fl•H-tI 11111111

1986 1991 1996

—6

—2

8

2

4.

6

8

le,

GNP

17.

Net National Saving Assuming OASDI Surplus Finances Federal
Deficit and HI Balance

Figure

/

pae",,

1986 1991

—8•

—6

—2

6

8

10

GNP

......
..

"-

Saving

41

,••••••.••

Fed Surplus

-...

(ex—SSec)

Private Saving

— Total

III

...

IH
St & Local Govt Surplus

HI Surplus

OASDI Surplus

-....-.

Year

1996 2801 2086 2011 2816 2821 2826 2031 2036 2041 2846 2051 2856

— —

..

Net National Saving Assuning OASDI Surplus is Spent and HI
Balance

Figure 18.

--

HI Surplus
St & Local Gout Surplus

Fed Surplus (ex—SSec)

OASDI Surplus

Private Saving

— Total Saving

—

¶ear

1986 1991 1996 208i 2086 2011 2016 2021 2026 2031 2036 2041 2046 2051 2856

6

8

18

> GNP

Net National Saving Assuriing Private Saving Varies with Age
Structure

Figure 19.

1986

—o

—6

—4

-2

o

6

8•

18•

1991

1996

Fed Surplus (ex—SSec)

— St & Local

I

11111111

Govt Surplus

HI Surplus

11111 I

Private Saving

III

OASDI Surplus

111111111111

Total Saving

III

—

I

Year

2001 2006 2811 2016 2821 2826 2031 2836 2841 2846 2851 2856

I

Net National Saving Assuming 'Denison's Law"

Figure 20.

