                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




HEALTHY-TIME MEASURES OF HEALTH OUTCOMES AND HEALTHCARE QUALITY

                                       Marguerite Burns
                                        John Mullahy

                                      Working Paper 22562
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22562


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2016




John Mullahy's work has been supported in part by the Health & Society Scholars Program, by
NICHD grant P2C HD047873 to the Center for Demography and Ecology, and by the Robert
Wood Johnson Foundation Evidence for Action Program (grant 73336), all at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Marguerite Burns and John Mullahy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Healthy-Time Measures of Health Outcomes and Healthcare Quality
Marguerite Burns and John Mullahy
NBER Working Paper No. 22562
August 2016
JEL No. I1

                                        ABSTRACT

The purposes of this paper are to describe some conceptual and empirical foundations of
"healthy-time" measures of health outcomes or healthcare quality, and to explore how to expand
the empirical opportunities for measuring such outcomes using U.S. national survey data. To
these ends, the paper provides an overview of Grossman's seminal health production framework,
surveys some of the healthy-time outcome/quality measures in use across a variety of contexts
and applications, explores how data from the U.S. Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS)
might be used to develop ongoing healthy-time measures for U.S. samples, describes an
econometric strategy for studying such outcomes, and presents estimates of regression models
describing two sets of healthy-time outcome measures obtained from 2011 and 2012 MEPS data.


Marguerite Burns
Department of Population Health Sciences
University of Wisconsin
WARF Building
Madison WI 53726
meburns@wisc.edu

John Mullahy
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Dept. of Population Health Sciences
787 WARF, 610 N. Walnut Street
Madison, WI 53726
and NBER
jmullahy@facstaff.wisc.edu
                        ...consumers	   demand	   health,	   defined	   broadly	   to	   include	   illness-­‐
                        free	  days	  in	  a	  given	  year	  and	  life	  expectancy...	  	  (Grossman,	  2016)	  
                                                                                  	  
                        What	   generally	   matters	   to	   patients	   are	   outcomes	   that	  
                        encompass	   the	   whole	   cycle	   of	   care	   -­‐-­‐	   including	   health	   status	  
                        achieved	   (e.g.,	   survival,	   functional	   status,	   quality	   of	   life);	   the	  
                        time,	   complications,	   and	   suffering	   involved	   in	   getting	   care;	   and	  
                        the	  sustainability	  of	  benefits	  achieved...	  	  	  (Porter	  et	  al.,	  2015)	  
	  
	  
1.	  Introduction	  

	          Economists	  examining	  health	  questions	  often	  encounter	  data	  on	  concepts	  like	  work-­‐

loss	   days,	   restricted-­‐activity	   days,	   bed-­‐disability	   days,	   and	   school-­‐loss	   days,	   these	   often	  

reported	  over	  a	  two-­‐week	  recall	  or	  lookback	  period.	  	  Other	  familiar	  measures,	  like	  EVGFP	  

self-­‐assessed	  physical	  health	  or	  mental	  health,	  may	  or	  may	  not	  have	  defined	  recall	  periods	  

or	   timeframes,	   while	   yet	   other	   measures	   are	   tied	   tightly	   to	   specific	   time	   windows,	   e.g.	   how	  

many	  days	  in	  the	  past	  30	  days	  physical	  health	  or	  mental	  health	  has	  been	  not	  good.	  

	          Regardless	   of	   the	   particular	   metric,	   a	   fundamental	   motivation	   for	   analyzing	   or	  

reporting	  such	  measures	  is	  that	  they	  are	  intended	  to	  describe	  individuals'	  "health",	  and	  -­‐-­‐	  

in	   most	   cases	   -­‐-­‐	   to	   provide	   a	   time	   reference	   for	   the	   period	   during	   which	   that	   health	   was	  

being	  experienced.	  	  That	  is,	  they	  are	  oriented	  to	  characterizing	  and	  measuring	  what	  we	  will	  

call	   "healthy	   time."	   	   As	   we	   suggest	   in	   Section	   2,	   such	   notions	   of	   time-­‐denominated	  health	  

are	  essentially	  those	  that	  characterize	  Grossman's	  seminal	  work	  on	  the	  demand	  for	  health	  

(Grossman,	   1972),	   and	  notion	   that	   "time	   being	   healthy	   is	   what	   people	   value"	   is	   challenging	  

to	  challenge.	  

	          Indeed	  patient-­‐centered	  and/or	  value-­‐based	  healthcare	  is	  -­‐-­‐	  or	  at	  least	  ought	  to	  be	  -­‐-­‐	  

based	  on	  the	  premise	  that	  the	  health	  outcomes	  or	  healthcare	  quality	  dimensions	  of	  interest	  

are	   those	   that	   matter	   to	   patients.	   	   Measures	   used	   to	   assess	   the	   value	   of	   such	   healthcare	  



	                                                                            1	  
should	   logically	   attempt	   to	   capture	   such	   dimensions	   of	   health	   status	   (Lynn,	   et	   al.,	   2015;	  

Porter	   et	   al.,	   2015).	   	   Section	   3	   describes	   how	   some	   prominent	   measures	   currently	   in	   use	  

that	   point	   towards	   quantifying	   value	   or	   patient-­‐centeredness	   are	   fundamentally	   about	  

"time	  being	  healthy."	  	  	  

	          In	   reality,	   "time	   being	   healthy"	   will	   often	   be	   operationalized	   in	   available	   data	   by	  

measures	   of	   time	   not	   spent	   in	   contact	   with	   the	   healthcare	   system.	   	   As	   such,	   its	   nature	   as	  

truly	   healthy	   time	   is	   perhaps	   questionable.	   	   Downstream	   research	   might	   usefully	   explore	  

the	  extent	  to	  which	  time	  spent	  outside	  of	  healthcare	  system	  contact	  is	  or	  isn't	  healthy	  and	  

how	   this	   might	   vary	   with	   individuals'	   characteristics,	   including	   health	   status.	   	   	   But	   such	  

considerations	  are	  beyond	  the	  scope	  of	  the	  present	  paper.	  

	          The	   purposes	   of	   this	   paper	   are	   to	   describe	   some	   conceptual	   and	   empirical	  

foundations	   of	   "healthy-­‐time"	   measures	   of	   health	   outcomes	   or	   healthcare	   quality,	   and	   to	  

explore	  how	  to	  expand	  the	  empirical	  opportunities	  for	  measuring	  such	  outcomes	  using	  U.S.	  

national	  survey	  data.	  	  To	  these	  ends,	  here	  is	  the	  plan	  for	  the	  paper.	  	  Section	  2	  gives	  a	  brief	  

overview	   of	   Grossman's	   health	   production	   framework.	   	   Section	   3	   surveys	   some	   of	   the	  

healthy-­‐time	   measures	   in	   use	   across	   a	   variety	   of	   contexts	   and	   applications.	   	   Section	   4	  

explores	  how	  data	  from	  the	  U.S.	  Medical	  Expenditure	  Panel	  Survey	  (MEPS)	  might	  be	  used	  

to	  develop	  ongoing	  healthy-­‐time	  measures	  for	  samples	  of	  the	  noninstitutionalized	  civilian	  

population	   in	   the	   U.S.	   	   Section	   5	   describes	   an	   econometric	   strategy	   for	   studying	   such	  

outcomes	   in	   reduced-­‐form	   settings.	   	   Section	   6	   presents	   estimates	   of	   regression	   models	  

describing	  two	  sets	  of	  healthy-­‐time	  outcome	  measures	  obtained	  from	  2011	  and	  2012	  MEPS	  

data.	  	  Section	  7	  concludes.	  

	  	  



	                                                                          2	  
2.	  Health	  Measurement	  in	  Time:	  Grossman's	  Health	  Production	  Framework	  

	          Many	   discussions	   of	   health	   in	   health	   economics	   begin	   with	   Grossman's	   (1972)	  

model	  of	  the	  demand	  for	  health.	  	  This	  work	  is	  best	  known	  for	  its	  emphasis	  on	  health	  as	  a	  

valued	   commodity	   that	   cannot	   be	   purchased	   on	   markets,	   for	   its	   development	   of	   the	   notion	  

of	   investment	   in	   health	   capital	   stocks	   as	   a	   special	   form	   of	   human	   capital,	   and	   for	   its	   careful	  

assessment	   of	   the	   roles	   of	   medical	   care	   and	   schooling	   in	   the	   demand-­‐investment	  

framework.	  

	          A	  less-­‐often	  emphasized	  feature	  of	  Grossman's	  framework	  is	  its	  careful	  distinction	  

between	  health	  capital	  and	  health	  status.	  	  Health	  capital,	  a	  stock,	  is	  at	  time	  (subscripts	  "i"	  

index	   time	   periods	   in	   Grossman's	   notation)	   generated	   via	   some	   investment-­‐depreciation	  

process	   Hi+1 − Hi = Ii − δ iHi ,	   with	   investment	   "production"	   given	   by	   Ii = Ii Mi ,THi ;Ei 	  
            !                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                            (                  )
wherein	  M	  represents	  medical	  care	  utilization,	  TH	  is	  time	  devoted	  to	  investment	  in	  health	  

capital	   (including,	   but	   not	   limited	   to,	   time	   spent	   engaged	   in	   medical	   care),	   and	   E	   is	  

schooling	  or	  some	  other	  feature	  of	  non-­‐health	  human	  capital.	  

	          Health	  status,	  conversely,	  is	  a	  flow	  that	  in	  Grossman's	  framework	  is	  at	  any	  time	  "i"	  

                                                                                          (          (             )       )
proportional	   to	   health	   capital	   stocks,	   hi = φiHi = φi Ii−1 − 1− δ i−1 Hi−1 .	   	   As	   a	   flow,	   health	  
                                                          !

status	   is	   necessarily	   defined	   by	   some	   time	   frame	   or	   time	   denomination.	   	   In	   Grossman's	  

framework,	  this	  translates	  into	  considering	  poor	  health	  or	  sickness	  as	  a	  particular	  form	  of	  

time	   use	   within	   individuals'	   overall	   time	   budgets.	   	   Grossman's	   original	   exposition	   is	  

characteristically	  clear:	  

            	  
            ...The	   time	   constraint	   requires	   that	   Ω ,	   the	   total	   amount	   of	   time	   available	   in	  
            any	   period,	   must	   be	   exhausted	   by	   all	   possible	   uses:	   TWi + TLi + THi + Ti = Ω ,	  
                                                                                                   !

	                                                                             3	  
                                                            where	   TLi 	  is	  time	  lost	  from	  market	  and	  nonmarket	  activities	  due	  to	  illness	  or	  
                                                                     !
                                                            injury.	  
                                                            	                                                           	  ...If	   sick	   time	   were	   not	   added	   to	   market	   and	   nonmarket	   time,	   total	  
                                                            time	   would	   not	   be	   exhausted	   by	   all	   possible	   uses.	   	   My	   model	   assumes	   that	  
                                                             TL 	  is	   inversely	   related	   to	   the	   stock	   of	   health;	   that	   is,	   ∂TLi ∂Hi < 0 .	   	   If	   Ω 	  
                                                            ! i                                                                                                  !
                                                            were	  measured	  in	  days	  ( Ω =365	  days	  if	  the	  year	  is	  the	  relevant	  period)	  and	  if	  
                                                             φ 	  were	   defined	   as	   the	   flow	   of	   healthy	   days	   per	   unit	   of	   Hi ,	   hi 	  would	   equal	  
                                                            ! i                                                                                                    ! !
                                                            the	   total	   number	   of	   healthy	   days	   in	   a	   given	   year.	   	   Then	   one	   could	   write	  
                                                             TL = Ω − hi .	  	  (Grossman,	  1972)	  
                                                            ! i
                                                            	  

	                                                          For	   present	   purposes	   the	   important	   point	   is	   that	   the	   component	   shares	   of	   the	  

period-­‐i	   time	   budget TWi + TLi + THi + Ti = Ω 	  are,	   or	   result	   from,	   choices	   made	   in	   period	   i	   as	  
                              !

well	   as	   in	   periods	   prior	   to	   i.	   	   As	   such,	   at	   a	   fundamental	   level	   the	   time	   share	   components	  

result	   from	   individuals'	   purposive	   time-­‐allocation	   decisions,	   and	   resultant	   period-­‐i	   healthy	  

time	   that	   emerges	   ( hi = Ω − TLi )	   is	   allocated	   to	   labor	   supply,	   further	   investments	   in	  
                               !

downstream	   health,	   and	   time	   engaged	   in	   other	   forms	   of	   household	   production	   or	  

investment.	  

	                                                          Implementing	  empirically	  this	  time-­‐allocation	  framework	  is	  challenging.	  	  The	  MEPS	  

data	   we	   use	   (described	   in	   Section	   4)	   contain	   no	   useful	   measures	   of	   date-­‐specific	   labor	  

supply,	   TW,	   nor	   do	   they	   permit	   distinction	   between	   productive	   investment	   time	   (T)	   and	  

sick	   time	   (TL). 1 	  	   What	   we	   can	   reasonably	   draw	   from	   the	   MEPS	   data,	   however,	   is	  


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
1	  While	   it	   may	   or	   may	   not	   be	   important	   to	   draw	   sharp	   distinction	   between	   health	   capital	  


and	  healthy	  time	  (i.e.	  "health	  status")	  in	  a	  particular	  application,	  some	  measures	  of	  health	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (continued)	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4	  
information	  for	  a	  365-­‐day	  accounting	  period	  on	  elements	  of	  a	  time	  vector	   t = ⎡⎣ TH,TN,TD⎤⎦ 	  
                                                                                                               !

measuring:	   a	   vector	   of	   health-­‐capital	   (specifically,	   medical	   care	   utilization)	   investments,	  

TH;	   time	   spent	   alive	   -­‐-­‐	   healthy	   or	   ill	   -­‐-­‐	   but	   not	   using	   medical	   care,	   TN;	   and	   time	   possibly	  

deceased	  during	  the	  365-­‐day	  accounting	  period	  (TD).	  	  For	  the	  most	  part	  it	  is	  not	  possible	  to	  

distinguish	   which	   aspects	   of	   TH	   represent	   investments	   in	   health	   while	   healthy	   (e.g.	  

preventive	   healthcare	   utilization)	   from	   the	   "investments"	   that	   arise	   from	   the	   use	   of	  

healthcare	   while	   unhealthy.	   	   In	   any	   event,	   the	   relevant	   time	   budget	   for	   present	   purposes	   is	  

!TH + TN + TD = Ω = 365 .	   	   Previewing	   our	   empirical	   analysis,	   our	   interest	   is	   in	   estimating	  

models	  of	  features	  of	  the	  distributions	  of	  period-­‐two	  time	  allocations	   t 2 	  given	  period-­‐one	  
                                                                                                       !

covariates	   x 1 .	  
              !

	                                                    In	   Grossman's	   framework,	   the	   TH	   time	   allocations	   or	   investments	   might	   variously	  

be	  conceived	  as	  factor	  demands	  for	  productive	  health	  investments,	  as	  components	  of	  time	  

budgets	  within	  which	  health	  outcome	  flows	  are	  present,	  or	  in	  some	  sense	  as	  indicators	  of	  

healthcare	   utilization	   per	   se.	   	   Moreover,	   as	   suggested	   by	   Grossman's	   human	   capital	  


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
(cont.)	  
elicited	  via	  familiar	  survey	  questions	  will	  often	  be	  difficult	  to	  interpret	  because	  of	  the	  lack	  
of	   correspondence	   to	   either	   health	   capital	   or	   healthy	   time.	   	   For	   instance,	   compare	   a	   survey	  
question:	  "In	  general,	  would	  you	  say	  your	  health	  is	  EVGFP?"	  with	  an	  alternative:	  "Over	  the	  
past	   week,	   would	   you	   say	   your	   health	   is	   EVGFP?"	   	   The	   former	   version	   provides	   no	   time-­‐
frame	  anchor	  within	  which	  a	  respondent	  can	  interpret	  unambiguously	  what	  is	  meant	  by	  "in	  
general";	  as	  such	  it	  is	  challenging	  to	  interpret	  a	  response	  to	  such	  a	  question	  as	  a	  measure	  of	  
healthy	  time	  or	  a	  health	  flow.	  

	  




	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5	  
                                          (                 )
investment	   process	   Ii = Ii Mi ,THi ;Ei ,	   the	   TH	   time	   inputs	   into	   health	   investment	   will	   to	  
                          !

some	  degree	  be	  complementary	  with	  the	  medical	  care	  inputs	  (M)	  purchased	  or	  otherwise	  

obtained	   by	   individuals.	   	   As	   such,	   the	   extent	   to	   which	   M	   is	   responsive	   to	   incentives	   like	  

insurance	   generosity	   and	   the	   extent	   to	   which	   insurance	   generosity	   may	   be	   endogenously	  

determined	   by	   unobserved	   illness	   propensities	   suggests	   that	   the	   TH	   time	   inputs	   will	  

themselves	   be	   influenced	   by	   possibly	   self-­‐selected	   insurance	   generosity.	   	   Some	  

implications	  of	  this	  econometric	  analysis	  are	  considered	  in	  Section	  6.	  

	  

3.	  Healthy-­‐Time	  Measures	  in	  Practice	  

	         The	  notion	  that	  healthiness	  is	  a	  flow	  corresponding	  to	  some	  form	  of	  time	  use	  or	  time	  

allocation	  within	  a	  given	  time	  budget	  or	  time	  frame	  is	  both	  conceptually	  (in	  the	  context	  of	  

Grossman's	   model)	   as	   well	   as	   intuitively	   appealing.	   	   While	   such	   measures	   are	   hardly	  

common	  in	  empirical	  work	  -­‐-­‐	  or	  in	  the	  datasets	  that	  support	  such	  work	  -­‐-­‐	  applications	  are	  

increasingly	   prominent.	   	   This	   section	   reviews	   some	   of	   these	   measures,	   and	   in	   so	   doing	  

points	  the	  way	  to	  this	  paper's	  measurement	  innovations	  discussed	  in	  Section	  4.	  

	         Two	   prominent	   measures	   of	   health	   status	   from	   the	   Behavioral	   Risk	   Factors	  

Surveillance	   System	   (BRFSS)	   have	   been	   adopted	   as	   summary	   measures	   of	   health-­‐related	  

quality	  of	  life	  in	  population	  health	  contexts	  (CDC,	  2000).	  	  The	  same	  questions	  (apart	  from	  

slightly	   different	   punctuation)	   are	   also	   administered	   in	   the	   Medicare	   Health	   Outcomes	  

Survey	  (HOS).	  	  These	  are	  measures	  of	  physically	  and	  mentally	  healthy	  time	  in	  the	  30	  days	  

preceding	  the	  survey,	  based	  on	  the	  following	  survey	  questions	  (see	  Figure	  1):	  

           	  
           	  



	                                                                        6	  
            Now	   thinking	   about	   your	   physical	   health,	   which	   includes	   physical	   illness	   and	  
            injury,	   for	   how	   many	   days	   during	   the	   past	   30	   was	   your	   physical	   health	   not	  
            good?	  
            	  
            Now	  thinking	  about	  your	  mental	  health,	  which	  includes	  stress,	  depression,	  and	  
            problems	  with	  emotions,	  for	  how	  many	  days	  during	  the	  past	  30	  days	  was	  your	  
            mental	  health	  not	  good?	  
            	  
	          Characterizing	   healthiness	   via	   time	   allocations	   also	   appears	   in	   the	   context	   of	  

disease-­‐specific	   clinical	   outcomes.	   	   For	   instance,	   in	   a	   randomized	   trial	   comparing	   deep-­‐

brain	  stimulation	  and	  medication	  against	  medical	  management	  for	  patients	  suffering	  from	  

Parkinson's	   symptoms	   (Deuschl	   et	   al.,	   2006)	   the	   main	   outcome	   studied	   is	   a	  

multidimensional	   time	   allocation	   measure	   based	   on	   subjects'	   diaries.	   	   The	   dimensions	   of	  

clinical	   interest	   are:	   (1)	   mobile	   with	   troublesome	   dyskinesias;	   (2)	   mobile	   without	  

troublesome	  dyskinesias;	  (3)	  neither	  fully	  mobile	  nor	  fully	  immobile;	  (4)	  immobile;	  and	  (5)	  

sleeping.	   	   The	   first	   and	   fourth	   measures	   are	   considered	   negative	   outcomes,	   the	   second	   and	  

fifth	  positive	  outcomes,	  and	  the	  third	  an	  ambiguous	  outcome.	  	  By	  construction,	  these	  time	  

uses	  add	  up	  to	  24	  hours	  in	  one	  diary	  day;	  see	  Figure	  2.	  

	          In	  similar	  spirit,	  and	  of	  central	  interest	  in	  this	  paper,	  are	  measures	  that	  are	  based	  on	  

information	   on	   individuals'	   healthcare	   utilization	   and	   mortality	   experiences	   over	   some	  

predefined	   time	   window.	   	   We	   refer	   to	   such	   measures	   generically	   as	   utilization-­‐based	  

healthy-­‐time	   measures.	   	   One	   early	   example	   of	   such	   a	   measurement	   approach	   is	   ESCAPE	  

(2005)	  that	  examines	  using	  a	  randomized	  trial	  the	  safety	  and	  efficacy	  of	  pulmonary	  artery	  

catheters	  for	  patients	  with	  congestive	  heart	  failure.	  	  The	  main	  endpoint	  in	  this	  study	  is	  days	  

alive	   out	   of	   the	   hospital	   (DAOH)	   during	   the	   six	   months	   following	   randomization.	   	   The	  



	                                                                            7	  
ESCAPE	   trial	   adopts	   the	   terminology	   of	   "days	   well"	   being	   days	   on	   which	   subjects	   were	  

neither	  in	  the	  hospital	  nor	  deceased.	  

	         Building	   on	   the	   DAOH	   concept,	   MedPAC,	   2015,	   considers	   an	   indicator	   of	   care-­‐

related,	   patient-­‐centered	   outcomes	   which	   they	   call	   healthy	  days	  at	  home	   (HDAH).	   	   The	   idea	  

in	   defining	   HDAH	   is	   that	   over	   one	   calendar	   year,	   time	   not	   spent	   engaged	   in	   various	  

encounters	  with	  the	  healthcare	  system	  or	  time	  not	  deceased	  constitutes	  a	  positive	  outcome	  

from	   a	   patient's	   perspective.	   	   Using	   Medicare	   patients'	   encounters	   and	   mortality	  

experiences,	   multiple	   forms	   of	   healthcare-­‐related	   time	   allocation	   are	   defined:	   days	   not	  

alive;	  days	  in	  an	  SNF;	  days	  with	  an	  ED	  visit;	  days	  with	  an	  outpatient	  observation	  stay;	  and	  

days	   with	   receipt	   of	   home	   health	   care.	   	   Adding	   up	   all	   these	   measures,	   adjusting	   for	   double-­‐

counting,	  and	  subtracting	  from	  365	  yields	  the	  HDAH	  metric	  (see	  Figure	  3).	  	  This	  measure	  is	  

in	  fact	  silent	  on	  the	  question	  of	  whether	  the	  "days	  at	  home"	  are	  actually	  "healthy",	  but	  the	  

basic	  premises	  underlying	  this	  measure's	  definition	   are	  conceptually	  sound	  and	  intuitively	  

appealing;	  its	  use	  as	  a	  patient-­‐centered	  outcome	  or	  care-­‐quality	  indicator	  holds	  promise.	  

	         Similar	   in	   spirit	   is	   the	   Dartmouth	   Institute	   (2016)	   measure	   of	   contact	   days	   (CD),	  

defined	  as	  "the	  number	  of	  days	  a	  patient	  spends	  per	  year	  in	  an	  inpatient	  setting	  or	  having	  a	  

clinician	  visit,	  procedure,	  imaging	  study,	  or	  lab	  test	  in	  an	  ambulatory	  setting."	  	  Based	  in	  this	  

particular	   example	   on	   Medicare	   encounters,	   it	   is	   argued	   that	   the	   CD	   measure	   is	   patient-­‐

centered	   and	   yields	   increased	   appreciation	   of	   "how	   much	   of	   the	   older	   adult's	   daily	   life	   is	  

being	   occupied	   by	   health	   care."	   	   For	   our	   subsequent	   purposes	   it	   is	   useful	   to	   define	   the	  

complementary	   measure	   of	   noncontact	   days	   (NCD),	   equal	   to	   365	   minus	   CD,	   as	   well	   as	   a	  

measure	   of	   noncontact	   days	   alive	   (NCA),	   equal	   to	   NCD	   minus	   the	   number	   of	   days	   in	   the	  

accounting	  period	  the	  individual	  was	  deceased.	  



	                                                                         8	  
	         The	   final	   utilization-­‐based	   measure	   we	   discuss	   is	   that	   of	   days	   residing	   in	   the	  

community	   (DRC).	   	   This	   measure	   is	   discussed	   by	   Mathematica	   Policy	   Research	   (2016)	   in	  

the	   context	   of	   designing	   outcome	   measures	   for	   dual-­‐eligible	   Medicare-­‐Medicaid	  

beneficiaries	  (see	  also	  Fenton	  et	  al.,	  2002).	  	  The	  stated	  goals	  in	  considering	  measures	  like	  

DRC	   "are	   to	   develop	   measures	   that	   are	   meaningful,	   outcomes-­‐based...	   and	   take	   into	  

consideration	   preferences	   of	   key	   measure	   users	   and	   stakeholders,	   including	   consumers,	  

state	  Medicaid	  agencies,	  health	  plans,	  and	  providers."	  

	         In	   all	   these	   cases,	   the	   presumed	   goal	   is	   to	   utilize	   existing	   data	   to	   characterize	  

outcomes	   that	   are	   likely	   to	   be	   considered	   important	   by	   patients	   and	   other	   stakeholders,	  

and	   ultimately	   to	   understand	   the	   factors	   -­‐-­‐	   treatments,	   quality	   initiatives,	   provider	  

incentives,	   etc.	   -­‐-­‐	   that	   produce	   these	   time-­‐allocation	   outcomes.	   	   For	   the	   DAOH,	   HDAH,	   NCA,	  

DRC,	   and	   kindred	   utilization-­‐based	   healthy-­‐time	   measures	   the	   basic	   premise	   is	   that	   any	  

given	  day	  within	  the	  accounting	  period	  has	  	  positive	  value	  if	  the	  individual	  is	  alive	  and	  not	  

in	  contact	  with	  the	  healthcare	  system	  on	  that	  day.	  	  While	  no	  single	  such	  measure	  may	  be	  

conceptually	   ideal,	   these	   measures	   trade	   off	   some	   conceptual	   purity	   for	   the	   ability	   to	   use	  

available	  data	  on	  healthcare	  utilization	  and	  mortality	  to	  compute	  the	  respective	  metrics.	  

	         The	  next	  section	   builds	   on	   these	   frameworks	   and	  explores	  how	  such	  measures	  may	  

be	  built	  on	  MEPS	  data.	  	  Among	  other	  things,	  to	  the	  extent	  that	  the	  measures	  we	  derive	  are	  

sound	  -­‐-­‐	  plausible,	  reliable,	  robust,	  etc.	  -­‐-­‐	  the	  ability	  to	  define	  utilization-­‐based	  health-­‐time	  

measures	  from	  MEPS	  greatly	  expands	  the	  scope	  of	  such	  measures	  from	  that	  of	  Medicare-­‐

encounter	  or	  clinical-­‐EMR	  contexts.	  

	  

	  



	                                                                        9	  
4.	  Healthy-­‐Time	  Measures	  Based	  on	  MEPS	  Data	  

	         Our	   empirical	   analysis	   uses	   data	   from	   the	   Medical	   Expenditure	   Panel	   Survey	  

(MEPS).	  	  Specifically	  we	  utilize	  the	  two-­‐year	  Longitudinal	  Data	  files	  for	  MEPS	  panels	  15	  and	  

16,	   covering	   2010-­‐2011	   and	   2011-­‐2012,	   respectively	   (these	   are	   MEPS	   data	   files	   HC-­‐148	  

and	   HC-­‐156,	   respectively).	   	   To	   these	   files	   is	   merged	   information	   on	   the	   dates	   of	   various	  

forms	  of	  healthcare	  system	  contact	  from	  the	  2011	  and	  2012	  Household	  Component	  Event	  

files	  (MEPS	  files	  HC-­‐144xx	  and	  HC-­‐152xx,	  respectively).	  	  In	  the	  spirit	  of	  Grossman's	  time-­‐

allocation	   framework,	   the	   analytical	   strategy	   we	   pursue	   here	   is	   to	   use	   baseline	   measures	  

obtained	  in	  year	  one	  of	  each	  two-­‐year	  panel	  as	  conditioning	  covariates	  ( x 1 )	  and	  time-­‐use	  
                                                                                                           !

measures	  from	  year	  two	  of	  each	  panel	  as	  outcomes	  ( t 2 ).	  
                                                                             !

	         MEPS	   affords	   potentially	   many	   different	   ways	   to	   proceed	   with	   respect	   to	   defining	  

the	   time-­‐allocation	   outcome	   measures.	   	   We	   focus	   here	   on	   two.	   	   The	   first	   mimics	   closely	   the	  

spirit	   of	   the	   days	  alive	  and	  out	  of	  hospital,	   DAOH,	   measures	   described	   above.	   	   The	   second	   is	  

essentially	   an	   amalgam	   of	   the	   NCD	   and	   the	   HDAH	   measures,	   in	   which	   the	   TN	   time	   use	   is	  

noncontact	  days	  alive,	  or	  NCA.	  	  We	  refer	  to	  the	  sets	  of	  time-­‐allocation	  outcomes	  in	  these	  two	  

measurement	  approaches	  as	  Outcomes	  A	  and	  Outcomes	  B,	  respectively.	  

	         To	   compute	   these	   measures,	   we	   define	   the	   timing	   of	   various	   types	   of	   year-­‐two	  

healthcare	  utilization	  (e.g.	  dates	  of	  an	  inpatient	  stay)	  from	  the	  Household	  Component	  Event	  

files.	   	   Date	   of	   death,	   if	   relevant,	   is	   obtained	   from	   the	   in-­‐scope	   timing	   indicators	   in	   the	  

Longitudinal	   Data	   files.	   	   Since	   multiple	   types	   of	   healthcare	   may	   have	   been	   reported	   for	   any	  

given	   calendar	   date,	   we	   use	   the	   following	   hierarchy	   to	   assign	   a	   unique	   type	   of	   utilization	  

(or	  death)	  to	  each	  calendar	  date:	  

	  


	                                                                         10	  
                                  Death	  	  >	  	  Inpatient	  Stay	  	  >	  	  E.R.	  Visit	  	  >	  	  Outpatient	  Visit	  	  >	  

                                           Office-­‐Based	  Visit	  	  >	  	  Dental	  Visit	  	  >	  	  Noncontact	  

	  

For	  example,	  if	  on	  a	  particular	  date	  an	  individual	  made	  a	  dental	  visit	  and	  an	  E.R.	  visit,	  the	  

utilization	   type	   assigned	   for	   that	   date	   was	   E.R.	   Visit.	   	   Our	   analytical	   sample	   contains	  

observations	  on	  N=20,421	  respondents	  ages	  18	  and	  above	  with	  nonmissing	  relevant	  data.	  	  

Future	  work	  will	  add	  data	  from	  survey	  years	  prior	  to	  2010	  to	  our	  samples.	  	  Basic	  summary	  

statistics	   for	   Outcomes	   A	   and	   B	   are	   displayed	   in	   Table	   1;	   graphical	   depictions	   are	   provided	  

in	  Figure	  4.	  

	            Obtaining	   this	   analytical	   sample	   was	   not	   straightforward,	   and	   it	   is	   important	   for	  

readers	  to	  appreciate	  some	  of	  the	  key	  issues	  confronted	  and	  decisions	  made	  in	  arriving	  at	  

this	  sample.	  	  Among	  these	  are	  the	  following:	  

       	     1.	   A	   minor	   point	   is	   that	   2012	   is	   a	   leap	   year	   and	   2011	   is	   not;	   we	   use	   2012	   data	  

              only	  for	  January	  1	  through	  December	  30.	  

       	     2.	  The	  specific	  timing	  of	  the	  dates	  of	  home	  healthcare	  contacts	  is	  not	  provided	  in	  

              the	  Event	  files.	  	  As	  such	  we	  ignore	  home	  healthcare	  in	  our	  analyses.	  

       	     3.	   The	   utilization-­‐type	   hierarchy	   we	   use	   (displayed	   above)	   is	   admittedly	  

              arbitrary,	  and	  reasonable	  alternatives	  can	  certainly	  be	  imagined.	  

       	     4.	   We	   explored	   the	   use	   of	   summaries	   of	   inpatient	   stay	   nights	   (ipngtdy2),	   zero-­‐

              night	   hospital	   stays	   (ipzeroy2),	   and	   home	   health	   provider	   days	   (hhtotdy2)	   that	  

              are	  provided	  in	  the	  Longitudinal	  Data	  files,	  particularly	  insofar	  as	  computation	  of	  

              a	   "days	   alive	   and	   out	   of	   the	   hospital"	   measure	   was	   concerned.	   	   In	   conjunction	  

              with	   our	   calculated	   year-­‐two	   mortality	   timing,	   however,	   the	   totals	   of	   these	  



	                                                                                       11	  
              categories	  exceeded	  365	  days	  in	  a	  nontrivial	  number	  of	  cases.	  	  As	  such	  we	  elected	  

              not	  to	  pursue	  further	  a	  measure	  based	  on	  these	  variables.	  

       	     5.	   The	   Longitudinal	   Data	   files	   for	   panels	   15	   and	   16	   provide	   information	   on	   the	  

              timing	  of	  when	  respondents	  may	  become	  "out	  of	  scope"	  for	  MEPS.	  	  (Indeed,	  this	  

              is	   how	   date-­‐of-­‐death	   is	   computed.)	   	   In	   principle	   information	   on	   the	   person	  

              disposition	  status	  (pstatxx)	  might	  be	  used	  to	  compute	  specific	  dates	  on	  which	  a	  

              respondent	   became	   institutionalized	   in	   a	   healthcare	   facility,	   for	   instance.	  	  

              However,	  determining	  the	  date	  on	  which	  such	  a	  respondent	  might	  have	  re-­‐joined	  

              MEPS	  as	  in	  scope	  is	  more	  problematic.	  	  Thus,	  while	  institutionalized	  status	  would	  

              be	   an	   interesting	   dimension	   of	   healthcare	   system	   contact	   to	   consider,	   further	  

              exploration	   will	   be	   required	   before	   it	   can	   be	   determined	   whether	   this	   is	  

              reasonable	  to	  pursue.	  	  (Only	  a	  small	  number	  of	  respondents	  are	  so	  identified,	  it	  

              should	  be	  noted.)	  

       	     6.	  The	  episodic	  nature	  of	  some	  forms	  of	  time	  spent	  in	  contact	  with	  the	  healthcare	  

              system	   is	   not	   addressed	   with	   the	   means-­‐based	   analytical	   methods	   we	   use	  

              (described	   in	   the	   next	   section).	   	   That	   is,	   three	   four-­‐day	   inpatient	   stays	   over	   the	  

              course	  of	  a	  365-­‐day	  accounting	  period	  would	  be	  treated	  as	  the	  same	  "outcome"	  

              as	  two	  six-­‐day	  stays	  or	  one	  twelve-­‐day	  stay.	  	  This	  also	  appears	  to	  be	  a	  feature	  of	  

              some	  of	  the	  other	  utilization-­‐based	  time-­‐allocation	  measures	  in	  use	  (e.g.	  HDAH).	  	  

              Whether	  or	  not	  this	  is	  problematic	  depends	  presumably	  on	  the	  questions	  at	  hand.	  

       	     7.	   Other	   than	   death	   and	   institutionalization	   in	   a	   healthcare	   facility,	   other	   reasons	  

              for	  respondents	  to	  fall	  out	  of	  scope	  include	  some	  forms	  of	  military	  service,	  other	  

              forms	   of	   institutionalization,	   moving	   outside	   the	   U.S.,	   etc.	   	   For	   simplicity,	   we	  



	                                                                           12	  
              elected	  to	  define	  our	  sample	  to	  consist	  of	  respondents	  who	  either	  were	  in	  scope	  

              for	  the	  entire	  two-­‐year	  MEPS	  survey	  period,	  or	  who	  died	  at	  some	  point	  during	  the	  

              two-­‐year	  period.	  

       	     8.	   Finally,	   while	   we	   plan	   to	   supplement	   our	   sample	   with	   panels	   prior	   to	   panel	   15	  

              (i.e.	  initial	  survey	  years	  prior	  to	  2010),	  using	  samples	  after	  panel	  16	  encounters	  

              challenges.	   	   Specifically,	   after	   2012	   the	   MEPS	   public	   use	   files	   eliminated	   for	  

              confidentiality	   reasons	   specific	   date	   information	   for	   several	   key	   measures	   on	  

              which	  our	  measurement	  approach	  relies,	  instead	  providing	  only	  month	  and	  year	  

              data.	   	   For	   our	   proposed	   methods	   to	   be	   useful	   going	   forward,	   having	   ready	   access	  

              to	  specific	  date	  information	  is	  essential,	  and	  we	  will	  explore	  possible	  alternatives.	  	  

              (Accessing	   the	   specific	   date	   information	   is	   presumably	   possible	   through	  

              approved	   Census	   Research	   Data	   Center	   protocols	   or	   by	   working	   through	   the	  

              MEPS	  On-­‐Site	  Data	  Center,	  but	  neither	  of	  these	  is	  ideal.)	  

	  

5.	  Econometric	  Strategies	  

	            With	   M	   types	   of	   time	   allocation	   t m 	  of	   interest,	   the	   key	   measurement	   features	   are	  
                                                                     !

                                  M
t ∈⎡0,Ω ⎤⎦ 	  and	   ∑ m=1 t m = Ω ,	   where	   Ω =365	   in	   our	   MEPS	   applications.	   	   One	   might	   be	  
!m ⎣                  !

                                                                                                                                 (         )         ( )
interested	   in	   general	   properties	   of	   	   a	   marginal	   or	   joint	   distribution,	   i.e.	   f t m x 	  or	   f t x 	  
                                                                                                                           !                  !

(where	   x	   represents	   exogenous	   covariates	   of	   interest,	   treatments,	   etc.).	   	   Or	   one	   might	   be	  

interested	   more	   narrowly	   in	   particular	   features	   of	   such	   distributions,	   like	   conditional	  

means	   E ⎡⎣ t m x ⎤⎦ .	  
         !




	                                                                           13	  
	                                                          As	  any	  particular	   t m 	  will	  represent	  a	  fraction	  of	  the	  the	  overall	  fixed	  time	  budget	   Ω ,	  
                                                                                       !

approaching	  such	  modeling	  using	  fractional	  regression	  methods	  is	  intuitively	  appealing.	  	  In	  

the	   case	   where	   only	   two	   forms	   of	   time	   allocation	   are	   of	   interest	   -­‐-­‐	   e.g.	   healthy	   and	   sick,	  

along	   the	   lines	   of	   the	   BRFSS	   health	   days	   measures	   -­‐-­‐	   then	   the	   analytical	   setting	   is	   a	  

univariate	   outcome	   model.	   	   In	   this	   instance,	   the	   original	   work	   of	   Papke	   and	   Wooldridge	  

(PW,	  1996)	  on	  estimation	  of	  conditional	  mean	  models	  for	  fractional	  univariate	  outcomes	  is	  

directly	   applicable.	   	   In	   the	   PW	   framework	   one	   specifies	   conditional	   mean	   functions

                                                                                                       ( ) ( )
E ⎡ t x ⎤ = G x,β ∈ 0,1 ,	  with	  the	  logical	  choice	  of	  functional	  forms	  for	   G ... 	  being	  the	  class	  
! ⎣ m ⎦                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ()
of	  univariate	  distribution	  functions.	  	  Specifying	   G ... 	  as	  a	  logit	  or	  probit	  function	  gives	  rise	  
                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ()
to	   fractional	   logit	   (FLOGIT)	   or	   fractional	   probit	   (FPROBIT)	   specifications.	   	   Estimation	   of	  

such	  models	  is	  generally	  undertaken	  using	  quasi-­‐ML.	  

	                                                          When	  the	  time	  allocation	  outcomes	  are	  multivariate	  (!M ≥ 2),	  a	  generalization	  of	  the	  

PW	  estimator	  to	  the	  multivariate	  fraction	  or	  share	  context	  suggested	  by	  Mullahy,	  2015,	  and	  

Murteira	   and	   Ramahlo,	   2016,	   may	   be	   useful. 2 	  	   Normalizing	   !Ω = 1 ,	   the	   essence	   of	   the	  

multivariate	  fractional	  logit	  (MFLOGIT)	  model	  for	  multivariate	  time-­‐share	  outcomes	   t m is	  
                                                                                                                ! 	  

a	  set	  of	  !M ≥ 2	  conditional	  means	  

	  	  

	                                                          E ⎡ t x ⎤ = ξ x;β ∈ 0,1 ,	  	  	  m=1,...,M,	  
                                                            ! ⎣ m ⎦ m
                                                                                                                                                                                 ( ) ( )
	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
2	  Among	                                                                      other	   applications,	   the	   MFLOGIT	   method	   has	   been	   used	   to	   study	   empirically	  
health-­‐related	  time	  allocation	  (Mullahy	  and	  Robert,	  2010).	  	  	  




	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       14	  
having	   the	   property	                                                                                                                                                                                         ∑ E ⎡t x ⎤ = 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ! m=1 ⎣ m ⎦
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (          )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ,	   and	   accommodating	   Pr t m = 0 x ≥ 0 	  and	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !

                      (                                                                           )
Pr t m = 1 x ≥ 0 ,	   	   	   m=1,...,M.	   	   The	   M	   conditional	   means	   are	   specified	   to	   have	   multinomial	  
!

logit	  (MNL)	  functional	  forms,	  

	  


	                                                          E ⎡⎣ t m x ⎤⎦ = ξm x;β =
                                                                                       exp xβ m
                                                                                                  ,	  	  	  m=1,...,M,	                                                      ( )                                                                      (        )
                                                            !
                                                                                       M
                                                                                     ∑ k=1exp xβk                                                                                                                                                              (       )
	                                                          	                                                           	                                                          	                                                           	  

with	  a	  required	  normalization	  one	  one	  of	  the	  outcomes'	   β m 	  ( β M = 0 	  is	  used	  here).3,4,5	  
                                                                                  !         !

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
3	  Estimation	   is	   via	   quasi-­‐ML	   using	   a	   MNL	   quasi-­‐likelihood	   function	   where	   the	   observed	  


shares	   t im ∈⎡⎣0,1⎤⎦ 	  take	   the	   place	   of	   the	   usual	   binary	   indicators	   that	   would	   typically	  
          !
                                                                                                                             !
populate	  a	  multinomial	  logit	  likelihood	  function.	  	  The	  asymptotic	  distribution	  of	   β 	  follows	  
from	   the	   quasi-­‐ML	   arguments	   in	   PW.	   	   Specifically,	   given	   correct	   specification	   of	   the	  
                                      !
conditional	  first	  moments	   N β − β 	  is	  asymptotically	   N 0,V ,	  where	  the	  true	  asymptotic	  
                                   !                                    !                                                                                                                                                                                ( )                               ( )
covariance	   matrix	   V	   manifests	   underdispersion	   relative	   to	   the	   MNL	   covariance	   matrix;	  
inference	   using	   sandwich	   estimators	   accommodates	   such	   differences;	   Mullahy,	   2015,	  
provides	  details.	  

4	  If	  features	  of	   f
                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                           ( t x ) 	  beyond	  simply	  its	  marginal	  conditional	  means	  are	  of	  interest	  then	  -­‐-­‐	  
at	  the	  risk	  of	  jeopardizing	  robustness	  of	  conditional	  mean	  estimates	  -­‐-­‐	  models	  like	  negative	  
hypergeometric	   distributions	   can	   be	   used	   to	   accommodate	   the	   restrictions	  

 ∑ E ⎡ t x ⎤ = 1 ,	   !Pr ( t m = 0 x ) ≥ 0 ,	   and	   !Pr ( t m = 1 x ) ≥ 0 	  and	   provide	   a	   comprehensive	  
                         M
! m=1 ⎣ m ⎦
picture	   of	   the	   relationship	   between	   covariates	   and	   outcomes.	   	   This	   model	   is	   a	   Dirichlet	  
mixture	  of	  multinomials	  or	  multivariate	  negative	  hypergeometric,	  a	  multivariate	  version	  of	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (continued)	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15	  
6.	  Results	  

	                                                    This	  section	  reports	  the	  results	  of	  an	  empirical	  exercise	  examining	  determinants	  or	  

correlates	  of	  the	  time-­‐allocation	  shares	  in	  Outcomes	  A	  and	  B.	  	  The	  analysis	  is	  based	  on	  the	  

2010-­‐2012	   MEPS	   data	   as	   described	   in	   Section	   3.	   	   The	   main	   objective	   of	   this	   empirical	  

analysis	   is	   not	   so	   much	   to	   provide	   definitive	   estimates	   of	   the	   determinants	   or	   correlates	   of	  

such	  outcomes,	  but	  instead	  to	  provide	  proof-­‐of-­‐concept	  estimates	  in	  which	  such	  outcomes	  

might	   be	   characterized	   as	   the	   product	   of	   some	   "treatment"	   process	   of	   interest.	   	   A	   wide	  

array	   of	   interesting	   questions	   might	   be	   posed	   such	   that	   exploiting	   MEPS's	   longitudinal	  

structure	  might	  be	  exploited	  fruitfully,	  and	  at	  a	  minimum	  the	  estimation	  strategy	  pursued	  

here	   should	   be	   suggestive	   as	   to	   how	   such	   questions	   might	   be	   addressed.	   	   That	   said,	   we	  

believe	  the	  estimates	  presented	  here	  are	  also	  of	  intrinsic	  interest.6	  


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
(cont.)	  
the	  beta-­‐binomial	  distribution	  (Heckman	  and	  Willis,	  1977;	  Liu	  et	  al.,.	  2013).	  

5	  One	   advantage	   of	   MFLOGIT-­‐type	   estimation	   strategies	   is	   that	   inferences	   based	   thereon	  


can	   be	   fully	   classical	   in	   the	   sense	   that	   the	   full	   joint	   covariance	   matrix	   of	   the	   parameter	  
estimates	   and	   their	   corresponding	   partial	   effects	   is	   a	   by-­‐product	   of	   this	   approach	   that	  
estimates	   jointly	   all	   outcomes.	   	   In	   contrast,	   when	   such	   multivariate	   outcomes	   are	   neither	  
considered	   nor	   modeled	   jointly,	   undertaking	   proper	   inference	   may	   be	   more	   challenging;	  
for	   instance,	   in	   the	   Deuschl	   et	   al.,	   2006,	   study	   of	   Parkinson's	   interventions,	   it	   does	   not	  
appear	  that	  the	  reported	  inferences	  accommodate	  the	  inherent	  jointness	  of	  the	  outcomes.	  

6	  Beyond	   the	   scope	   of	   this	   particular	   analysis,	   one	   might	   consider	   settings	   in	   which	   time-­‐


allocation	   outcomes	   like	   these	   might	   be	   modeled	   in	   contexts:	   with	   actual	   exogenous	   or	  
random	  treatment	  assignment	  (e.g.	  the	  Deuschl	  et	  al.,	  2006,	  study);	  with	  exogenous	  policy	  
changes	  (e.g.	  Medicare	  quality-­‐improvement	  initiatives,	  along	  the	  lines	  of	  MedPAC,	  2015);	  
or	  with	  others	  in	  reduced-­‐form	  settings	  in	  which	  exogeneity	  of	  RHS	  covariates	  is	  plausible	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (continued)	  


	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16	  
	                                                    To	  this	  end	  we	  exploit	  the	  longitudinal	  structure	  of	  the	  MEPS	  data	  and	  model	  time-­‐

allocation	  patterns	  (Outcomes	  A	  and	  B)	  in	  each	  MEPS	  panel's	  second	  year	   t 2 	  as	  a	  function	  
                                                                                                            !

of	   year-­‐one	   baseline	   characteristics	   x 1 	  that	   include	   individual	   and	   family	   demographics	  
                                                      !

and	  baseline	  indicators	  of	  chronic	  disease.	  	  As	  such	  this	  exercise	  can	  be	  interpreted	  roughly	  

as	  one	  relying	  on	  Grossman's	  health	  production	  framework	  in	  which	   t 2 	  are	  the	  period-­‐two	  
                                                                                                !

time	   allocations	   arising	   from	   period-­‐one	   health	   capital	   stocks,	   constraints,	   etc.,	   i.e.	   x 1 .	  	  
                                                                                                                                     !

From	  an	  econometric	  perspective,	  the	  MFLOGIT	  point	  estimates	  of	  the	  parameters	   β 	  -­‐-­‐	  as	  

with	   standard	   multinomial	   logit	   models	   -­‐-­‐	   are	   not	   themselves	   particularly	   interesting	   or	  

informative.7	  	  Instead	  we	  present	  estimates	  of	  each	  covariate's	  average	  partial	  effect	  (APE),	  

which	  indicate	  how,	  averaged	  over	  the	  sample,	  the	  means	  of	  the	   t m 	  conditional	  on	  x	  vary	  
                                                                                                !

with	   the	   components	   xk .	   	   The	   estimated	   APEs	   for	   Outcomes	   A	   and	   B	   along	   with	   their	  
                               !




	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
(cont.)	  
(or	   is	   "induced"	   via	   control	   functions).	   	   In	   such	   cases,	   it	   will	   be	   useful	   to	   recall	   the	  
discussion	  in	  Section	  2	  that	  considered	  how	  models	  of	  such	  outcomes	  -­‐-­‐	  in	  part	  consisting	  
of	   measures	   of	   healthcare	   utilization	   -­‐-­‐	   have	   important	   commonalities	   with	   many	  
healthcare	  utilization	  models	  in	  which	  exogeneity	  of	  RHS	  covariates	  like	  health	  insurance	  
status	  may	  be	  tenuous,	  and	  in	  which	  problems	  of	  "postdiction"	  -­‐-­‐	  does	  health	  status	  predict	  
utilization	  or	  does	  utilization	  predict	  health	  status	  -­‐-­‐	  may	  readily	  arise	  (see	  Manning	  et	  al.,	  
1982).	  
7	  The	  parameter	  point	  estimates	  are	  available	  on	  request.	  




	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     17	  
corresponding	  estimated	  bootstrap	  .95	  confidence	  intervals	  are	  presented	  in	  Tables	  2	  and	  

3,	  respectively.8	  

	                                                          For	   Outcomes	   A,	   the	   results	   in	   Table	   2	   suggest	   unsurprisingly	   that	   age	   and	  

race/ethnicity	  have	  prominent	  associations	  with	  DAOH	  and	  time	  deceased.	  	  Of	  the	  year-­‐one	  

chronic	  diseases,	  cancer,	  diabetes,	  emphysema,	  joint	  pain,	  M.I.,	  and	  stroke	  have	  particularly	  

large	  negative	  associations	  with	  DAOH	  and	  mortality.	  	  Similar	  stories	  emerge	  in	  Table	  3	  for	  

the	  APEs	  for	  Outcomes	  B,	  although	  the	  specific	  forms	  of	  time	  allocated	  to	  healthcare	  used	  in	  

that	  outcome's	  definition	  obviously	  permit	  a	  more	  nuanced	  assessment	  of	  how	  individual	  

demographics	  and	  chronic	  illnesses	  affect	  time	  allocated	  to	  healthcare	  utilization.	  

	  

7.	  Summary	  

	                                                          This	   paper	   has	   described	   some	   conceptual	   and	   empirical	   foundations	   of	   "healthy-­‐

time"	  measures	  of	  health	  outcomes	  or	  healthcare	  quality,	  and	  has	  explored	  how	  to	  expand	  

the	   empirical	   opportunities	   for	   measuring	   such	   outcomes	   using	   U.S.	   national	   survey	   data	  

from	  MEPS.	  	  Existing	  utilization-­‐based	  time-­‐allocation	  measures	  were	  seen	  to	  be	  more-­‐or-­‐

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  
8	  The	  APE	  of	  covariate	   x                                                                                                                                                                                    	  on	  outcome	   t m 	  is	  given	  by	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                   !            k                                !
                                                                                        #⎡          ⎤
                                                             !         N "          N δE ⎣ t im x i ⎦
                                                             APEmk = ∑ i=1PEmki = ∑ i=1               ,	  
                                                                                          δxik
                                                            !
                                                                                                M !
where	  !"δ" 	  denotes	   either	  !"Δ" 	  or	  !"∂" .	   	   Note	   that	   	   ∑ m=1 APEmk = 0 	  due	   to	   the	   adding-­‐up	  
                                                                                             !
restriction.	  	  The	  confidence	  intervals	  are	  computed	  as	   ⎡⎣.025,.975⎤⎦ 	   C2 	  percentile	  confidence	  
                                                                               !                  !
intervals	  as	  described	  in	  Hansen	  (2016,	  Chapter	  10.5);	  the	  CIs	  presented	  here	  are	  based	  on	  
1,000	  bootstrap	  replications.	  




	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            18	  
less	  conceptually	  well	  grounded	  in	  economic	  theory.	  	  As	  such,	  their	  use	  as	  patient-­‐centered	  

outcome	  measures	  is	  both	  intuitively	  plausible	  as	  well	  as	  conceptually	  defensible.	  	  We	  are	  

encouraged	   by	   our	   preliminary	   investigations	   into	   the	   utility	   of	   MEPS	   data	   for	  

characterizing	   and	   assessing	   the	   determinants	   of	   such	   outcomes,	   although	   further	  

conceptual	  work	  and	  scrutiny	  of	  the	  details	  of	  MEPS	  measures	  is	  necessary	  before	  we	  could	  

advocate	  comfortably	  one	  particular	  or	  dominant	  set	  of	  healthy-­‐time	  measures	  from	  MEPS.	  

	  

Acknowledgments	  

	        Thanks	   are	   owed	   to	   participants	   at	   the	   Bari	   Health	   Econometrics	   Workshop	   for	  

helpful	  comments	  and	  discussion.	                                                	  




	                                                               19	  
References	  

Centers	  for	  Disease	  Control	  and	  Prevention.	  2000.	  Measuring	  Healthy	  Days.	  Atlanta:	  CDC.	  

Dartmouth	   Institute	   for	   Health	   Policy	   &	   Clinical	   Practice.	   2016.	   Our	   Parents,	   Ourselves:	  

           Health	  Care	  for	  an	  Aging	  Population.	  Hanover,	  NH:	  Dartmouth	  Institute.	  

Deuschl,	  G.,	  C.	  Schade-­‐Brittinger,	  P.	  Krack,	  et	  al.	  2006.	  "A	  Randomized	  Trial	  of	  Deep-­‐Brain	  

           Stimulation	  for	  Parkinson's	  Disease."	  NEJM	  355:	  896-­‐908.	  

The	   ESCAPE	   Investigators	   and	   ESCAPE	   Study	   Coordinators.	   2005.	   "Evaluation	   Study	   of	  

           Congestive	   Heart	   Failure	   and	   Pulmonary	   Artery	   Catheterization	   Effectiveness."	  

           JAMA	  294:	  1625-­‐1633.	  

Fenton,	   W.S.	   et	   al.	   2002.	   "Cost	   and	   Cost-­‐Effectiveness	   of	   Hospital	   vs.	   Residential	   Crisis	   Care	  

           for	   Patients	   Who	   Have	   Serious	   Mental	   Illness."	   Archives	   of	   General	   Psychiatry	   59:	  

           357-­‐64.	  

Grossman,	   M.	   1972.	   "On	   the	   Concept	   of	   Health	   Capital	   and	   the	   Demand	   for	   Health."	   Journal	  

           of	  Political	  Economy	  80:	  223-­‐255.	  

Grossman,	   M.	   2016.	   "'A	   Theory	   of	   the	   Allocation	   of	   Time'	   Turns	   Fifty:	   Its	   Impact	   on	   the	  

           Field	  of	  Health	  Economics."	  Health	  Economics	  25:	  3-­‐7.	  

Hansen,	   B.E.	   2016.	   Econometrics.	   (Online	   textbook)	   Dept.	   of	   Economics,	   UW-­‐Madison.	  

           http://www.ssc.wisc.edu/~bhansen/econometrics/Econometrics.pdf.	  (Accessed	  28	  

           June	  2016).	  

Heckman	   J.J.	   and	   R.J.	   Willis.	   1977.	   "A	   Beta-­‐Logistic	   Model	   for	   the	   Analysis	   of	   Sequential	  

           Labor	  Force	  Participation	  by	  Married	  Women."	  Journal	   of	   Political	   Economy	  85:	  27-­‐

           58.	  

Liu,	   C.-­‐F.,	   J.F.	   Burgess,	   Jr.,	   W.G.	   Manning,	   and	   M.L.	   Maciejewski.	   2013.	   "Beta-­‐Binomial	  



	                                                                       20	  
           Regression	  and	  Bimodal	  Utilization."	  Health	  Services	  Research	  48:	  1769-­‐1778.	  

Lynn,	   J.,	   A.	   McKethan,	   and	   A.K.	   Jha.	   2015.	   "Value-­‐Based	   Payments	   Require	   Valuing	   What	  

           Matters	  to	  Patients."	  JAMA	  314:	  1445-­‐1446.	  

Manning,	   W.G.,	   J.P.	   Newhouse,	   and	   J.E.	   Ware,	   Jr.	   1982.	   "The	   Status	   of	   Health	   in	   Demand	  

           Estimation;	   or,	   Beyond	   Excellent,	   Good,	   Fair,	   and	   Poor."	   in	   V.	   Fuchs,	   Ed.	   Economic	  

           Aspects	  of	  Health.	  Chicago:	  University	  of	  Chicago	  Press	  for	  NBER.	  

Mathematica	  Policy	  Research.	  2016.	  Quality	  Measure	  Development	  and	  Maintenance	  for	  CMS	  

           Programs	   Serving	   Medicare-­‐Medicaid	   Enrollees	   and	   Medicaid-­‐Only	   Enrollees:	   Dual	  

           Enrollees	   and	   Medicaid	   HCBS	   Technical	   Expert	   Panel,	   April	   13,	   2016	   Meeting	  

           Summary.	  Contract	  No.	  HHSM-­‐500-­‐2013013011I.	  

Medicare	   Payment	   Advisory	   Committee	   (MedPAC).	   2015.	   "Next	   Steps	   in	   Measuring	   Quality	  

           of	   Care	   in	   Medicare."	   Chapter	   8	   in	   June	  2015	  Report	  to	  the	  Congress:	  Medicare	  and	  

           the	  Health	  Care	  Delivery	  System.	  Washington,	  DC:	  MedPAC.	  

Mullahy,	   J.	   2015.	   "Multivariate	   Fractional	   Regression	   Estimation	   of	   Econometric	   Share	  

           Models."	  Journal	  of	  Econometric	  Methods	  4:	  71-­‐100.	  

Mullahy,	   J.	   and	   S.A.	   Robert.	   2010.	   "No	   Time	   to	   Lose:	   Time	   Constraints	   and	   Physical	   Activity	  

           in	  the	  Production	  of	  Health."	  Review	  of	  Economics	  of	  the	  Household	  8:	  409-­‐432.	  

Murteira,	   J.M.R.	   and	   J.J.S.	   Ramalho.	   2016.	   "Regression	   Analysis	   of	   Multivariate	   Fractional	  

           Data."	  Econometric	  Reviews	  (in	  press).	  

Papke,	   L.E.	   and	   J.M.	   Wooldridge.	   1996.	   "Econometric	   Methods	   for	   Fractional	   Response	  

           Variables	   with	   an	   Application	   to	   401(K)	   Plan	   Participation	   Rates."	   Journal	  of	  Applied	  

           Econometrics	  11:	  619-­‐632.	  

Porter,	  M.E.	  et	  al.	  2015.	  "Standardizing	  Patient	  Outcome	  Measures."	  NEJM	  374:	  504-­‐506.	  



	                                                                      21	  
                                       Figure	  1	  
                                           	  
       Healthy-­‐Days	  Measures,	  2014	  BRFSS	  (Sample	  Frequencies)	  
	  
	  




                                                                      	  
	  
	                    	  




	                                        22	  
                                                                 Figure	  2	  
                                                                     	  
        A	  Randomized	  Trial	  of	  Deep-­‐Brain	  Stimulation	  for	  Parkinson’s	  Disease:	  Changes	  in	  
       Patients’	  Diaries	  from	  Baseline	  to	  Six	  Months	  in	  the	  Neurostimulation	  and	  Medication	  
                                                                 Groups	  
                                (Reproduced	  from	  Deuschl	  et	  al.,	  2006,	  Figure	  2B)	  
                                                                     	  
                                                                     	  
                                                      2.0              1.0
                                                                                                   2.4             2.5

                                                      3.2                                          3.0             2.5
                                                                       7.6

                                                      4.8
                                                                                                   5.6             6.2

                                        Hrs.                           4.8

                                                      6.2                                          5.5             5.5
                                                                       2.0



                                                      7.7              8.4
                                                                                                   7.4             7.2



                                                    Baseline         6-Month                     Baseline        6-Month

                                                      Neurostimulation                                 Medication

                                                 Sleeping                                  Immobile

                                                 Neither Fully Mobile nor Fully Immobile   Mobile w/o Troublesome Dyskinesias

                                                 Mobile w/ Troublesome Dyskinesias


                                                                                                                                	  
	                                        	  




	                                                                                23	  
                                                                Figure	  3	  
                                                                      	  
                                    MedPAC	  Healthy	  Days	  at	  Home	  Measures,	  by	  Age,	  
                                    Beneficiaries	  with	  at	  Least	  One	  Chronic	  Condition	  
                                           (Source:	  MedPAC,	  2015,	  Table	  8-­‐5)	  
	  
	  

        <65                                                                                             <65




       65-69                                                                                           65-69




       70-79                                                                                           70-79




        >79                                                                                             >79


               0                                                    365                                        0                                                 65
                                        Days                                                                             Days beyond 300 HDAH


          HDAH          Mortality       Home Health       ED                                              HDAH          Mortality   Home Health       ED

          Observation   SNF             Other Inpatient   Acute Care Hosp                                 Observation   SNF         Other Inpatient   Acute Care Hosp


                                                                            	  	  	  	  	  	                                                                      	  
                                                                                        	  
                                                                                        	                                                  	  




	                                                                           24	  
                                                     Figure	  4	  
                                                            	  
                              Healthy-­‐Time	  Outcomes:	  Time-­‐Budget	  Shares	  
                              (MEPS,	  2012-­‐2013;	  N=20,421;	  Sample	  Means)	  
                                                            	  
                                                            	  
                               Outcomes	  A:	  Days	  Alive	  and	  Out	  of	  Hospital	  
                                                            	  


       18-44                                                                                18-44




       45-64                                                                                45-64




                                                                                             65+
        65+


                                                                                                    0                                                35
               0                                           365                                                   Days beyond 330 Days
                                Days                                                                             Alive & Out of Hospital


           Alive &            In Hospital        Deceased                                       Alive &                 In Hospital        Deceased
           Out of Hospital                                                                      Out of Hospital

                                                          	  	  	  	  	  	                                                                          	  
                                                                      	  
                                                                      	  
                                    Outcomes	  B:	  Noncontact	  and	  Alive	  Days	  
                                                                      	  

       18-44                                                                                18-44




       45-64                                                                                45-64




        65+                                                                                  65+


               0                                           365                                      0                                                35
                                Days                                                                    Days beyond 330 Noncontact & Alive Days


               NCA           Dental         Office-based                                            NCA                Dental         Office-based
               Outpatient    E.R.           Inpatient                                               Outpatient         E.R.           Inpatient
               Deceased                                                                             Deceased

                                                                 	  	  	  	  	  	                                                                   	  
                                                                             	  
                                                                             	  
                                                                             	  


	                                                                25	  
                                                                                      Table	  1	  
                                                                                            	  
                                                Summary	  Statistics	  for	  Outcome	  Measures,	  by	  Age	  (Total	  N=20,421)	  
       	  
                                                                         Ages	  18-­‐44	                       Ages	  45-­‐64	                        Ages	  65+	  
                                                                         (N=9,159)	                             (N=7,405)	                             (N=3,857)	  
       Outcomes	                   Days	                      Mean	      %=0	   %=365	            Mean	       %=0	   %=365	             Mean	      %=0	   %=365	  
	                                                                                                     	  
                      Deceased	                                .309	       .999	       .001	       1.634	      .994	           .003	     13.675	     .957	     .028	  
                                                                                                       	  
                      Alive	  &	  Out	  of	  Hospital	     364.3	      .001	       .860	       362.8	      .003	           .860	     350.0	      .028	     .756	  
Outcomes	  A	  
                      In	  Hospital	                           .410	      .862	         0	         .570	      .864	             0	      1.314	      .792	       0	  
                                                                                             	  
                  Noncontact	  &	  Alive	                    361.5	      .001	       .432	       357.6	        .003	        .272	      341.4	      .028	     .116	  
                  Dental	  Visit	                              .404	      .774	         0	         .638	        .694	          0	        .787	      .665	       0	  
                  Office-­‐Based	  Visit	                     2.231	      .539	         0	        4.189	        .363	          0	       7.087	      .189	       0	  
Outcomes	  B	  
                  Outpatient	  Visit	                          .184	      .925	         0	         .409	        .853	          0	        .736	      .759	       0	  
                  ER	  Visit	                                  .124	      .905	         0	         .113	        .913	          0	        .137	      .892	       0	  
                  Inpatient	                                    .285	      .944	         0	         .457	        .936	          0	       1.314	      .871	       0	  




       	                                                                                  26	  
                                                                      Table	  2	  
                                                                            	  
       Estimated	  APEs	  and	  .95	  Confidence	  Intervals:	  Outcomes	  A	  (N=20,421;	  Hansen	  C2	  CIs)	  
                                                                            	  
                                                                                            Days	  
                                                Alive	  &	  Out	  of	  
                                                                                     In	  Hospital	   Deceased	  
                              Covariate	          Hospital	  
         Age	                                      -­‐0.301	                              0.003	        0.298	  
         	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	       -­‐0.360	                            -­‐0.002	       0.239	  
         	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	       -­‐0.242	                              0.007	        0.357	  
         Female	                                     0.628	                               0.153	      -­‐0.781	  
         	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	       -­‐0.295	                              0.052	      -­‐1.806	  
         	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	         1.678	                               0.265	        0.121	  
         Education	                                -­‐0.022	                            -­‐0.037	       0.059	  
         	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	       -­‐0.149	                            -­‐0.053	     -­‐0.070	  
         	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	         0.115	                             -­‐0.021	       0.181	  
         Family	  Size	                             0.088	                             -­‐0.051	     -­‐0.038	  
         	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	       -­‐0.262	                            -­‐0.085	     -­‐0.345	  
         	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	         0.413	                             -­‐0.013	       0.331	  
         Non-­‐Hispanic	  
                                                      5.728	                               0.206	      -­‐5.935	  
         White	  
         	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	         3.512	                               0.101	      -­‐8.024	  
         	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	         7.807	                               0.321	      -­‐3.690	  
         Non-­‐Hispanic	  
                                                      4.232	                               0.293	      -­‐4.524	  
         Black	  
         	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	         1.968	                               0.123	      -­‐6.759	  
         	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	         6.448	                               0.456	      -­‐2.201	  
         Northeast	                                  0.136	                               0.113	      -­‐0.248	  
         	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	       -­‐1.348	                            -­‐0.049	     -­‐1.647	  
         	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	         1.557	                               0.255	        1.199	  
         Midwest	                                  -­‐0.360	                              0.097	        0.263	  
         	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	       -­‐1.632	                            -­‐0.049	     -­‐1.264	  
         	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	         1.140	                               0.224	        1.539	  
         West	                                       1.155	                               0.001	      -­‐1.155	  
         	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	         0.016	                             -­‐0.134	     -­‐2.268	  
         	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	         2.267	                               0.116	      -­‐0.054	  
         MSA	                                        0.045	                               0.057	      -­‐0.101	  
         	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	       -­‐1.259	                            -­‐0.063	     -­‐1.244	  
         	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	         1.229	                               0.197	        1.189	  
                                                                     continued	  


	                                                             27	  
                                                            Table	  2	  (continued)	  
                                                                            	  
                                                                                        Days	  
                                                Alive	  &	  Out	  of	  
                                                                                 In	  Hospital	     Deceased	  
                            Covariate	            Hospital	  
       Angina	                                         1.138	                         0.085	         -­‐1.223	  
       	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	           -­‐0.110	                      -­‐0.158	        -­‐2.748	  
       	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	             2.684	                         0.303	           0.005	  
       Arthritis	                                      0.833	                         0.180	         -­‐1.013	  
       	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	           -­‐0.196	                        0.015	         -­‐2.072	  
       	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	             1.941	                         0.341	           0.023	  
       Asthma	                                       -­‐0.239	                        0.182	           0.056	  
       	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	           -­‐1.619	                      -­‐0.027	        -­‐1.461	  
       	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	             1.264	                         0.349	           1.444	  
       Cancer	                                       -­‐2.936	                        0.141	           2.795	  
       	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	           -­‐4.436	                      -­‐0.023	          1.169	  
       	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	           -­‐1.305	                        0.291	           4.271	  
       Chronic	  Bronchitis	                          0.907	                         0.064	         -­‐0.972	  
       	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	           -­‐0.490	                      -­‐0.186	        -­‐2.628	  
       	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	             2.552	                         0.271	           0.398	  
       Coronary	  Heart	  Dis.	                    -­‐0.355	                        0.022	           0.333	  
       	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	           -­‐1.767	                      -­‐0.207	        -­‐1.318	  
       	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	             1.350	                         0.228	           1.803	  
       High	  Cholesterol	                            2.013	                       -­‐0.074	        -­‐1.940	  
       	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	             1.010	                       -­‐0.182	        -­‐2.925	  
       	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	             3.012	                         0.041	         -­‐0.941	  
       Diabetes	                                     -­‐2.425	                        0.465	           1.960	  
       	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	           -­‐3.698	                        0.270	           0.565	  
       	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	           -­‐1.053	                        0.646	           3.255	  
       Emphysema	                                    -­‐7.115	                        0.380	           6.735	  
       	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	        -­‐10.300	                        -­‐0.004	          2.520	  
       	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	           -­‐2.807	                        0.688	           9.899	  
       Hypertension	                                 -­‐0.157	                        0.112	           0.045	  
       	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	           -­‐1.217	                      -­‐0.016	        -­‐0.932	  
       	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	             0.841	                         0.242	           1.098	  
       Joint	  Pain	                                -­‐1.558	                        0.008	           1.550	  
       	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	           -­‐2.542	                      -­‐0.121	          0.515	  
       	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	           -­‐0.490	                        0.153	           2.510	  
                                                                    continued	  



	                                                                     28	  
                                                             Table	  2	  (continued)	  
                                                                             	  
                                                                                         Days	  
                                                Alive	  &	  Out	  of	  
                                                                                  In	  Hospital	     Deceased	  
                            Covariate	            Hospital	  
       M.I.	                                       -­‐3.720	                           0.152	         3.569	  
       	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	         -­‐5.905	                         -­‐0.245	        0.665	  
       	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	         -­‐0.759	                           0.408	         5.746	  
       Other	  Heart	  
                                                       -­‐0.607	                     0.243	            0.364	  
       Disease	  
       	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	            -­‐1.748	                     0.037	            -­‐0.915	  
       	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	              0.674	                      0.422	              1.522	  
       Stroke	                                        -­‐2.328	                     0.747	              1.581	  
       	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	            -­‐3.984	                     0.376	            -­‐0.169	  
       	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	            -­‐0.478	                     1.063	              3.199	  
	                                              	  




	                                                                      29	  
                                                                           Table	  3	  
                                                                              	  
                       Estimated	  APEs	  and	  .95	  Confidence	  Intervals:	  Outcomes	  B	  (N=20,421;	  Hansen	  C2	  CIs)	  
                	  
                                                                                               Days	  
                                                           Dental	         Office-­‐ Outpatient	                            Inpatient	  
                                         Noncontact	                                                     E.R.	  Visit	                    Deceased	  
                     Covariate	                              Visit	     Based	  Visit	      Visit	                            Stay	  
Age	                                       -­‐0.337	       0.006	          0.025	          0.005	     -­‐0.002	             0.005	       0.298	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	        -­‐0.394	       0.005	          0.017	          0.003	     -­‐0.003	             0.001	       0.240	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	        -­‐0.279	       0.007	          0.033	          0.008	     -­‐0.002	             0.010	       0.356	  
Female	                                    -­‐0.887	       0.118	          1.337	          0.060	       0.046	              0.108	     -­‐0.782	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	        -­‐1.888	       0.086	          1.106	        -­‐0.011	      0.035	              0.012	     -­‐1.697	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	          0.042	        0.152	          1.560	          0.142	       0.057	              0.211	       0.233	  
Education	                                 -­‐0.413	       0.098	          0.260	          0.034	     -­‐0.005	           -­‐0.032	      0.058	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	        -­‐0.565	       0.087	          0.189	          0.018	     -­‐0.008	           -­‐0.046	    -­‐0.074	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	        -­‐0.265	       0.110	          0.331	          0.049	     -­‐0.003	           -­‐0.015	      0.184	  
Family	  Size	                              0.605	      -­‐0.054	       -­‐0.440	       -­‐0.027	    -­‐0.007	           -­‐0.044	    -­‐0.034	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	          0.220	      -­‐0.064	       -­‐0.523	       -­‐0.054	    -­‐0.011	           -­‐0.077	    -­‐0.369	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	          0.944	      -­‐0.042	       -­‐0.350	         0.007	     -­‐0.002	           -­‐0.004	      0.367	  
Non-­‐Hisp.	  White	                        4.208	        0.220	          1.293	          0.015	       0.022	              0.184	     -­‐5.941	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	          2.160	        0.177	          1.014	        -­‐0.080	      0.005	              0.063	     -­‐8.009	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	          6.201	        0.265	          1.588	          0.123	       0.037	              0.289	     -­‐3.885	  
Non-­‐Hisp.	  Black	                        4.443	      -­‐0.074	       -­‐0.136	         0.007	       0.035	              0.257	     -­‐4.531	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	          2.392	      -­‐0.122	       -­‐0.507	       -­‐0.137	      0.016	              0.091	     -­‐6.974	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	          6.741	      -­‐0.031	         0.242	          0.139	       0.054	              0.410	     -­‐2.394	  
Northeast	                                 -­‐1.028	       0.142	          0.791	          0.233	       0.008	              0.104	     -­‐0.250	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	        -­‐2.409	       0.091	          0.466	          0.129	     -­‐0.010	           -­‐0.048	    -­‐1.597	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	          0.316	        0.187	          1.131	          0.339	       0.024	              0.233	       1.128	  
Midwest	                                   -­‐1.528	       0.211	          0.665	          0.292	       0.031	              0.067	       0.262	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	        -­‐2.926	       0.165	          0.402	          0.172	       0.013	            -­‐0.063	    -­‐1.206	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	        -­‐0.052	       0.256	          0.949	          0.392	       0.048	              0.201	       1.705	  
West	                                      -­‐0.094	       0.186	          1.040	          0.023	     -­‐0.001	             0.002	     -­‐1.155	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	        -­‐1.207	       0.139	          0.718	        -­‐0.057	    -­‐0.018	           -­‐0.126	    -­‐2.191	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	          0.987	        0.233	          1.374	          0.114	       0.016	              0.117	     -­‐0.040	  
MSA	                                       -­‐0.425	       0.099	          0.422	        -­‐0.051	    -­‐0.009	             0.064	     -­‐0.100	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	        -­‐1.639	       0.055	          0.125	        -­‐0.117	    -­‐0.025	           -­‐0.058	    -­‐1.271	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	          0.773	        0.146	          0.723	          0.024	       0.009	              0.182	       1.102	  
                                                                               continued	  
                	  
                	                                           	  


                	                                                                 30	  
                                                                        Table	  3	  (continued)	  
                                                                                        	  
                                                                                                  Days	  
                                                           Dental	         Office-­‐ Outpatient	                              Inpatient	  
                                         Noncontact	                                                       E.R.	  Visit	                    Deceased	  
                     Covariate	                              Visit	     Based	  Visit	        Visit	                            Stay	  
Angina	                                      1.116	      -­‐0.065	         0.099	          -­‐0.015	      0.009	              0.076	     -­‐1.219	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	        -­‐0.174	     -­‐0.190	       -­‐0.572	         -­‐0.147	    -­‐0.028	           -­‐0.151	    -­‐2.973	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	          2.947	        0.042	          0.692	            0.082	       0.043	              0.261	     -­‐0.029	  
Arthritis	                                 -­‐0.843	       0.007	          1.518	            0.150	       0.032	              0.150	     -­‐1.014	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	        -­‐1.938	     -­‐0.039	         1.203	            0.041	       0.014	            -­‐0.017	    -­‐2.144	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	          0.366	        0.054	          1.837	            0.243	       0.051	              0.305	       0.045	  
Asthma	                                    -­‐1.680	       0.035	          1.286	            0.118	       0.061	              0.125	       0.055	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	        -­‐3.199	     -­‐0.026	         0.849	          -­‐0.067	      0.034	            -­‐0.080	    -­‐1.482	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	          0.042	        0.093	          1.674	            0.262	       0.085	              0.285	       1.446	  
Cancer	                                    -­‐4.357	       0.097	          1.124	            0.193	       0.032	              0.110	       2.801	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	        -­‐5.851	       0.046	          0.806	            0.092	       0.009	            -­‐0.053	      0.998	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	        -­‐2.572	       0.154	          1.475	            0.284	       0.057	              0.245	       4.294	  
Chron.	  Bronchitis	                        0.588	      -­‐0.140	         0.468	          -­‐0.017	      0.013	              0.058	     -­‐0.970	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	        -­‐0.861	     -­‐0.232	       -­‐0.240	         -­‐0.160	    -­‐0.022	           -­‐0.185	    -­‐2.585	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	          2.333	      -­‐0.053	         1.086	            0.100	       0.044	              0.253	       0.405	  
Coronary	  Heart	  Dis.	                 -­‐0.767	     -­‐0.087	         0.482	            0.009	       0.028	              0.000	       0.335	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	        -­‐2.185	     -­‐0.165	       -­‐0.094	         -­‐0.119	    -­‐0.017	           -­‐0.210	    -­‐1.303	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	          1.040	      -­‐0.009	         0.989	            0.107	       0.063	              0.178	       1.682	  
High	  Cholesterol	                         1.331	        0.091	          0.581	            0.009	       0.003	            -­‐0.072	    -­‐1.942	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	          0.278	        0.053	          0.302	          -­‐0.077	    -­‐0.014	           -­‐0.164	    -­‐2.924	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	          2.360	        0.133	          0.846	            0.090	       0.019	              0.041	     -­‐0.897	  
Diabetes	                                  -­‐3.567	     -­‐0.045	         1.096	            0.106	       0.024	              0.428	       1.958	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	        -­‐4.928	     -­‐0.110	         0.714	          -­‐0.018	      0.000	              0.218	       0.584	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	        -­‐2.113	       0.014	          1.457	            0.214	       0.046	              0.604	       3.238	  
Emphysema	                                 -­‐6.736	     -­‐0.035	       -­‐0.361	           0.034	       0.048	              0.324	       6.725	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	        -­‐9.915	     -­‐0.173	       -­‐0.892	         -­‐0.148	    -­‐0.002	           -­‐0.033	      2.694	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	        -­‐2.585	       0.100	          0.138	            0.179	       0.092	              0.613	       9.876	  
Hypertension	                              -­‐0.873	     -­‐0.061	         0.733	            0.044	       0.031	              0.084	       0.042	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	        -­‐1.916	     -­‐0.104	         0.484	          -­‐0.056	      0.013	            -­‐0.037	    -­‐0.997	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	          0.221	      -­‐0.020	         0.978	            0.142	       0.049	              0.215	       1.118	  
Joint	  Pain	                             -­‐2.714	       0.077	          0.986	            0.090	       0.033	            -­‐0.021	      1.549	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	        -­‐3.770	       0.033	          0.718	            0.012	       0.017	            -­‐0.149	      0.512	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	        -­‐1.647	       0.115	          1.232	            0.169	       0.049	              0.122	       2.640	  
                                                                            continued	  



               	                                                                 31	  
                                                                          Table	  3	  (continued)	  
                 	  
                                                                                                Days	  
                                                           Dental	          Office-­‐ Outpatient	                            Inpatient	  
                                         Noncontact	                                                      E.R.	  Visit	                    Deceased	  
                     Covariate	                              Visit	      Based	  Visit	      Visit	                            Stay	  
M.I.	                                      -­‐3.642	     -­‐0.098	          0.062	        -­‐0.017	    -­‐0.016	             0.149	       3.562	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	        -­‐5.953	     -­‐0.187	        -­‐0.470	       -­‐0.159	    -­‐0.048	           -­‐0.173	      0.866	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	        -­‐0.784	     -­‐0.018	          0.598	          0.100	       0.012	              0.378	       5.844	  
Other	  Heart	  Dis.	                    -­‐1.721	       0.083	           0.783	          0.247	       0.035	              0.206	       0.368	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	        -­‐2.980	       0.017	           0.356	          0.038	       0.013	              0.020	     -­‐0.946	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	        -­‐0.305	       0.144	           1.234	          0.388	       0.057	              0.365	       1.554	  
Stroke	                                    -­‐2.212	     -­‐0.129	          0.090	        -­‐0.042	      0.057	              0.653	       1.584	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  L	        -­‐3.903	     -­‐0.224	        -­‐0.548	       -­‐0.154	      0.016	              0.297	     -­‐0.250	  
	  	  	  	  	  CI	  -­‐	  U	        -­‐0.238	     -­‐0.043	          0.632	          0.051	       0.094	              0.942	       3.251	  
                                  	  




                 	                                                                   32	  
