                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     A TIME TO MAKE LAWS AND A TIME TO FUNDRAISE? ON THE RELATION
          BETWEEN SALARIES AND TIME USE FOR STATE POLITICIANS

                                       Mitchell Hoffman
                                       Elizabeth Lyons

                                      Working Paper 22571
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22571


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2016




This paper represents a revision of an earlier working paper, "Do Higher Salaries Lead to Higher
Performance? Evidence from State Politicians," to focus on time use. We thank Alan
Auerbach, Kevin Bryan, Varanya Chaubey, Decio Coviello, Dan Elfenbein, John de
Figueiredo, Rui de Figueiredo, Fred Finan, Yosh Halberstam, Nikolaj Harmon, Deepak
Hegde, Gianmarco Leon, Dan Mitchell, Naci Mocan, John Morgan, Gerard Roland, Michel
Serafinelli, Orie Shelef, Nathan Yang, and various seminar participants for helpful comments.
We are grateful to Ernesto Dal Bo and Enrico Moretti for sharing data with us, as well as to
Kathleen Bratton, Ray Fisman, and James Snyder for sharing data that were used in an earlier
version of the paper. Kevin (Hongjia) Hu, Ania Jaroszewicz, Palermo Penano, Nicholas Roth,
Kristjan Sigurdson, and Trent Turnbull provided outstanding research assistance. Financial
support from the Kauffman Foundation, the National Science Foundation IGERT
Fellowship, and the Social Science and Humanities Research Council of Canada is
gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Mitchell Hoffman and Elizabeth Lyons. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
A Time to Make Laws and a Time to Fundraise? On the Relation between Salaries and Time
Use for State Politicians
Mitchell Hoffman and Elizabeth Lyons
NBER Working Paper No. 22571
August 2016
JEL No. D72,H70,M52

                                           ABSTRACT

Paying higher salaries is often believed to enhance worker effort, leading workers to work harder
to avoid getting fired. However, workers may also respond to higher salaries by focusing on tasks
that most directly affect getting fired (as opposed to those that contribute most to productivity).
We explore these issues by analyzing the relationship between the level of compensation and
time use for US state legislators. Using data on time use and legislator salaries, we show that
higher salary is associated with legislators spending more time on fundraising. In contrast, higher
salary is also associated with less time spent on legislative activities and has no clear relation to
time spent on constituent services. Subgroup analysis broadly supports our interpretation of the
data.


Mitchell Hoffman
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3E6
CANADA
and NBER
mitchell.hoffman@rotman.utoronto.ca

Elizabeth Lyons
School of Global Policy and Strategy
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive, MC 0519
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
lizlyons@ucsd.edu
1       Introduction

The relationship between voters and politicians is a classic example of the principal-agent problem

(Barro, 1973). In this problem, like many others, it is difficult for the principal to accurately evaluate

the performance of the agent due to a noisy relationship between the agent’s inputs and outcomes. An

alternative to measuring outcomes for evaluating an agent’s performance is to examine how she uses

her time. Politicians may spend their time enacting laws and serving constituents. Alternatively,

they may spend their time on fundraising, outside work, or leisure, potentially leading to worse

outcomes for voters. Unfortunately, it is difficult to measure how politicians use their time as they

do not work under the close supervision of the principal (the general public). As a result, little is

known about how politicians actually use their time, or about how incentives affect their time use.

        Concerns about suboptimal politician productivity and time use emerge forcefully in the con-

text of US state government. It is sometimes argued that state legislators spend excessive time on

fundraising.1 As a consequence, they may have too little time to fulfill their other duties. While

state legislatures differ in many features such as whether the legislator position is a full-time position

or not, one particularly striking difference across legislatures is in the level of compensation. Some

states like California pay legislatures a salary on the order of $100,000. Other states like New Mexico

and Texas pay much lower salaries around $5,000 or less.2

        This paper studies the relationship between the level of salary for state politicians and how

politicians spend their time. The level of compensation can have a variety of theoretical effects on a

workforce, potentially selecting better workers (Weiss, 1980), as well as incentivizing them to work
    1
     For example, in a survey of state legislative candidates, Francia and Herrnson (2003) find that candidates spend
roughly one quarter of their campaign time on fundraising. David Jolly, a congressman from Florida, proposed the
“Stop Act” in 2016 to prohibit federal officeholders from directly soliciting contributions; Jolly has declared that
“Members of Congress spend too much time raising money and not enough time doing their job” (see the 60 Min-
utes piece on “Are Members of Congress Becoming Telemarketers?” on April 24, 2016). For a popular discussion of
excessive time on fundraising for US politics, see Last Week Tonight with John Oliver on 4/3/2016. For state legisla-
tive races, in particular, there is growing concern about the need to raise large sums of campaign money; see, e.g.,
“Money pours into Minn. legislative campaigns” by Catherine Richert, http://www.mprnews.org/story/2012/11/05/
politics/legislative-races-money.
   2
     It is argued that lower salaries may contribute to low performance. For example, the Council of State Governments,
a national organization representing state governments, often argues that low legislative compensation has deleterious
consequences, stating “If legislators are not paid adequately, then candidates are drawn from a smaller pool. ...You
can’t expect to attract good candidates with pay that is lower when compared to other jobs and professions (quotation
from Keon Chi, editor-in-chief of the Council of State Government’s Book of the States). Quoted in “Legislators’
pay falling behind” by Eric Kelderman, a February 13, 2007, article on Stateline.org. General popular discussion on
whether politicians should be paid more is also very common. For example, business magnate Richard Branson in a
July 13, 2013 blog post entitled, “Should politicians be paid more?” argues that increasing pay is critical for attracting
high-quality politicians in the context of discussion on whether to raise pay for members of British Parliament.



                                                            1
harder so as to avoid getting fired (Becker and Stigler, 1974; Shapiro and Stiglitz, 1984). However,

compared to work on incentive pay, there is more limited empirical research on the level of pay.

As recognized in the work on incentive pay, increases in compensation may not necessarily lead to

improvements in the overall quality of the work performed, particularly for multitask jobs (Holmstrom

and Milgrom, 1991). It is well recognized, for example, that giving teachers bonuses based on student

test scores might lead teachers to strongly emphasize teaching activities that improve test scores and

to de-emphasize other learning activities that may be beneficial to students, but do not improve

test scores. Likewise, if the level of teacher pay is significantly increased, thereby significantly

increasing the cost of getting fired, teachers may focus on activities that most decrease the chance

of getting fired (as opposed to those that give the highest, long-run benefits to students). Turning

back to politicians, if politician salary is higher, politicians may devote more effort to activities that

increase their likelihood of being elected, but, that given the problems associated with monitoring

their inputs, may not lead to better outcomes for voters. By studying time use empirically, we can

examine whether such behavior may occur.

       Beyond this, there are multiple other reasons to study politician time use. First, what politi-

cians do on a day-to-day basis has often been a “black box” for researchers. Second, there are

challenges in measuring politician productivity. For example, it is hard to say whether a legislature

should be deemed more productive when it has higher or lower expenditures. Measures like the num-

ber of bills passed or proposed are also controversial because bills differ widely in their importance.3

Third, there has been little work on politician time use, despite the potential for time use data to

overcome some of the difficulties associated with measuring politician effort. To our knowledge, our

paper represents the first study in economics on politician time use.

       To measure how politicians spend their time, we take advantage of rich, confidential surveys

conducted by political scientists (Carey et al., 1995, 2002). In 1995 and 2002, state legislators were

asked how much time they spent on various activities on a 1-5 scale. A central concern for any

study of politician time use is whether we can trust the time use data. Two key features of our data

address this concern. First, the politicians were informed truthfully that their confidentiality would
   3
    In addition, the number of bills passed may be strongly affected by the structure of the legislature and the party
in power, as well as the identity of the governor (e.g., a Republican governor may veto bills by Democratic legislators).
Moreover, anticipating a possible veto, some bills may not be proposed in the first place. Finally, if a legislature is
functioning well and addressing a state’s more important issues, there may be much less need of passing new bills in a
particular year.



                                                           2
be protected. As such, outside researchers can only match politicians by state (and cannot do so by

person). Second, the surveys covered many different topics, with only a small section on time use.

As such, we are much less concerned that politicians might be selecting into the survey based on how

they use their time.

       We find a significant positive association between the level of pay and time spent fundrais-

ing. All else equal, when politicians are paid higher salaries, they spend significantly more time on

fundraising, particularly on fundraising for themselves (as opposed to for their party). In contrast,

higher salary also is associated with politicians spending less time on legislative activities and has no

relation to time spent on constituent services. These relationships are robust to the gradual inclusion

of more and more controls, including those for legislature characteristics (including professionalism

controls), state characteristics, region controls, and legislator characteristics. To probe our fundrais-

ing results further, we analyze how the relation between salary and fundraising varies across different

subgroups.

       Our study contributes to a growing economics literature on the impact of politician salary.

In economic theory, there is substantial work analyzing the impact of politician salary (e.g., Besley,

2004; Caselli and Morelli, 2004; Mattozzi and Merlo, 2008; Messner and Polborn, 2004; Poutvaara and

Takalo, 2007). This work points out that the impact of increasing salary is not always straightforward,

often because of various selection effects. Our paper takes a different approach, focusing on how salary

affects politicians’ choices among different time “inputs” as opposed to how it affects selection. In

empirical work, Ferraz and Finan (2010) and Gagliarducci and Nannicini (2013) study the impact

of politician salary for Brazilian municipal legislators and Italian mayors, respectively. For these

politicians, salaries change discontinuously with city population, allowing for regression discontinuity

estimates of the impact of salary. Fisman et al. (2015) and Mocan and Altindag (2013) study

the impact of salaries for Members of the European Parliament (MEPs), exploiting a recent pay

equalization policy that significantly increased salaries for MEPs from certain countries. Kotakorpi

and Poutvaara (2011) analyze a recent pay increase for Finnish parliamentarians. These papers

mostly tend to find often substantial positive impacts of salary on competitiveness, selection, and

performance.4 Though we lack a clean regression discontinuity strategy or natural experiment as in
   4
   For electoral competitiveness, Ferraz and Finan (2010) and Fisman et al. (2015) find large positive impacts on
whether politicians seek re-election. For selection, Ferraz and Finan (2010), Gagliarducci and Nannicini (2013), and
Kotakorpi and Poutvaara (2011) find large positive impacts on politician quality, whereas Fisman et al. (2015) find



                                                         3
several of the above papers, our paper suggests a potential drawback from higher salaries, namely,

that they could drive politician time use toward fundraising.

       While other empirical work studies the impact of politician salary outside the US, we know

of very little prior empirical work on the impact of politician salary in the US.5 In economics, the

only work on US politician salary we are aware of is by Diermeier et al. (2005) and Keane and Merlo

(2010). These two papers estimate structural models of career decisions for US congressmen. Their

counterfactual simulations include an investigation of how changes in congressional wages affect

congressional career decision-making. Our reduced form approach complements their structural

approach. Given that there is very little work on US politician salary, some of the most related work

to our paper is arguably that on other institutions for US politicians, such as term limits (Besley

and Case, 1995; List and Sturm, 2006), term length (e.g., Kalt and Zupan, 1990; Titiunik, 2014),

and district size (e.g., Baqir, 2002; Gilligan and Matsusaka, 1995).

       Within political science, there is a small literature on time use by candidates or politicians. On

candidates, for example, Francia and Herrnson (2003) and Miller (2016) examine aspects of time use

in state legislative candidates as opposed to elected legislators.6 On politicians, we are also aware of

a few papers that use some of the time use data we study, though for different purposes. Using the

2002 survey, Kurtz et al. (2006) study legislators’ perceptions about how “full-time” their job is.7

Also using the 2002 survey, VanDusky-Allen (2014) examines the relation between term limits and

time spent on constituent services and fundraising.8 Probably most related to our paper is a book

by Powell (2012). The book is primarily focused on understanding the extent to which campaign

contributions influence or corrupt public policy in state legislatures. As part of this exercise, one of

the book’s chapters (Chapter 4) looks at how different factors relate to time spent on fundraising and
negative impacts on politician quality. (For Kotakorpi and Poutvaara (2011), positive impacts are only observed for
female candidates.) For political performance, Ferraz and Finan (2010) and Gagliarducci and Nannicini (2013) find
large positive impacts on legislative productivity, whereas Fisman et al. (2015) find zero effect.
    5
      In political science, we have found some papers that have included salary in some analyses related to state legis-
latures (Berkman, 1994; Fiorina, 1994; Squire, 1997), but the focus of these papers is not on the impact of politician
salary. In economics, Besley (2004) shows that higher salary for governors is associated with greater ideological con-
gruence between governors and their electorate. Although not directly related to our paper, two papers in political
science, Groseclose and Krehbiel (1994) and Hall and Van Houweling (1995), show that US congressmen respond to
financial incentives to retire.
    6
      Francia and Herrnson (2003) examine how public finance laws affect the time that state legislative candidates spend
on fundraising. Miller (2016) examines the relationship between time spent on fundraising and vote share. However,
we are not aware of work with candidates analyzing how salary relates to time use.
    7
      The authors include legislator compensation as a control in one regression. There is a positive relation between
salary and a legislator’s perception of what percentage of a full-time job is the job as legislator.
    8
      To address this, we control for whether there are term limits in our baseline controls. VanDusky-Allen (2014) does
not control for salary, but does control for a general measure of legislature professionalism.


                                                           4
campaigning using the 2002 wave of the survey we use in our analysis. Like us, she finds a positive

relationship between legislator compensation and time spent on fundraising.

         Besides the difference in focus, our study differs from the analysis in Chapter 4 of Powell (2012)

in many ways. First, Powell (2012) focuses exclusively on time on fundraising, whereas we also study

time spent on legislative activities, constituent services, and work outside of politics. We believe

this is important from both a conceptual and empirical standpoint. Specifically, it is important to

understand whether higher salaries entail a potential trade-off or whether they simply increase time

spent on all political activities. Second, we perform theoretically grounded analyses of how estimates

vary across subgroups, whereas Powell (2012) does not perform subgroup analyses. Third, we use

different empirical specifications. Our analysis is based on regression models, including those in the

tradition of Altonji et al. (2005) where additional controls are gradually added.9 Fourth, our sample

size is significantly larger, as we study both the 1995 and 2002 survey waves (instead of simply the

2002 survey wave).10

         Our work also relates to research on the time use of other prominent individuals such as CEOs

(Bandiera et al., 2013), as well as to general analyses of time use (Becker, 1965; Hamermesh and

Pfann, 2005).

         Our paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides further relevant institutional context on

state legislatures. Section 3 describes the data sources. Section 4 shows results. Section 5 concludes.



2        Institutional Context

We first provide a brief overview of responsibilities and compensation for state legislators in order to

give context to our analysis. Then, in Section 2.3, we provide theoretical discussion on how salaries

may affect politician time use.


2.1      Being a State Legislator

State legislators in the US are responsible for many aspects of government. States provide a variety

of services including those related to education, healthcare, and prisons (e.g., Rehavi, 2007). Each
    9
    Powell (2012) uses a multi-level hierarchical model.
    10
    Our main results have about 6,300 observations. In contrast, the results in Chapter 4 of Powell (2012) have about
2,000 observations for the individual-level analysis. Further, in Chap. 4 of Powell (2012), legislator pay is only analyzed
as part of analysis at the state-chamber level, where there are 88 observations (and only 6 independent variables).



                                                            5
state has approximately 50 to 400 legislators.

      Legislators vary substantially across states in the time commitment involved. Many legislatures

meet every year, whereas others meet every other year (though this has become less prevalent over

time, and currently only six legislatures are biennial). Some legislatures are in session for most of

the year, whereas other legislatures meet for a few months. In our empirical analysis, we will control

for frequency of meeting, as well as session length.

      Legislator serve terms of four years or of two years. In order to get re-elected, legislators

devote substantial time to fundraising. The demands of fundraising for federal congresspeople are

well understood, even in the popular press. However, state legislators also raise sizable sums of

money for their election campaigns (Gierzynski and Breaux, 1996). In some states, there are term

limits, which limit the number of terms a legislator can serve.

      Of course, legislators are also involved in developing and learning about new legislation. Leg-

islators come from many backgrounds and often serve constituents with widely varying interests.

Thus, theoretical work has emphasized the importance of building coalitions in order for legislation

to pass (e.g., Groseclose and Snyder, 1996).

      In addition, legislators report spending significant time on serving constituents (Freeman and

Richardson Jr, 1996). Casework can take many forms, e.g., helping a constituent learn about or

receive a benefit that the constituent is eligible for. National Conference of State Legislatures (2000)

and Kurtz et al. (2006) note that legislators can even personally become physically involved in

casework, such as personally cutting down weeds blocking a highway.


2.2   Legislator Salaries

While nominal salaries for legislators averaged across all states have been increasing at a steady clip,

there is substantial variation both within and across states. Our analysis relies heavily upon cross-

state salary variation, so it is key to understand its drivers. In addition, it is also useful to briefly

explain how salaries have changed over time in order to provide context on why different states had

different salaries in the survey years (1995 and 2002).

      How pay is determined varies across states. In 16% of the contiguous 48 states, pay for

legislatures was determined exclusively by a state compensation commission in 2001. Commissions set

salaries based on a number of criteria, including the pay of other government officials and bureaucrats.


                                                   6
In a relatively small number of the contiguous states, 8.3% in 2001, pay was set exclusively by the

constitution. In states where pay is constitutionally determined, it is changed only if the constitution

is amended. In 35% of states in 2001 legislator pay was exclusively set by statute, either a law outside

the constitution, or the legislators essentially set their own pay by passing compensation bills. In

many cases, legislators vote on their own pay, but the increases only take effect for the next term.11

Many states use more than one method to set legislator pay with 3 states in 2001 using all three pay

setting methods.12

       Several factors affect the level of pay. First, salaries have increased as legislatures have become

more “professionalized.” In the past, many legislatures would meet every other year or be in session

for only several months. In the mid 20th century, however, legislatures began a shift toward increased

responsibilities. As of 2010, only five legislatures meet bienially: Montana, Nevada, North Dakota,

Oregon, and Texas. The National Conference of State Legislatures classifies states into categories

based on whether their legislatures are full-time or part-time. Ten states are categorized as full-time

or almost full-time, and the rest are considered as part-time or almost part-time (National Conference

of State Legislatures, 2009). In general, full-time legislators tend to receive higher pay. In all our

analyses, we control for length of legislative sessions in days, probably the most important measure

of session length, and we also explore other measures of professionalization such as a legislator’s

number of staff.13

       Second, as documented by Di Tella and Fisman (2004), US governor salaries have often been

increased in response to economic growth. As the economy improves and there are greater tax

revenues at both the national and state level, salaries for politicians tend to increase. To account for

this possibility in our regressions, we control for state GDP (though the reader should bear in mind

that we study legislators, while Di Tella and Fisman (2004) study governors).

       Third, even conditional on professionalization and economic growth, as well as other differences

across states, there are a substantial number of large, and seemingly irregular salary changes in the

historical record. As an example, consider the nearby states of Michigan and Minnesota. In the 1980s
  11
     Per the 27th amendment to the US constitution passed in 1992, this is the method use by the US congress in
setting its compensation.
  12
     In 2001, 1 state used both a compensation commission and the constitution to set pay, about 19% of states
determined pay both by statute and the constitution, and 12.5% of states set pay by both statute and compensation
commission.
  13
     Although many legislatures have historically been part-time, many legislators perceive the job as being full-time
or close to it (Kurtz et al., 2006).



                                                          7
and 1990s, legislator salaries were higher in Michigan than in Minnesota, but both were growing at a

slow, steady rate. In 2000, Michigan legislators made $55,054 per year and Minnesota legislators made

$31,440. However, due to a vote of the Michigan Compensation Commission, salaries were increased

roughly 40% from $55,054 to $77,400, where it remained at a roughly similar level throughout the

2000s. In contrast, the Minnesota salary stayed flat during this time period. Or in another example,

legislator salary in Oklahoma increased by 60% in 1990, from $20,000 to $32,000, a change which

were not observed in nearby states.

       The form of legislative compensation differs across states. In some states, legislators are paid

a yearly annual salary. For example, in California, legislator pay was $99,000 per year in the 2002

Book of the States ($118,074 in 2009 dollars). This amount is paid irrespective of the number of days

the legislature meets. In other states, legislators are paid a daily wage.14


2.3     Theoretical Framework: How Might Salaries affect Legislator Time Use?

Having discussed what legislators do and how they are paid, how do these factors relate? We provide

qualitative discussion on this question (in keeping with the empirical focus of our paper), but provide

formal arguments in Appendix C.

       For simplicity, suppose that politicians can spend their time on two activities: legislative

activities and fundraising. All else equal, politicians prefer to engage in legislative activities relative

to fundraising, either because politicians view legislative activity as socially desirable or because

fundraising is very unpleasant. Both legislative activities and fundraising affect the probability of

getting re-elected, but we assume there is a greater return from fundraising.15

       When salaries are higher, politicians face a greater incentive to get re-elected (as the value

of serving in office is greater). Thus, they will optimally respond by increasing the time spent on

fundraising. They do this even though voters care about the time they spend on legislative activities.

       This argument does not require that salaries are the only “compensation” that politicians

receive from their office. In reality, there are many other potential benefits to serving in office,
  14
      In Vermont, legislators receive a weekly wage.
  15
      We are not aware of empirical evidence supporting that fundraising matters more than legislative activities for
getting re-elected. However, as discussed further in Appendix C, there is evidence that fundraising and political
advertising matter for elections (see, e.g., Spenkuch and Toniatti (2016) for recent, careful evidence of sizable effects;
we caveat, though, that not all the literature finds positive effects (e.g., Levitt, 1994)). Given politicians’ often expressed
dislike for fundraising (discussed further in Appendix C), it seems unlikely that politicians would spend time fundraising
if it didn’t yield electoral benefits relative to spending the time on legislating. It is likely easier for most voters to see
a campaign ad on TV than to accurately observe whether politicians are spending time on legislative activities.


                                                              8
including perks from being in office and post-office career rewards (e.g., getting to serve as a lobbyist

or getting to run for a higher office in the future). However, individuals who receive a lot of “non-

pecuniary value” from serving in office seem likely to have time use patterns that are less shaped

by salary.16 Legislators having a high outside option outside of politics should work in the opposite

direction of legislators having non-pecuniary value from the office.17

         One interesting feature of US state legislature elections is that many elections are non-competitive,

with only one candidate running or with one candidate obtaining a very large share of the vote. How-

ever, it is not immediately clear how electoral competitiveness will affect the relation of salary and

time spent on fundraising.



3        Data

We describe the main features of our data here. Further details are given in Appendix A.


3.1      Time Use Data

Information on politician time use was collected from the survey of legislators done by Carey et al.

(1995) and Carey et al. (2002). Surveys were conducted through the mail and respondents were

promised confidentiality. The 1995 survey was mailed to every upper house legislator and 77% of

lower house legislators. In addition, it was mailed to all former legislators who last served in 1993

or 1994.18 For the 1995 survey, there were 3,542 legislators who responded and the response rate

was 47%. The 2002 survey was mailed to all state legislators. There were 2,982 state legislators who

responded and the response rate was 40.1%. Questions asked on time use differ across the two years.

These differences are specified in Appendix A. State legislators were asked to report how much time

they actually spent on one of several activities going from 1=“Hardly Any” to 5=“A Great Deal.”19
    16
     In the paper, we use the term “non-salary benefits” to refer to other money paid by the state to the legislator
during the year as part of his or her compensation (such as per diem pay or miles reimbursement). We use the term
“non-pecuniary benefits” or “non-pecuniary value” to refer to other benefits of serving or having served in office; this
includes non-monetary benefits (such as enjoyment from being in power), as well as monetary benefits, such as the
money one can get from being a lobbyist in the future.
  17
     Specifically, legislators who have a high outside option should have their time on fundraising more responsive with
respect to salary than legislators with lower outside options.
  18
     In the 1995 survey, 21% of respondents were former legislators. We believe these data are still informative because
the legislators served quite recently. However, our results are robust to dropping these prior office holders from our
sample.
  19
     In the wording of the question, only the end points of the scale are defined (i.e., there’s no definition for a response
of 2, 3, or 4). The 1995 survey has these end-points in reverse such that 5=“Hardly Any” and 1=“A Great Deal”. We



                                                             9
We normalize these variables to use as outcomes in our analysis (normalized by year).

       For most of the analysis, we group time use questions into three categories: legislative activities,

constituent services, and fundraising/campaigning. When there are multiple questions per category,

the category is defined as the average of the normalized values. (This approach of taking the average

of z-scores is shared with other papers such as Bloom et al. (2015).) We define the legislative activity

category using time spent on studying proposed legislation, developing new legislation, building

coalitions within the party, and building coalitions across paries. We define the constituent services

category using time spent on helping constituents and on staying in touch with constituents. The

fundraising/campaigning category is given by one question on fundraising/campaigning. We focus

on questions that are asked across both years of the survey.20

       Data Reliability. As with most survey data, a basic concern is whether the data are reliable,

i.e., do they reflect true information on politician time use? For example, politicians may be loathe

to report that they spend little time actually attending to legislation and serving the public. One

key defense against such social desirability bias is that the data were collected through confidential

mail surveys (as opposed to interviews). Thus, provided legislators trusted that the survey was

confidential, there would be little benefit from lying. Separate from social desirability pressure,

another question is whether the politicians provided serious and attentive answers to the time use

questions. While it is difficult to address this issue directly, we note to the reader that the time use

questions appeared in the middle of the survey form.21

       It is quite possible, however, that there is noise in how politicians responded to the time use

questions. Given our focus on time-use as a dependent variable, this will not bias our results if

the noise in survey response is classical measurement error. One possible version of non-classical

measurement error that relates to salary is that politicians in states with higher salary may feel that

they ought to report spending more time “serving the public.” That is, individuals who are better
re-code the scale to match that of 2002 in the data.
  20
     In each survey, there was also a question about time spent on making sure one’s district receives “a fair share
of government money and projects.” Ensuring one’s district receives a fair share of government money seems a bit
different to us than communicating with or helping one’s constituents (as legislation may also be involved), so we have
not included it as part of constituent services. However, if we include time spent on ensuring a fair share for one’s
district as part of the definition of time spent on constituent services, our main results in Table 2 are substantively
unchanged. The ensuring a fair share for one’s district question is analyzed separately in Table 4.
  21
     One possible downside to long surveys is that respondents become bored or fed up and begin giving the easiest
responses rather than the honest ones. However, this shows up near the end of the surveys, rather than in the middle
where the time use questions are placed (Herzog and Bachman, 1981).




                                                          10
compensated might feel more social pressure to exaggerate what they have done for their state or

constituents, and to understate time spent fundraising. While we cannot rule this out, we point

out that such responses would go in the opposite direction of our findings. Correcting for such bias

would seem likely to make our findings stronger.22

       Non-response Bias. Even if politicians respond truthfully to the survey, bias could also

emerge due to differential non-response. We consider two main possibilities. First, legislators who

are more altruistic may be more likely to respond to the survey (Jones and Linda, 1978). This is

similar to a social desirability bias in that we would have the sample of legislators who are “better

behaving” and our data would be biased towards time use that is more consistent with what legislators

are supposed to do rather than what they are doing. If this is true, then our estimates are a lower

bound on how much time legislators devote to fundraising and campaigning as opposed to legislative

activities. In addition, the survey was not framed as a study of time use, and time use was a small

part of the total survey. As a result, we believe that it is unlikely that legislators selected out of the

survey based on their time use (Levitt and List, 2011).

       Second, legislators who have more free time on their hands may be more likely to respond

(e.g., Tomaskovic-Devey et al., 1994). Although we try to control for how much responsibility

legislators have through our measures of legislature professionalization (described below), there may

be unobservable reasons why some legislators have more time on their hands than others and these

unobservables may also correlate with legislator salary. If we have the sample of legislators with the

most spare time, then we may have lower bounds on all measures of time use. As a result, it could

be that we are underestimating the effects of salary on legislative activities, constituent services,

and fundraising and campaigning. We test whether response rates differ depending on legislator

salary, and find that, conditional on our controls for legislature and state characteristics, there is no

relationship between salary and response rates (see Appendix Table B2). This finding reduces our

concerns that response bias is confounding our findings.

       Descriptives. Figure 1 presents histograms of time use across the three main categories: leg-

islative activities, constituent services, and fundraising/campainging. (Appendix Figure B1 presents

histograms for individual time use questions (also referred to as “narrow categories”) as opposed to
  22
    It is also possible to conceive of bias that would go in the same direction of our results, e.g., higher salaries might
conceivably introduce a stronger sense of “entitlement” to the job, and this could make someone more likely to lie
about spending time serving the public. Such a bias seems less plausible to us than the bias in the opposite direction.


                                                            11
the three main categories.) In Figure 1, note that panel (a) is based on four questions, panel (b) is

based on two questions, and panel (c) is based one question, reflecting what data are available on

the different categories.

      As seen in Figure 1, and as detailed further in Table 1, legislators’ average time use is highest

on constituent services, where the average response is 4.1 of 5. For legislative activities, the average

answer is a bit lower at 3.4, and it is lowest for fundraising/campainging at 2.4 of 5. However, there

is considerable variation across legislators on all the categories. Still, there are fewer instances of

legislators reporting spending more time on fundraising/campaigning than on legislative activity or

on constituent services. Only 19% of respondents have a lower number for the legislative activity

category than for fundraising/campaigning, and only 6% have a lower number for the constituent ser-

vices category than for fundraising/campaigning. Also, 6% have the same number for the fundraising

and legislative activity categories, and 9% have the same for fundraising and constituent services.

      Panel B of Table 1 demonstrates how our main time use categories (i.e., legislative activities,

constituent services, and fundraising and campaigning) correlate with one another. The correlation

between time use categories is positive, though not particularly large.23

      In the surveys, politicians are also asked whether they were the primary author of a bill that

passed. This question enables us to see whether there is a relation between time use on various cate-

gories and an actual legislative outcome, namely, whether one authored a bill that passed. Consistent

with time spent on legislative activities being important for legislative outcomes, Appendix Table B3

shows that time on legislative activities is significantly correlated with the number of passed bills a

legislator was a primary author on. A standard deviation increase in time on legislative activities is

associated with being the primary author on 0.3 more bills that passed. In contrast, the association

is much smaller between our other time use measures and this bill-passing outcome.


3.2    Salaries

We hand-collected politician salary data from the Book of the States, a periodical providing extensive

information about policies and programs in different states. We create a single annual salary figure

for each state by annualizing the relevant time frame. Salaries that are given for biennial legislative

sessions are divided by two to obtain an annual salary figure. Daily salaries are multiplied by the
  23
     This also seems to suggest that legislators who spend more time on a given category spend more time on the job
overall.


                                                        12
average number of days a legislature is in session over time.

      We use real salaries deflating with the national CPI (2009 level). As in Di Tella and Fisman

(2004), we ignore non-salary benefits that politicians receive (e.g., transportation expenses, living

per diems, etc.) for our main results. States compensate non-salary expenses in different ways

(e.g., some provide reimbursement on actual expenses, which are unobserved to the econometrician,

whereas other states give fixed amounts), thereby making it quite challenging to create a consistent

measure of non-salary benefits across all states. We return to non-salary benefits again in Section

4.2.2, where we do a robustness check using some data on non-salary benefits.

      For our main analysis, we use salary given in terms of tens of thousands of dollars (not in

logged form). By using non-logged form, we capture the idea that increasing salary from $20,000 to

$80,000 seems more consequential to a legislator than increasing salary from $2,000 to $8,000 even

though both are the same in percentage terms.


3.3   Other Characteristics of Legislatures and Summary Statistics

From the Book of the States, we also hand-collected data on methods used to set salaries, session

length over time, bill-passing over time, and on legislative support staff over time. We use the data on

methods of compensation to help assuage concerns about endogenous wage-setting, examining how

the impact of politician salary varies by method of compensation. Session length is an important

control variable. Bill-passing is a standard measure of legislative productivity. We use data on

legislative support staff as a control, one that is particularly useful in proxying a legislature’s degree

of professionalization over time.

      Throughout the paper, we restrict attention to the 48 contiguous states (Hawaii and Alaska

are excluded). Table 1 reports summary statistics on our outcome variables, salary, and primary

controls.



4     Results

4.1   Baseline Results on Salaries and Time Use

Baseline Results. Table 2 reports our baseline estimates of the relationship between salary and

legislator time use. At the legislator level, we regress normalized self-reported time use on legislator


                                                   13
salary and controls. Standard errors are clustered at the state level (Bertrand et al., 2004).

       Column 1 presents results with baseline controls (session length, upper house dummy, log state

population, log state GDP, and a year dummy). The base controls help address some of the basic

potential confounds, such as the possibility that economic conditions could influence both salary and

politician time use. In column 2, we add “professionalization controls” (such as whether legislators

have staff) to account for legislatures having different levels of professionalization, as we would like

to isolate the role of salary compared to that of other aspects of professionalization.

       In column 3, we would like to add geographic controls to account for states having persistent

differences in politician behavior that could be correlated with salary (e.g., a culture of corruption

that affects both the level of salary, as well as how politicians use their time). We lack sufficient

variation between 1995 and 2002 in salaries to add state effects. So, instead, in column 3, we use

census region fixed effects, as well as controls for state characteristics. The state characteristics are

time-varying, so they also help address the possibility of a time-varying shock that affected both

salaries and time use behavior. Column 4 additionally adds controls for legislator characteristics

to achieve our full specification. This controls for differences across states in the characteristics of

individuals who become state legislators.24

       Panel A shows a negative and statistically significant relationship between salary and time

spent on legislative activities. Because the dependent variable (time use) is normalized, the regression

coefficients can be interpreted in terms of standard deviations.

       Panel B examines the relationship of salary to time spent on constituent services. Unlike time

spent on legislative activities, the coefficient here is positive. However, it is insignificant.

       Panel C shows a significant positive relationship between salary and time spent on fundraising

and campaigning. The relation remains strongly statistically significant even as more and more

controls are added.


       Magnitudes. How should we think about the magnitudes of the coefficients estimated? We

start with the fundraising results where the estimated coefficients are largest in magnitude. The

coefficients in Panel C range from 0.041 − 0.053. This implies that a $30,000 increase in legislative

salary, which would be a sizable increase, is associated with roughly a 0.12σ − 0.16σ increase in time
  24
     Salary may also have a direct effect on the characteristics of politicians. Thus, it is not clear we should be controlling
for legislator characteristics if they are a possible mechanism by which salary affects time use. Thus, column 4 is the
fullest specification, but for some readers, it may not necessarily be the most preferred specification.


                                                              14
spent fundraising (where σ stands for standard deviations). A $30,000 increase in salary represents

an increase in salary by about 1.25σ (as Table 1 indicates the standard deviation of real salary is

about $24,000). Thus, our estimated coefficients seem moderate in size, though we admit that this

is somewhat subjective.

         In Panel A, the coefficient estimates are roughly around −0.03. This implies that a $30,000

increase in legislative salary is associated with roughly a 0.09σ decrease in time spent on legislative

activities. This is slightly smaller in magnitude than the coefficients in Panel C, but still seems

non-trivial in magnitude.


         Outside job. A limitation of the time use data is that we do not observe total time spent on

politician activities vs. total time spent on non-politician activities. We do observe a proxy though in

the form of whether a politician reports having a job outside of politics.25 Table 3 shows that paying

a higher salary is associated with politicians being less likely to hold an outside job. This relation

is significant even controlling for measures of legislature professionalization. A $30,000 increase in

salary is associated with roughly a 10% lower chance of having an outside job (as roughly implied

by column 4).


         Narrower Time Use Categories. Table 2 focused on the three combined categories of time

use. In Table 4, to delve further into how salary relates to time use, we narrow our definitions of

the time use categories to particular questions. Column 1 indicates a significant negative relation

between salary and time spent studying proposed legislation, whereas there is no significant relation

between salary and time spent on developing legislation in column 2. Column 3 analyzes time

spent on building coalitions within one’s party, whereas column 4 analyzes building coalitions across

parties. Salary has a negative association with both of them, though the coefficient for coalition

building across parties is more negative. In columns 5 and 6, we analyze time spent staying in touch

with constituents and on helping constituents, respectively. Consistent with the combined measure

of constituent services presented in Panel B of Table 2, there does not appear to be a relation

between legislator salary and these sub-categories of constituent services. There is also no relation

between salary and time spent on ensuring one’s district receives a fair share of government money

and projects in column 7.
 25
      For analysis of outside work done by Italian politicians, see Gagliarducci et al. (2010).



                                                             15
        In columns 8 and 9, we break down time spent on fundraising by whether legislators were

fundraising for themselves or fundraising for their caucuses.26 Again, consistent with our findings in

Table 2, we find that a higher legislator salary does positively relate to time spent on fundraising.

Interestingly, however, we only find a significant relationship between salary and fundraising for

oneself and not for one’s caucus. Column 8 implies that an increase in salary of $30,000 is associated

with legislators spending 0.15σ more time on fundraising for themselves.27


4.2     Robustness of Findings

4.2.1     Endogeneity Concerns

A central concern for our analysis is that there is an unobserved factor that is correlated with both

salary level and how politicians spend their time. We lack a quasi-experimental research design

and cannot rule out all possibilities of endogeneity. However, we provide evidence and discussion

regarding what we believe to be the most important potential sources of endogeneity. We do not

believe that any of these are primarily driving our main result.

        Endogenous Salary Setting. As described in Section 2.2, in some states, legislators often

vote on their own salaries. One may be concerned that there could be an unrelated factor that

affects the willingness of a state legislature to give itself a larger salary, as well as how legislators

use their time. For example, if a legislature is more corrupt, the legislature may choose to pay

its members high salaries, as well as spend more time on fundraising. A bias could also go in the

opposite direction. For example, if legislators in one state are of unobservedly higher quality, they

may be more able to command a higher salary from the public, as well as be more willing to spend

more time on legislating.

        To try to address this concern, we repeat our main, full-control time use analyses while re-

stricting attention to states where legislators do not set their own salaries (i.e., we drop states where

salary is only governed by statute). As seen in Appendix Table B4, the results are qualitatively

similar to those in column 4 of Table 2.

        Professionalization and Unobserved State or Legislature Characteristics. Another
  26
     The 1995 time use survey does not break down fundraising/campaigning time use into narrower categories, so these
sub-categories are only available for 2002. Appendix Table A1 lists time use questions by year.
  27
     This last finding, that salary is significant associated with fundraising for oneself, but not for fundraising for the
caucus, is also found in Chapter 4 of Powell (2012).


                                                            16
concern is that politician salary may related to unobserved legislature characteristics or state char-

acteristics that also affect performance. Given the paper’s focus on salary, a particular one to be

mindful of is the degree of “professionalization” of state legislatures.

        Historically, legislatures have differed significantly in the extent to which being a legislator was

a “professional” position. The late 1960s and 1970s saw a large increase in the “professionalization”

of state legislatures, where wages were increased, along with other changes such as lengthening

legislative sessions and providing increased legislative staff (Fiorina, 1994). These changes differ

by state, and have continued to the present, with gradually longer sessions and annual instead of

bi-annual meetings.

        Our main approach toward addressing the issue that professionalization could bias the results

is to incorporate control variables for different aspects of professionalization. In Table 5, our baseline

controls include session length, which is an important measure of how much time being a legislator

entails. With the professionalization controls in column 2, we incorporate data on the frequency of

meetings and on different dimensions of legislative staff. We think that controls for legislative staff

might be particularly important with regard to time use because having more staff could be relevant

for how legislators use their time.

        Despite these controls, it is possible that salary may be correlated with unobserved legislature

characteristics, e.g., the capital buildings or facilities. Alternatively, while we have controls for

regions and some state characteristics, there may be important aspects of states that are difficult to

measure. For example, in states where there are large differences across districts, legislators may face

a harder time agreeing on which bills to pass (e.g., Dearden and Husted, 1993). We cannot eliminate

these concerns entirely. We take comfort, however, in the fact that the coefficient on salary remains

sizable even as increasingly more and more control variables are added (Altonji et al., 2005).


4.2.2     Measurement

Time. Different politicians could interpret the time use answers (1=“Hardly any” to 5=“A great

deal”) in different ways. “A great deal” of time for one person may only be a moderate amount of

time for another. While our main approach has been to treat a politician’s responses separately, an

alternative is to look at the time use questions relative to one another. Specifically, we can define

the “share of time” on an activity category as the amount of time on that category divided by the


                                                     17
sum of the time on the three activity categories. Appendix Table B6 shows that the results from

Table 2 are qualitatively robust to looking at share of time as the left-hand side variable instead of

an absolute time measure.

       As mentioned above, we do not measure a politician’s total number of hours spent on political

activities. However, there is a question in the 2002 survey that asks about what percentage of

the individual’s time is occupied with state legislator activities. Table B5 shows a positive relation

between salary and share of time occupied with state legislator activities even while controlling for

our full set of controls (including region and state characteristic controls).28

       Salary. Because our analysis focuses on salary in tens of thousands of dollars, this makes our

regression potentially more susceptible to outliers. The state with the highest salary in the data is

California (see Section 2.2 above for an earlier mention on California salary level). However, our

results are broadly qualitatively robust to excluding California, as seen in Appendix Table B9.29

       As mentioned above in Section 3.2, it is difficult to measure non-salary benefits for state

legislators. Despite these challenges, however, the 1995 survey data contains information on annual

per diem amounts. To examine whether per diems are somehow driving our results, we identified the

states where per diem as a proportion of per diem plus salary was the highest in the 1995 data (the

average proportion is about one-third). Excluding the highest proportional per diem states (90th

percentile and above), the results are qualitatively similar, as seen in Appendix Table B8.

       Another concern is that the “real value” of a given salary will vary across the country due to

differences in the cost of living. To address this, we test whether our results are robust to deflating

salaries using a state-level CPI based on data from Moretti (2013) (data details in Appendix A.4).

Appendix Table B7 shows that our main results are qualitatively robust to using a state-level CPI.
  28
     Kurtz et al. (2006) also show that salary is positively related to what share of a full time job is being a state
legislator.
  29
     The coefficient for time spent on fundraising is still roughly 0.04 and the coefficient for time spent on legislative
activity is still roughly -0.03; an important difference is that the positive relation between pay and time spent on
constituent services is now statistically significant at the 5% level. As an alternative robustness check to excluding
California, we also explored using log salary (instead of salary) as a regressor. Using log salary as a regressor, we
continue to find a positive relation between pay and time spent on fundraising. However, log salary results are more
sensitive to specification; see Appendix A.5 for a more detailed discussion.




                                                           18
4.3     Subgroup Analysis

Table 5 further examines the relation between salary and time on fundraising/campaigning using

subgroup analysis.

       Non-pecuniary benefits of office. In the conceptual framework, we predicted that the

larger the degree of non-pecuniary benefits from being in office, the smaller the impact of salary on

time spent on fundraising. We use several different strategies for attempting to measure this. First,

we look at whether a politician reports it is likely they will run for higher office after serving in the

legislature.30 For these individuals, we would imagine there is a greater value in getting re-elected

insofar as being in office helps facilitate being able to run for higher office in the future. Among

individuals who do not think it’s likely that they’ll run for higher office, there is a significant positive

relation between salary and time spent on fundraising, whereas there is no such positive relation

among individuals who think it’s likely they will run for higher office.

       Second, we examine heterogeneity by whether a politician reports it is likely they will do

lobbying or consulting after serving in office. We assume that individuals will have better lobbying

opportunities the longer they are in office.31 There is little difference in the salary coefficient based

on whether politicians report expecting to become lobbyists, as see in columns 3 and 4 of Panel A.

       However, a concern with the survey question on lobbying/consulting is that politicians may

lie about whether they intend to become lobbyists.32 Thus, third, we also repeated the analysis

using the size of the legislature as a rough proxy for whether politicians have many opportunities

to become lobbyists. Specifically, we split legislatures by above-median and below-median levels of

spending. The coefficient on salary is larger in states with below-median spending, consistent with

salary mattering less in states with fewer post-office opportunities for lobbying.

       Competitiveness of elections. In Panel B, we examine split samples according to electoral

competitiveness. We create three different measures of competitiveness: (1) whether the legislator
  30
     We define planning to run for higher office as planning to run for US Congress or a statewide office. We do not
consider planning to run for the other legislative chamber, local office, or appointive office as running for a higher office.
  31
     An opposite interpretation is also possible. For example, individuals who expect to do lobbying may not mind
so much to lose an election because they can then become a lobbyist. It seems likely that a politician can command
greater compensation as a lobbyist if they have greater and more detailed experience as a politician. For example,
(Bertrand et al., 2014) provide evidence that social connections are important for US federal lobbyists.
  32
     We thank an anonymous referee for raising the point that politicians may lie about post-politics careers. Of course,
politicians may lie about any aspect of post-politics careers (or about any item on the survey) including possibly the
question on intent to run for higher office. However, it seems that politicians may be especially prone to lying about
a future interest in lobbying given that there seems to be more social stigma attached to being a lobbyist (at least
compared to, say, running for a higher office such as US Congress).


                                                             19
was opposed in their last general election, (2) whether the legislator was opposed in their last primary

election, and (3) whether or not the previous general election was “close,” defined as being decided

by 10 percentage points or less. (For (3), for cases where the general election was uncontested, we

code the election as being not close.) Across these three different measures, the responsiveness of

fundraising with respect to pay is similar whether or not the district is competitive. This is consistent

with the conceptual framework, which does not predict a consistent relation.

       Politicians’ individual characteristics. Panel C of Table 5 examines how the relation of

salary to time on fundraising varies by other individual characteristics of politicians. Columns 1 and

2 show that the relation of salary to time on fundraising seems actually a bit weaker for Democrats

than for Republicans. This is consistent with Republicans potentially having better outside options

than Democrats if they don’t get re-elected (Fiorina, 1994), but there are many other possible

explanations for this result.     33


       We also observe that women respond less with respect to salaries than men. This could

possibly be explained by women having a worse outside option than men if they don’t get re-

elected. In addition, Dollar et al. (2001) show that greater female parliamentary representation is

associated with less corruption, consistent with the idea that women may be less corrupt than men.

In addition, men and women could potentially experience differential impacts of salary increases on

their intrinsic motivations.34 It is thus possible female and male politicians may respond differently

to salary incentives.

       Finally, the relation of salary to time on fundraising appears slightly larger for non-white

politicians compared to white politicians. While race could encapsulate many relevant variables in

this setting, one possibility is differences between whites and non-whites in the non-pecuniary value of

the seat.35 If non-whites have a lower non-pecuniary value of the seat (e.g., due to less opportunities

after office of pursuing lobbying or consulting), then they may be more responsive to salary.
  33
     For example, Democrats and Republicans could conceivably differ in their level of “intrinsic motivation” and
tendency to exhibit “crowd out.” We discuss crowd out in general below in Section 4.4.
  34
     For example, in a very different context, Mellström and Johannesson (2008) show that women exhibit crowd-out
in response to getting paid to donate blood, whereas men do not. Other studies in economics reach more skeptical
conclusions about crowd-out behavior (presumably for both men and women), such as Esteves-Sorenson and Broce
(2016).
  35
     If non-whites have a lower outside option than whites outside of politics, then whites should be more responsive in
time use with respect to salary.




                                                          20
4.4    Alternative Explanations / Alternative Theoretical Mechanisms

Intrinsic Motivation. It is sometimes argued that politicians feel a call to serve the public (Weber,

2004). One alternative explanation for our results (also hinted at above in the discussion of gender) is

an intrinsic motivation story. When politicians are paid a low salary, they are intrinsically motivated

to serve the public and thus spend more of their time on legislative activities. When salary increases,

their intrinsic motivation could be crowded out.

       We are unable to rule out that intrinsic motivation could help explain our result that salary is

associated with more time on fundraising and less time on legislative activities. In subgroup analysis,

we also find that individuals who intend to run for higher office in the future (and thus have a greater

non-pecuniary value from getting re-elected) respond less to salary with respect to time fundraising

as an outcome. To explain the subgroup result, these individuals would need to experience less

crowd-out than those who don’t wish to run for higher office in the future. This is possible, but does

not seem immediately intuitive.36

       “Incentives” vs. “Selection.” In the conceptual framework and much of the discussion

throughout the paper, we implicitly take the selection of legislators as given, and then examine how

salaries shape how legislators allocate their time. That is, we focus on the incentive role of salary.

We note, however, that salary may also play a role in selecting certain types of politicians. That

is, our results could also reflect higher salaries leading individuals to choose to run for office who

have a greater affinity for fundraising/campaigning (and perhaps less of an affinity for legislative

activities).37 This might be possible, for example, if higher salaries led to politicians who were less

intrinsically motivated and more focused on money.

       Ultimately, it is difficult for us to rule out this interpretation. However, it seems a bit less

likely to explain our subgroup analysis results, particularly the result that individuals who intend to

run for office in the future are less responsive to salary with respect to time on fundraising.
   36
      Another behavioral economics theory that is commonly discussed in the context of compensation level is gift
exchange (Akerlof, 1982). However, gift exchange does not seem likely to explain our results.
   37
      Gagliarducci and Nannicini (2013) use cases where legislators are term limited as a clever way of separating selection
effects from incentive effects. Unfortunately, we cannot observe in our data whether an individuals is term limited or
not, but rather only whether they live in a state with term limits.




                                                            21
5    Discussion and Conclusion

Using a survey of US state legislators, we examine the relationship between salary and time use.

Politicians who are paid more spend more time on fundraising, but actually less time on legislative

activities. While we cannot rule out omitted variables, the results are robust to adding various

controls. The relation of salary to time fundraising is strongest for politicians who do not intend to

run for higher office.

      Policy-makers have sometimes argued that higher salaries are necessary to achieve high pro-

ductivity by politicians. We believe that policy-makers should take into account that politicians

may respond to salaries on multiple effort margins. That higher salary could lead to unintended

consequences in terms of time use, we believe, is also relevant for theoretical work on compensation

and organizations.

      Our paper has a number of limitations. First, the data presented here are self-reported and

given on a 1-5 scale, as opposed to measured on a minute-by-minute basis. It would be fascinating to

validate the results of our study if and when such data become available. Second, while our results

are robust to inclusion of more and more controls, we do not have a quasi-experimental research

design such as a natural experiment or regression discontinuity design. Third, we are unable to

empirically distinguish selection and incentive channels of salary on time use. We believe politician

time use represents a very interesting research area, and hope that such limitations may be addressed

in future work.




                                                 22
References
Akerlof, George A, “Labor contracts as partial gift exchange,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1982, pp. 543–569.
Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber, “Selection on Observed and Unobserved Variables:
  Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools,” Journal of Political Economy, 2005, 113 (1), 151–184.
Bandiera, Oriana, Andrea Prat, and Raffaella Sadun, “Managing the Family Firm: Evidence from CEOs at Work,”
  Working Paper 19722, National Bureau of Economic Research December 2013.
Baqir, Reza, “Districting and Government Overspending,” Journal of Political Economy, 2002, 110 (6), 1318–1354.
Barro, Robert, “The Control of Politicians: An Economic Model,” Public Choice, 1973, Spring.
Becker, Gary S., “A Theory of the Allocation of Time,” The Economic Journal, 1965, 75 (299), 493–517.
   and George J. Stigler, “Law Enforcement, Malfeasance, and Compensation of Enforcers,” Journal of Legal Studies, 1974,
  3 (1), 1–18.
Berkman, Michael B., “State Legislators in Congress: Strategic Politicians, Professional Legislatures, and the Party Nexus,”
  American Journal of Political Science, 1994, 38 (4), 1025–1055.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan, “How Much Should We Trust Differences-in-Differences
  Estimates?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004, 119 (1), 249–275.
  , Matilde Bombardini, and Francesco Trebbi, “Is it whom you know or what you know? An empirical assessment of the
  lobbying process,” The American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (12), 3885–3920.
Besley, Timothy, “Paying Politicians: Theory and Evidence,” JEEA, 2004, 2 (2-3), 193–215.
   and Anne Case, “Does Electoral Accountability Affect Economic Policy Choices? Evidence from Gubernatorial Term
  Limits,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1995, 110 (3), 769–98.
Bloom, Nicholas, James Liang, John Roberts, and Zhichun Jenny Ying, “Does Working from Home Work? Evidence
  from a Chinese Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 130 (1), 165–218.
Carey, John M., Richard G. Niemi, and Lynda W. Powell, “State Legislative Survey and Contextual Data, 1995,”
  Technical Report, ICPSR03021-v1, Rochester, NY: University of Rochester 1995.
  ,   , and      , “State Legislative Survey and Contextual Data, 2002,” Technical Report, ICPSR20960-v1, Rochester, NY:
  University of Rochester 2002.
Caselli, Francesco and Massimo Morelli, “Bad Politicians,” Journal of Public Economics, 2004, 88 (3-4), 759–782.
Dearden, James A and Thomas A Husted, “Do governors get what they want?: An alternative examination of the line-item
  veto,” Public Choice, 1993, 77 (4), 707–723.
Di Tella, Rafael and Raymond Fisman, “Are Politicians Really Paid Like Bureaucrats?,” Journal of Law & Economics,
  2004, 47 (2), 477–513.
Diermeier, Daniel, Michael Keane, and Antonio Merlo, “A Political Economy Model of Congressional Careers,” American
  Economic Review, 2005, 95 (1), 347–373.
Dollar, David, Raymond Fisman, and Roberta Gatti, “Are women really the fairer sex? Corruption and women in
  government,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 2001, 46 (4), 423 – 429.
Esteves-Sorenson, Constança and Robert Broce, “Do Monetary Incentives Undermine Performance on Intrinsically En-
  joyable Tasks? A Field Test,” 2016. Working paper, Yale University.
Ferraz, Claudio and Federico Finan, “Motivating Politicians: The Impacts of Monetary Incentives on Quality and Perfor-
  mance,” 2010. Working paper, UC Berkeley.
Fiorina, Morris P., “Divided Government in the American States: A Byproduct of Legislative Professionalism?,” American
  Political Science Review, 1994, 88 (2), pp. 304–316.
Fisman, Raymond, Nikolaj A Harmon, Emir Kamenica, and Inger Munk, “Labor supply of politicians,” Journal of
   the European Economic Association, 2015, 13 (5), 871–905.
Francia, Peter L and Paul S Herrnson, “The impact of public finance laws on fundraising in state legislative elections,”
  American Politics Research, 2003, 31 (5), 520–539.
Freeman, Patricia K and Lilliard E Richardson Jr, “Explaining variation in casework among state legislators,” Legislative
  Studies Quarterly, 1996, pp. 41–56.
Gagliarducci, Stefano and Tommaso Nannicini, “Do better paid politicians perform better? Disentangling incentives from
  selection,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2013, 11 (2), 369–398.
  ,    , and Paolo Natichioni, “Moonlighting Politicians,” Journal of Public Economics, 2010, 94 (910), 688 – 699.
Gierzynski, Anthony and David Breaux, “Legislative elections and the importance of money,” Legislative Studies Quarterly,
  1996, pp. 337–357.
Gilligan, Thomas W and John G Matsusaka, “Deviations from Constituent Interests: The Role of Legislative Structure



                                                            23
  and Political Parties in the States,” Economic Inquiry, 1995, 33 (3), 383–401.
Groseclose, Timothy and James Snyder, “Buying Supermajorities,” American Political Science Review, 1996, pp. 303–315.
   and Keith Krehbiel, “Golden parachutes, rubber checks, and strategic retirements from the 102d House,” American Journal
  of Political Science, 1994, pp. 75–99.
Hall, Richard L and Robert P Van Houweling, “Avarice and ambition in Congress: Representatives’ decisions to run or
  retire from the US House,” American Political Science Review, 1995, pp. 121–136.
Hamermesh, Daniel S and Gerard A Pfann, The economics of time use, Vol. 271, Elsevier, 2005.
Herzog, A Regula and Jerald G Bachman, “Effects of questionnaire length on response quality,” Public Opinion Quarterly,
  1981, 45 (4), 549–559.
Holmstrom, Bengt and Paul Milgrom, “Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive Contracts, Asset Ownership, and
  Job Design,” Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization, 1991, 7, 24–52.
Jones, Wesley H and Gerald Linda, “Multiple criteria effects in a mail survey experiment,” Journal of Marketing Research,
  1978, pp. 280–284.
Kalt, Joseph P and Mark A Zupan, “The Apparent Ideological Behavior of Legislators: Testing for Principal-Agent Slack
  in Political Institutions,” Journal of Law and Economics, April 1990, 33 (1), 103–31.
Keane, Michael and Antonio Merlo, “Money, Political Ambition, and the Career Decisions of Politicians,” American Eco-
  nomic Journal: Microeconomics, 2010, 2 (3), 186–215.
Kotakorpi, Kaisa and Panu Poutvaara, “Pay for politicians and candidate selection: An empirical analysis,” Journal of
  Public Economics, 2011, 95 (7-8), 877–885.
Kurtz, Karl T., Gary Moncrief, Richard G. Niemi, and Lynda W. Powell, “Full-Time, Part-Time, and Real Time:
  Explaining State Legislators’ Perceptions of Time on the Job,” State Politics & Policy Quarterly, 2006, 6 (3), 322–338.
Levitt, Steven D., “Using Repeat Challengers to Estimate the Effect of Campaign Spending on Election Outcomes in the U.S.
  House,” Journal of Political Economy, 1994, pp. 777–798.
Levitt, Steven D and John A List, “Was there really a Hawthorne effect at the Hawthorne plant? An analysis of the original
  illumination experiments,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2011, 3 (1), 224–238.
List, John A and Daniel M Sturm, “How Elections Matter: Theory and Evidence from Environmental Policy,” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, 2006, 121 (4), 1249–1281.
Mattozzi, Andrea and Antonio Merlo, “Political Careers or Career Politicians?,” Journal of Public Economics, 2008, 92
 (3-4), 597–608.
Mellström, Carl and Magnus Johannesson, “Crowding out in blood donation: was Titmuss right?,” Journal of the European
 Economic Association, 2008, 6 (4), 845–863.
Messner, Matthias and Mattias K Polborn, “Paying politicians,” Journal of Public Economics, 2004, 88 (12), 2423–2445.
Miller, Michael G., “The Power of an Hour: Effects of Candidate Time Expenditure in State Legislative Elections,” Legislative
  Studies Quarterly, 2016, 41 (2), 327–359.
Mocan, Naci and Duha T Altindag, “Salaries and work effort: An analysis of the European Union parliamentarians,” The
 Economic Journal, 2013, 123 (573), 1130–1167.
Moretti, Enrico, “Real Wage Inequality,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, January 2013, 5 (1), 65–103.
National Conference of State Legislatures, A New Perspective on Representative Democracy: A Guide for Legislative
  Interns., Denver, CO: NCSL, 2000.
  , “Full and Part-Time Legislatures,” 2009.
Poutvaara, Panu and Tuomas Takalo, “Candidate quality,” International Tax and Public Finance, 2007, 14 (1), 7–27.
Powell, Lynda W, The Influence of Campaign Contributions in State Legislatures: The Effects of Institutions and Politics,
  University of Michigan Press, 2012.
Rehavi, Marit M., “Sex and Politics: Do Female Legislators Affect State Spending?,” 2007.
Shapiro, Carl and Joseph E Stiglitz, “Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker Discipline Device,” American Economic
  Review, 1984, 74 (3), 433–44.
Spenkuch, Joerg and David Toniatti, “Political Advertising and Election Outcomes,” 2016. Working paper, Northwestern.
Squire, Peverill, “Another Look at Legislative Professionalization and Divided Government in the States,” Legislative Studies
  Quarterly, 1997, 22 (3), 417–432.
Titiunik, Rocio, “Drawing Your Senator From a Jar: Term Length and Legislative Behavior,” Political Science Research and
  Methods, 2014, Forthcoming.
Tomaskovic-Devey, Donald, Jeffrey Leiter, and Shealy Thompson, “Organizational survey nonresponse,” Administrative
  Science Quarterly, 1994, pp. 439–457.



                                                             24
VanDusky-Allen, Julie, “The Conditional Effect of Term Limits on Electoral Activities,” Politics & Policy, 2014, 42 (3),
  431–458.
Weber, Max, The Vocation Lectures: Science As a Vocation, Politics As a Vocation, New York, NY: Hackett Pub Co, 2004.
Weiss, Andrew W, “Job Queues and Layoffs in Labor Markets with Flexible Wages,” JPE, 1980, 88 (3), 526–38.




                                                          25
 Figure 1: Distribution of Time Use across Legislators for the Three Main Time Use Categories




                                                 (a) Legislative Activities




                      (b) Constituent Services                         (c) Fundraising & Campaigning

Notes: An observation is a survey respondent. A given legislator may potentially appear in both the 1995 and 2002
surveys (and thus have 2 observations in our dataset), but we cannot observe this (as it is not possible to link the
data at the individual level). “Legislative Activities” is based on four questions; “Constituent Services” is based on
two questions; and “Fundraising & Campaigning” is based on one question. Each question is on a 1-5 Scale. The
numbers plotted are averages within each category.




                                                            26
                                          Table 1: Summary Statistics

   Variable                                                       Obs         Mean     Std. Dev.       Min      Max
   Panel A: Legislator Survey, Salary and Controls for Corresponding Years of Observation
   Legislator Time Use
   Time Spent on Legislative Activities                           6334        3.401        0.698         1        5
   Time Spent on Constituent Services                             6325        4.103        0.862         1        5
   Time Spent Fundraising & Campaigning                           6269        2.452        1.122         1        5
   Has Job Outside Politics                                       5539        0.652        0.476         0        1
   Salaries and Legislature Characteristics
   Salary/$10,000 (in 2009 dollars)                               6334        2.584        2.403         0      11.807
   Upper house                                                    6334         0.287       0.453         0         1
   Session length in election year (in hundreds of days)          6334        0.624        0.646         0       3.84
   Election for term-limited seat                                 6334         0.208       0.406         0         1
   Log(Population)                                                6334        15.031       0.995      13.059    17.374
   Log(GDP per Capita)                                            6334         5.196       0.153       4.860     5.629
   Legislature Professionalization
   Any Personal Staff                                             6334        0.639         0.48         0        1
   Any Shared Staff                                               6334        0.590        0.492         0        1
   Any District Staff                                             6334        0.240        0.427         0        1
   Bi-Annual Meetings                                             6334        0.101        0.301         0        1
   State Characteristics
   Unemployment Rate                                              6334        5.325        1.091       2.400    10.900
   Proportion Population Aged Over 65                             6334        0.129        0.017       0.088    0.184
   Proportion Population Aged 5-17                                6334        0.188        1.349       0.159    0.264
   Proportion Population Black                                    6334        0.09         0.091       0.002    0.356
   Legislator Characteristics
   Female Legislator                                              6334        0.245        0.430         0        1
   White Legislator                                               6334        0.895        0.306         0        1
   Democrat                                                       6334        0.517         0.5          0        1
   Panel B: Correlations Across Legislator Time Use Measures
   Time Use Measures                                         Correlation
   ρ(Constituent Services, Legislative Activities)              0.206
   ρ(Constituent Services, Fundraising & Campaigning)           0.238
   ρ(Legislative Activities, Fundraising & Campaigning)         0.188

Notes: An observation is a survey respondent, that is, a legislator-year. See Appendix A for further details on
variable definitions. A given legislator may potentially appear in both the 1995 and 2002 surveys (and thus have 2
observations in our dataset), but we cannot observe this (as it is not possible to link the data at the individual level).
The non-time use variable summary statistics in Panel A are calculated on the sample of survey respondents for
whom “time spent on legislative activities” is non-missing. The session length has a maximum of 384 days. This
reflects the listing in the 2003 Book of the States for Massachusetts in 2002, where the session is listed as Jan. 2 -
Dec. 31, 2002 and containing 384 legislative days. Our results are robust to replacing Massachusett’s session length
with 364 days. Some survey items are missing for some legislators. There is a small amount of missingness in the
legislator characteristics data. 0.2% of observations are missing gender, 1% of observations are missing Democrat, and
2% of observations are missing race. Thus, female is defined relative to male or missing; Democrat is defined relative
to non-Democrat or missing; and Caucasian is defined relative to non-Caucasian or missing. The correlation
coefficients are calculated at the legislator-year level.




                                                           27
                                  Table 2: Legislative Salary and Time Use

                                                          (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)
          Panel A: Time Spent on Legislative Activities
          Salary/$10,000                              -0.025***      -0.028***     -0.029***     -0.027***
                                                       (0.009)        (0.009)       (0.008)       (0.008)
          Observations                                   6,334         6,334         6,334          6,334
          R-squared                                      0.014         0.017         0.022          0.044


          Panel B: Time Spent on Constituent Services
          Salary/$10,000                                 0.031         0.028         0.025          0.026
                                                        (0.021)       (0.021)       (0.019)        (0.020)
          Observations                                   6,325         6,325         6,325          6,325
          R-squared                                      0.084         0.085         0.104          0.112


          Panel C: Time Spent on Fundraising and Campaigning
          Salary/$10,000                               0.053***      0.052***      0.041***       0.041***
                                                        (0.015)       (0.016)       (0.011)        (0.012)
          Observations                                   6,269         6,269         6,269          6,269
          R-squared                                      0.049         0.059         0.064          0.071
          Baseline Controls                                X             X              X             X
          Professionalization Controls                                   X              X             X
          State Characteristic Controls                                                 X             X
          Region Fixed Effects                                                          X             X
          Legislator Characteristic Controls                                                          X
Notes: This table analyzes the relationship between legislative salary and how legislators spend their time in 1995
and 2002. An observation is a legislator-year. Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. “Time Spent on
Legislative Activities” is the average of 4 normalized time use questions (i.e., the average of 4 z-scores). “Time Spent
on Constituent Services” is the average of 2 normalized time use questions. “Time Spent on Fundraising and
Campaigning” is based on 1 normalized time use question. Normalization is done separately by year. We calculate
the average using a “rowmean” in Stata, so that the average is calculated using the questions that an individual
answers for that category. “Baseline Controls” are session length in days (measured for the contemporaneous
legislative session in the state), a dummy for whether the legislator is in the upper house, a dummy for a seat being
term-limited, the log of state population, the log of state GDP, and a year dummy. “Professionalization Controls” are
controls for the frequency of meetings, whether legislators have personal staff, whether legislators have shared staff,
and whether legislators have district staff. “State Characteristic Controls” are controls for income per capita,
proportion of the population aged 65 or older, proportion of the population aged 5-17, proportion of the population
that is black, and unemployment rate. “Legislator Characteristic Controls” are controls for whether the legislator is a
democrat, whether the legislator is white, and legislator gender. “Region fixed effects” are fixed effects for the 4
census regions. Salary is in 2009 dollars. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                          28
                               Table 3: Legislative Salary and Outside Jobs

                                                          (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)
          Salary/$10,000                              -0.045***     -0.042***     -0.032***     -0.034***
                                                       (0.012)       (0.010)       (0.007)       (0.007)

          Observations                                  5,539         5,539          5,539         5,539
          R-squared                                     0.084         0.088          0.103         0.155
          Baseline Controls                               X              X             X             X
          Professionalization Controls                                   X             X             X
          State Characteristic Controls                                                X             X
          Region Fixed Effects                                                         X             X
          Legislator Characteristic Controls                                                         X
Notes: This table analyzes the relationship between legislative salary and whether legislators have an outside job (0
or 1). We use data from both the 1995 and 2002 surveys. An observation is a legislator-year. Standard errors
clustered by state in parentheses. Controls are as in Table 2. Salary is in 2009 dollars. * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                          29
                                                   Table 4: Legislative Salary and Narrow Time Use Categories

                               (1)           (2)           (3)               (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)           (9)
         Dep var:           Studying                    Building          Building        Staying in                    Fair Share of
                            Proposed     Developing     Coalitions       Coalitions      Touch with        Helping       Money for      Fundraising    Fundraising
                           Legislation   Legislation   Within Party     Across Parties   Constituents    Constituents     District        for Self     for Caucus
         Salary/$10,000      -0.022*        0.001         -0.034**        -0.058***          0.028          0.023           0.018         0.050***        0.016
30




                             (0.013)       (0.013)         (0.013)         (0.013)          (0.019)        (0.021)         (0.019)         (0.014)       (0.030)
         Observations         6,298         6,289          6,244            6,264            6,291          6,294           6,294          2,799          2,735

     Notes: This table analyzes the relationship between legislative salary and legislator time use in 1995 and 2002. Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses.
     An observation is a legislator-year. In each column, the dependent variable is a different normalized time use question. Controls are as in Column 4 of Table 2.
     Salary is in 2009 dollars. Columns 8-9 are restricted to 2002. Columns 1-7 include two years of data, and hence include year fixed effects. Each narrow category is
     based on one time use question. “Fair Share of Money for District” refers to time spent “Making sure your district gets a fair share of government money and
     projects.” See Appendix Table B1 for summary statistics of the un-normalized variables.* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                               Table 5: Heterogeneity across Subgroups in the Relation of Salary to Fundraising/Campaigning

                       Panel A: Non-Pecuniary Value of Being in Office
                                                   (1)                (2)                 (3)                (4)                    (5)                     (6)
                       Sample:                 No Higher           Higher             No Desire            Desire                Below                   Above
                                                 Office            Office           for Lobbying       for Lobbying           Median State            Median State
                                               Objective          Objective              Job                Job               Expenditures            Expenditures
                       Salary/$10,000           0.061***             -0.009           0.039***              0.043                0.051**                 0.039**
                                                 (0.012)            (0.018)            (0.012)             (0.028)               (0.020)                 (0.018)

                       Observations               4,713              1,553              5,331                935                   3,081                   3,188

                       Panel B: Election Competitiveness
                                                   (7)                (8)                 (9)                (10)                  (11)                    (12)
                       Sample:              Unopposed in         Opposed in        Unopposed in         Opposed in         Not (Last General         Last General
                                            Last General        Last General       Last Primary        Last Primary         Election Margin         Election Margin
                                                                                                                                ≤ 10%)                   ≤ 10%
31




                                              Election            Election           Election            Election
                       Salary/$10,000           0.049***           0.043***           0.043***            0.053***              0.040***                  0.044*
                                                 (0.017)            (0.014)            (0.014)             (0.015)               (0.012)                  (0.023)

                       Observations               1,624              4,260              3,829               2,084                  5,054                   1,215

                       Panel C: Individual Characteristics
                                                  (13)                (14)               (15)                (16)                  (17)                    (18)
                       Sample:                Republican          Democrat             Female               Male                  White                Non-white

                       Salary/$10,000           0.052***            0.030*              0.010             0.048***              0.035***                 0.080***
                                                 (0.017)            (0.015)            (0.022)             (0.013)               (0.012)                  (0.029)

                       Observations               2,945              3,240              1,524               4,733                  5,619                    521
     Notes: This table analyzes the relationship between legislative salary and legislator time use in 1995 and 2002 and how this varies with legislature, state, and legislator
     characteristics. An observation is a legislator. Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. The dependent variable is normalized Time Spent on Fundraising and
     Campaigning. Controls are as in Column 4 of Table 2. Salary is in 2009 dollars. Columns 1-2 of Panel A refer to whether politicians are likely to run for US Congress or a
     statewide office after service in the legislature. Columns 3-4 of Panel A refer to whether politicians are likely to do “Lobbying/Consulting” after service in the legislature. *
     significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
       Web Appendix: For Online Publication Only
      This Appendix consists of three parts. Appendix A gives more details on the data. Appendix B
provides additional results and robustness checks. Appendix C presents a formal model accompanying
our conceptual framework.


Appendix A               Data Appendix
A.1     Time Use.
Information on politician time use was collected from the surveys of legislators done by Carey et al.
(1995) and Carey et al. (2002). The 1995 survey was mailed to every upper house legislator and
77% of lower house legislators. In addition, it was mailed to all former legislators who last served
in 1993 or 1994. For the 1995 survey, there were 3,542 legislators who responded and the response
rate was 47%. The 2002 survey was mailed to all state legislators. There were 2,982 state legislators
who responded and the response rate was 40.1%. Questions asked on time use differ across the two
years.
       The 1995 survey was described to respondents as a survey focused on better understanding
term limits. The 2002 survey did not have such a description.

                              Table A1: Time Use Survey Questions by Year

 Question                                                     1995 Survey      2002 Survey
 Time   Spent   Studying Proposed Legislation                      Yes              Yes
 Time   Spent   Developing New Legislation                         Yes              Yes
 Time   Spent   Building Coalitions Within Party                   Yes              Yes
 Time   Spent   Building Coalitions Across Parties                 Yes              Yes
 Time   Spent   Keeping in Touch with Constituents                 Yes              Yes
 Time   Spent   Helping Constituents                               Yes              Yes
 Time   Spent   Ensuring Fair Share for District                   Yes              Yes
 Time   Spent   Campaigning and Fundraising                        Yes              Yes
 Time   Spent   Fundraising for Self                               No               Yes
 Time   Spent   Fundraising for Caucus                             No               Yes
Notes: On “Time Spent Building Coalitions Within Party,” the survey question asks about “Building coalitions
within own party to pass legislation.” On “Time Spent Helping Constituents,” the survey question asks about
“Helping constituents with problems with government.” On “Time Spent Building Coalitions Across Parties,” the
survey question asks about “Building coalitions across parties to pass legislation.” On “Time Spent Ensuring Fair
Share for District,” the question is “Making sure your district gets a fair share of government money and projects.”


       Legislative Activity. The average of the amount of time on a scale from one to five a
legislator reports spending time studying proposed legislation, developing new legislation, building
coalitions within their party, and building coalitions across parties.
       Constituent Services. The average of the amount of time on a scale from one to five a
legislator reports spending time staying in touch with constituents, and helping constituents.
      Fundraising and Campaigning. The amount of time on a scale from one to five a legislator
reports spending time fundraising and campaigning.




                                                          1
A.2       Term Limits.
Obtained from the website of the Council of State Governments for state legislators.
       Election for Term-Limited Seat. A dummy for whether or not an election is for a term-
limited seat.
       We can observe whether the seat is term-limited, but not if an individual is in their final term.
It might be interesting to compare politicians based on whether or not they are in their final term
(e.g., in Table 5), but we can’t do that. The salary-fundraising coefficients are broadly similar if we
split the sample based on whether the seat is term-limited or not.

A.3       Other Legislature Characteristics.
We classify legislatures as part-time or full-time based on the classification of the National Council
of State Legislatures. We collected data on legislator staff and legislative session frequency from the
Council of State Governments.
     Any Personal Staff A dummy for whether a legislator has any staff working directly for
him/her.
         Any Shared Staff A dummy for whether a legislator has any shared staff.
         Any District Staff A dummy for whether a legislator has access to any legislative district
staff.
       Biennial Session Frequency A dummy for whether or not legislative sessions occur bienni-
ally. This variable is equal to zero if sessions occur annually.
      We do a robustness check where we restrict the sample to states where legislators don’t set
their own salaries. The results are also robust to controlling for this variable.

A.4       Other
Age. We don’t control for age in our regressions because the age variable is not available in the 2002
survey. As explained on http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ICPSR/studies/20960 (accessed
last on July 7, 2016), age was asked in the 2002 survey, but was removed from the dataset by the
Principal Investigator.
      Multi-member districts. In all the main analyses, we do not exclude multi-member districts.
There is no information on multi-member district status for the 2002 survey, but there is information
on which states have multi-member districts for the 1995 survey.1 We re-did the analyses in column
4 of Table 2 excluding states with multi-member districts in 1995 and reached qualitatively similar
results.
      Margin of victory in last general election. Panel B of Table 5 splits the sample by
whether a legislator’s previous general election was “close,” defined as having a margin of victory of
10 percentage points or less. Information on margin of victory was asked as part of the politician
surveys. We define the margin of victory as the winner’s vote share minus the runner up’s vote share.
There are some cases where the runner-up vote share is reported as greater than the winner’s vote
share—we do not count such cases as “close,” and they are part of the sample in column 11 of Table
5. In the data we use, the vote share numbers are listed in increments of 5 or 10 percentage points.
   1
     Specifically, for the 1995 survey, there is a variable called “multi.” As noted in the codebook, it sometimes indicates
the number of members for a district, but sometimes also includes information averaged across districts within a state-
chamber.


                                                             2
      State-level CPI. Moretti (2013) computes price indices at the MSA level. We use his data
on prices for food, apparel, transportation, medical, educational, recreational, and other expenses.
Specifically, we construct his non-housing total index (including imputed apparel) using the category
weights in his code, but construct it using state-level data instead of MSA data. This information is
available for 1980 and 1990-2001. We use the data available for 1994 to match with the 1995 survey.
For the 2002 survey, we do a linear interpolation to the year 2002 using the available price data.
      We also repeated Appendix Table B7 deflating based on a state-level CPI constructed solely
from housing data in Moretti (2013) (constructed in the same manner as the non-housing index
described above), and obtained qualitatively similar findings.

A.5    Legislator Salary
As described in the main text, our main regressor is salary in terms of tens of thousands of dollars
instead of log salary. We found that the results under log salary are sensitive to specification.
Using log salary as the regressor, we continue to find a significant positive relation between pay and
time spent on fundraising; however, the relationship between pay and time spent on constituent
services is now statistically significant, whereas there is no longer a statistically significant negative
relation between pay and time spent on legislative activity. Using log salary drops New Mexico as an
observation because salary is zero. If instead we use log(1+salary), there is still a positive relation
between pay and time spent on fundraising, but it is no longer statistically significant (and the other
time use coefficients also are insignificant). In contrast, the inclusion or exclusion of New Mexico has
little effect on our main results where salary is in tens of thousands of dollars.
       Overall, we continue to see a positive relation between pay and time spent on fundraising when
we used log salary. However, the results are much more sensitive when the regressor is log salary
instead of absolute salary. This suggests another reason for preferring absolute salary as the regressor
of interest compared to log salary.
       In the survey data of Carey et al. (1995) and Carey et al. (2002), a legislator salary variable
is provided for the 1995 survey, but not for the 2002 survey. Thus, we construct our own measure
of annual salary, as described in Section 3.2. The 1995 survey is matched to the 1994-1995 Book of
the States (with salary levels as of January 1994), whereas the 2002 survey is matched to the 2002
Book of the States (with salary levels as of March 29, 2001).
       As we describe in the text, the initial data were hand-collected from the Book of the States.
Recently, tables from past editions of the book have been posted online. These can be found
at http://knowledgecenter.csg.org/kc/category/content-type/content-type/book-states
(last accessed August 8, 2016).




                                                    3
Appendix B               Additional Tables and Figures

                       Table B1: Narrow Time Use Category Summary Statistics

           Variable                                      Obs     Mean       Std. Dev.       Min      Max
           Developing Legislation                        6289     3.426           1.04        1        5
           Studying Proposed Legislation                 6298      3.77          0.947        1        5
           Building Coalitions Within Party              6244     3.256          1.052        1        5
           Building Coalitions Across Parties            6264     3.147          1.097        1        5
           Helping Constituents                          6294     4.099          0.962        1        5
           Staying in Touch with Constituents            6291     4.108          0.919        1        5
           Ensuring Fair Share for District              6294     3.401          1.216        1        5
           Fundraising for Self                          2799     2.811          1.291        1        5
           Fundraising for Caucus                        2735     2.069          1.093        1        5

Notes: An observation is a legislator. Fundraising for self and fundraising for caucus are only
observed in 2002.


                    Table B2: Legislative Salary Does Not Predict Survey Response

                                                                  Response Percentage
                            Salary/$10,000                                 -0.003
                                                                          (0.004)

                            Observations                                    143
                            Mean dep var                                   0.423
                            Baseline Controls                                X
                            Professionalization Controls                     X
                            State Characteristic Controls                    X
                            Region Fixed Effects                             X
Notes: This table analyzes the relationship between legislative salary and responses to legislator surveys in 1995 and
2002. An observation is a legislature-year (e.g., lower house of Alabama in 2002). For the 1995 survey, we only
include upper house legislatures because not all lower house legislators were mailed surveys for the 1995 survey. The
dependent variable is the share of legislators who respond for that legislature year. Robust standard errors in
parentheses. The controls are the same as in Table 2 except that they are collapsed to the state-chamber-year level.
Salary is in 2009 dollars. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                          4
     Figure B1: Sample Distribution of Time Use Across Narrow Categories
                                Panel A: Legislative Activities

    .5




                                                               .5
    .4




                                                               .4
 Fraction




                                                            Fraction
      .3




                                                                 .3
.2




                                                           .2
    .1




                                                               .1
    0




                                                               0
            1        2          3          4       5                   1         2          3         4         5
                Building Coalitions Within Party                           Building Coalitions Across Parties
    .5




                                                               .5
    .4




                                                               .4
 Fraction




                                                            Fraction
      .3




                                                                 .3
.2




                                                           .2
    .1




                                                               .1
    0




                                                               0




            1       2         3          4         5                   1         2         3         4          5
                    Developing Legislation                                   Studying Proposed Legislation




                                Panel B: Constituent Services
    .5




                                                               .5
    .4




                                                               .4
 Fraction




                                                            Fraction
      .3




                                                                 .3
.2




                                                           .2
    .1




                                                               .1
    0




                                                               0




            1       2         3           4        5                   1         2         3          4         5
                     Helping Constituents                                  Staying in Touch with Constituents
    .5
    .4
 Fraction
.2  .1
    0 .3




            1      2           3          4        5
                Ensuring Fair Share for District




                                                       5
                                       Panel C: Fundraising & Campaigning



                   .5




                                                                                        .5
                   .4




                                                                                        .4
                   .3




                                                                                        .3
            Fraction




                                                                                 Fraction
                   .2




                                                                                        .2
                   .1




                                                                                        .1
                   0




                                                                                        0
                        1    2                3             4            5                   1         2                3             4   5
                                    Fundraising for Self                                                     Fundraising for Caucus




Notes: An observation is a legislator. Time spent raising money for district is only observed in 1995. Time spent getting district
fair share, fundraising for self, and fundraising for caucus are only observed in 2002.

                                 Table B3: Legislator Time Use and Bill Authorship

                            Dep var: Number of Bills Authored, where Primary Author
                                                           (1)       (2)      (3)

                            Legislative Activities                               0.285***
                                                                                  (0.021)
                            Constituent Services                                                        0.004
                                                                                                       (0.021)
                            Fundraising & Campaigning                                                                    0.026*
                                                                                                                         (0.014)

                            Observations                                                    5,264      5,259                5,216
                            Mean dep var                                                    2.919      2.919                2.922
Notes: This table analyzes the relationship between legislative time use and a politician’s self-reported number of bills
authored. Legislators are asked about the number of bills they authored that became law during the last term. The
survey was asked in 1995 and 2002. An observation is a legislator. Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses.
All regressions include controls for legislator salary as well as controls included in Column 4 of Table 2. Salary is in
2009 dollars. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Table B4: Salary and Time Use, Results Restricted to States where Legislators do Not Set Their
                                       Own Salaries

                                                              (1)                    (2)                        (3)
                                                           Legislative            Constituent              Fundraising &
                                                            Activity               Services                Campaigning
                            Salary/$10,000                 -0.030***                          0.017            0.053***
                                                            (0.008)                          (0.024)            (0.014)

                            Observations                        4,109                        4,105                 4,070
Notes: The regressions here are similar to those in column 4 of Table 2. The difference is we eliminate states in which
legislator pay is only determined by statute (i.e., not by a compensation commission or the state constitution). *
significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


                                                                             6
                  Table B5: Salary and Proportion of Legislator Time Spent on Job

                                                 Proportion of Time Spent on Job
                            Salary/$10,000                       1.575***
                                                                  (0.558)
                            Observations                          2,853
                            Mean dep var                          65.66
Notes: This table analyzes the relationship between legislative salary and what proportion of their time legislators
spend on their legislative job in 2002. The proportion of time spent on the job is asked in 5 bins. We create the
dependent variable using the midpoint of each bin. Thus, the dependent variable is equal to 15%, 40%, 60%, 80%, or
95%. An observation is a legislator. Standard errors clustered by state in parentheses. Controls are as in column 4 of
Table 2. Salary is in 2009 dollars. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                    Table B6: Salary and Time Spent Relative To Other Categories

                                               (1)               (2)               (3)
                                            Legislative       Constituent     Fundraising &
                                             Activity          Services       Campaigning
                        Salary/$10,000      -0.0045***          0.0009             0.0036***
                                             (0.0012)          (0.0012)             (0.0010)
                        Observations           6,036             6,036               6,036
                        Mean dep var           0.346             0.415               0.239
Notes: This table analyzes the relationship between legislative salary and time spent on an activity relative to the
other two time use categories in 1995 and 2002. The regressions are similar to those in column 4 of Table 2 except the
dependent variable is different. The dependent variable is time spent on a given activity category (un-normalized, as
in Table 1) divided by the sum of time spent on the three activities. Controls are as in column 4 of Table 2. *
significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                         Table B7: Legislative Salary and Time Use, State CPI

                                                       (1)            (2)                  (3)
                                                    Legislative    Constituent        Fundraising &
                                                     Activity       Services          Campaigning
                Salary/$10,000 (State CPI)          -0.026***             0.024          0.032***
                                                     (0.007)             (0.017)          (0.011)
                Observations                           6,137             6,128               6,078
Notes: The regressions here are similar to those in column 4 of Table 2. The difference is we use a state-level CPI
based on data from Moretti (2013) instead of a national CPI (as described in Appendix A.4). After this deflation, we
multiply salary times the ratio of 2009 CPI to 1980 CPI to convert it to 2009 dollars. * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                          7
  Table B8: Legislative Salary and Time Use, Excluding States with Substantial Per Diem Pay

                                               (1)               (2)              (3)
                                            Legislative       Constituent    Fundraising &
                                             Activity          Services      Campaigning
                        Salary/$10,000       -0.026***           0.029          0.039***
                                              (0.008)           (0.021)          (0.013)
                        Observations            5,609            5,603            5,551
Notes: The regressions here are similar to those in column 4 of Table 2. The difference is we exclude states that have
“substantial” per diem pay. We define a state as having substantial per diem pay if its ratio of per diem to annual
salary plus per diem is in the top 10% of the sample in the 1995 data. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ***
significant at 1%




                   Table B9: Legislative Salary and Time Use, Excluding California

                                               (1)               (2)              (3)
                                            Legislative       Constituent    Fundraising &
                                             Activity          Services      Campaigning
                        Salary/$10,000       -0.028***         0.040**          0.041***
                                              (0.009)          (0.017)           (0.013)
                        Observations            6,263            6,254            6,198
Notes: The regressions here are similar to those in column 4 of Table 2. The difference is we exclude California
legislators. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                          8
Appendix C                Model
We study a two-period model of politicians.2 Some state legislatures have term limits, so the first
period can be thought of as the non-term limited term, and the second period can be thought of as
the term before the term limit. One can also think of the first period as the “normal” period and
the second period as the one before retirement.
       Our model concerns the behavior of incumbent politicians (the ones studied in our data). The
analysis begins after the politician has won their election. We do not study how politicians first get
elected.
       Incumbent politicians decide how they want to spend their time. Each period, they choose how
they would like to spend their T units of time. Time spent on fundraising is denoted by TF whereas
time spent on law-making is denoted by TL . We assume that these are exhaustive activities. However,
one can also think of time spent on lawmaking as encompassing as all time not spent on fundraising.
Of course, many legislators have time that they spend on other activities (like doing non-politician
work). For now, we will think of T as encompassing only time for their work as politicians.
       A recent edition of Last Week Tonight with John Oliver on 4/3/2016 suggests two aspects of
politician fundraising. First, fundraising is viewed as quite important for getting re-elected, and there
may be significant returns.3 Second, John Oliver’s piece describes fundraising as very unpleasant.
Many politicians seem to actively dislike having to call wealthy strangers and plead for money. No
one dreams of being a politician so that they can spend time fundraising. Rather, many people in
politics seem motivated by the desire to serve others and shape policy (e.g., Weber, 2004).
       To capture these aspects, we assume that a politician’s chance of getting re-elected, p, is an
increasing function of time spent fundraising. We will additionally assume that p00 (TF ) < 0, so
that fundraising has diminishing returns. For simplicity, we initially assume that the probability
of getting re-elected is unaffected by actual legislative activity. (We relax this later in Section C.2,
where we show it is sufficient that the re-election probability responds more to fundraising than to
legislative activity.) Second, we assume that politicians receive utility from doing legislative activity
v (TL ), and that v 0 (TL ) > 0 and v 00 (TL ) < 0.4
       As a condition of being in office, politicians receive a salary w as well as non-pecuniary benefits
b. The non-pecuniary benefits include non-salary compensation (such as per diems), as well as future
benefits from being a politician (such as increased opportunities to run for higher office or be a lobbyist
in the future). If a politician loses office, they receive an outside option of utility r. Each period,
politicians receive utility v(TL ) + u(c), where u(c) is a concave utility function over consumption. For
simplicity, we assume that u (c) = c.5 There is no discounting. We also assume that the politician
prefers winning re-election over losing.
       The model is solved backwards. In the second period, there is no possibility of running for
   2
     While the focus of our models is somewhat different, there are many parallels between our model and that in
Chapter 3 of Powell (2012). In her model, a politician chooses between fundraising time oneself, fundraising time
for one’s party, and other time, whereas our model studies time between legislative activities and fundraising. While
elections in our model are simple, there are no elections in her model (she uses what she refers to as a “reduced form”
of a candidate’s decisions about time on fundraising). However, it seems that the basic tradeoffs across her model and
ours are similar.
   3
     Note that the John Oliver piece (like a lot of academic work) focuses on US congressional fundraising. While
empirical work on the returns to fundraising in political campaigns does not always find positive returns (e.g., Levitt,
1994), Spenkuch and Toniatti (2016) find economically meaningful impacts of TV advertising on vote shares. See
(Ansolabehere et al., 2003) for general discussion of money in US politics.
   4
     Instead of this assumption, we could alternatively assume that politicians receive no utility from legislative activity,
but that there is a convex cost to fundraising.
   5
     We have also solved the model assuming a concave utility function with no savings, and all results remain. The
results are simpler, however, with linear utility.



                                                             9
re-election. Thus, the politician sets TF = 0. In the first period, the politician faces the tradeoff
between enjoying more TL and spending more time on fundraising which increases the chance of
getting elected. Formally, the utility function is:
                                                              
                   U = v (TL,1 ) + w + b + p (TF,1 ) v T + w + b + (1 − p (TF,1 ))r
Using the time budget constraint, we plug in TL,1 = T − TF,1 to create a one variable problem. To
simplify notation, we denote TF,1 by t. The politician then solves:
                                                                   
                   max U = max v T − t + w + b + p (t) v T + w + b − r + r
                     t             t

This leads to a first-order condition of:

                               −v 0 T − t + p0 (t) v T + w + b − r = 0
                                                               

To check whether this is a maximum, we compute the second derivative:


                         ∂2U       ∂U
                                       −v 0 T − t + p0 (t) v T + w + b − r
                                                                         
                                   =
                         ∂t2       ∂t
                              = v 00 T − t + p00 (t) v T + w + b − r < 0
                                                                   


where we have used that v 00 and p00 are negative, and that v T + w + b − r > 0 (i.e., the politician
                                                                

prefers winning re-election to losing). Returning to the first-order condition,
                                                                               denote the left-hand
side expression of the first-order condition by M ≡ −v 0 T − t + p0 (t) v T + w + b − r . By the
                                                                       

Implicit Function Theorem, we have that:


                      ∂t∗              − ∂M
                                         ∂w                          −p0 (t∗ )
                               =        ∂M
                                               =                                     
                      ∂w                 ∂t       v 00 T − t∗ + p00 (t) v T + w + b − r
                                                            p0 (t∗ )
                               =                                              
                                       −v 00   T − t∗ − p00 (t) v T + w + b − r

The numerator is positive because p is increasing in time on fundraising. Further, note that the
                                                                             ∗
denominator is signed positive by the second-order condition. Therefore, dt dw > 0. The intuition is
simple: as the wage is increased, the politician faces a greater return to spending time on getting
re-elected.

C.1    Interaction Terms

There are a number of possible interaction terms that may be of interest:

  1. How does the derivative of interest (responsiveness of time on fundraising with respect to
     salary) vary with the level of non-pecuniary benefits?

  2. How does the derivative of interest vary with the competitiveness of elections?

  3. How does the derivative of interest vary with a politician’s outside option?

To address difficulties associated with analyzing the cross-derivatives for general functional forms, we
assume that v (x) = x1/2 , p (x) = x1/2 , and T = 1. To simplify notation, we also define θ ≡ 1+w+b−r,

                                                           10
which is a measure of how much a politician would like to get re-elected relative to their outside
option. These assumptions yield the below problem:

                                      max (1 − t)1/2 + w + b + t1/2 θ + r
                                       t

This leads to a first order condition of:

                                 −.5 (1 − t)−1/2 + .5t−1/2 θ = 0
                                                                                 θ2
                                                                    t∗ =
                                                                               1 + θ2
Now, we can calculate our initial derivative of interest for this functional form:

                                ∂t∗
                                               2 
                                           ∂       θ
                                      =
                                ∂w        ∂w 1 + θ2
                                             ∂θ                     ∂θ
                                                  1 + θ2 − θ2 ∗ 2θ ∂w
                                                        
                                          2θ ∂w
                                      =
                                                    (1 + θ2 )2
                                              2θ
                                      =
                                          (1 + θ2 )2
                                             ∂ 2 t∗
QUESTION 1. We want to compute               ∂w∂b     :


                             ∂ 2 t∗
                                                                                     
                                           ∂              2θ          ∂           θ
                                       =                            ∝
                             ∂w∂b          ∂b    (1 + θ2 )2       (1 + θ2 )2
                                                                      ∂b
                                           ∂θ           2
                                                1 + θ2 − θ ∗ 2 1 + θ2 ∗ 2θ ∂θ
                                                                    
                                           ∂b                               ∂b
                                       =
                                                        (1 + θ2 )4
                                            1 + θ2 − θ ∗ 2 ∗ 2θ
                                                  
                                                                    1 − 3θ2
                                       =                         =
                                                (1 + θ2 )3         (1 + θ2 )3
                        
                ∂ 2 t∗
                                                                                 p
                    = sgn 1 − 3θ2 . This is negative when 1 < 3θ2 , or when θ > 1/3. Thus, if the
                                    
Thus, sgn       ∂w∂b
                                                                   ∂ 2 t∗
                                                       p
drive to get re-elected is sufficiently high (i.e., θ > 1/3), then ∂w∂b   < 0.
      Thus, assuming that there is sufficient value put on getting elected, the cross-partial will be
negative. This means that, for politicians who have a large non-pecuniary value of the job (b), the
derivative of interest is smaller, as these individuals are already more motivated to invest time in
fundraising. Intuitively, for politicians with larger b, salary may not be the main benefit from the
job, and their time use will be less responsive as a function of salary.

QUESTION 2. So far, we have not defined the competitiveness of elections. To do so now, let
c be the probability that an election is competitive. Specifically, with probability c, the election is
competitive and the incumbent has a probability p (TF,1 ) of winning. However, with probability 1 − c
the election is non-competitive and the incumbent wins regardless of how much time is spent on
fundraising. The timing is as follows. First, the politician chooses his or her time allocation knowing
c, but not knowing whether the election is competitive or not. Thus, the agent’s problem can be
written now as:




                                                           11
                                                                              
       max v T − t + w + b + c p (t) v T + w + b + (1 − p (t)) r + (1 − c) v T + w + b
        t
                                                                        
     = max v T − t + w + b + c p (t) v T + w + b − r + r + (1 − c) v T + w + b
        t
                  
     = max v T − t + w + b + c [p (t) θ + r] + (1 − c) [θ + r]
           t

Using the first order condition and the implicit function theorem, one can show that this leads to a
                 ∗          cp0 (t∗ )
derivative of ∂t
              ∂w = −v 00 (T −t∗ )−cp00 (t∗ )θ , which is positive. Now we turn to a specific functional form
so as to be able to analyze interaction effects.

                          max (1 − t)1/2 + w + b + ct1/2 θ + r + (1 − c) [θ + r]
                              t

The first-order condition is now:


                                  −.5 (1 − t)−1/2 + .5ct−1/2 θ = 0
                                                                                       c2 θ2
                                                                          t∗ =
                                                                                     1 + c2 θ2


                                       ∂t∗             ∂    c2 θ2
                                              =
                                       ∂w             ∂w 1 + c2 θ2 
                                                      2c2 θ 1 + c2 θ2 − c2 θ2 ∗ 2c2 θ
                                              =
                                                                  (1 + c2 θ2 )2
                                                         2c2 θ
                                              =
                                                      (1 + c2 θ2 )2

Note that if c = 0, then the agent will choose t∗ = 0 and this allocation is independent of the salary.
                     ∂ 2 t∗
Next, we compute ∂w∂c       :


                         ∂ 2 t∗                          2c2 θ                          c2 θ
                                                                                              
                                             ∂                              ∂
                                       =                                  ∝
                         ∂w∂c                ∂c  (1 + c2 θ2 )2        (1 + c2 θ2 )2
                                                                            ∂c
                                                          2
                                             2cθ 1 + c2 θ2 − c2 θ ∗ 2 1 + c2 θ2 ∗ 2cθ2
                                                                               
                                       =
                                                                    (1 + c2 θ2 )4
                                                       1 − c2 θ   2
                                                                    
                                       = 2cθ
                                                      (1 + c2 θ2 )3
                                      
                              ∂ 2 t∗
                                           = sgn 1 − c2 θ2 . This cross-partial is ambiguously signed. It will
                                                          
Thus, we have that sgn        ∂w∂c
be positive if θ < 1c and will be negative if θ > 1c . From our discussion above, we are assuming that
θ is often sizable because legislators presumably want to keep their seats. On the other hand, we
know that many state legislative races in the US are non-competitive. This makes it difficult to sign
the cross-derivative.
       It is difficult a priori to think about how competition will affect the relation of salary and
time on fundraising. Competition seems likely to increase time on fundraising in general, as there is
less value to “investing” time on fundraising when it is likely the politician will win for sure (Powell,

                                                                 12
2012). However, the second derivative is less clear.

                                                ∂ 2 TF,1
QUESTION 3. We want to compute                   ∂w∂r      :


                                    ∂ 2 TF,1
                                                                                       
                                                   ∂            2θ          ∂         θ
                                               =                          ∝
                                    ∂w∂r           ∂r       (1 + θ2 )2       (1 + θ2 )2
                                                                            ∂r
                                                    ∂θ             2
                                                           1 + θ2 − θ ∗ 2 1 + θ2 ∗ 2θ ∂θ
                                                                               
                                                    ∂r                                 ∂r
                                               =
                                                                     (1 + θ2 )4
                                         ∂θ d2 t∗                    3θ2 − 1
                                               =  =
                                         ∂r dwdb    (1 + θ2 )3
                              2     
                              ∂ TF,1
                                       = sgn 3θ2 − 1
                                                     
                         sgn
                              ∂w∂r

This is the mirror image of the result with respect to b.
                                                                                            p
      Assuming that the desire to get re-elected is sufficiently high (i.e., 1 + w + b − r > 1/3), we
have thus proven four hypotheses:
      H1: An increase in salary leads to more fundraising.
      H2: When non-pecuniary benefits are larger, this derivative is smaller.
      H3: The competitiveness of elections does not have a clear impact on the derivative.
      H4: When a politician’s outside option is larger, this derivative is larger.

C.2    Allowing Legislative Activities to Have a Return in Getting Re-elected
In the basic model, there was no return for legislative activities in terms of getting re-elected. This
assumption can be modified. Suppose that the probability of getting re-elected is p (TL,1 + θTF,1 )
where θ expresses the return to fundraising relative to legislating.
      For simplicity, let us begin by assuming u(r) = 0. Then, the politicians solves the problem:

                                                                                   
           max U      = max v T − TF,1 + u (w + b) + p (TL,1 + θTF,1 ) v T + u (w + b)
           TF,1           TF,1

Applying the Implicit Function Theorem, we obtain that:


                      − ∂M                        (θ − 1)p0 T + (θ − 1)TF,1 u0 (w + b)
                                                                            
       ∂TF,1            ∂w
                  =    ∂M
                              =                                                              
        ∂w            ∂TF,1       −v 00   T − TF,1 − (θ − 1)2 p00 T + (θ − 1)TF,1 v T + u (w + b)
                                 (θ − 1)p0 u0
                  =                               
                      −v 00 − (θ − 1)2 p00 ∗ v T + u

Note that p0 and u0 are positive, so the numerator will have the same sign as (θ− 1).Also, note that
                                                                                    ∂TF,1
v 00 and p00 being negative implies that the denominator is negative. Thus, sgn ∂w          = sgn (θ − 1).
This means that, if there is a greater return to fundraising than legislative activity in terms of getting
re-elected, then the main comparative will hold.




                                                               13
Appendix References
Ansolabehere, Stephen, John M. de Figueiredo, and Jr Snyder James M., “Why is There so Little Money
  in U.S. Politics?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, March 2003, 17 (1), 105–130.
Levitt, Steven D., “Using Repeat Challengers to Estimate the Effect of Campaign Spending on Election Outcomes
  in the U.S. House,” Journal of Political Economy, 1994, pp. 777–798.
Moretti, Enrico, “Real Wage Inequality,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, January 2013, 5 (1),
  65–103.
Powell, Lynda W, The Influence of Campaign Contributions in State Legislatures: The Effects of Institutions and
  Politics, University of Michigan Press, 2012.
Spenkuch, Joerg and David Toniatti, “Political Advertising and Election Outcomes,” 2016. Working paper,
  Northwestern.
Weber, Max, The Vocation Lectures: Science As a Vocation, Politics As a Vocation, New York, NY: Hackett Pub
  Co, 2004.




                                                      14
