NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF DEBT AND ENTITLEMENTS
Laurent Bouton
Alessandro Lizzeri
Nicola Persico
Working Paper 22570
http://www.nber.org/papers/w22570

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2016, Revised September 2019

We thank the editor Nicola Gennaioli, three anonymous referees, Marina Azzimonti, Micael
Castanheira, Pedro Gete, and Stefanie Stantcheva. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2016 by Laurent Bouton, Alessandro Lizzeri, and Nicola Persico. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Political Economy of Debt and Entitlements
Laurent Bouton, Alessandro Lizzeri, and Nicola Persico
NBER Working Paper No. 22570
August 2016, Revised September 2019
JEL No. D72,E62,H60
ABSTRACT
This paper presents a dynamic political-economic model of total government obligations. Its
focus is on the interplay between debt and entitlements. In our model, both are tools by which
temporarily powerful groups can extract resources from groups that will be powerful in the
future: debt transfers resources across periods; entitlements directly target the future allocation of
resources. We prove the following results. First, the presence of endogenous entitlements
dampens the incentives of politically powerful groups to accumulate debt, but it leads to an
increase in total government obligations. Second, fiscal rules can have perverse effects: if
entitlements are unconstrained, and there are capital market frictions, debt limits lead to an
increase in total government obligations and to worse outcomes for all groups. Analogous results
hold for entitlement limits. Third, our model sheds some lights on the influence of capital market
frictions on the incentives of governments to adopt fiscal rules, and implement entitlement
programs. Finally, we identify preference polarization as a possible explanation for the joint
growth of debt and entitlements.
Laurent Bouton
Georgetown University
Department of Economics
37th & O Streets, NW
Washington,DC 20057
and CEPR
and also NBER
boutonllj@gmail.com
Alessandro Lizzeri
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
alessandro.lizzeri@nyu.edu

Nicola Persico
Kellogg School of Business
room 542 Jacobs Center
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
nicola@nicolapersico.com

1

Introduction

Increasingly, governments struggle to meet their …scal obligations. Fiscal stress is usually
blamed on government debt and, indeed, debt has ballooned in the U.S. and other OECD
countries in recent decades. To tame this trend, more and more countries (as of 2015, over
90: see Figure 3 below) have put in place …scal rules that limit government debt and/or
de…cit. Similar rules also exist in many U.S. states (see Figure 4 below).
However, …scal rules often do not target other spending obligations (most notably
pensions and health care) that are major determinants of …scal sustainability: the socalled entitlement programs. Entitlements are a major determinant of …scal sustainability
in many jurisdictions because they are large (on a ‡ow basis, larger than interest payments
on debt) and because by de…nition they cannot be compressed easily. In the United States,
entitlements have grown rapidly since the 1960s and have long overtaken discretionary
spending.1 A similar pattern in the growth of entitlements holds across OECD countries.2
This growth is viewed as a threat to …scal stability in many countries (see, e.g., Evans,
Kotliko¤, and Phillips 2012, and Steuerle 2014). Sometimes entitlements are practically
the sole determinant of …scal sustainability: this is the case for some US states where debt
is strictly capped by state constitutions.
Fiscal rules that target debt but not entitlements generates perverse incentives for
governments to reduce debt but increase future entitlements, with an uncertain e¤ect on
total obligations. In fact, recent research argues that the European Union Stability Pact
has caused de-funding of pensions (Carey 2014), and that U.S. states with stricter …scal
rules have less-funded pensions (Wang 2017). And yet, while leading academics have long
pointed out that debt and entitlements should be recognized as a combined …scal burden
for the government (see Kotliko¤ and Burns, 2004), there is no academic work that studies
the political forces that jointly shape debt and entitlements.
In this paper we provide a politico-economic model in which debt and entitlement
levels are jointly determined in equilibrium. Our aim is to study the interplay between
debt and entitlements and thus to investigate the political economy of total government
obligations (i.e., debt plus entitlements). To maximize comparability with the literature
that builds on Alesina and Tabellini (1990), we adhere closely to their basic framework.
Our main departure from the canonical framework is to allow for the coexistence of debt
1
See, e.g., Steuerle (2014) and David Crane: “New California Taxes Pay for Pensions, Not Students.”
Bloomberg, April 23 2012. Steuerle and Roeper developed an index of Fiscal Democracy that measures
the percentage of (projected) revenues not claimed by permanent programs currently in place. In the US,
this index dropped from 65% in 1962 to a range between 0 and 20 percent in the period 1998-2012; it is
forecast to stay in this range through 2022, and there is no expectation of improvement in the more distant
future. Evans, Kotliko¤, and Phillips (2012) provide another measure of …scal sustainability –the so-called
duration to game over. In the case of the US, this measure also points to the high (or even unsustainable)
…scal burden of entitlement programs.
2
De…ned as: public social expenditure as a percent of GDP in 1960-2014. Source: OECD (2014).

and entitlements.
The key ingredients of our model are the following. In each of two periods, a political
process determines spending on a public good as well as private goods for two groups.
Political power changes over time, as for instance in an intergenerational setting. The
group that is powerful in period 1 (we call it “young generation A”) can use debt to leverage
future resources to …nance higher current consumption. In addition, young generation A
can set entitlements, which we model as “pre-committing” some fraction of future resources
to a desired allocation. Thus, both debt and entitlements are tools for the temporarily
powerful group to extract resources from groups that will be more powerful in the future.
Note the assumption that entitlements for generation A cannot be changed once generation
A is old. Albeit stark, this assumption is not counterfactual3 and it has the advantage of
being symmetric to the assumption, which is standard in this literature, that there is no
default on government debt.
We …rst characterize the equilibrium allocation when there are no limits to debt and
entitlements. We …rst show that, in the presence of endogenous entitlements, young generation A may choose to run a surplus, because future resources may be more e¤ectively
extracted via entitlements. Nevertheless, we also show that total government obligations
increase compared to the model without entitlements. Furthermore, while entitlements
allow generation A to smooth its private consumption over time, they crowd out period-2
public goods.4 These results highlight that abstracting from the presence of entitlements,
as is generally done in the political economy literature on debt, leads one not only to
risk over-estimating the power of the model to account for debt accumulation, but also to
under-estimate its ability to account for total obligations.
We then present our main results, which concern whether …scal rules protect future
generations. In a world with frictionless capital markets, debt limits have no real e¤ects.
For example, forcing a reduction in debt by  will cause young generation A to increase
both its entitlements and private borrowing by exactly , such that young generation A’s
private and public consumption levels, and indeed all agent’s consumption levels in both
periods, are unchanged in equilibrium. Thus, tightening a debt limit results is neutralized
by a combination of less government debt, more entitlements, and more private borrowing.
The same neutrality property holds for limits on entitlements. (This is not to say that
debt and entitlement limits together are neutral: constraints on total obligations do impact
3
The entitlements of current bene…ciaries have proved di¢cult to change without the current bene…ciaries’ consent. In the vast majority of US states, for example, changing future bene…ts for current employees
is extremely di¢cult; see Munnell and Quinby (2012). And across the world, even when pension laws have
been revised, the bene…ts of current retirees have generally been protected. Typically, what is reformed
are the bene…ts of future bene…ciaries. We discuss the mechanisms that protect entitlements in Section
10, but in our model we simply assume that the entitlements of current bene…ciaries cannot be changed
without the current bene…ciaries’ consent.
4
As we discuss below, this crowding out is in line with the evolution of government spending in the
U.S. and other OECD countries since the 1960s.

2

inter-generational resource allocation.)
When, instead, frictions are so large that agents do not participate in private capital markets, …scal rules are partially e¤ective in protecting the future generation: they
reduce total government obligations, but less than one-for-one because group A partially
substitutes debt with entitlements.
Strikingly, however, when capital market frictions are in an intermediate range such
that agents actively participate in capital markets, …scal rules have perverse e¤ects. In such
a setting, if entitlements are unconstrained, tightening a debt limit leads to an increase in
total government obligations and to worse outcomes for all groups. Suppose for example
that, to borrow privately, a household has to pay a premium , which we interpret as a
deadweight loss, above the government rate. Then, forcing a reduction in debt would lead
young generation A to react as before (more entitlements and more private borrowing),
except now increasing one’s private borrowing by  requires repaying    tomorrow.
Thus, our model predicts that: tightening a debt limit causes entitlements to grow; and
in the presence of capital-market frictions, Pareto-harmful e¤ects arise. Analogous results
hold for entitlement limits if debt is unconstrained.
The Pareto-harmful e¤ect of limits on debt seems particularly relevant nowadays given
how prevalent …scal rules are across the world and within states, that international institutions such as the International Monetary Fund encourage an even broader use of …scal
rules, and that most of these …scal rules do not address entitlements.5
As we discuss in Section 8, the main theoretical results of the model shed a new light
on some real-world phenomena and policy ideas. First, the prediction that entitlements
increase following the tightening of a debt limit is in line with the evidence that …scal rules
are met by increasing future unfunded obligations.
Second, our model also sheds some lights on the in‡uence of capital market frictions
on the incentives of governments to: (1) adopt …scal rules; and (2) implement entitlement
programs. These incentives grow stronger when market frictions increase. The historical
evolution of pensions systems in the US and the UK is consistent with these results.
Last but not least, despite debt and entitlements being substitute tools of intergenerational redistribution, we show that an increase in preference polarization may lead to
an increase in both debt and entitlements. This is in line with the joint growth of debt,
entitlements and polarization that has taken place since the 1960s. Our model is also consistent with the decrease in public good provision and savings (or increase in borrowing)
during that time period.

5

See Eyraud et al (2018).

3

2

Related Literature

Some papers explain debt as the outcome of a struggle between di¤erent groups in the
population who want to gain more control over resources. The reason debt is accumulated
is that the group that is in power today may not be in power tomorrow, and debt is a way
to take advantage of this temporary power. For instance, Cukierman and Meltzer (1989)
and Song, Storesletten, and Zilibotti (2012) argue that debt is a tool used to redistribute
resources across generations. Persson and Svensson (1989), Alesina and Tabellini (1990),
and Tabellini and Alesina (1990) argue that debt represents a way to tie the hands of future
governments that will have di¤erent preferences from the current one. In Tabellini and
Alesina (1990), voters choose the composition of public spending in an environment where
the median voter theorem applies. If the median voter remains the same in both periods,
the equilibrium involves budget balance. If the median voter tomorrow has di¤erent
preferences, the current median voter may choose to run a budget de…cit to take advantage
of his temporary power and tie the hands of the future government. The equilibrium may
also involve a budget surplus because there is an “insurance” component that links the two
periods as well: a surplus tends to equalize the median voter’s utility in the two periods.
Tabellini and Alesina (1990) detail conditions such that de…cits will be incurred and show
that increased polarization leads to larger de…cits.
Browning (1975) and Boadway and Wildasin (1989) have studied voting models of pensions in which age is the only dimension of heterogeneity. Conde-Ruiz and Galasso (2005)
study a two-dimensional voting model in which pensions coexist with a welfare state. Thus
they allow for voting on both intragenerational and intergenerational redistribution. They
argue that pensions are particularly stable because the elderly are a relatively homogeneous voting group, and the pension system is supported by a broad coalition including
the low-income young.
Tabellini (1991) also illustrates how debt and social security di¤er as distributional
instruments in an overlapping generations environment. In contrast with our model, the
main force concerns the di¤erence in default between the two instruments.
Battaglini and Coate (2008) present a dynamic model of taxation and debt where
a rich policy space is considered within a legislative bargaining environment. Velasco
(1996) discusses a model where government resources are “common property” with which
interest groups can …nance their own consumption. De…cits arise in his model because of
a dynamic “common pools” problem. Lizzeri (1999) presents a model of debt as a tool of
redistributive politics.
There are several papers that discuss the impact of …scal rules, such as budget procedures and budgetary institutions.6 Recent work has focused on understanding political
6

See for instance, Von Hagen (1991, 1992) and Alesina and Perotti (2000).

4

economic consequences of debt limits. For instance, Azzimonti et al. (2015) study the effects of a “no de…cit” constraint in the Battaglini and Coate (2008) model. They show that
the e¤ect is a gradual reduction in debt, and the characterize the circumstances that lead
to improvement (or reduction) in voters’ welfare. Piguillem and Riboni (2018) consider an
extension of the Alesina and Tabellini (1990) model in which a …scal rule can be overcome
if there is su¢cient consensus. Thus, …scal rules can be viewed as bargaining chips for the
groups out of power. They show that under some assumptions …scal rules are partially
e¤ective in reducing debt, and they also lead to more “equitable” distribution of spending.
Amador et al. (2006) study optimal …scal rules in an environment in which an individual
(or a government) faces a bias toward present spending. Halac and Yared (2014) extend
this model to an environment with persistent shocks, and Halac and Yared (2019) study
the case in which the enforcement of these rules is imperfect. In contrast to this literature,
our focus is on the consequence of tightening a debt rule for total government obligations
when currently powerful groups can substitute toward entitlement programs.
The dynamic public …nance literature (e.g., Golosov, Tsyvinski and Werning 2006)
provides a setup that is suited to the normative study of debt and entitlements, although
this question has not been a main substantive focus of this literature so far.7
This paper is also related to work on legislative bargaining with endogenous status quo.
Kalandrakis (2004) studies a classic divide-the-dollar problem where the division agreed
to in one period is the status quo for the next period. Bowen, Chen and Eraslan (2014)
study a model in which two parties decide unanimously how to allocate a given budget
to spending on a public good and private transfers. The focus is on the comparison
between two political institutions: discretionary vs. mandatory public good spending
(private transfers are discretionary in both cases).8 When the public good is discretionary
(mandatory), the status quo level of the public good is zero (the one from the previous
period). By contrast, we focus on the interplay between debt and entitlements.
A very di¤erent approach to understanding public debt is explored by Azzimonti et al.
(2014). They propose a multi-country model with incomplete markets, and they show that
governments may choose higher public debt when …nancial systems are more integrated.
They thus o¤er an explanation of the rise in debt as driven by an increase in …nancial
integration.

7
See also Stantchveva (2014) and (2016). Regarding the latter, one could think of entitlements as
promised spending on education and health.
8
In a modi…ed version of this model–with two periods and no private transfers–Bowen et al. (2015)
allow the party making the take-it-or-leave-it o¤er to choose whether the public good is discretionary or
mandatory. The focus is on the e¢ciency of the public good provision under various budgetary institutions.

5

3

Model

In this section we present the model. We provide a detailed discussion of the key assumptions of the model in the Online Appendix.
There are two periods.9 There are three equal-size groups: group A, which represents
a single generation that works in period 1 and is retired in period 2; group B1, the retired
in period 1; and group B2, the workers in period 2. In each period, workers hold political
power.

3.1

Demography and economy

In each period , workers inelastically supply labor that produces 1 unit of output. Government spending consists of group-targeted transfers of private consumption  as well
as spending on public goods  . This spending is …nanced via a lump-sum tax   on the
workers, and via government debt  (which can be negative). After taxes and transfers,
the retired group in period  has an endowment of  . Workers have an endowment of
1¡  + . Since after period 2 the world ends, workers in period 2 do not face an intertemporal decision. In contrast, in period 1, workers can choose to borrow or save. We assume
that these workers face imperfect capital markets. Speci…cally, we assume that private
agents face more unfavorable terms than the government. We break this assumption into
two parts depending on whether we talk about borrowing or savings. Let  be the interest
rate faced by the government.10
¹ with 
¹  1.
Assumption 1 Borrowing Frictions. Private agents borrow at rate 
Assumption 2 Savings Frictions. Private agents returns to savings are given by 
with   1.
We believe that Assumption 1 is uncontroversial, that is, if agents borrow they pay
higher rates than the government does.11 This case is the primary focus of our analysis.
We are more ambivalent about Assumption 2 and our main result does not rely on this
assumption. However, we believe that it is still worth exploring the role of frictions on
both sides of the capital market. One possible interpretation of the friction is a tax on
¹ is
returns to savings.12 If both assumptions 1 and 2 hold, and in addition,  is low and 
9

The two-period (…nite-horizon) model facilitates comparison with some of the prior work done in the
literature on debt and outlines how some basic forces are changed by the presence of entitlements. In
ongoing work, we study an in…nite horizon extension of this model where we focus on di¤erent forces that
do not arise in the two-period environment. We elaborate on this issue brie‡y below in our section on
…scal rules.
10
We assume a small open economy so that this interest is exogenous to the choices of the government.
11
It is certainly true in the data. We discuss this in Section 8 below.
12
We discuss this issue in more detail in Section 8.

6

¹ = 1 = , then agents
high, then agents cannot borrow or save. If, on the other hand, 
have access to perfect capital markets. These are useful benchmark cases that we discuss
in detail later.
In period 1, group ’s private consumption is given by
1
1 = 1 ¡  1 + 
¡ 

In period 2, group ’s private consumption is given by
2
2 = 
+  ()

¹ if   0). From now on, whenever there is no
where  () =  if   0 and  () = 
ambiguity, we abuse notation by just writing  for  ().
The government’s budget constraint in period  is


  + 
+ 
+ ¡1 =  +   

We assume that the government and individual agents borrow on the world capital market.
From now on, we set  = 113 and 0 = 0 Therefore, 2 = ¡1 ´ . We also assume no
default on debt, but we revisit this assumption in Section 9.
The aggregate resource constraint in period 1:
1 + 1 + 1 = 1 +  ¡ 

(1)

2 + 2 +  2 = 1 ¡  + 

(2)

and in period 2:

Finally, preferences in each period are given by:
¡
¢
¡ ¢
¡ ¢
      =   +   

where  (¢) and  (¢) are concave, and twice continuously di¤erentiable. We also assume
that both the private and the public goods are su¢ciently valuable that 0 (0) = 1 =
0 (0), implying that it is not optimal for one group to spend all the resources on its own
private good or on the public good. Utility is additive across periods and there is no
discounting.

13

This is the natural speci…cation given that we assume no discounting. Allowing for an interest rates
above the discounting factor and discounting has no qualitative e¤ects on our results.

7

3.2

Political structure and entitlements

The political structure is such that group A decides the public allocation in period 1
1   1     1  group B2 decides the public allocation in period 2  2   2   2   2 subject
 1  

 
14
to debt and entitlements, as speci…ed below.
Because taxes are non distortionary, and because the members of the group are homogeneous, although savings and consumption are private, group ’s overall problem reduces
to choosing the following quintuple:15
¡ 1 1 1
¢
         

(3)

subject to the resource constraint (1).  is a nonnegative number that represents group
A’s entitlements in the future.16 In period 2, group B2 chooses the triple:
¡ 2 2 2¢
     

subject to the resource constraint (2) and to the following additional constraint:
2 ¸  + 
This constraint requires group B2 to transfer to group A at least the level of entitlements
() so that group A’s private consumption is a least  plus group A’s private savings.
Given that group B2 does not bene…t from resources transferred to group A, this constraint
is always binding in equilibrium.

4

Benchmarks and Preliminary Discussion

In this section we highlight some features of the setup that are conceptually important to
frame the results in this paper.

14

In the Online Appendix we consider the consequences of allowing for some persistence in power.
To be precise, the government, which is controlled by group  chooses  1   1   and  under the
constraint that each member of group  will allocate his endowment 1 ¡  1 + 1 optimally between private
consumption, 1  and savings,  Given that all members of group  are identical, this problem is equivalent
to one representative agent of group  choosing the quintuple in (3) 
16
This assumption is discussed extensively in the Online Appendix. In the Online Appendix we also
discuss a speci…cation where group A can choose between entitlements on private or public goods. We show
that there is a strong preference for entitlements on private goods, essentially because group B already has
an incentive to provide some public goods. The Online Appendix also discusses the possibility of costly
reneging of entitlements.
15

8

4.1

Private Savings Frictions and Ricardian Equivalence

If capital market frictions are so large that it is impractical for group A to save or borrow
privately; if furthermore entitlements are absent (or restricted to equal zero): then the
only way for group A to save (borrow) is by running a government surplus (debt). In
this scenario our model becomes essentially equivalent to early political economy models
of debt such as Alesina and Tabellini (1990) and Tabellini and Alesina (1990): it can be
shown that group A runs up debt in period 1 and that public good provision decreases
between periods 1 and 2.
¹ = 1 = ), then a Ricardian-equivalence-type
If there are no capital market frictions (
result arises, in the following sense. Suppose that group A selects a triple   and 
¡
¢
in order to generate a certain allocation 1   1  2  2 for itself. If subsequently  was
¡
¢
exogenously shifted to 0 6= , then group A would still be able to achieve 1  1  2  2 by
opportunely adapting  and . A direct implication of this observation is that debt limits
are neutral in the frictionless case. Clearly, analogous considerations apply to entitlement
limits if there are no frictions and debt is unconstrained.

4.2

Absent entitlements, debt limits redistribute across generations

The above Ricardian equivalence property of irrelevance of debt limits requires ‡exibility
in choosing entitlements (and no borrowing frictions). If, for instance, entitlements are
constrained to be zero, then restricting group A’s ability to create debt redistributes utility
from the …rst-period groups (A and B1) to group B2. In this sense, tightening or relaxing
a debt limit can transfer utility across groups, but it cannot lead to either a Paretoimprovement or worsening. This feature is shared with early models of sovereign debt
such as Alesina and Tabellini (1990) and Tabellini and Alesina (1990). In those models
debt accumulation is viewed negatively from a utilitarian perspective since they allow the
current group to extract resources from a group that will have power in the future. This
view needs to be revisited in the presence of entitlements, as we will see below.

5

Equilibrium Analysis Without Fiscal Rules

Absent …scal rules it is without loss of generality to set ¤ = 0 because it is optimal
for group A to neither save nor borrow (strictly optimal if there are even small saving/borrowing frictions). This is because private savings/borrowings are redundant for
group A; a manifestation of the Ricardian equivalence property highlighted in Section 4.1.
We start with some de…nitions and preliminary analysis. We denote by  the portion of
the second period budget that has already been committed (either in debt or entitlements)
in period 1.
9

De…nition 1 (second-period policies) De…ne second-period policy choices conditional
on a budget commitment of  as the set  ()   () that solves:
max  () +  () s.t.  +  · 1 ¡ 
()

 () represents the amount of private good that the group in charge in period 2 would
allocate itself, subject to the constraint that a fraction  of period 2’s endowment has been
reserved for other purposes.  () represents the corresponding amount of public good.
Lemma 1 (well-behaved second-period policies) Second period policy choices  ()
and  () are single-valued di¤erentiable functions that are decreasing in  Thus, increasing the fraction of the second period budget which is committed lowers private and public
consumption in the second period.
Proof. See Appendix A.
In period 2, group B is in power. We can use De…nition 1 to describe group B’s
allocation choice.
Corollary 1 (second period equilibrium allocation) Assume the second period starts
with pre-de…ned commitments  of debt and  of entitlements. Then in period 2 group B
allocates exactly  to group A’s private good, allocates  ( + ) in private good to itself,
and allocates  ( + ) to the public good.

Given period-2 policy choices, we can move to consideration of optimal policies in the
…rst period.
De…nition 2 (…rst-period policies) De…ne …rst-period policy choices as the set (¤   ¤  ¤   ¤ )
that solves:
max  () +  () +  () +  ( ( + )) s.t.  +  · 1 + 

()

(4)

The four-tuple (¤   ¤  ¤   ¤ ) maximizes group A’s lifetime payo¤. This payo¤ is partly
accrued in period 1 (the …rst two addends in equation (4)) and partly in period 2 (the last
two addends in equation (4)). However, in period 2 group A does not directly control the
allocation; therefore, its private consumption in period 2 is given by the amount  it chose
in entitlements in the …rst period, and its amount of public consumption is determined by
whatever amount group B chooses to provide given the (uncommitted) resources available
in the second period.
10

In what follows, we assume that  ( (¢)) is concave. This is a technical assumption
that guarantees concavity of the problem faced by group A. Because  (¢) is endogenous, it
is helpful to provide su¢cient conditions on the primitives that ensure the desired property.
Lemma 2 in Appendix A provides these conditions.
It is easy to see that the optimal allocation is interior: group A does not fully commit
period 2’s budget: ¤ +  ¤  1. The reason is that when government obligations are
too high, second period public good provision becomes very small, and the high marginal
utility of public consumption requires that this provision stay bounded away from zero.
The next Proposition and the discussion that follows highlight some key properties of
the equilibrium of the model when entitlements are allowed.
Proposition 1 In equilibrium, total government obligations are always positive and
larger than in the case without entitlements; however, equilibrium debt is lower than in
the case without entitlements: ¤ +  ¤  ¤=0  ¤ .
Proof. See Appendix A.
Consider the proposition in light of the important literature that has highlighted the
role of debt as an instrument to leverage temporary power (e.g., Alesina and Tabellini
1990, Tabellini and Alesina 1990, Persson and Svensson 1989).17 If, consistent with this
literature, entitlements were left out of our model (i.e., implicitly set to zero), Proposition
1 indicates that the equilibrium level of debt would be larger than if entitlements were
accounted for by the model. That is, by abstracting from the presence of entitlements,
there is a risk of over-estimating the amount of debt that is created in an e¤ort to take
advantage of temporary power.
Furthermore, in a model with both debt and entitlements, debt can even be negative,
i.e., group A may choose to run a surplus; for example, if  () and  () have a CRRA
form, with  () = ()1¡  (1 ¡ )  and  () =  ()1¡  (1 ¡ ) then group A runs a
surplus if and only if   1.18
Proposition 1 also highlights that a model that abstracts from entitlements would
underestimate the total level of government obligations (i.e., the sum of debt and entitlements). In our model, both types of government obligations arise because group A
anticipates its lack of political control in period 2 and understands that a fraction of any
uncommitted dollar will be diverted from public consumption to group B’s private consumption. Absent entitlements, the only way to pre-commit period 2 dollars is to consume
17

This determinant of debt is a major component of recent developments in the political economy theory
of public debt (see, e.g., Battaglini and Coate 2008, Battaglini 2011, and Azzimonti et al. 2015).
18
We show this result formally in the Online Appendix (see Proposition 7 part 3). We also wish to
emphasize that the possibility of surplus is not of interest in itself. We view it as a useful contrast with
the no entitlement benchmark. Of course, surplus is also a possibility in other political economy models of
debt (e.g., Persson and Svensson 1989). However, this is due to di¤erences in the utility functions between
groups.

11

them today (by issuing debt). But, due to the concavity of the utility function, group A
would prefer to allocate (at least some of) these period 2 dollars to its private consumption in period 2. This is exactly what entitlements allow group A to do. This additional
commitment channel raises the value of committing period 2 dollars and therefore leads
to larger government obligations.
To understand the intuition of these results, it is useful to consider the two key …rstorder conditions that determine debt and entitlements. They are obtained by di¤erentiating the objective function (4) with respect to  and  respectively:
0 () = ¡ 0 ( ( + )) 0 ( + ) 

(5)

0 () = ¡ 0 ( ( + )) 0 ( + ) 

(6)

These equations illustrate the di¤erent roles of debt and entitlements. Group A uses
debt to smooth consumption over time and entitlements to smooth consumption over types
of goods in period 2. If group A were in charge in both periods, then the term 0 () would
not appear. This term captures the fact that an extra dollar left uncommitted to period 2
only increases public consumption by j0 () j  1, the marginal amount chosen by group
, with the remainder going to group B’s private consumption. We call the presence of
this term the crowdout e¤ect. As in the model without entitlements, the crowdout e¤ect
gives an incentive to increase government obligations. There is also a smoothing e¤ect that
works as follows: because of concavity in the utility function, group A wants to smooth
consumption over time. Because public consumption is smaller in period 2, then, in a
model without entitlements, the smoothing e¤ect gives an incentive to decrease debt. The
presence of entitlements increases the importance of the smoothing e¤ect in determining
total obligations, but it has a more complicated e¤ect on how it a¤ects the distribution of
these obligations between debt and entitlements. The balance of the crowdout e¤ect and
the smoothing e¤ect determines the equilibrium level of debt and entitlements.
To illustrate more explicitly how the crowdout e¤ect and the smoothing e¤ect balance to produce equilibrium debt and entitlements, we discuss two examples with CRRA
preferences (that is,  () = ()1¡  (1 ¡ ) and  () =  ()). First, let us consider
a low value of  = 5, which represents an environment with relatively high distributive
con‡ict since the value of public consumption is relatively low. Figure 1 shows how equilibrium magnitudes vary with , and contrasts them with the case in which entitlements
are exogenously set to zero.
Consider …rst the case without entitlements. The dashed red line depicts equilibrium
debt when entitlements are not allowed. In this case, debt is always positive. When  ! 0
(to the limiting case of linear preferences), the con‡ict among the two groups becomes
extreme because group B would spend the entire budget on its private consumption,

12

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

-0.2

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2.0

rho

Figure 1: Entitlements (Green); Debt with entitlement (Plain Red); Debt without entitlements
(Dashed Red).

leaving nothing for the public good. The crowdout e¤ect is thus maximal, and group A
chooses maximal debt. As  increases, the smoothing e¤ect starts to matter more and more
and it become more important to devote resources to second period public consumption,
so debt falls.
Suppose now that entitlements are allowed (represented by the solid lines). Just as in
the case with no entitlements, when  ! 0 there is an extreme con‡ict of views in period
2 and the crowdout e¤ect is maximal. However, the consequence is very di¤erent: in the
limit there is no debt and full entitlements. Entitlements are a superior way to capture the
second period resources as long as   0. Just as before, when  increases the smoothing
e¤ect implies that it becomes more desirable to devote part of the budget to the public
good, so entitlements drop. Debt responds non-monotonically to an increase in . While
resources become available for the public good over both periods, the amount invested in
the public good is di¤erent in the two periods; for low values of , the crowdout e¤ect
dominates, and for high values of  the smoothing e¤ect dominates.
Second, let us consider a case with relatively low con‡ict, i.e.,  = 15, which is
shown in Figure 2. When  ! 0, there is essentially no con‡ict between groups because
group B spends the entire budget on the public good. Thus, in this case, the optimal
debt (entitlements) level goes to zero as  goes to zero. When  increases, con‡ict starts
mattering, but the e¤ect di¤ers for debt and entitlements. For debt, the crowdout e¤ect
…rst dominates so debt rises until it is overtaken by the smoothing e¤ect and debt drops.
For entitlements, both e¤ects pull in the same direction. Because group B starts allocating
resources to its private consumption, the crowdout e¤ect pulls entitlements up. Because of
the change in the concavity of the utility function, group A wants to balance private and
public consumption more in period 2. Given that we start from zero private consumption
(and full public consumption), this requires an increase in entitlements.

13

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

rho

-0.2

Figure 2: Entitlements (Green); Debt with entitlement (Plain Blue); Debt without entitlements
(Dashed Blue).

6

Fiscal Rules

We now discuss the consequences of …scal rules for equilibrium allocations and for the
welfare of the three groups in our economy. We begin by discussing debt limits, then we
consider limits to entitlements. Finally, we discuss limits to the overall level of government
obligations.
Debt limits restrict group A’s policy space in period 1. Therefore, tightening a binding
debt limits cannot improve, and will generally reduce group A’s period-1’s payo¤, and
also its overall utility. Moreover, group B1’s utility must also decrease as a debt limit
is tightened because group A, being “poorer” chooses to provide a lower level of public
good in period 1. Regarding group B2, a naive intuition suggests that this group should
bene…t from the protection provided by debt limits. We show in this section that this
is not necessarily the case and that the welfare of group B2 depends on the existence of
capital market frictions.
¡ ¢
Group B2’s utility is a decreasing function of total obligations  +    where  is
a binding debt limit. Tightening  reduces the marginal cost of entitlements because it
frees up resources in period 2, so group A optimally responds by increasing entitlements.
Since debt is strategically replaced by entitlements, the combined e¤ect of a debt limit on
total obligations can be ambiguous.
To appreciate this ambiguity, consider the extreme but important benchmark of no
¹ = 1 = ). In this case, forcing a reduction in debt by  will cause
…nancial frictions (
young generation A to increase both its entitlements and private borrowing by exactly
, such that young generation A’s private and public consumption levels, and indeed all
agent’s consumption levels in both periods, are unchanged in equilibrium. Thus, tightening
a debt limit results in a combination of less government debt, more entitlements, and more

14

private borrowing.19
Consider next the other extreme case in which credit market frictions are su¢ciently
high that group A is at a corner in its borrowing decisions, choosing not to borrow at
all. Then it can be shown that debt ceilings are partially e¤ective, i.e., tightening a
¡ ¢
binding debt ceiling  reduces  +   . The intuition for this result is the following.
Suppose that, in response to the tighter debt ceiling, group A increased entitlements to
¡ ¢
keep total obligations  +   constant. Then, the marginal cost of obligations, given
by the reduction in public consumption in period 2, is unchanged. However, the marginal
bene…t of these obligations is now lower: since the debt limit was already binding, group
A’s preferred composition of obligations favored transferring resources toward …rst period
consumption. Thus, increasing private consumption in the second period, which is the
e¤ect of increased entitlements, has lower marginal bene…t for group A. Restoring second
period optimality requires reducing total obligations.
We now consider the case in which capital market distortions are at an intermediate
level, so that, given a binding debt limit, group A chooses to borrow in equilibrium. We
show that, in fact, government obligations increase as a consequence of a tightening of the
debt limit. A direct consequence of this result is that, in this case, all groups su¤er when
debt limits are tightened.
Proposition 2 Assume assumption 1 and a binding debt limit  tight enough that group
A chooses to borrow in equilibrium.20 Then, total government obligations inherited by
group B2 are decreasing in , and so tightening the debt limit harms group B2 as well as
harming groups A and B1.
Proposition 2 identi…es a Pareto-harmful e¤ect of debt limits. This is a novel e¤ect
relative to the existing literature, which views debt limits as constraints on the ability of
temporarily-powerful group to expropriate future generations. This novel e¤ect arises due
to the presence of entitlements.
19
There is one caveat to this irrelevance result on debt limits. In an in…nite horizon economy, even
when there are no capital market frictions, if debt accummulation motives are very strong, there can be
an e¤ect on debt limits. We explore these e¤ects in ongoing work.
20
The proposition requires that group A …nds it optimal to borrow a positive amount privately in
period 1, in addition to issuing government debt. This condition can be expressed in closed form in the
Constant Relative Risk Aversion (CRRA) case where  () = ()1¡  (1 ¡ ) and  () =  (). (The
parameter   0 captures the value that all groups place on public consumption.) With these preferences,
the condition can be shown to be:



   1  1  1
1


1

1 + 
¡
¡1
1
¹






1+


  1
1



1
¹




15

  +1

+



1


1

  +1

1 





+1

The intuition for why total government obligations increase in response to a tightening
of debt limits is as follows. Suppose that, in response to a tightening of the debt ceiling
by , group  responded by borrowing  more and increasing entitlements by . This
operation keeps generation A’s period-1 private consumption unchanged, but its period-2
private consumption would decrease because they would have to repay   . Thus, group
 has an incentive to raise entitlements by more than  to partially o¤set this reduction.
Such an increase in future entitlements more than o¤sets the debt reduction.
Another way to develop an intuition for the logic of Proposition 2 is to consider a
really stripped down problem in which entitlements and savings are kept constant, so that
group  only chooses debt. However, we assume that the debt ceiling is soft. Speci…cally,
assume that generation  can choose to borrow more than the debt ceiling, but in such
a scenario, it needs to pay an extra interest,   0 Thus, if group  issues a level of
debt  which is  ¡  units above the debt ceiling  , the reimbursement in period 2 is
 + (1 + ) ( ¡  )  These resources do not bene…t anybody in the economy.
This simpler problem allows us to highlight the key feature underlying our main result:
a tightening of the debt limit leads to a Pareto deterioration when it increases the marginal
cost of intertemporal consumption smoothing.

Remark 1 Fix a binding (but soft) debt limit  . Then the equilibrium debt level,  ( ), is
increasing in   but total government obligations inherited by group B2,  +(1 + ) ( ¡  ),
are decreasing in  . Hence, tightening the debt limit harms all groups.
We prove this remark in Appendix B (see Proposition 5).
The intuition for this result is as follows. Suppose that the equilibrium debt level
prior to the tightening of the soft debt limit is ¤ . A debt limit   ¤ increases the
marginal cost of debt  in the range [  ¤ ] . This leads group  to reduce the debt level.
This reduction, of course, reduces the total cost of obligations in period 2. However, this
reduction cannot be so large that  + (1 + ) ( ¡  )  ¤ , i.e., below the original debt
level. Otherwise group A would wish to increase debt because the marginal bene…t of debt
in period 1 is unchanged by the debt limit.
We now consider the possibility of entitlement limits  and discuss the consequences
¡ ¢
for total government obligations   + . As for the case of debt limits, there are
three cases depending on the severity of credit market frictions. Absent …nancial frictions,
entitlement limits have no e¤ect on total obligations because debt and savings adjust to
restore the pre-existing allocation. If frictions are very severe, then entitlement limits are
partially e¤ective: total obligations fall when entitlement limits are tightened. However,
in this case, the consequence of an entitlement limit is a reduction of private consumption
for group A in period 2 and an increase in private and public consumption in period 1.
Therefore, in contrast to the case of debt limits with severe credit market frictions, both
16

groups B1 and B2 can bene…t from a tighter entitlement limit. The next result presents
the mirror image of Proposition 2 for the case of entitlement limits when capital market
frictions are intermediate, and group A actively saves in equilibrium.
Proposition 3 Assume assumption 2 and a binding entitlement limit  tight enough that
group A chooses to save in equilibrium.21 Then, total government obligations inherited by
group B2 decrease in , and …rst period spending on the public good increases in  so
tightening the entitlement limit harms group B1 and B2 as well as harming group A.
The logic for the perverse e¤ect of tightening entitlement limits on the total level of
government obligations is almost the same as for Proposition 2.
Most of the discussion of …scal rules so far has relied on the substitution between
entitlements and debt when the use of one of these tools is restricted. This suggests that
the most e¤ective way to limit the …scal burden on group 2 is to restrict the overall level
of government obligations directly. Leaving aside potential concerns of enforceability of
such limits, it is correct that these limits would be e¤ective in our model. Such limits
would have a straightforward intergenerational redistributive e¤ect along the lines of debt
limits in the Tabellini and Alesina model, as discussed in Section 4.2.

7

Preference polarization

Tabellini and Alesina (1990) provide conditions under which polarization of preferences
for public policy leads to an increase in debt. In our context, this same polarization can be
modeled as a decreased valuation for the public good compared to private goods. The idea
is that, as preference polarization increases, there are fewer goods whose enjoyment society
as a whole shares.22 To model polarization we introduce a parameter  that governs how
much, within each cohort, everyone likes the public good relative to the private goods.
We focus on the case of CRRA preferences where preferences for private consumption
are given by  () = ()1¡  (1 ¡ ) and  () =  (). The parameter  captures
the value that all groups place on public consumption, and lower values of  imply more
disagreement over the distribution of resources since both groups wish to shift consumption
toward their private good.
21

In the CRRA case, the condition that guarantees positive savings can be shown to be:
1



2 

 1 1



1
1


1 + 
1+
+ 
1


  +1

22

For example, an increase in income inequality might cause the young rich and the young poor to
diverge in the type of goods that they prefer.

17

For the purposes of this discussion we assume that there are no …scal rules, and hence,
as in Section 5, savings and borrowings are optimally zero.
Proposition 4 (growth in debt and entitlements) Suppose  () = ()1¡  (1 ¡ )
and  () =  ()  where   0 is a parameter that captures the degree of redistributive
con‡ict. Then, as  decreases: for   1 (respectively:   1), debt
2 and entitlements
3


increase jointly if and only if  is smaller (respectively: larger) than
Proof. See Appendix C.



4   1¡  5
1¡ 1¡

.

A reduction in  has the following e¤ects on debt and entitlements. As  falls, there is
a direct e¤ect of a reduction in the value that group A places on public consumption. This
is a force in favor of increasing debt and entitlements because both can lead to increases
in private consumption for group A. Of course, the reduction in  also reduces group B’s
value for public consumption, implying that group B contributes less to the public good
in the second period both in total and at the margin, changing both the crowdout and the
smoothing e¤ects. A larger crowdout e¤ect also pushes toward an increase in debt and
entitlements. However, the smoothing e¤ect can become larger pushing in the opposite
direction. Figure 8 in Appendix C illustrates the region of parameters for which debt and
entitlements increase with con‡ict.23
This proposition can be contrasted with Alesina and Tabellini (1990). In their model,
an increase in disagreement always leads to an increase in debt. Absent entitlements, our
model delivers the same result. When entitlements are endogenous, the results are more
subtle: entitlements always increase with con‡ict, but this is not always the case for debt.

8

Empirical Relevance

This section aims to demonstrate that the main forces featured in our model have a
signi…cant counterpart in the real world.

23

We have also considered two other ways to de…ne increasing intergenerational con‡ict. First, we have
considered a case in which  decreases over time in the same way for both groups. In this case we have
shown that debt and entitlements increase with con‡ict for all values of . Second, we have considered a
case in which  is smaller for the new generation: group B has lower  than group A. In this case there is
always comovement between debt and entitlements, but debt and entitlements increase in con‡ict if and
only if   1. Interestingly, the latter version of the model is close to the model used by Persson and
Svensson (1989) to study debt. For the case without entitlements we can replicate their results in our
version of the model.

18

8.1

Fiscal rules increasingly prevalent

Our main results concern the (sometimes counterintuitive) e¤ect of …scal rules. This
subsection documents that …scal rules are increasingly prevalent, in the U.S and round
the world. Figure 3 reports the number of countries with a …scal rule. Figure 4 provides
a summary of the features of …scal rules in U.S. states. Typically, these …scal rules do not
explicitly constrain entitlements.

Figure 3: After 1990: number of countries with a …scal rule is increasing. Reproduced from Tapp
(2010, Figure 2.1).

One could of course question whether these …scal rules are e¤ective in reducing de…cits.
No doubt, some are not. For instance, the U.S. congress routinely raises its self-imposed
debt limit. However, several studies document the e¤ectiveness of some …scal rules, and
the IMF places a lot of importance on these rules. Regarding Europe’s Stability and
Growth Pact (SGP), Koehler and Konig (2015, p. 20) …nd that “the aggregated level of
debt for the euro 11 countries is signi…cantly lower than the level we would have observed
without the introduction of the euro and the working of the SGP.” Further evidence of
the fact that the SGP a¤ected member countries’ behavior, Caselli and Wingender (2018)
show evidence of “bunching” around the 3% threshold after its introduction.
Smith and Hou (2013) study over 50 years of US states expenditure, and …nd that
certain balance budget requirement provisions are e¤ective in reducing de…cits. This
…nding agrees with Bohn and Inman’s (1996) seminal study.
While we do not explicitly model the adoption of …scal rules, our welfare analysis
19

Figure 4: Most US states have balanced-budget requirements (in blue). Reproduced from Randall
and Rueben (2017, Figure 11).

nonetheless speaks to the issue of endogenous adoption. In particular, we …nd that, for
some values of the parameters, citizens’ opposition to debt limits increases when capital
market frictions increases. This in line with the …ndings of Altunbas and Thornton (2015)
and Elbadawi et al. (2015): there is a positive correlation between the …nancial market
developments and the adoption of debt limits.

8.2

Fiscal rules met by increasing future unfunded obligations

In our model, if …scal rules are tightened, it is optimal for today’s government to increase
entitlements (future unfunded government obligations). In this section we provide support
for this theoretical prediction.
Casey (2014) documents that when the European SGP became more binding for member states (during the …nancial crisis), it caused them to de-fund pensions (in our language,
to increase entitlements). This phenomenon was prophesized by Schick (2005, p.109), who
wrote that “…scal rules [...] are not attuned to long-term issues [... and] may spur some
stressed governments to engage in budgetary legerdemain which improves the mediumterm outlook at the expense of the country’s long-term …scal health.” Beetsma and Oksanen (2007) and Banyár (2017) link this e¤ect on pension systems to a speci…c feature
of the SGP: “[...] it only deals with explicit government debt and ignores implicit debt.”
(Banyár 2017, p.45); in our language: the SGP ignores entitlements to solely focus on
debt. This is so even if the 2005 reform of the SGP has increased the importance of

20

the long-term sustainability of a country (and thus pension systems) in the terms of the
Pact.24 The increased awareness of these long-term sustainability issues has also led the
European Commission, in 2009, to develop a forward-looking measure of …scal sustainability, the “intertemporal net worth,” that captures government obligations much more
broadly than simple measures of debt.25
A related point can be made by looking at the United States, where states with morestringent …scal rules have a lower funded-ratio of pensions and a higher level of pensions
liability per state resident (in our language, a higher level of entitlements). Chaney et al.
(2002, p. 287) study the relation between the stringency of balanced budget rules (BBR)
and the extent of underfunding problem for state pensions.26 The conclusion of their
empirical analysis is that “…scally stressed states that are required to balance their budgets
both underfund their pensions and select discount rates which obscure the underfunding.”
Similarly, Wang (2017) …nds that “states with stricter balanced budget requirements and
debt limits had a lower pension funded ratio.” As Chaney et al. (2002) discuss, a key issue
is that …scal rules do not address entitlements.27 Even worse, “Governmental accounting
practices contribute to states’ ability to use pension funds in this manner [i.e., to balance
their budget].” (Chaney et al. (2002, p. 307).

8.3

Relevance of capital market frictions

Our analysis of the e¤ect of a …scal rule relies on the assumption of capital market frictions.
This type of assumption underlies a vast literature in …nance and macroeconomics (see
e.g., the survey by Brunnermeier et al. 2013 and Kaplan and Violante 2014). Various
forms of these frictions have been amply documented. In our setting, we can break down
this assumption into two parts depending on whether we consider borrowing frictions or
savings frictions.
For the analysis of debt limits, the relevant market frictions concern private borrowing:
there is an unfavorable wedge between the interest rate on private debt and the one on
public debt. We view this assumption, which is common in the literature (see, e.g., Cocco
et al. 2005, Davis et al. 2006, Livshits et al. 2007, Huo and Rios-Rull 2016, Chatterjee
et al. 2016), as uncontroversial in the sense that it is clearly satis…ed for the vast major24

This issue about PAYG pension systems and their reform was recognised by the European Council
and was one of the drivers of the 2005 reform of the SGP (see, e.g., Daniele et al. 2017 for more details).
25
Intertemporal Net Worth is based on the total discounted sum of future primary balances under
current policies and current net worth. This measure suggests that assessing the …scal burden via debt only
and ignoring entitlements not only severely understates the problem but can also bring about misleading
inferences about the relative burden across countries. For instance, according to some of these measures
the EU country in the best state of …scal health is Italy, despite its extremely high level of government
debt. See also the discussion in Velculescu (2010).
26
The correlation between these variables is -0.249.
27
This is also understood by journalists: “Governmental accounting, you see, simply counts formal
government debt, it ignores unfunded governmental promises” (The Wall Street Journal, 1997, p. A18).

21

ity of individuals and governments. In the US, there is a clear positive spread between
the interest rate on government bonds and various type of private credit instruments:
credit cards (Stango and Zinman 2016, Galenianos and Gavazza 2019), automobile loans
(Grunewald et al. 2019), and mortgages (Justiniano et al. 2017). For other countries,
see, e.g., Alesina et al. (1992) and the “risk premium on lending” measure from the International Monetary Fund.28 As stated by Cuadra et al. (2010, p. 453): “The empirical
literature also documents that the cost of public debt generally represents a ‡oor for the
cost of private borrowing.” One potential explanation is that in most countries, sovereign
default is much less frequent than private default. The government can indeed handle risk
more e¢ciently than the private sector by pooling many projects and spreading the risk
over many taxpayers (see, e.g., Arrow and Lindt 1970). It can also avoid default by taxing
citizens; a recourse which is not available to private citizens.
For the analysis of entitlements limits, the relevant market frictions concern private
savings. One possible reason is that most governments tax returns on private savings
(see, e.g., OECD 2018). Moreover, in some countries with weaker institutions, private
investments face risks of theft and/or expropriation by either the government or, sometimes
through the government by powerful groups.29 Regarding savings for retirement, capital
markets do not always o¤er the …nancial products pension funds require: long-term …xed
income assets and annuities (see the discussion in OECD 2005).

8.4

Entitlements, savings, and frictions

In our model, there are two key predictions related to savings: 1. The promise of an
increases in entitlement leads consumers to save less. This is a Ricardian equivalence-type
result. When there are …nancial frictions, our model predicts that the o¤set is only partial.
2. Entitlements grow larger in equilibrium if private savings are subject to higher frictions.
In this Subsection we discuss evidence pertaining to these two predictions of the model.
Regarding the …rst prediction, there is a large literature seeking to estimate the o¤set
between public and private savings, and the estimated o¤set varies depending on the time
frame. Based on aggregate US time-series data, Feldstein (1974) concluded that “social
security substantially depresses personal savings.” Cutler and Gruber (1996) report similar
crowding out for health insurance. Roehn (2010) reviews the literature and says that
28

https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/FR.INR.RISK
There are many cases of expropriation of savings by the governemnt. It could be of general savings (as
in the case of Cyprus in 2013, https://www.investors.com/politics/editorials/expropriating-cyprus-privateinsured-deposits-is-eu-overreach/), or directly targeted at pension savings (as in the case of Argentina in
2008 https://www.nytimes.com/2008/10/22/business/worldbusiness/22argentina.html). For data about
the risks of expropriation see, e.g., the Property Right componen of the Heritage Foundation Economic
Freedom Index or the Expropriation Risk Index from the Credendo Group. For a theoretical discussion of
of the incentives of governments, see, e.g., Chassang and Padro-i-Miquel (2010). In developing countries
land reform is an example of expropriation by politically powerful groups. See for instance, Ntsebeza, L.
and R. Hall (2007) on South Africa, Guo (2001) on China, and Alston et al. (2000) on Brazil.
29

22

“Estimates of the o¤set for OECD countries range from 0.1 to 0.5 in the short run to
about 0.3 to as much as 0.9 in the long run.” Overall, the literature supports a partial
o¤set.
The second prediction suggests that exogenous variation in …nancial development
should impact the development of the welfare state. Cutler and Johnson (2004, p. 88)
point to this e¤ect as a possible explanation for their …ndings: “In our study of the creation
of social insurance, we …nd the most evidence for a negative e¤ect of the level of per capita
GDP, that is, the opposite of Wagner’s Law. This re‡ects the fact that some of the richer
countries in our sample were particularly late in adopting social-insurance institutions,
such as the United States. Our interpretation is that in richer countries, where private
capital markets are more developed, there is less need for and greater private opposition
to the introduction of state insurance systems.”
The creation of state pensions in Great Britain is a historical case study that illustrates
how increasing savings frictions contribute to the creation of entitlements. The landmark
Old Age Pensions Act of 1908 created state pensions …nanced by general taxation.30 Before 1908, retirement savings were channeled through working-class provident institutions
and “Friendly Societies:” private cooperatives that collected contributions and provided
sickness insurance, death bene…ts, usually medical care, and occasionally a small pension,
to their members. These institutions numbered almost 24,000 in 1898, with 4.2 million
members (Gilbert 1965, p. 552). According to Boyer and Schmidle (2009, p. 255) “probably somewhere between 33 and 40 per cent of adult males were eligible to receive a small
’pension’ from a friendly society or trade union when they were no longer able to work.”
But, “by the end of the nineteenth century, many of these societies were in a precarious
…nancial condition,” (Gilbert 1965, p. 551) due to increasing longevity and to competition
for members among provident institutions. At the same time, young men grew reluctant
to join the societies at all (Gilbert, p. 554). Despite being seriously troubled, the leadership of provident societies opposed the creation of state pensions out of fear of unfair
government competition. But …nally their resistance was overcome in 1908 and, by 1911,
the majority of provident societies were folded into the state pension system (Jones 1984,
p. 327). We read this historical event as a case study in which increasing …nancial frictions to private savings for retirement grew exogenously (because the Friendly Societies
were mismanaged) and, as a result, a new entitlement was created by the state to replace
frictional private savings.

30

This was viewed as a revolutionary entitlement because it was “gender-blind, redistributive, and [. . . ]
represented social reform as socialists sought it,” and also because, as Prime Minister Lloyd George put
it, it was “incomplete . . . purely the …rst step.” (Macnicol 2002, p. 163).

23

8.5

Entitlements crowd out public good provision

In our model, entitlements crowds out public good provision. In this section we propose
suggestive evidence in support of that theoretical prediction.
As illustrated in Figure 5, in the U.S. entitlements have grown rapidly since the 1960s
and have overtaken discretionary spending, suggesting that entitlement programs must
be crowding out other types of government spending such as, perhaps, infrastructure and
R&D spending.31

Figure 5: Evolution of U.S. Federal Government Expenditurs by type, 1962-2017e. Data Source:
U.S. O¢ce of Management and Budget 2015; Budget of the United States Government, Fiscal
Year 2015: Historical Tables, 2014, Table 8.4.

A similar pattern in the growth of entitlements, and thus in possible crowding out,
holds across OECD countries.32

8.6

Joint growth of debt and entitlements

In most OECD countries, …scal pressure has been ratcheted up by the simultaneous growth
in debt and entitlements since the mid 1970s.33 Our model sheds some light on this coevolution.
Our model highlights the relevance of a factor that has been previously identi…ed as
a determinant in the growth in debt over the same period (see Yared 2019), namely: the
31

See also the footnotes 1 and 2 in the Introduction.
De…ned as public social expenditure as a percent of GDP in 1960-2014. Source: OECD (2014).
33
For the U.S., see, e.g., U.S. O¢ce of Management and Budget 2015; Budget of the United States
Government, Fiscal Year 2015: Historical Tables, 2014, Tables 1.2 and 8.4.
32

24

polarization of advanced economies. As shown in Figure 6 that growth in polarization
started in the mid 1960s. Our model predicts that an increase in polarization may lead to
an increase in both debt and entitlements.34

Figure 6: Reproduced from Yared (2019, Figure 4).
Given that entitlements crowd out savings in our model, another prediction is that
savings should have decreased over the same time period (or borrowing should have increased). This is what Dynan and Kohn (2007) documents for the US (see Figure 7).35

8.7

Government credit ratings re‡ect both debt and entitlements

Our baseline model does not allow for government default.36 However, intuitively one can
relate government solvency to the size of its obligations. Since in our model these are
the sum of debt and entitlements, intuitively our model predicts that government credit
ratings should depend on both debt and entitlements. In this section we marshall support
for this evidence.
Regarding US states, Killian et al (2016) report that “between 2010 and 2013, Moody’s
Investors Service downgraded the credit ratings of six states due largely to growing pension liabilities.” Martell et al. (2013) reviews the funding status of US state-administered
pension plans and their impact on state credit quality. They …nd that “As the fund ratio
34

Our model also excludes some potential explanations for this joint growth. The strategic substitute
property between debt and entitlements highlighted in our model indicates that the comonotonicity of
debt and entitlements cannot be explained by a factor that only a¤ects one of them since this would cause
them to evolve in opposite directions. This excludes, for instance, the possibility that this joint growth
is due to the “mechanical” and positive e¤ect of population aging on payout due to pre-existing payment
formulas. In order to see this, assume that there is a mechanical increase in entitlements due to population
aging. In this case, group A should be less willing to use debt. We discuss this topic formally in the Online
Appendix.
35
See also the discussion in Zinman (2015).
36
We discuss the issue of default in the next Section.

25

Figure 7: Reproduced from Dynan and Kohn (2007, Figure 1).
(actuarial assets/actuarial accrued liability) of state-administered pension plans decreases,
states are more likely assigned a lower rating.” For US cities, Benson and Marks (2016) report that “the level of pension funding is strongly related to the credit rating on municipal
debt.”

9

Allowing for Default

In our model we assume that there is no default on either debt or entitlements. This
assumption is in line with most of the prior literature on the political economy of debt.
However, a novel question arises in our context: the possibility that default may impact
debt and entitlements di¤erentially. This is a rich question with many possible angles.
For instance, an important di¤erence between debt and entitlements arises because debt
is partly owed to outsiders (sovereign debt), while entitlements are only “owed” to a
speci…c group of voters. This di¤erence potentially generates di¤erent political incentives
26

to default. We believe that this is an important di¤erence, and we plan to purse it in
follow-up work. Yet, it requires a major departure from the model that we have worked
with so far. Tabellini (1991) also points out that there is an additional potential di¤erence
among the coalitions supporting default, even if he focuses on domestic debt and does not
focus on the comparative statics of default.
Here we discuss some preliminary analysis of the consequences of default for the size
of debt and entitlements. To …x ideas, let us begin by assuming that there are exogenous
probabilities  and  with which debt repayments and entitlement payments are reduced
by a …xed amount  (the default size). In equilibrium, for investors to be willing to lend,
the interest rate on debt has to be adjusted to re‡ect this probability of default. This, of
course, a¤ects the willingness of group A to take on debt. This market discipline e¤ect
is absent in the case of entitlements. In fact, we believe that we can construct scenarios
in which debt decreases with the probability and size of default, while entitlements are
increasing in the same quantities. Note that these are statements about the e¤ect of default
on one given obligation–say entitlements–on the endogenous size of that obligation. The
e¤ect of an increase in the default probability for entitlements on the equilibrium size of
debt is complex and may well be positive: if lenders expect pensions to be reduced, they
may be more willing to lend.
A richer model of default incorporates an endogenous default response by group B2 to
the size of debt and entitlements. A particularly simple way to do this is to assume that
¡
¢
there is a default technology for debt  (     ) and one for entitlements        .
These re‡ect the cost for group B2 to change the amount of debt (entitlements) from 
to  ( to   ). In order to introduce uncertainty about these possibilities, we could add
some shocks to the size of the endowment available in period 2. In turn group A may,
at some cost, build institutions   and   in period 1 that raise the cost of defaulting
on these promises in the subsequent period. We conjecture that in equilibrium, group
A would over-entitle itself relative to the target level of desired entitlements and build
institutions to protect debt and entitlements in anticipation of partial default on both.

10

Conclusions

Entitlements are a key determinant of …scal sustainability beyond the level of sovereign
debt. Despite the policy relevance of entitlements, the political economy literature has not
yet focused on the interplay between debt and entitlements. And yet there is a lot we can
learn from taking a closer look at the interplay between these two di¤erent government
obligations.
In this paper we have presented a very simple politico-economic model where entitlements and debt are jointly determined. The main …ndings are the following. First,

27

the presence of endogenous entitlements dampens the incentives of politically powerful
groups to accumulate debt, but it leads to an increase in total government obligations.
Second, …scal rules can have perverse e¤ects: if entitlements are unconstrained, and there
are capital market frictions, debt limits robustly lead to an increase in total government
obligations and to a Pareto-deterioration. Analogous results hold for entitlement limits
if debt is unconstrained. This …nding points to the importance of …scal rules that constrain both debt and entitlements. Third, our model sheds some lights on how capital
market frictions a¤ect the incentives of governments to adopt …scal rules, and implement
entitlement programs. Finally, we identify the polarization of preferences as a possible
explanation for the joint growth of debt and entitlements.
We view this paper as an instructive …rst step in a larger research program that explores the forces that shape total government obligations, that is, the sum of debt and
entitlements.

28

Appendix A: Proofs and Examples for Section 5
Proof of Lemma 1.

Uniqueness follows directly from the concavity of the problem, and
di¤erentiability from the implicit function theorem. Using the constraint to substitute for  and
taking the …rst order conditions with respect to  we have:
¡0 (1 ¡  ¡ ) + 0 () = 0

(7)

Replacing  with  () and di¤erentiating yields:
00 ( ()) 0 () = ¡00 (1 ¡  ¡  ()) (1 + 0 ()) 
hence
0 () = ¡

00 (1 ¡  ¡  ())
2 (¡1 0) 
00 ( ()) + 00 (1 ¡  ¡  ())

Because at the optimum the constrain holds with equality, we have:
 () +  () = 1 ¡ 
Di¤erentiating, we have  0 () = ¡1 ¡ 0 () 2 (¡1 0).

Lemma 2 (su¢cient conditions for concavity)  ( (¢)) is concave if  () is concave.
1.  () is concave if and only if

 00 ([ 0 ]¡1 ())
00 ([0 ]¡1 ())

is nonincreasing in 

2. (symmetric case)  () is concave if  () =  () 
3. (proportional CRRA functions)  () is concave if  () is CRRA and  () =  ()
for   0.
4. (CRRA functions with di¤erent curvatures) Suppose  () =   and  () =  
with    1 Then  () is strictly concave if and only if   
Proof.
Part 1.  ()   () solve:
max  () +  () s.t.  +  · 1 ¡ 
()

 () is concave in  i¤  (1 ¡ ) is concave in . So, let’s make the change of variables  = 1 ¡ 
and write the following auxiliary problem:
max  () +  () s.t.  +  · 
()

e ()  
e ()  Let us derive necessary and su¢cient
Denote the solutions to the auxiliary problem by 
e () to be globally concave.
conditions for 

29

Form the auxiliary problem’s Lagrangian to get the …rst order conditions:

Di¤erentiate with respect to  :

³
´
³
´
e () =  () = 0 
e () 
0 

(8)

³
´
³
´
e () 
e 0 () = 0 () = 00 
e () 
e0 () 
00 

e () and 
e () :
Note that 0 ()  0 Use (8) to substitute for 

³
´
³
´
¡1
e 0 () = 0 () = 00 [ 0 ]¡1 ( ()) 
e0 () 
00 [0 ] ( ()) 

Eliminate 0 () to get:

³
´
00
0 ¡1

[
]
(
())
0
e
 ()
³
´
=
e0 ()

00 [0 ]¡1 ( ())

e 0 () + 
e0 () = 1 whence
Since the constraint  +  ·  must hold with equality, we must have 
our equation can be rewritten as follows:
³
´
00 [ 0 ]¡1 ( ())
³
´
¡1=
e0 ()

00 [0 ]¡1 ( ())
1

e0 () is decreasing in  if and only if:
Therefore 

³
´
 00 [ 0 ]¡1 ( ())
³
´ is nondecreasing in 
00 [0 ]¡1 ( ())

Since  () is decreasing in  (recall that 0 ()  0), the above condition is equivalent to:
³
´
00 [0 ]¡1 ()
³
´ nonincreasing in 
00 [0 ]¡1 ()
e () is linear. Indeed, symmetry and concavity
Part 2. In this case we can see directly that 
e () = 
e () = 2 Thus 
e () is (weakly) concave.
guarantee that 
Part 3. Consider now e
 () =  ()  Then:

e0 () =  0 ()

e00 () =  00 ()
³ ´
¡1
¡1 
[e
0 ] () = [0 ]



30

When  () =   we get:
 0 () = ¡1
 00 () = ( ¡ 1) ¡2

¡1

[0 ]

1(¡1)

() = ()



Thus:
e00 () =  ( ¡ 1) ¡2
³ ´ ³  ´1(¡1) µ 1 ¶1(¡1)
¡1
¡1 
¡1
[e
0 ] () = [0 ]
=
=
[ 0 ] () 



So

=
=
=
=
=
Thus

³
´
¡1
e00 [e
0 ] ()
³
´¡2
¡1
 ( ¡ 1) [e
0 ] ()
!¡2
Ãµ ¶1(¡1)
1
0 ¡1
[ ] ()
 ( ¡ 1)

µ ¶(¡2)(¡1)
³
´¡2
1
¡1
 ( ¡ 1) [ 0 ] ()

µ ¶(¡2)(¡1)
³
´
1
¡1
00 [0 ] ()

³
´
1
¡1
 ¡1 00 [0 ] () 

³
´
e00 [e
0 ]¡1 ()
1
³
´ =  ¡1 independent of 
¡1
00 [0 ] ()

Thus the condition in part 1 of the lemma is veri…ed trivially.

Part 4. Given the functional forms of  () and  () we get:

so that

³
´
¡1
 00 [ 0 ] ()
= ( ¡ 1) ()(¡2)(¡1) 
³
´
¡1
(¡2)(¡1)
00 [0 ] ()
= ( ¡ 1) ()

³
´
µ
¶
 00 [ 0 ]¡1 ()
(¡2)
(¡2)
¡1
³
´=
 (¡1) ¡ (¡1) 
¡1

¡
1
00 [0 ] ()

Because    1 the term in parentheses is positive. Therefore, the RHS is decreasing in  if and
only if
( ¡ 2)
( ¡ 2)


( ¡ 1)
( ¡ 1)
Because    1 this equation is equivalent to   

31

Proof of Proposition 1.
We need to prove that ¤ +  ¤  0 Suppose, by way of contradiction, that ¤ +  ¤ · 0.
Because  ¤  0, it must then be that ¤  0. Then, we show that public good provision must
be higher in period 2 than in period 1 (i.e.  (¤ +  ¤ )  ¤ ). Fix any  (for example,  = ¤ )
and consider the vector (  ) that solves problem (4) conditional on the debt level being set at
. The conditional problem is separable in the sense that the  and  that solve the conditional
problem (4) are the solutions to the following simpler problem which does not involve :
max  () +  () s.t.  +  · 1 + 
()

This problem was introduced in De…nition 1, and so the  that solves the conditional problem (4)
must be exactly  (¡)  The solution to the unconditional problem (4) is then  ¤ =  (¡¤ )  Now
from Lemma 1 we know that  (¢) is a decreasing function, so if ¤ is negative, ¤ =  (¡¤ )  (0)
If ¤ +  ¤ · 0, we also have (0) ·  (¤ +  ¤ )  and hence  (¤ +  ¤ )  ¤ . By the concavity
of  (), we conclude that 0 ( ¤ )  ¡0 ( (¤ +  ¤ )) 0 (¤ +  ¤ ). But then, group A could
increase its lifetime payo¤ by increasing public good provision in period 1 (and decreasing public
good provision in period 2). To do so, group A just has to increase debt (or reduce surplus).
Therefore, ¤ +  ¤ · 0 cannot hold in equilibrium.
Fix any  and consider the vector (  ) that solves problem (4) conditional on the entitlement level being set at . Denote the  that solves this conditional problem as  () 

First, we prove ¤  ¤=0  To this end, we prove that the  () is decreasing in  Note that
 () is the solution to the following simpler problem:
max  () +  () +  ( ( + )) s.t.  +  · 1 + 

()

The …rst order conditions read:
0 (1 +  ¡ ) = ¡0 ( ( + )) 0 ( + ) 

(9)

The LHS is a decreasing function of  Because  ( ( + )) is concave in , its …rst derivative
with respect to  0 ( (¢)) 0 (¢)  is a decreasing function of  The RHS is its opposite, and
therefore an increasing function of . Now increase  The LHS function stays unchanged. The
RHS function shifts up. Therefore the two functions now cross at a lower level of  This proves
that the  () is decreasing in  Since it is optimal for generation A to choose  ¤  0 it follows
that ¤ =  ( ¤ )   (0) = ¤=0 
We now prove that ¤ +  ¤  ¤=0  To this end, we prove
that  () +  is increasing in 
³Ã
¡ ¢
Ã
¡
¡´
Ã
¡
Consider any    Suppose by contradiction that  +     +    Then, because the
RHS of (9) is an increasing function of  +  we have:
³ ³Ã
³Ã
³Ã
¡ ¡
¡ ¢¢¢ 0 ¡
¡ ¢¢
¡
¡´´´ 0 ³Ã
¡
¡´´
¡ 0   +  
  + 
 ¡0   +  
 +  

(10)

³Ã
¡ ¢
¡´
Now, given that  () is decreasing in  we have      , so marginal utility of consumption

32

Ã
¡
in period 1must be lower under  , and hence:
³
³Ã
³Ã
¡
¡ ¢
¡ ¢¢
¡´
¡´´
0 1 +   ¡  
 0 1 +   ¡   

(11)

¡ ¢
By de…nition of    the RHS of (10) must equal the RHS of (11). But then it follows that:
³
³Ã
³Ã
³ ³Ã
³Ã
³Ã
¡
¡´´´ 0 ³Ã
¡
¡´´
¡´
¡´´
0 1 +   ¡  
 ¡0   +  
  + 


³Ã
¡´
which contradicts the de…nition of    Thus  () +  must be increasing in . Hence
¤ +  ¤ =  ( ¤ ) +  ¤   (0) + 0 = ¤=0  where the inequality follows because it is optimal for
generation A to choose  ¤  0

Appendix B: Proofs of Section 6
Proof of Proposition 2.

First, note that Lemma 1 and Corollary 1 apply verbatim to the
case with non-zero savings because they characterize group B’s behavior as a function of  + 
only. This means that, taking  as a …xed parameter, generation A’s problem can be written as:
max () +  () +  ( + ) +  ( ( + ))



  +  +  · 1 + 
or:
max (1 +  ¡  ¡ ) +  () +  ( + ) +  ( ( + )) 



Denote the argmax of the parameterized problem by f ()   ()   ()g  We want to prove that
the resources available to group 2 are decreasing when  decreases, i.e., that + () is increasing
in 
The …rst order conditions w.r.t.   and  are, respectively:
0 (1 +  ¡  ¡ ) = 0 () 

(12)

0 ( + ) = ¡0 ( ( + )) 0 ( + ) 

(13)

0 (1 +  ¡  ¡ ) = 0 ( + ) 

(14)

and
¡ ¢
¹  1.
By assumption, ¹ is su¢ciently low such that  ¹  0 which also implies that  = 
¡
¢
¹ We want to show that  ¹ + ¹   (0 ) + 0  Suppose by contradiction
Now, consider 0  .
¡ ¢
that  ¹ + ¹ ¸  (0 ) + 0  In that case, by the concavity of  ( ( + )) in  +  we have:
¡ ¡
¡ ¢¢¢ ¡
¡ ¢¢
¡0 ( ( (0 ) + 0 )) 0 ( (0 ) + 0 ) · ¡0  ¹ +  ¹ 0 ¹ +  ¹ 

Together with the …rst order conditions (13) this implies that

¡ ¡ ¢
¡ ¢¢
¡
¢
¹ ¹ ¸ 0  (0 ) + 
¹ (0 ) 
0  ¹ + 

33

and hence

¡ ¡ ¢
¡ ¢¢
¡
¢
¹ 0  ¹ + 
¹ ¹ ¸ 
¹ 0  (0 ) + 
¹ (0 ) 


Therefore, using the …rst order conditions (12) and (14) we also have

¡ ¢
¡ ¢
0 (1 + ¹ ¡  ¹ ¡  ¹ ) ¸ 0 (1 + 0 ¡  (0 ) ¡  (0 )), and
¡ ¡ ¢¢
0  ¹
¸ 0 ( (0 )) 

From the concavity of  and  it follows that:

From (16)  we have

¡ ¢
¡ ¢
¹ ¹ ·  (0 ) + 
¹ (0 ) ,
 ¹ + 
¡ ¢
¡ ¢
1 + ¹ ¡  ¹ ¡  ¹ · 1 + 0 ¡  (0 ) ¡  (0 )  and
¡ ¢
 ¹ ·  (0 )

(15)
(16)

¡ ¢
¡ ¢
 ¹ ¡  (0 ) ¸ ¹ ¡ 0 +  (0 ) ¡  ¹ 

¡ ¢
and using  ¹ ·  (0 ), we obtain:
Using (15), we obtain:

¡ ¢
 ¹ ¡  (0 ) ¸ ¹ ¡ 0 

¡ ¢
¡ ¡ ¢
¢
¹  ¹ ¡  (0 ) ·  (0 ) ,
 ¹ + 

¡ ¢
Using  ¹ ¡  (0 ) ¸ ¹ ¡ 0 , we have that the following must be true:
¡ ¢
¡
¢
¹ ¹ ¡ 0 ·  (0 ) ,
 ¹ + 

and hence

¡ ¢
¡
¢
¹ 0 ¡ ¹
 ¹ ¡  (0 ) · 
¡
¢
· 0 ¡ ¹ 

¹  1 This inequality contradicts our
where the second inequality results from 0 ¡ ¹  0 and 
¡ ¢
assumption that  ¹ + ¹ ¸  (0 ) + 0  thus achieving the desired contradiction.

Proof of Proposition 3.

First, note that Lemma 1 and Corollary 1 apply verbatim to the
case with non-zero savings because they characterize group B’s behavior as a function of  + 
only. This means that, taking  as a …xed parameter, generation A’s problem can be written as:
max () +  () +  ( + ) +  ( ( + ))



  +  +  · 1 + 
or
max (1 +  ¡  ¡ ) +  () +  ( + ) +  ( ( + ))


Denote the argmax of the parameterized problem by f ()   ()   ()g  We want to prove that

34

the resources available to group 2 are decreasing when  decreases, i.e.  () +  is decreasing
in 
The …rst order conditions w.r.t.   and  are, respectively:
0 (1 +  ¡  ¡ ) = 0 () 

(17)

0 (1 +  ¡  ¡ ) = ¡0 ( ( + )) 0 ( + ) 

(18)

0 (1 +  ¡  ¡ ) = 0 ( + ) 

(19)

and
¡ ¢
¹ is su¢ciently low such that  
¹  0 Now, consider  0  .
¹ We want to
By assumption, 
¡ ¢
¡
¢
¹ + 
¹   0 +  ( 0 )  Suppose by contradiction that ¹ +  
¹ ¸  0 +  ( 0 )  Then,
show that 
by the concavity of  ( (¢)) we have
¡ ¡
¡ ¢¢¢ 0 ¡
¡ ¢¢
¹ + 
¹
¹ + 
¹ 
¡0 ( ( 0 +  ( 0 ))) 0 ( 0 +  ( 0 )) · ¡0  
 

Together with the …rst order conditions (18) this implies that

¡ ¢
¡ ¢
¡ ¢
¹ ¡ 
¹ ¡  ¹ ) ¸ 0 (1 +  ( 0 ) ¡  ( 0 ) ¡  ( 0 ))
0 (1 +  

Therefore, using the …rst order conditions (17) and (19) we also have
¡ ¡ ¢¢
¹ ¸ 0 ( ( 0 ))
0  

and

¡
¡ ¢¢
¡
¢
¹ +  
¹ ¸ 0  0 +  ( 0 ) 
0 

From the concavity of  and  it follows that:

¡ ¢
¹
¹ +  
·  0 +  ( 0 ) ,
¡ ¢
¡ ¢
¡ ¢
¹ ¡ 
¹ ¡ 
¹
1+ 
· 1 +  ( 0 ) ¡  ( 0 ) ¡  ( 0 )  and
¡ ¢
¹
 
·  ( 0 ) 

(20)
(21)

From (21)  we have

¡ ¢
¡ ¢
¡ ¢
¡ ¢
¹ ¡  ( 0 ) ¸  
¹ ¡  ( 0 ) +  ( 0 ) ¡  
¹ ¸ 
¹ ¡  ( 0 ) 
 

¡ ¢
¹ ·  ( 0 ).
where the second inequality uses  
Using (20), we obtain:

 0 ¡ ¹

¡ ¡ ¢
¢
¹ ¡  ( 0 )
¸   
¡ ¡ ¢
¢
¹ ¡  ( 0 ) 
¸   

¡ ¢
¡ ¢
¹ ¡  ( 0 ) ¸  
¹ ¡  ( 0 )  Now recall from the proof of
where the second inequality uses  
¡ ¢
¡ ¡ ¢
¢
¹ ¡  ( 0 )  0 and   
¹ ¡  ( 0 ) 
Proposition 1 that  () is decreasing in  whence  

35

¡ ¢
¹ ¡  ( 0 )  Therefore the above inequality implies:
 

¡ ¢
¹ 
¹ ¡  ( 0 ) 
0 ¡ 

¡ ¢
¹ + 
¹ ¸  0 +  ( 0 )  thus achieving the desired contradiction.
contradicts our assumption that 

Soft Fiscal Rule
In this Appendix, we consider a situation in which the debt ceiling is soft. In particular,
when group  borrows more than the debt ceiling, it needs to pay an extra interest,   0
Thus, if group  chooses a debt level  which is  ¡  units above the debt ceiling  , the
reimbursement in period 2 is  + (1 + ) ( ¡  )  These wasted resources do not bene…t
anybody in the economy. We also assume that entitlements are …xed at  and that there
is no savings.
The following proposition proves our main result:
Proposition 5 Fix   ´ 0 and any soft debt ceiling  that is stringent enough that it
is exceeded in equilibrium. Then the equilibrium choice of debt level,  ( ), is increasing
in   but the total government obligations inherited by group B2,  + (1 + ) ( ¡  )  are
decreasing in   Hence, tightening the debt limit harms all groups.
Proof. First, note that Lemma 1 and Corollary 1 characterize second period policy choices  ()
and  ()  where now  =  (;  ) =  + (1 + ) ( ¡  ). Group A’s problem can be written as:
max () +  () +  () +  ( ( (;  )))


  +  · 1 + 
or
max (1 +  ¡ ) +  () +  () +  ( ( (;  ))) 


and let f ( )   ( )g denote the optimal choices when the debt ceiling is  .
The …rst order conditions w.r.t.  and  are, respectively:
0 (1 +  ¡ ) =  0 () 

(22)

0 (1 +  ¡ ) = ¡(1 + )0 ( ( (;  ))) 0 ( (;  )) 

(23)

and

By assumption,  is su¢ciently low such that    ( ). Now, consider any 0   . We
want to show that both  (0 )   ( ) and  ( (0 ) ; 0 )   ( ( ) ;  ) are true. Let’s proceed by
contradiction. There are three ways in which this statement can be violated: (i) if  ( (0 ) ; 0 ) 
 ( ( ) ;  ) but  (0 )   ( ), (ii) if  (0 )   ( ) but  ( (0 ) ; 0 )   ( ( ) ;  )  and (iii) if

36

both  (0 )   ( ) and  ( (0 ) ; 0 )   ( ( ) ;  )  Note that case (iii) is not possible given the
de…nition of  (;  )  Thus, we only have to consider cases (i) and (ii).
Case (i): by the concavity of  ( (¢))   ( (0 ) ; 0 )   ( ( ) ;  ) implies:
¡ (1 + ) 0 ( ( ( (0 ) ; 0 ))) 0 ( ( (0 ) ; 0 )) ¸ ¡ (1 + ) 0 ( ( ( ( ) ;  ))) 0 ( ( ( ) ;  )) 
Because  (0 )   ( ) implies  (0 )   ( ), using (22) we get:
0 (1 +  (0 ) ¡  (0 ))  0 (1 +  ( ) ¡  ( ))
Combining these two inequalities contradicts (23)  as desired.
Case (ii): by the concavity of  ( ()) in  we have that  ( (0 ) ; 0 )   ( ( ) ;  ) implies:
¡ (1 + ) 0 ( ( ( (0 ) ; 0 ))) 0 ( ( (0 ) ; 0 )) · ¡ (1 + ) 0 ( ( ( ( ) ;  ))) 0 ( ( ( ) ;  )) 
Because  (0 )   ( ) implies  (0 )   ( ), using (22) we get:
0 (1 +  (0 ) ¡  (0 ))  0 (1 +  ( ) ¡  ( )) 
Combining these two inequalities contradicts (23)  as desired.

Appendix C: Proof and …gure for Section 7
Proof of Proposition 4.

From Proposition 9 in the Online Appendix, we have that:  ¤

¤
is
2 decreasing
3in  for any   0; for   1  is decreasing in  if and only 2if  is larger
3 than


 1¡  5

1¡ 1¡

4



 1¡  5

1¡ 1¡

; for   1 ¤ is decreasing in  if and only if  is smaller than 4 

37



Figure 8: Shaded areas give the combinations of parameters such that debt and entitlements
co-move when con‡ict increases.

References
[1] Alesina, A., M. De Broeck, A. Prati, G. Tabellini, M. Obstfeld, and S. Rebelo (1992). “Default
Risk on Government Debt in OECD Countries, Economic Policy, 7(15), 427-463.

[2] Alesina, A. and R. Perotti (2000). “Budget De…cits and Budget Institutions,” in J. Poterba,
ed., Fiscal Institutions and Fiscal Performance, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

[3] Alesina, A. and G. Tabellini (1990) “A Positive Theory of Fiscal De…cits and Government
Debt.” Review of Economic Studies (1990) 57 (3): 403-414.

[4] Alston, LJ, GD Libecap, and B Mueller (2000) “Land reform policies, the sources of violent
con‡ict, and implications for deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon” Journal of environmental
economics and Management, Vol. 39, 2, 162-188

[5] Amador, M., I. Werning, and G.-M. Angeletos (2006): “Commitment Vs. Flexibility,” Econometrica, 74, 365–396.

[6] Arrow, K. and R. Lind (1970). Uncertainty and the Evaluation of Public Investment Decisions,
American Economic Review, 60, 364-78.

[7] Azzimonti, M., M. Battaglini, and S. Coate (2015). “The Costs and Bene…ts of Balanced
Budget Rules: Lessons from a Political Economy Model of Fiscal Policy.” Journal of Public
Economics, forthcoming.

[8] Azzimonti, M., E. de Francisco, and V. Quadrini (2014). "Financial Globalization, Inequality,
and the Rising Public Debt." American Economic Review, 104(8): 2267-2302.

38

[9] Battaglini, M. (2011), “The Political Economy of Public Debt,” Annual Review of Economics,
3, 161-189.

[10] Battaglini, M. and S. Coate (2008), “A dynamic theory of public spending, taxation, and
debt,” American Economic Review, Vol. 98, No. 1, 201-236.

[11] Benson, E. D., and Marks, B. R. (2016). Does the level of funding of city government pension
liabilities a¤ect tax-exempt bond insurance premiums and credit ratings?. Municipal Finance
Journal, 37(1).

[12] Boadway, R. and Wildasin, D. (1989) “A Median Voter Model of Social Security,” International Economic Review, Vol. 30, pp. 307-328.

[13] Bohn, H., and Inman, R. P. (1996, December). Balanced-budget rules and public de…cits:
evidence from the US states. In Carnegie-Rochester conference series on public policy (Vol.
45, pp. 13-76). North-Holland.

[14] Boyer, G., & Schmidle, T. (2009). Poverty among the Elderly in Late Victorian
England. The Economic History Review, 62(2), new series, 249-278. Retrieved from
http://www.jstor.org/stable/20542911

[15] Bowen, R., Y. Chen, and H. Eraslan (2014) “Mandatory Versus Discretionary Spending: the
Status Quo E¤ect,” American Economic Review, 104(10): 2941-2974

[16] Bowen, R., Y. Chen, H. Eraslan, and J. Zapal (2015) “E¢ciency of Flexible Budgetary
Institutions,” working paper.

[17] Browning, E. (1975), “Why the Social Insurance Budget is too Large in a Democracy;”
Economic Inquiry, Vol. 22, pp. 373-388.

[18] Brunnermeier, M., Eisenbach, T., & Sannikov, Y. (2013). Macroeconomics with Financial
Frictions: A Survey. In D. Acemoglu, M. Arellano, & E. Dekel (Eds.), Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Tenth World Congress (Econometric Society Monographs, pp.
3-94). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

[19] Caselli, F. G., and Wingender, M. P. (2018). Bunching at 3 percent: The Maastricht …scal
criterion and government de…cits. International Monetary Fund.

[20] Casey, B. H. (2014). From pension funds to piggy banks: (Perverse) consequences of the
Stability and Growth Pact since the crisis. International Social Security Review, 67(1), 27-48.

[21] Chaney, B. A., Copley, P. A., and Stone, M. S. (2002). The e¤ect of …scal stress and balanced
budget requirements on the funding and measurement of state pension obligations. Journal
of Accounting and Public Policy, 21(4-5), 287-313.

39

[22] Chassang, S. and G. Padro-i-Miquel (2010). “Savings and Predation.” Journal of the European
Economic Association, Papers and Proceedings, 8(2-3), 645-654.

[23] Chatterjee, S., D. Corbae, K. Dempsey, and J.-V. Ríos-Rull (2016). A Theory of Credit
Scoring and the Competitive Pricing of Default Risk, mimeo.

[24] Cocco, J., F. Gomes, and P. Maenhout (2005). “Consumption and Portfolio Choice over the
Life Cycle.” Review of Financial Studies, 18(2), 491–533.

[25] Conde-Ruiz, J. I. and V. Galasso (2005), “Positive Arithmetic of Social Security.” Journal of
Public Economics; vol. 89, pp. 933-955.

[26] Cuadra, G., J. M. Sanchez, and H. Sapriza (2010). “Fiscal policy and default risk in emerging
markets,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 13(2), 452-469.

[27] Cukierman, A. and A. Meltzer, (1989), “A Political Theory of Government Debt and De…cits
in a Neo-Ricardian Framework,” American Economic Review, Vol. 79, No. 4, Pages 713-732.

[28] Cutler, D. M., and Gruber, J. (1996). Does public insurance crowd out private insurance?.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2), 391-430.

[29] Cutler, David M., and Richard Johnson. "The birth and growth of the social insurance state:
Explaining old age and medical insurance across countries." Public Choice 120.1-2 (2004):
87-121

[30] Davis, S., F. Kubler, and P. Willen (2006). “Borrowing Costs and the Demand for Equity
over the Life Cycle.”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(2), 348-362.

[31] Evans, R., L. Kotliko¤, and K. Phillips (2012), “Game Over: Simulating Unsustainable Fiscal
Policy,” NBER working paper, 17917.

[32] Eyraud, Luc, Xavier Debrun, Andrew Hodge, Victor Lledó, and Catherine Pattillo (2018)
“Second-Generation Fiscal Rules: Balancing Simplicity, Flexibility, and Enforceability” IMF
Sta¤ discussion note.

[33] Galenianos, Manolis and Alessandro Gavazza (2019) “Regulatory Interventions in Consumer
Financial Markets: The Case of Credit Cards,” working paper.

[34] Gilbert, Bentley B. "The decay of nineteenth-century provident institutions and the coming
of old age pensions in Great Britain." The Economic History Review 17.3 (1965): 551-563.

[35] Golosov, M., A. Tsyvinski, and I. Werning (2006) “New Dynamic Public Finance: A User’s
Guide” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual Volume 21, edited by Acemoglu, D., K. Rogo¤ and
M. Woodford.

40

[36] Grunewald, A., J. Lanning , D. Low , and T. Salz (2019). “Auto Dealer Loan Intermediation:
Consumer Behavior and Competitive E¤ects,” mimeo.

[37] Guo, Xiaolin (2001) “Land Expropriation and Rural Con‡icts in China,” China Quarterly,
Vol. 166, June, 422-439.

[38] Halac, M. and Yared, P. (2014), Fiscal Rules and Discretion Under Persistent Shocks. Econometrica, 82: 1557–1614.

[39] Halac, M. and Yared, P. (2019), “Fiscal Rules and Discretion under Limited Enforcement.”
Working paper.

[40] Huo, Z. and V. Rios-Rull (2016). “Financial Frictions, Asset Prices, and the Great Recession.”
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Sta¤ Report, 526, .

[41] Jones, D. (1984). Did friendly societies matter? A study of friendly societies in glamorgan,
1794-1910. Welsh History Review = Cylchgrawn Hanes Cymru, 12, 324.

[42] Justiniano, A., G. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2017). “The Mortgage Rate Conundrum.”
NBER Working Paper, 23784.

[43] Kalandrakis, T. (2004), “A Three-Player Dynamic Majoritarian Bargaining Game,” Journal
of Economic Theory, 116: 294-322.

[44] Kaplan, Greg and Giovanni L. Violante (2014) “A Model of the Consumption Response to
Fiscal Stimulus Payments” Econometrica Volume 82, Issue 4 July, 1199-1239.

[45] Killian, Larita, EdD,C.G.F.M., C.P.A., Faulk, D., PhD., & Hicks, M. J., PhD. (2016). The
hidden costs of underfunded pensions. The Journal of Government Financial Management,
65(1), 20-24.

[46] Koehler, S., and König, T. (2015). Fiscal governance in the Eurozone: How e¤ectively does
the stability and growth pact limit governmental debt in the Euro countries?. Political Science
Research and Methods, 3(2), 329-351.

[47] Kotliko¤, L. and S. Burns (2004) The Coming Generational Storm MIT Press.
[48] Livshits, I., J. MacGee, M. Tertilt (2007). “Consumer Bankruptcy: A Fresh Start.” American
Economic Review, 97(1), 402-418.

[49] Lizzeri, A. (1999), “Budget De…cits and Redistributive Politics,” Review of Economic Studies,
Vol. 4, Pages 909-928.

[50] Macnicol, John. The politics of retirement in Britain, 1878-1948. Cambridge University Press,
2002.

41

[51] Martell, C. R., Kioko, S. N., and Moldogaziev, T. (2013). Impact of unfunded pension obligations on credit quality of state governments. Public Budgeting & Finance, 33(3), 24-54.

[52] Munnell, A. and L. Quinby (2012). “Legal Constraints on Changes in State and Local Pensions.” Center for Retirement Research at Boston College, State and Local Pension Plans
Number 25, August 2012.

[53] Ntsebeza, L. and R. Hall (2007). The land question in South Africa: the challenge of transformation and redistribution, Pretoria: Human Sciences Research Council.

[54] OECD (2018), “Taxation of households savings, OECD Tax Policy Studies, 25, OECD Publishing, Paris.

[55] Persson, T. and L. Svenson (1989), “Why a Stubborn Conservative Would Run a De…cit:
Policy with Time Inconsistent Preferences,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 104, No.
2, Pages 325-345.

[56] Piguillem, F. and A. Riboni (2018) “Fiscal Rules as Bargaining Chips,” Working Paper.
[57] Randall, M., and Rueben, K. (2017). Sustainable Budgeting in the States:

Ev-

idence on State Budget Institutions and Practices. Washington, DC: Urban Institute. https://www. urban. org/research/publication/sustainable-budgeting-states-evidencestatebudget-institutions-and-practices.

[58] Roehn, Oliver, (2010) New Evidence on the Private Saving O¤set and Ricardian Equivalence
(May 6, 2010). OECD Economics Department Working Paper No. 762.

[59] Schick, A. (2005). Sustainable budget policy. OECD Journal on Budgeting, 5(1), 107-126.
[60] Smith, D. L., and Hou, Y. (2013). Balanced budget requirements and state spending: A
long–panel study. Public Budgeting & Finance, 33(2), 1-18.

[61] Song, Z., K. Storesletten, and F. Zilibotti (2012), “Rotten Parents and Disciplined Children:
A Politico-Economic Theory of Public Expenditure and Debt,” Econometrica, 80(6), pp.
2785-2803.

[62] Stango, V.. and J. Zinman (2016). "Borrowing High versus Borrowing Higher: Price Dispersion and Shopping Behavior in the U.S. Credit Card Market," Review of Financial Studies,
vol. 29(4), pages 979-1006.

[63] Stantcheva, S. (2014) “Optimal Income Taxation with Adverse Selection in the Labour Market.” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 81, pp. 1296-1329.

[64] Stantcheva, S. (2016) “Optimal Taxation and Human Capital Policies over the Life Cycle.”
Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

42

[65] Steuerle, E. (2014) “Dead Men Ruling: How to Restore Fiscal Freedom and Rescue our
Future.” The Century Foundation Press.

[66] Tabellini, G. (1991), “The Politics of Intergenerational Redistribution,” Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 99, No. 2, Pages 335-357.

[67] Tabellini, G. and A. Alesina (1990), “Voting on the Budget De…cit,” American Economic
Review Vol. 80, No. 1, Pages 37-49.

[68] Tapp, S. (2010). Canadian Experiences with Fiscal Consolidations and Fiscal Rules. O¢ce of
the Parliamentary Budget O¢cer= Bureau du Directeur parlementaire du budget.

[69] Velasco, A. (1996), “A Model of Endogenous Fiscal De…cits and Delayed Fiscal Reform,”
NYU working paper.

[70] Von Hagen, J (1991) “A Note on the Empirical E¤ectiveness of Formal Fiscal Restraints.”
Journal of Public Economics, 44, pp. 99-110.

[71] Von Hagen, J. (1992) “Budgeting Procedures and Fiscal Performance in the European Communities.” Working paper.

[72] Wang, Q. (2017). Fiscal institutions and the funding of US state and local pension plans.
Public Money & Management, 37(7), 507-514.

43

