                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE COMPLEXITY OF LIQUIDITY:
                 THE EXTRAORDINARY CASE OF SOVEREIGN BONDS

                                     Jacob Boudoukh
                                      Jordan Brooks
                                    Matthew Richardson
                                        Zhikai Xu

                                     Working Paper 22576
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w22576


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2016




We thank seminar participants at NYU-Stern, AQR Asset Management, ICS of Hitotsubashi
University, State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE), Bank of Korea, Shanghai Institute
of Finance (SAIF), and Fudan University; and Yakov Amihud, Robin Greenwood, Antti Ilmanen,
Michael Katz, Lars Nielsen, Yao Hua Ooi, Lasse Pedersen, Thomas Philippon and Marti
Subrahmanyam for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Jacob Boudoukh, Jordan Brooks, Matthew Richardson, and Zhikai Xu. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Complexity of Liquidity: The Extraordinary Case of Sovereign Bonds
Jacob Boudoukh, Jordan Brooks, Matthew Richardson, and Zhikai Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 22576
August 2016
JEL No. F3,G1,G12,G15

                                          ABSTRACT

It is well-documented that government bonds with almost identical cash flows can trade at
different prices. The explanation is that due to higher liquidity the most recently issued bond
tends to trade at a premium to previously issued bonds. This paper analyzes the cross-section of
bond spreads across developed countries over a 17-year time period. Indeed, liquidity has
commonality across countries in the expected direction. However, the paper documents a novel
finding that questions the standard view of liquidity. Under certain conditions, especially related
to credit deterioration and flight to quality, new issue bond spreads tighten and can be negative.
In other words, the liquid bonds become cheaper, not more expensive, relative to their less liquid
counterparts. We offer an explanation based on price pressure and provide empirical support
using data on net flows of investors in sovereign bonds. Of some interest, we are able to reconcile
the differential behavior of bond spreads of the U.S. and Germany versus Belgium, Spain and
Italy during the Eurozone crisis period.

Jacob Boudoukh                                      Matthew Richardson
The Caesarea Center                                 Stern School of Business
Arison School of Business, IDC                      New York University
3 Kanfei Nesharim St                                44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190
Herzlia 46150                                       New York, NY 10012
ISRAEL                                              and NBER
jboudouk@idc.ac.il                                  mrichar0@stern.nyu.edu

Jordan Brooks                                       Zhikai Xu
AQR Capital Management                              Princeton University and
2 Greenwich Plaza                                   AQR Capital Management
Greenwich, CT                                       xuzhikai19@gmail.com
jordan.brooks@aqr.com
        I. Introduction
        It is now well documented that there are numerous violations of the law of one price for
financial assets, i.e., securities with almost identical cash flows can trade at different prices. There
is arguably no better illustration of this phenomenon than that of government bonds, in particular,
between the pricing of the most recently issued bond and a matched previously issued counterpart.1
The extant literature finds the yield spread between newly issued and previously issued bonds
(hereby denoted the NI-spread) to be meaningfully positive and time-varying. 2 The explanation
advanced in this literature for the existence of this spread is liquidity. Specifically, investors value
the ability to trade the newly issued bonds with immediacy, in relatively large quantities and at the
prevailing price (or with a relatively small price impact), and hence are willing to pay a premium
for these bonds.
        The level and variation of liquidity in the government bond market, however, can arise
through a variety of sources, including exogenous transaction costs, demand pressure and inventory
risk, and difficulty in locating trading counterparties (see for example the survey by Amihud,
Mendelson and Pedersen (2005)).3 One of the questions resulting from this literature is the extent
to which these sources are common across government bonds: is the NI-spread explained by
common liquidity shocks (“flight to liquidity”) (e.g., Longstaff (2004) and Goyenko,
Subrahmanyam and Ukhov (2011))? A related literature looks at sovereign government bonds of
various credit quality and decomposes the sovereign spread into a flight to liquidity and aggregate
economy shocks (“flight to quality”) (e.g., Beber, Brandt and Kavajecz (2009), Favero, Pagano and



1
   See, for example, Cornell and Shapiro (1990), Amihud and Mendelson (1991), Warga (1992), Boudoukh and
Whitelaw (1993), Kamara (1994), Elton and Green (1998), Jordan, Jorgensen, and Kuipers (2000), Krishnamurthy
(2002), Longstaff (2004), Goldreich, Hanke and Nath (2005), Pasquariello and Vega (2009), and Goyenko,
Subrahmanyam and Ukhov (2011). In the U.S., the spread between new and previous bond issues is often denoted the
on-the-run versus off-the-run spread.
2
  In the U.S., the spread between new and previous bond issues is often denoted the on-the-run versus off-the-run
spread. We choose the NI spread because this terminology is less common in international bond markets for reasons
described later.
3
  Some specific theories relevant to the liquidity of the government bond market include Amihud and Mendelson
(1986), Grossman and Miller (1988), Boudoukh and Whitelaw (1993), Duffie, Garleanu and Pedersen (2002),
Vayanos (2004), Vayanos and Weill (2008) and Pasquariello and Vega (2009), Favero, Pagano and Von Thadden
(2010), and Banerjee and Graveline (2013).


                                                          2
Von Thadden (2010), Bai, Julliard and Yuan (2012), Darbha and Dufour (2015), and Pelizzon,
Subrahmanyam, Tomio, and Uno (2015)).
       In this paper, we study the behavior of the spread between newly issued and previously
issued government bonds across a range of countries over an extensive time period, 1998 to 2015.
By construction, the spread reflects the relative pricing of government bonds that differ only by
issuance date and, importantly, not by credit risk. The behavior of the spread is at times startling
and provides a challenge to existing research on liquidity. For example, from 2009 to 2013, the NI-
spreads of Belgian, Italian and Spanish government bonds are consistently negative. In other
words, the price of the liquid newly issued bond falls below the less liquid previously issued bonds.
If, in fact, newly issued bonds are more liquid than previously issued bonds, then how can these
spreads turn negative? Of course, there exist many time periods when the spreads across countries
are positive and move together. Such cases documented in this paper include the default of Russian
debt and the so-called LTCM crisis in August of 1998 (i.e., the failure and then bailout of the large
fixed income hedge fund, Long Term Capital Management) and, to a lesser extent, the bankruptcy
of Lehman Brothers in September 2008.
       Our paper provides a framework for understanding these and other stylized facts. In
particular, there are two components to the pricing of liquidity, namely (i) the standard benefit
arising from lower trading and search costs, and (ii) an ambiguous cost-benefit arising in stressful
periods. Current thinking suggests (ii) is a benefit of liquidity as investors “fly” towards liquidity in
times of crisis. That is, the NI-spread should widen. However, we document that, in periods of a
flight to quality, investors will “fly” from, not to, the liquidity of weak sovereigns. Their NI-
spreads actually tighten. This is because, under extreme conditions, newly issued bonds are easier
to trade than previously issued bonds. Price pressure pushes the price of newly issued bonds more
than previously issued bonds.
       In equilibrium, investors realize that the newly issue bond of low quality countries could be
subject to price pressure episodes, leading to tighter NI-spreads on average in lower quality
countries. In other words, a flight episode is a time of high marginal utility. That is, because
illiquid bonds of low quality countries can outperform liquid bonds during these episodes, the NI-
spread is tighter for low quality countries. We document that this is indeed the case; the R2
increases from 42% to 71% when sovereign CDS spreads are added to a cross-sectional regression
of average NI-spreads on a common liquidity factor.

                                                      3
            While the NI-spread is on average smaller for low quality countries, it is a surprising result
that this spread turns negative during intense flight to quality periods. Once selling pressure pushes
down the price of the newly issued bond, market segmentation can explain why the previously
issued bond does not follow suit. The natural arbitrage here would be to buy the cheaper newly
issued bond and short the more expensive older bond, but this is difficult to implement due to
illiquid bonds being more difficult to short. Moreover, investors are reluctant to transact in older
government bonds on the short side because they may get stuck with the transaction (e.g.,
Graveline and McBrady (2011) and Banerjee and Graveline (2013)). Prices can therefore diverge
in segmented markets with heterogeneous investors (e.g., Boudoukh and Whitelaw (1993)).4
           To some extent, this argument should not be a surprise in the context of the current
literature. It is well documented both theoretically and empirically that price pressure can exist in
newly issued bonds. For example, the theory of preferred habitat in the U.S. government bond
market has been formally derived and resulting supply effects have been empirically confirmed in
specific circumstances (e.g., see Vayanos and Vila (2009) and Greenwood, Hanson and Liu (2016)
for a theoretical analysis and D’Amico and King (2013) and Greenwood and Vayanos (2013) for
empirical studies). Feldhutter (2012) develops a model in which the price of two identical bonds
can differ due to search costs and/or selling pressures associated with segmented small and large
traders.
           The main contribution of this paper is empirical. Using information about global credit risk
(“flight to liquidity”), sovereign credit risk (“flight to quality”), and sovereign government bond
flows (as a proxy for investor demand for specific maturities), we are able to infer price pressure
episodes and explain the remarkable behavior of the NI-spreads. We study a 17-year period
compared to previous studies which focus on much shorter time intervals for sovereign government
bonds. 5 The longer period provides much more power to detect liquidity and flight to quality
events, including the aforementioned LTCM crisis, the 9/11 terrorist attack, the financial crisis and
the Euro crisis, among other episodes. The paper presents novel findings for the relative pricing of
sovereign government bonds and may imply broader consequences for the pricing of liquidity.

4
  See also Harrison and Kreps (1978), Ofek and Richardson (2003), and Hong and Stein (2003). Alternatively,
Greenwood, Hanson and Liu (2016) describe a model in which markets are partially segmented, and, upon one market
being hit by a supply shock, the other market is impacted by the supply flows from one market to the other.
5
  For example, the sample epriods include 2002-2003 in Favero, Pagano and Von Thadden (2010), 2003-2004 in Beber,
Brandt and Kavajecz (2009), 2006-2012 in Bai, Julliard and Yuan (2012), 2004-210 in Darbha and Dufour (2015) and
2011-2012 in Pelizzon, Subrahmanyam, Tomio, and Uno (2015).

                                                         4
Because we are comparing the spread of likewise government bonds, credit risk is netted out. 6 The
NI-spreads therefore cannot reflect differential default rates, thus, helping isolate the liquidity
effect.
          First, not surprisingly, we document commonality in liquidity across countries. Correlations
across most sovereign bond spreads are positive, averaging 12%, with some correlations exceeding
50%. The first principal component captures 43.6% with similarly signed loadings across many
countries. These findings suggest a common factor, which we choose objectively as the median
country NI-spread. In a regression of NI-spreads on this common factor, we estimate R2s on the
order of 27% (and 38% with country fixed effects).
          Second, while there is evidence in support of the standard liquidity premium (i.e., more
recently issued bonds are on average more expensive than likewise bonds), there is a large portion
of NI-spread variation that this model cannot account for. Indeed, we document that, for some
countries, at the very time one might value liquidity (such as flight to quality as represented by net
outflows or deteriorating credit quality), the spreads actually tighten or go negative. Specifically, in
a pooled time-series regression of bond spreads on a country’s relative credit quality, we document
R2s on the order of 13% (and 20% with country fixed effects). In other words, liquid bonds become
cheaper (more expensive) relative to less liquid bonds when a country’s credit condition worsens
(improves). We argue and provide empirical evidence that this is due to price pressure more readily
showing up in the liquid bond.
          Third, we show that this alternative liquidity measure, which is better described as a flight
from liquidity, is not due to stale pricing, but rather seems related to selling pressure. We measure
this pressure in one of two ways, namely as flows into and out of the sovereign bonds, and as the
impulse response of shocks to NI-spreads. The results support the conclusion of temporary price
pressure.
          Finally, we provide a detailed analysis of various crisis events during the sample period.
These crises are estimated objectively and demonstrate two key findings: (1) as expected, crisis
events are liquidity events in that the R2s of the empirical liquidity models are much higher during

6
 Note that the NI-spread is usually calculated as the difference between the newly issued bond and the most recently
issued bond (e.g., Krishnamurthy (2002) and Pasquiarello and Vega (2009)). One of the problems with this calculation is
that the previously issued bond can have quite different coupon rates and be of a different maturity depending on the
issuance cycle. Here, we construct a new measure of the NI-spread by estimating the parallel shift in the entire off-the-
run zero curve necessary to price the previous bond. We show that this method has preferable qualities to typical NI-
spread calculations.

                                                              5
these periods, and (2) less expected, crisis events are quite different in nature with the
aforementioned two liquidity components having differential effects.
        The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we describe the data and, in particular,
focus on the methodology for comparing recently issued bonds to previously issued bonds. Section
III documents the main results of the paper, showing that sovereign liquidity spreads are driven by
two components. The first component is common across countries while the second component
goes against current thinking. In fact, the spreads tighten when the sovereign runs into trouble and
suffers a flight to quality. In Section IV, we provide an explanation provide supporting evidence
using a dataset of net flows of sovereign government bonds and time-series patterns of NI-spreads.
Section V concludes.


        II. Data Description
        Our primary data source for government bond prices is Data Scope Fixed-Income (DSFI)
from Thompson Reuters. We process a total of 3261 treasury bonds and 6005 treasury bills issued
by the ten largest issuers from developed countries: Belgium, Canada, France, Italy, Germany,
Japan, Netherlands, Spain, UK and US. The dataset starts in 1993 but actual start dates vary by
country. For European countries, DSFI does not contain complete price history for a large number
of bonds issued pre-euro. We use Bloomberg as our secondary data source when DSFI data is
unavailable or discontinuous.7
        The purpose of this paper is to study liquidity in sovereign bond markets by comparing the
most liquid issue to a closely related but less liquid issue. In previous studies, especially involving
U.S. Treasury markets, this was paramount to comparing the most recently issued to the second
most recently issued bond. International sovereign markets present an important institutional
challenge to the common procedure which needs to be addressed. In particular, unlike in the United
States, a number of countries do not continually issue new bonds, but rather, reissue existing ones.
In these cases we need to identify not only the issuance date of each bond, but also reissuance (also
known as re-openings) dates and quantities for each of the candidate bonds. Since most reissuances
are simply those of the existing most recently issued bond, the reissuance itself generally does not

7
 DSFI is the standard data source for marking books of portfolio managers, mutual fund administrators and custodians,
among others. Thompson Reuters sources the data from various primary sources such as the Bridge EJV database and
broker-dealers. In comparing the pricing of bonds using Thompson Reuters versus Bloomberg, weekly correlation of
bond price changes of newly issued and most recent previously issued bonds average 98.5% (with a low of 97.1% for
Japanese bonds).

                                                            6
alter our identifying of the most liquid newly issued bond. In instances where this is not the case,
i.e., the reissuance is not of the most recently issued bond, we have to take into consideration the
quantity that was issued. Intuitively, a small re-opening does not make a bond the most liquid one,
while a large one does. We define “large” to be a reissuance of 70% or more of the original amount
issued when the bond was first auctioned. The results largely are robust to this choice. We classify
a bond with remaining time-to-maturity between 8.5 and 11.5 years to be part of the 10 year bond
cohort. In order to determine the appropriate cohort, we consider the remaining time-to-maturity at
the last point in time that the bond was reissued as its tenor. For all ten government issuers, we are
able to identify the 10-year newly issued bond for the entire sample period.
         Table 1A documents properties of the issuance cycle for the 10-year newly issued bond.
The number of newly issued 10-year bonds range from a low of 19 for Canada to a high of 144 for
Japan. Related, the average issuance cycle is 363 days for Canadian bonds while just 45 days for
Japanese bonds. As a frame of reference, the U.S. has 81 newly issued 10-year bonds in our
sample, with an average issuance cycle of 104 days. As mentioned above, rather than issuing a new
bond, some countries simply reissue an existing bond. Table 1B documents the properties of the
reissuance cycle. For 9 of the 10 countries in our sample, a majority of a country’s bond reissuance
occurs within 6 months and 90% within 9 months of the original issue. As an illustration, consider
Italy. Italy issues 27% of the total issuance of a bond at initiation, then cumulative 39% up to 1
month after issuance, 61% up to 3 months, 88% up to 6 months and 93% up to 9 months. In
comparison, the U.S. issues 47% of the total issuance of a bond at initiation, 74% up to 1 month
after and 99% up to 3 months after. Table 1B confirms the assertion above that most reissuances
are simply those of the existing most recently issued bond. Moreover, Table 1B shows that, 6
months after a new issue, governments tend to issue a new bond, thus starting the cycle over. Table
1B shows that, other than the U.K., this characteristic holds across all sovereign bond issuance. 8
         The fact that in general newly issued bonds are more liquid than previously issued bonds is
documented in a number of papers, e.g., Fleming (2003), Pasquariello and Vega (2009) and
Govenko, Subrahmanyam and Ukhov (2011). In particular, as a measure of liquidity, the spread
between the most recently issued bond and previously issued bonds is related to differences in the
bid-ask spreads of these bonds. As expected, the newly issued bonds’ bid-ask spreads are tighter

8
  As shown later in the paper, there is differential behavior of NI spreads pre- and post-financial crisis. Table 1C
repeats the new issuance calculations for the period post-crisis, and shows that there are no significant differences to
the pre-crisis period.

                                                              7
than older counterpart bonds. While this finding is intuitive, it would be useful to document such
evidence for our sample of bonds. Unfortunately, bid-ask data only becomes available for our
cross-section of bonds late in the sample, on October 30, 2013. Nevertheless, Table 2 documents
results for this shorter sample.
        Most important, for 9 of the 10 countries, the average bid-ask spread of the two most recent
previously issued bonds is higher than that of the newly issued bond.9 Intuitively, the most recently
issued bond should be more liquid and this is confirmed by bid-ask data albeit over a shorter time
period. Moreover, for 7 of these countries, the difference is significant at 10% p-values and, for 5
countries, at 5% p-values. As additional evidence, Table 2 documents that the newly issued bond
also has a lower bid-ask spread the majority of the time for 9 of the 10 countries, ranging from 59%
to 86% of the time. It should be noted that there are periods when the bid-ask spreads are the same.
Independent of the above point on the relative liquidity between newly issued and previously
bonds, the absolute level of the spreads are quite small. For example, for the United States 10-year
bond market, the quoted spreads are 0.23 basis points for the new issues versus 0.28 basis points
for the recent previous issues.


                 a. The New Issue Spread
        The goal of this paper is to analyze the spread between likewise sovereign government
bonds that differ only by their liquidity. As described in the introduction, there is a considerable
literature focusing primarily on the United States Treasury bond market that compares the yields of
the newly issued versus the next most recently issued comparable bond. As Table 1 shows, other
than Japan, the issuance cycle is considerably longer for other country’s 10-year bonds. This
lengthy cycle makes the comparison problematic. The reason is that if the term structure of interest
rates is not flat, then the difference in maturity may be significant enough to obscure the liquidity
premium inherent in the yield spread between the newly issued and the most recent previously
issued bond. Table 3A documents the properties of the yield spread country by country.
        To the above point, for all the countries, except the U.S., the average yield spread is
actually negative. If the term structure is upward sloping over this period, and there is a sufficient
gap in the issuance cycle, then there will be a bias towards a negative spread. In order to

9
  For this time period (i.e., post October 2013), the exception is Germany. For the majority of this period, the latest
previous issue to the newly issued 10-year bond was the cheapest-to-deliver bond in the corresponding futures contract,
thus, adding to its liquidity.

                                                             8
understand how important the bias is, note that the yield difference between the newly issued bond
and most recent previous issue is a combination of local slope of the yield curve and the liquidity
premium of the new issue (or illiquidity discount of the older issue). We use the curve based on
prices of previous issues to price the newly issued bond and compute its hypothetical yield if it
were priced by the curve in line with previous issues. We construct the local slope measure as the
most recent previous yield minus the hypothetical new issue yield. Liquidity aside, this slope
measure captures the impact of time-to-maturity differences between the newly issued and
previously issued bond.
         Table 3B reports regressions of the previous issue minus new issue yield spread on this
local measure of the term structure slope, as well as estimates of duration and convexity. The
coefficient on the term structure slope is 0.85 and explains an astonishing 59% of the variation of
the yield spread. Country fixed effects add just a fraction to the explained variation. Table 3B
shows that the yield spread is related to the difference of duration and convexity. However,
conditional on local slope, the relationship drops substantially. This reassures the thesis that a large
part of the yield spread is explained by the slope of the term structure and cash-flow differences
between the two bonds.
         The results of Table 3 suggest that, outside of the United States, any analysis of the spread
between new issues and the most recent previous issue will be difficult in light of the importance of
the coupon and maturity mismatch. This is a well-known issue in trying to match bonds of different
liquidity. (See Fleming (2002), Longstaff (2004) and Schwartz (2010).) For example, Longstaff
(2004) compares Refcorp and Treasury bonds in the U.S. as a way to isolate liquidity because
neither bond issues have credit risk. To adjust for the maturity mismatch, he creates constant
maturity yields based on constructed zero curves from Refcorp and Treasury bonds across
available maturities. The yield spread thus is relatively insensitive to term structure characteristics.
We follow a similar strategy here.
         In particular, we pool together all the applicable previously issued bonds of a given country.
We then bootstrap a zero curve using only these bonds.10 We compute a hypothetical price for each

10
   First, we group the bonds into different tenors (2, 3, 5, 7, 10, 15, 20, 30) by their time-to-maturity as of their most
recent issuance. We remove the newly issued bond for each tenor as well as the aged ones (e.g., a 7 year bond having a
time to maturity shorter than any of the 5 year bonds). Then we apply a standard bootstrapping procedure for all the on-
the-run T-bills and the selected bonds with linear forward rate interpolation to obtain zero curves. By construction, the
spread of the newly issued bond and a likewise hypothetical bond from this zero curve will generally be nonzero since
the newly issued bonds are not included in the bootstrapping procedure.

                                                               9
of the newly issued bonds assuming these bonds are priced by the same zero curve, discount
factors. The spread between the hypothetical bond (based on the previous issue curve) and the
newly issued bond, denote NI-spread, is defined as the shift in the zero curve that would price the
                                                                   𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 ℎ𝑦𝑝 −𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙
bonds equally. Mathematically, NI-spread = 𝑦 ℎ𝑦𝑝 − 𝑦 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙 =                                . We use the
                                                                    𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 ℎ𝑦𝑝 ⋅𝑑𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛

Fisher-Weil duration to capture the price sensitivity to the parallel shift of the yield curve (e.g.,
Fisher and Weil (1971)). Intuitively, the NI-spread has the interpretation of the number of basis
points the yield curve has to shift down so that the newly issued bond can be priced by the curve. A
positive spread represents the premium newly issued bonds are priced at relative to a duplicate
bond constructed from the term structure of older bonds.
         Table 4 documents the properties of the NI-spread of the 10-year bond country by country.
In contrast to the results of Table 3A, Table 4A documents that the spread is on average positive
for all countries except Japan. The positive spread is consistent with a premium for holding
previous bond issues compared to newly issued bonds. The range of average spreads varies from a
low of -0.4 basis points for Japan to a high of 4.8 basis points for the U.S. It is worth commenting
on two other features of the NI-spread. The first is that the NI-spread has considerable variation
over the time period, with volatilities on the order of several basis points, and extremes ranging
from both negative to positive spreads. The second is that the NI-spreads are persistent, dying out
slowly over a number of months. For example, on average, the autocorrelations at 1-week, 1-mth,
3-mth, and 6-mths are respectively 0.88, 0.68, 0.47 and 0.35.
         Table 4B reports an analogous analysis to that of Table 3B by regressing the NI-spreads on
our local measure of the term structure slope, as well as estimates of duration and convexity. The
coefficient on the term structure slope is now -0.14 and, net of country fixed effects, explains only
3% of the variation of the NI-spread. Country fixed effects now add approximately 13% to the
variation, suggesting that there are built-in-differences of the liquidity premium across countries.
Duration and convexity measures alone do not add much to the explained variation of NI-spreads
though the duration measure comes in significant, especially with fixed effects. In contrast to the
results of Table 3B, our conclusion is that the NI-spread is not explained by the slope of the term
structure which is to be expected given the NI-spread, by construction, matches maturity and cash
flows.




                                                    10
       As a comparison between the NI-spread and the more standard previous issue minus new
issue spread, Figures 1 graphs the two spreads over the time period for all ten countries. The slope
between the 10-year and 2-year bonds is also provided for each country. The slope is labelled on
the right-hand side of the figure whereas the spreads are labeled on the left-hand side. For
visualization purposes, note that the term structure is presented as the opposite of the usual slope,
i.e., 2-year minus 10-year. Consider the United States, Germany and Italy. It is quite apparent that,
especially for the U.S. and Germany, the difference between the two bond spreads widens when the
term structure slope steepens. While this result visually confirms the regressions of Table 3B and
Table 4B, an additional observation from Figure 1 is that the spread measures track each other
quite closely when the term structure is flat. This result is comforting to the extent it suggests the
two measures are capturing a common effect, namely liquidity. With respect to Italy (and, for that
matter, Belgium and Spain), note that there is a considerable period from 2009 to 2013 in which
both spread measures are negative. This period coincides with the Euro crisis and, in particular, the
sovereign debt crisis of the Eurozone periphery, including Italy and Spain (and to a lesser extent
Belgium). Of course, the spreads, by construction, have no exposure per se to credit risk, so the
credit difficulties of Italy, Spain and Belgium must be proxying for other relevant market
conditions.


       III. Empirical Results: The Liquidity Across Sovereign 10-Year Bonds


       While the NI-spread on average captures the positive spread between previously issued and
newly issued bonds, a perusal of the NI-spread, however, shows that the spread is sometimes
negative, and varies both through time and cross-sectionally. Other than measurement error, what
can explain such behavior of the NI-spread?
       As a first pass at the NI-spread data, Table 5A documents the unconditional variance-
covariance matrix of the NI-spreads between the 10 countries in our sample. Some striking
characteristics are apparent. First, as expected, the correlations are on average positive in the cross-
section, namely 0.12. Nevertheless, if there is a common global liquidity factor, it is either small or
offset by other factors. For example, across the 45 correlations, the range goes from a low of -0.25
(between Italy and Germany.) to a high of 0.53 (between the U.K. and U.S., and Belgium and
Italy). Second, to the extent there are economically significant correlations, these correlations

                                                     11
suggest an interesting pattern. For example, the Germany NI-spread tends to be negatively
correlated with other countries in Europe (such as Belgium, Spain, France and Italy), yet mildly
positive with the Americas (such as Canada and the U.S.). At first glance, this seems surprising as
one might expect that Europe would be subject to a more common liquidity factor. Indeed, the NI-
spreads of Belgium, Spain, France and Italy are all positively correlated.
        As further evidence, Table 5B provides the first three principal components of these ten
developed countries. The first principal component captures almost 44% of the total variation of
NI-spreads. To the above point, the first component loads in a similar sign across most of the
countries with a heavier weight on Belgium, Spain and Italy. The key driver of NI-spreads appears
to be a mix of a common factor with added weight on the weaker sovereigns. As we explain below,
this effect can be explained in the context of a simple empirical model which highlights a perverse
cost to holding the liquid bond in periods of stress.


                a. Does “Flight to Quality” Lead to “Flight from Liquidity”?
        Below, we present an empirical model for why the above surprising correlation pattern
exists. As a preview, in this subsection, we explain the variation of NI-spreads in terms of a “flight
to liquidity” factor plus “flight to quality” in the form of credit quality differences across countries.
Note that by construction NI-spreads do not have any credit risk embedded in them as the spread
represents the difference of government bonds within a country, that is, bonds with the exact same
credit quality (albeit of different liquidity). Thus, any explanatory power of credit quality for NI-
spread pricing must be due to credit quality across countries proxying for some other characteristic
of sovereign bond markets. The novel finding is that a “flight to quality” can represent a “flight
from liquidity” in those countries experiencing credit risk and suffering outflows of relevant
investors. In other words, in times of crisis, rather than increase, NI-spreads actually decrease and
can turn negative in high credit risk countries as investors put pressure on the most saleable assets,
namely the newly issued benchmark bonds.
        The standard equilibrium argument for the existence of a liquidity premium is that investors
value the ability to transact large amounts of a financial assets quickly at little or no cost. In times
of financial stress, when there is a common shock to liquidity and it dries up, there is a large
differential in this ability for liquid and illiquid financial assets. Given that there is a probability of



                                                        12
financial stress over the life of these financial assets, markets levy a significant premium for
holding the liquid asset.
           This paper suggests the equilibrium is more complicated. In time of financial stress, there
may also exist a flight to quality, namely a desired shift from one set of financial assets to another.
In our example, the shift is from low credit sovereign bonds to high credit sovereign bonds.
Investors use liquid bond issues to sell out of the low quality sovereigns precisely because they can
transact larger amounts quickly, leading to price pressure on these bonds. Investors recognize the
underperformance of liquid bonds in low quality countries and, consistent with a risk-based story,
trade them at a relative discount.
           In order to capture these two differential effects, we need to construct two observable
variables that simultaneously capture the “flight to liquidity” and “flight to quality”. With respect
to “flight to liquidity”, we follow a standard procedure. We model a common component to
liquidity, Ft , by taking the median NI-spreads, Ft  medianNI it i  . In theory, if there does exist
a common component, then the cross-sectional median will uncover it if the sensitivity is similar
across countries.11
           Note that a typical measure of the quality of the sovereign is its credit default swap (CDS)
spread and we use the CDS spread as a measure of “flight to quality”. We argue that credit quality
has pricing implications for the sovereign bond’s liquidity, independent of credit risk. The basic
idea is that marginal investors fly to and away from an asset depending on its quality. We choose
             N
                       
 CDS it  N1  CDS it  as a measure of the relative credit quality across the N countries. In other
             i        
words, our measure of “quality” proxies for the idiosyncratic portion of a sovereign’s credit,
namely the difference between a given sovereign’s CDS premium and the average cross-sectional
premium across the countries. Note that this explanatory variable, the relative CDS spread of the
sovereign (against a cross-sectional average), is the same one as that used by Beber, Brandt and
Kavajecz (2008). In contrast to our use of this variable, however, they use it as their measure of
credit risk of the sovereign bond. Specifically, in conjunction with various liquidity measures, they
attempt to decompose the spread between sovereign bonds and euro swaps into a credit and

11
     Note that the median spread is still subject to the well-known bias in deriving factors from the dependent variable.
That is, even if there is no systematic component to    NI it , some relationship will still exist due to NI it impacting the
median across N different NI it . If N is large enough, however, the sensitivity of each NI it to the factor Ft will be small.

                                                               13
liquidity component. Their sample is short, covering just April 2003-December 2004.
Nevertheless, they find strong evidence that the majority of sovereign yield spreads is driven by
credit quality though liquidity also matters in times of increased market risk, especially in low
credit risk countries.
        With respect to “flight to quality”, standard thinking is that it is closely linked to “flight to
liquidity”. In particular, it is argued that there is a preference for liquidity in times of stress. This
leads to liquidity premia increasing during these “flight to quality” periods (e.g., Vayanos (2004)).
There is growing empirical support for the existence of this link in a variety of markets, including
the U.S. Treasury bond market (Goyenko, Subrahmanyam and Ukhov (2011), across credit-free
markets in the U.S. (Longstaff (2004)), and the Euro-are government bond markets (Beber, Brandt,
and Kavajecz (2009)). For example, as mentioned above, Beber, Brandt, and Kavajecz (2009)
document that even though spreads of sovereign bonds against the Euro-swap benchmark are
primarily driven by credit quality of the sovereign, liquidity plays an important pricing role during
times of high uncertainty. Darbha and Dufour (2015) and Pelizzon, Subrahmanyam, Tomio and
Uno (2015) also document a relationship between credit quality and liquidity. In contrast, Favero,
Pagano and Von Thadden (2010) argue, and present evidence, that a “flight to quality” does not
necessarily lead to a “flight to liquidity”. Rather, they argue that an aggregate risk factor drives
sovereign yield spreads which, if not accounted for, can mistakenly link “quality” to “liquidity”.
        In this paper, we provide an alternative explanation by linking “quality” and “liquidity” to
the relative pricing of government bonds. Specifically, consider the following regression model:
                                                                N
                                                                              
                         NI it     i Ft    CDS it 
                                                
                                                             1
                                                             N    CDS
                                                                 i 1
                                                                         it      it
                                                                              
                                                                                         (1)

Regression equation (1) allows us to ask how much of the variation of the NI-spread both through
time and across countries can be explained by the countries’ relative credit quality and a common
factor. The coefficient on the liquidity factor is allowed to vary across countries, while the
coefficient on the quality factor does not vary, albeit the quality factor itself varies across countries
and time. The regression methodology is a pooled, time-series analysis of 10 countries’ 10-year NI-
spread over the period 1998 to 2015.
        The data on CDS for each country comes into the sample at different times. For example,
the first countries, Italy and Belgium, come in January 31, 2001 while the last countries, U.S. and
U.K., enter on December 1, 2003 and March 20, 2006, respectively. In order to take advantage of

                                                                 14
the entire sample, including the LTCM crisis in the summer and fall of 2008, we backfill the CDS
by using a CDS-implied level based on country ratings. Specifically, we regress CDS on ratings
during the period of available CDS data; we then take the coefficient from the regression and the
ratings during the prior period to estimate an implied CDS level; and, finally, to keep the CDS data
continuous, we shift the implied CDS level to the true CDS level when it enters the sample. The
results are reported for both the entire and the CDS-specific samples.
       Table 6 provides results for regression equation (1). In particular, the column labelled 1 and
2 of Table 6 document the results of the regression just using the common factor. The R2 is 27.0%
and the coefficients on the factor are significant and positive (with Japan being the exception).
Interestingly, the most sensitive NI-spread to the common factor is that of the U.S., namely 1.91. In
other words, the spread between newly issued and previously issued bonds is greatest for the U.S.
This finding is consistent with the “safe haven” nature of the United States and previous research
on the on-the-run versus off-the-run spreads of U.S. Treasuries. That said, when country fixed
effects are included in the regression, the coefficients on the U.S. and most other countries (Italy
being the exception) shrink towards one. In the U.S. case, its mean NI-spread is higher than any of
the other 9 countries.
       Columns 3-6 of Table 6 document the regression equation (1) just using the quality
                       N
                                 
variable,  CDS it  N1  CDS it  . Without country fixed effects (column 3), the R2 is 13% and the
                       i        
coefficient on CDS quality is negative and statistically significant. Indeed, the sign of the
coefficient       suggests   that   if   a   country’s   credit   quality is   relatively   low,   that   is,
              N
(CDSit  N1  CDSit )  0 , then its NI-spread will be lower. The coefficient, -0.03, implies that for
              i

every 100 basis points of additional CDS premium the NI-spread will fall by 3 basis points, or, in
return space, approximately 20 basis points for 10-year bonds. A nice finding from Table 6,
however, is that the intercept is positive, implying a positive average NI-spread.
       Columns 4-6 of Table 6 imply two additional points. First, with fixed effects, the R2 jumps
to 20%. The large increase is not surprising given the coefficient on a country’s credit quality does
not vary across countries. The variation in country betas on the common factor suggest some cross-
sectional adjustments are needed. Second, columns 5 and 6 extend the sample back to 1998 using
the aforementioned implied CDS measure. The coefficient on flight to quality remains at 0.03, but

                                                          15
the R2 drops from 13% to 8% for the longer sample without fixed effects and 20% to 16% with
fixed effects. The drop is most likely related to the noise associated with the use of ratings-based
implied CDS rates and the fact that the later sample includes more examples of flight to quality and
thus more variation of the explanatory variable.
       Columns 7 and 8 show the results from regression (1) over the full sample with both the
common liquidity factor and the flight to quality factor included. Some observations are in order.
First, without fixed effects, the R2 is an impressive 35%. In other words, a common liquidity factor
and a flight to quality factor can explain a substantial proportion of the cross-section and time-
series of the NI-spreads across countries. Second, in terms of the coefficients and statistical
significance, both maintain their magnitudes and t-statistics when both factors are included. For
example, the t-statistics on the flight to quality factor increase from -3.90 (column 5) to -4.00
(column 7), while the average absolute value of the t-statistic on the common factor increases from
5.32 (column 1) to 5.64 (column 7). Third, that regression equation (1) can fully explain the cross-
section seems a tall order. Credit quality aside, there might be specific characteristics of the
liquidity of each country’s bond market that is not common across countries. Column 8 of Table 6
presents regression equation (1) with country fixed effects. While there is no change in the
coefficient on credit quality or the common liquidity factor, the R2 does increase to 41%,
confirming important differences across countries. Finally, not shown in Table 6, the residual
correlations from regression (1) are much lower than those presented in Table 5. As an illustration,
the first principal component of the regression residuals of the NI-spreads explain 24.3% of the
variance compared to 43.6% for the raw NI-spreads.
       An alternative approach to the pooled time-series analysis provided in Table 6 is to look at
the cross-section of average NI-spreads. Figure 2 plots the average NI-spread for the ten developed
countries against (i) the factor loading of the NI-spreads on Ft from Table 6, scaled by the average

                                                                                        N
                                                                                                  
of the common liquidity factor, and (ii) this variable plus the average of  CDS it  N1  CDS it  for
                                                                                        i        
each country, scaled by the pooled regression coefficient from Table 6. There is a clear positive
relationship between the average NI-spreads and the common liquidity premium, with an R2 of
42%. There are a few outliers, such as Italy which has a high common liquidity factor loading yet
low average spread. However, when the average NI-spreads is graphed against both the common
liquidity premium and “flight to quality” premium, the R2 jumps to 71%. All the countries’

                                                    16
premiums correspond closely to their NI-spreads. This is consistent with the aforementioned
equilibrium interpretation, namely liquid bonds on average trade at a relative discount to illiquid
bonds for low quality versus high quality countries because of the risk of price pressure in times of
distress.
        Intuitively, the results of Table 6 and Figure 2 suggest that liquidity can be a curse in that,
during times of crisis, “flight to quality” can lead to a “flight from liquidity”. The liquidity of the
newly issued bond is not just about the premium investors pay for the ability to transact, but also
about receiving compensation for suffering price pressure episodes when the investor most wishes
to sell the bond. Ironically, illiquid bonds do not reflect this pressure because investors are
reluctant to transact, especially on the short side, because of getting stuck in the trade. This tradeoff
between standard notions of liquidity and flight to quality impact the pricing of bonds at all times.
This is because rational pricing is based on expectations of future liquidity events and flights to
quality. That said, it is reasonable to presume that these expectations are highest during crisis-like
periods. In the next section, we explore regression equation (1) during various crises.


               b. Flight to Liquidity, Flight to Quality and Crises


        As a first pass at comparing the pricing of NI-spreads in different crisis periods, we break
the sample into pre- and post-2008 financial crisis. Table 7A and 7B report the results from
regression equation (1) for both periods respectively. Consider first the pre 2008 period provided in
Table 7A. As seen from columns 1 and 2, the common liquidity factor explains 27% (and 38%
with fixed effects) of the variability on its own; has a positive loading on all countries except
Japan; and these loadings are all statistically significant. These results coincide with our standard
notion of liquidity. In contrast, the flight to quality factor is still negative and statistically
significant, albeit with a lower R2 of 13% (20% with fixed country effect) documented in columns
3-6. Compared to the full sample, the coefficient is more negative, most likely due to the much
lower variability of CDS spreads during the pre-2008 period. Perhaps most interesting, when
combining the two factors together, there is not a large jump in the R2. This suggests that the
positive coefficient on common liquidity and the negative coefficient on flight to quality are
capturing similar phenomenon with NI-spreads.



                                                      17
       The results post 2008 provide a useful comparison. First, and foremost, the common factor
plays a much smaller role in term of explanatory power with R2s of just 5% (29% with fixed
effects). The coefficients on the common factor are still all positive except only 5 of them have t-
statistics significant at conventional levels. Second, the flight to quality factor on its own has a
negative coefficient which is statistically significant. The R2 is 14% (25% with fixed effects). This
is important given that the regression uses just one loading on one variable to try and explain the
cross-sections and time-series patterns of NI-spreads during an exceptional sub period. Comparing
the two samples, the flight to quality factor is quite consistent in terms of the coefficient sign,
statistical significance and R2. Finally, in contrast to the early sample, the full regression equation
(1) provided in columns 7 and 8 show that the common factor and flight to quality factor are
picking up additional phenomena during the financial crisis period. Most telling, the individual R2s
of 5% and 14% (in columns 1 and 3) jump to a combined R2 of 23% (in column 7). The fact that
the combined R2 exceeds the sum of the individual R2s of 19% suggests that the common liquidity
factor may be negatively correlated with flight to quality in the pooled time-series.
       The contrasting behavior of the co-relation between common liquidity and flight to quality
in the two samples implies that not all liquidity crises are the same. In order to dig a little deeper,
we break the sample period from 1998 onwards into crisis and non-crisis periods. In order to be
objective in terms of defining a crisis period, we first take the St. Louis Fed Financial Stress Index
as a starting point (Klieseen and Smith (2010)). In brief, the index is based on the first principal
component of 18 weekly data series which have all been standardized, covering 7 interest rate
series, 6 yield spreads and 5 other indicators (such as volatility and equity series). The primary
assumption is that the main common factor across the 18 series is financial stress. In order to
convert this index into crisis periods, we create a rolling 1-year standard deviation of weekly
changes in the index and define a crisis as any period outside of 3 standard deviations from the
norm. Figure 3 plots the crisis periods over the full sample. For our purposes, the crisis periods
map well to intuition, with the LTCM and Asian contagion crisis, the DotCom and 9/11 terrorist
attack, the initial pre-financial crisis period including the summer of 2007, the financial crisis
starting with Lehman’s bankruptcy, and the Euro crisis in 20011-2012 (albeit perhaps shorter than
expected), all being captured by the methodology.
       Table 8A runs regression (1) during crisis periods only. A little over one-third of the
sample is defined by a crisis. The results are consistent with the full sample regression of Table 6

                                                     18
albeit somewhat stronger. For example, the coefficients on the common factor are strongly positive
and negative on the flight to quality. Moreover, without fixed effects, the R2s on the common factor
and flight to quality respectively are 31% and 20%, and 42% for the combined regression. In terms
of the pricing of NI-spreads, we argued earlier that these two factors rationally drive the NI-spreads
in all periods because of the likelihood that a liquidity or flight to quality episode could occur at
any. That said, it is comforting that, during periods when these episodes are more likely such as the
crises defined in Figure 3, the NI-spread regressions are more dramatic.
        The pre- and post-crisis regressions, however, of Table 7 implied that not all crises are the
same. It is quite possible that one crisis may be driven more by a shock to the common liquidity
factor and another by a shock to credit quality of various countries. To investigate this in more
detail, Tables 8b and 8c break the crisis periods into pre-2007 crises (including that of LTCM)
versus post 2007 crises. We choose the LTCM period because it is generally considered a period
that did not involve large moves in the credit quality of developed countries. Before discussing the
results, note that for the LTCM sample, we rely solely on the implied CDS spread based on ratings.
The LTCM crisis is very much captured by a common liquidity factor with positive coefficients
across countries (except Japan) and a high R-squared of 54% (60% with fixed effects). The flight
to quality factor, however, also explains variability of the NI-spreads. The R2 is a reasonable 12%
with a significant statistically negative coefficient though it should be stated that the factor drops
out once fixed effects are included. The combined regression, however, is dominated by the
common liquidity factor, confirming the standard intuition that the LTCM crisis was a common
liquidity shock. The cross-sectional and time series behavior of NI-spreads is consistent with this
intuition.
        More novel are the findings for all the other crisis periods (with LTCM excluded). Without
fixed effects, the common liquidity factor explains very little of the variation with an R2 of just 1%.
Only 2 of the 10 loadings are statistically significant albeit 7 of the 10 are still positive. With fixed
effects the R2 jumps to 38% with 4-5 of the 10 coefficients borderline significant. This finding
suggests that these other crises were primarily cross-sectional in nature. The flight to quality factor
confirms this result with an R2 of 20% (38% with fixed effects) and a statistically significant
negative coefficient on the factor. In other words, these other crises were primarily driven by cross-
sectional variation in NI-spreads due to differing credit quality; that is, the NI-spreads did not move
together during these crises but apart depending on their countries’ relative credit quality. When

                                                      19
the common liquidity factor and flight to quality are combined, the increase in R2 is incremental,
i.e., from 1% and 20% respectively to a combined 23% suggesting again a role for both factors.




       IV.     Understanding Flight to Quality
       Section 3 lays out evidence in support of two pricing factors for NI-spreads across countries
and through time. The first is a common liquidity factor, and the second is a country specific flight
to quality factor. There are two main takeaways.
       First, there is a premium for liquidity, since investors value the ability to transact quickly in
significant amounts with little or no transaction cost. This premium may differ across countries
because some countries offer a more liquid market for their newly issued versus older bonds. This
premium is generally positive and is represented by the fixed effects in Tables 6-8. During times of
crisis, there may be liquidity shocks which make newly issued bonds substantially more liquid than
older bonds. This generally increases the NI-spread across all countries. The sensitivity to this
liquidity shock may vary depending on a particular country’s characteristics. Tables 6-8 generally
support this factor by showing (a) positive coefficients on the common factor, (b) variation in the
coefficients across countries, and (c) large R2s.
       Second, and most notably, during times of crisis, there may also be credit quality shocks
resulting in some countries’ bond markets becoming distressed relative to other countries. The
results in this paper are novel because we show that there is an impact on NI-spreads even though
the bonds have the same default risk. The results documented in Tables 6-8 show that NI-spreads
tighten for low quality countries and widen for high quality ones. In other words, the liquidity
premium actually decreases the lower the credit quality of the country is. This extraordinary result
begs the question – what is the possible explanation?
       Our argument for this latter finding is that, during these crisis periods, investors transact in
the most liquid securities available and try and shift their holdings to high quality assets, i.e., flight
to quality. Price pressure then pushes down (up) the price of the most liquid securities in low (high)
credit quality countries. This theory leads to several additional implications that deserve scrutiny. If
price pressure can explain the NI-spread, then we should expect to see that, (i) in times of capital
flows from “marginal” investors, the flight to quality factor should be responsive to these flows,



                                                      20
and (ii) during price pressure episodes, shocks to the NI-spread should be temporary and driven by
newly issued, rather than previously issued bonds.
        Alternatively, the behavior of the NI-spreads could in theory be explained by stale pricing
of the older bonds. When credit quality of a country deteriorates and investors move out of the
country’s government bonds, the NI-spread can turn negative if the prices of the newly issued
bonds fall and, due to staleness, there is no corresponding move in the previously issued bonds. We
first address this issue.
        On the surface, there are tworeasons why staleness is unlikely to be a plausible explanation
for the behavior of NI-spreads. First, the NI-spreads and country credit quality are persistent over
several months. For example, other than Japan, the autocorrelation of NI-spreads range from 0.83
to 0.93 at 1 week, 0.67 to 0.87 at 1 month, and 0.32 to 0.72 quarterly. Idiosyncratic CDS spreads
persist even more, ranging from 0.96 to 0.99 at 1 week, 0.88 to 0.97 at 1 month, and 0.72 to 0.93
quarterly. In contrast, staleness would induce mean-reversion over relatively short horizons.
        Second, staleness in the older bond prices should show up as a lead-lag relation between the
older and newly issued bonds but not vice versa. Table 9 documents the weekly autocorrelation and
cross-autocorrelations changes in the yields of the newly issued and its hypothetical older
counterpart. There is no evidence of staleness of the older bond relative to newly issued series. The
cross-autocorrelation between lagged new bond yield changes and old bond yield changes are
actually negative (albeit small) for 9 out of the 10 countries, the opposite implication of staleness.
There is some slight evidence of negative autocorrelation of yield changes for both newly issued
and older bonds. While such a negative autocorrelation is consistent with stale pricing under a
random walk model, it is also consistent with mean-reversion under temporary price pressure (and
no stale pricing). Moreover, while the autocorrelations are quite similar for both the new and old
bonds, the new bond has a more negative autocorrelation in 4 of 9 cases, equal in 3 cases and less
negative in only one case. If anything, this finding suggests that the time-series properties of the
NI-spread are more likely driven by the newly issued bond.
        To investigate the mean reversion properties of NI-spreads more closely, we run a threshold
autoregressive model (e.g., Tong and Lim (1980)) for the NI-spread in a pooled time-series with
two thresholds and three ranges – a low (i.e., <0 basis points), middle (i.e. between 0 and 5 basis




                                                     21
points), and high (i.e., greater than 5 basis points) range of NI-spreads. 12 If temporary price
pressure is important for explaining NI-spreads, then it should be the case that shocks to the NI-
spread mean-revert in flight to quality episodes. Figure 4 presents the impulse response functions
for the three thresholds. Of particular interest, shocks to NI-spreads in the low and high range of
NI-spreads, that is, when credit quality is low and high respectively, are temporary and take around
16 weeks to completely disappear. Moreover, a significant portion of the shock has dissipated by
the sixth week. In contrast, shocks in the middle range are white noise with no staying power.
Figure 4 is broadly consistent with the notion that, during extreme periods of NI-spreads, there are
price pressure episodes in which it takes a while for NI-spreads to revert to “normal” levels.
          Note that for NI-spreads to behave contrary to the standard liquidity theory require
temporary price pressure of the newly issued bond. The existence of this pressure requires (i) limits
to arbitrage, and (ii) buying or selling pressure. With respect to the former, we argued in Section III
that shorting difficulties for older bonds imply some limits to arbitrage. With respect to the latter, if
bonds are in fixed supply, it is well-known that it is not straightforward to determine the trading
direction (i.e., “pressure”) underlying the transaction. In this subsection, we measure net trading
flows using State Street Associates’ dataset on the aggregated activities of institutional investors in
terms of their net flows into and out of sovereign government bonds as a proxy for buying and
selling pressure (e.g., Froot, O’Connell and Seasholes (2001) and Froot, Bhargava, Cuipa and
Arabadjis (2014)).
        With respect to the State Street data, State Street Corporation is one of the largest global
custodians, with $25.7 trillion of assets under custody, capturing 15% of the global market (as of
June 30, 2013). State Street argues that these assets represent a homogenous group of investors, so-
called “real money”, which are made up of primarily large global institutional investors, including
mutual funds, pensions, foundations and endowments. Of some note, State Street’s clients
generally do not include corporations, retail investors, hedge funds or central banks. State Street
takes each security-level transaction by the institutional investor and anonymously aggregates these
transactions. For our purposes, each transaction in a country’s sovereign government bonds are
calculated as the difference in dollar value of buys minus sells at a given time t. State Street then




12
  We experimented with TAR(p) models up to order 4. All the results with respect to the impulse response function of
shocks to NI-spreads are qualitatively similar, so we just show the results using a TAR(1).

                                                          22
takes a 5-day exponential average of these net flows and converts these flows into a percentile
based on the last five years of data. The sample starts in November 2005.
       Table 10 documents the contemporaneous correlation pattern between the change in the
                                                            N
                                                                     
cross-sectionally demeaned CDS premium, i.e.,  CDSit  N1  CDSit  , and net flows of
                                                            i       
sovereign government bonds for the 10 developed countries from November 2005-2015 (averaged
over coincident periods, including 1, 2, 3 and 6 months). Consistent with the price pressure story,
the correlation of changes in the flight to quality factor are negatively correlated with investor net
flows for all 10 of the countries. In other words, when the credit quality of a country worsens, there
is an increase in net flows out of that countries’ sovereign bonds. Moreover, the magnitude of the
correlation tends to increase with the horizon, consistent with noise in the net flows data. That said,
many of the correlations are quite small in magnitude, the exceptions being Belgium (-0.10, -0.22,
and -0.21), Spain (-0.20, -0.29 and -0.44), Italy (-0.24, -0.37 and -0.51) and the Netherlands (-0.17,
-0.34 and -0.34) at the monthly, quarterly and semi-annual horizon respectively. Three of these
four countries suffered large negative shocks to their CDS premiums during the Euro crisis and
exhibited negative NI-spreads during this same period. It is interesting to note that the correlation
pattern is between investor flows and CDS spreads and does not involve the relative pricing of
likewise bonds per se.
       It is an empirical question of course who in this case is initiating the trades and potentially
causing price pressure. Using State Street’s measure of net flows, it is possible to partially answer
this question. Since net flows are a measure of change in sovereign bonds holdings over a five-day
period, in order to capture a level effect, we integrate over a sovereign bond’s net flows using the
prior and post 6 weeks around a given time period, yielding a quarterly average of net flows at any
point in time. Moreover, since these net flows are relative to a five-year history, we convert all the
variables – NI spreads and CDS relative quality – similarly against past 5-year values. We then
reinvestigate regression equation (1) of NI spreads on the measure of net flows, alongside the
common liquidity factor and the CDS quality factor. These results are reported in Table 11A.
       Columns 1-2 of Table 11A document the regression equation (1) of NI spreads relative to
their 5-year history on integrated net flows of the country’s sovereign bonds. Note that the sample
size is smaller than that of, for example, Table 6 due to the availability of the State Street data
starting only in November 2005. As predicted by the price pressure story, NI spreads load

                                                    23
positively on net flows with t-statistics above 2. In other words, the NI spread is higher (lower) for
countries with higher (lower) net flows into their sovereign bonds. The liquidity premium increases
(decreases) as the marginal investor buys (sells) the bonds. Under the price pressure explanation,
this is expected as the investor chooses to transact in the more liquid, newly issue bond first.
       As a point of reference, Columns 3-4 of Table 11A document the usual regression equation
using the CDS quality variable relative to its 5-year history. Even though the sample size is
different than that of Table 6, the results are very similar to those previously; specifically, the
coefficient is of similar magnitude, negative and statistically significant. When integrated net flows
are added to the regression (in columns 5 and 6), the coefficient on net flows only marginally
changes and is again statistically significant. This is arguably to be expected as we argue that CDS
relative quality and net flows are different ways of capturing the same price pressure phenomenon.
Furthermore, when the common liquidity factor is added to the regression (in columns 7 and 8), the
results are also similar to the earlier table. All the coefficients on common liquidity are positive
(with 7 of the 9 countries being significant), and the coefficients on CDS relative quality and net
flows remain significant and of similar magnitude.
       In order to link the regression results of Table 11A to those of Table 10, Table 11B reports
regression results for the CDS relative quality variable from Table 11A on the integrated net flows
and contemporaneous net flow variable of sovereign bonds from the State Street data. The
coefficients are both negative, with respectively one being borderline statistically significant and
the other with a t-statistic above 2. Therefore, consistent with the negative correlation between net
flows and CDS changes documented in Table 10, Table 11B also shows that a transformed version
of these variables is also negatively related. Combining Tables 11B and 11A together implies that
lower quality countries have higher net outflows and ceteris paribus tighter NI spreads. These
tighter spreads, i.e., lower liquidity premiums, are consistent with selling pressure on the liquid,
newly issued bonds.



       V.      Conclusion
       What drives the liquidity of sovereign bonds? Current thinking is that government bonds
with almost identical cash flows can trade at different prices due to liquidity, and these differences
extenuate during global crises. In contrast, according to results presented in this paper, there is


                                                     24
evidence of not only a common liquidity factor, but also a country-specific flight to quality factor.
Global crises can actually lead to the opposite impact due to liquidity. In particular, when a country
suffers credit deterioration and/or a flight to quality, bond spreads tighten and can actually go
negative. In other words, the liquid bonds become cheaper, not more expensive, than their less
liquid counterparts. We offer an explanation based on temporary price pressure and provide
empirical support using data on net flows of investors in sovereign bonds and of mean reversion in
shocks to bond spreads. Of some interest, we are able to reconcile the differential behavior of bond
spreads of the U.S. and Germany versus Spain and Italy during the Eurozone crisis period.
       An interesting question is whether the findings of this paper are endemic to the government
bond market or can be applied elsewhere in capital markets. For example, consider the capital
structure of a firm that includes many bonds of similar credit risk, yet of possible different
liquidity. When a corporation suffers financial distress (or, more broadly, a credit crisis occurs),
what happens to the yield spreads between different bonds of the firm? The current view is that the
spread would widen as the illiquid bond falls in value; the results in this paper suggest the opposite.
Pulvino and Stafford (2013) provide an analysis of the financial crisis and the CDS-bond basis,
which suggests that corporates and governments may be different. We leave this topic, and related
ones on an asset quality-based liquidity factor, to future research.




                                                     25
References

Amihud, Yakov and Haim Mendelson, 1986, Asset pricing and the bid-ask spread, Journal of
Financial Economics 17, 223-249.

Amihud, Yakov and Haim Mendelson, 1991, Liquidity, maturity and the yields on U.S.
government securities, Journal of Finance 46, 1411-1426.

Amihud, Yakov, Haim Mendelson, and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2005, Liquidity and Asset Pricing,
Foundations and Trends in Finance 1, 269-364.

Andritzky, Jochen A., 2012, Government Bonds and Their Investors: What Are the Effects and
Do They Matter?, IMF working paper 12/158.

Arslanalp, Serkan and Tigran Poghosyyan, 2014, Foreign Investor Flows and Sovereign Bond
Yields in Advanced Economies, IMF working paper 14/27.

Arslanalp, Serkan and Takahiro Tsuda, 2014, Tracking Global Demand for Advanced Economy
Sovereign Debt, IMF Economic Review 62: 430-464.

Bai, J., Julliard, C., and Yuan, K., 2012, Eurozone Sovereign Bond Crisis: Liquidity or
Fundamental Contagion, Working Paper.

Banerjee, Snehal, and Jeremy Graveline, 2013, The Cost of Short-Selling Liquid Securities,
Journal of Finance, 68 (2): 637-664.

Beber, Alessandro, Michael W. Brandt and Kenneth A. Kavajecz
, 2009, Flight-to-Quality or Flight-to-Liquidity? Evidence from the Euro-Area Bond Market. The
Review of Financial Studies 22(3), 925-957.

Beirne, J. and M. Fratzscher (2013). The Pricing of Sovereign Risk and Contagion During the
European Sovereign Debt Crisis. Journal of International Money and Finance 34, 60-82.

Boudoukh, Jacob, and Robert F. Whitelaw, 1993, Liquidity as a choice variable: A lesson from
the Japanese government bond market, The Review of Financial Studies 6, 265-292.

Buraschi, Andrea, Emrah Sener, and Murat Meng¨ut¨urk, 2010, The Dynamics of Limits to
Arbitrage: An Empirical Investigation of the Sovereign Bond Market, Working paper, Imperial
College.

Cornell, Bradford, and Alan C. Shapiro, 1990, The Mispricing of U.S. Treasury Bonds: A Case
Study, Review of Financial Studies 2, 297-310.

D’Agostino, A. and M. Ehrmann (2014). The Pricing of G7 Sovereign Bond Spreads – The
Times, They are A-Changin. Journal of Banking and Finance 14, 155-176.


                                             26
D’Amico, Stefania and Thomas B. King, 2013, “Flow and Stock Effects of Large-Scale Treasury
Purchases: Evidence on the Importance of Local Supply,” Journal of Financial Economics, 108,
425-448.

Darbha, M. and Dufour, A., 2015, Euro Area Government Bond Market liquidity, Working
Paper, University of Reading.

De Jong, Frank and Joost Driessen, 2005, Liquidity risk premia in corporate bond markets,
Working Paper, University of Amsterdam.

Duffie, Darrell, Nicolae Garleanu and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2002, Securities lending, shorting, and
pricing, Journal of Financial Economics 66, 307-339.

Dunne, P. G., M. J. Moore, and R. Portes. 2003. Defining Benchmark Status: An Application
Using Euro-area Bonds. Working Paper 9087, NBER.

Edwin J. Elton and T. Clifton Green, 1998, Tax and liquidity effects in pricing of government
bonds, Journal of Finance 53, 1533-62

Ericsson, Jan, and Olivier Renault. 2006. Liquidity and Credit Risk. Journal of Finance
61:2219–50.

Favero, Carlo, Marco Pagano, and Ernst-Ludwig Von Thadden. 2010. How Does Liquidity
Affect Government Bond Yields? Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 45 (1): 107-
134.

Feldhutter, Peter. 2012. The same bond at different prices: identifying search frictions and selling
pressures." Review of Financial Studies 25:1155-1206.

Fisher, Lawrence, and Roman L. Weil. 1971. "Coping with the risk of interest-rate fluctuations:
returns to bondholders from naive and optimal strategies." The Journal of Business 44 (4): 408-
431.

Fleming, Michael J., 2002, Are Larger Issues More Liquid? Evidence from Bill Reopenings,
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 34 (3): 707-735.

Fleming, Michael J., 2003, Measuring Treasury Market Liquidity, Federal Reserve Bank of New
York Economic Policy Review (September), 83-108.

Froot, Kenneth A., Bhargava, Rajeev, Cuipa, Edward S. and John S. Arabadjis, 2014, Multi-
Asset Sentiment and Institutional Investor Behavior: A Cross-Asset Perspective, Journal of
Portfolio Management, 144-156.

Froot, Kenneth A., Paul G.J. O’Connell and Mark S. Seasholes, 2001, The Portfolio Flows of
International Investors, Journal of Financial Economics 59 (2): 151-193.



                                                27
Garleanu, Nicolae, Lasse H. Pedersen, and Allen Poteshman, 2004, Demand-based option
pricing, Working paper, The Wharton School.

Goldreich, David, Bernd Hanke and Purnendu Nath, 2005, The price of future liquidity: Time-
varying liquidity in the U.S. Treasury market, Review of Finance 9:1–32.

Goyenko, Ruslan, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam and Andrey Ukhov, 2011, The term structure of
bond market liquidity and its implications for expected bond returns. Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis, 46(1), 111-139.

Graveline, Jeremy J. and Matthew R. McBrady, 2011, Whom Makes On-the-run Treasuries
Special?, Journal of Financial Intermediation 20 (4): 620-632.

Greenwood, Robin, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2010, “Price Pressure in the Government Bond
Market,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 585-590.

Greenwood, Robin, Hanson, Samuel G., and Gordon Y. Liao, 2016, “Asset Price Dynamics in
Partially Segmented Markets”, working paper, Harvard University.

Grossman, Sanford J. and Merton H. Miller, 1988, Liquidity and market structure, Journal of
Finance 43, 617-633.

Harrison, J. Michael and David M. Kreps, 1978, Speculative Investor Behavior in a Stock
Market with Heterogenous Expectations, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 92 (2): 323-336.

Hong, Harrison and Jeremy Stein, 2003, Differences of Opinion, Short-Sales Constraints, and
Market Crashes, The Review of Financial Studies, 16 (2): 487-525.

Jordan, Bradford, Randy Jorgensen, and David Kuipers, 2000, The Relative Pricing of U.S.
Treasury STRIPS, Journal of Financial Economics 56, 89-123.

Kamara, Avraham, 1994, Liquidity, taxes, and short-term treasury yields, Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis 29, 403-416.

Kliesen, Kevin L. and Dougla C. Smith, 2010, Measuring Financial Market Stress, Economic
Synopses, St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, 1-2.

Krishnamurthi, Arvind, 2002, The bond/old-bond spread, Journal of financial Economics 66,
463-506.

Longstaff, Francis A., 2004, The flight-to-liquidity premium in U.S. Treasury bond prices,
Journal of Business 77 (3): 511-526.

Longstaff, Francis A., Sanjay Mithal, and Eric Neis. 2005. Corporate Yield Spreads: Default
Risk or Liquidity? New Evidence from the Credit-Default Swap Market. Journal of Finance
55:2213–53.

                                             28
Lou, Dong, Hongjun Yan and Zinfan Zhang, 2013, Anticipated and Repeated Shocks in Liquid
Markets, Review of Financial Studies 26 (8): 1891-1912.

Ofek, Eli and Matthew Richardson, 2003, DotCom Mania: The Rise and Fall of Internet Stock
Prices, The Journal of Finance, 58 (3): 1113-1138.

Pasquariello, Paolo and Clara Vega, 2009, The On-the-run Liquidity Phenomenon, Journal of
Financial Economics 92 (1): 1-24.

Pelizzon, Loriana, Subrahmanyam, Marti G., Tomio, Davide and Jun Uno, 2015, Sovereign
Credit Risk, Liquidity, and ECB Intervention: Deus ex Machina?, forthcoming Journal of
Financial Economics.

Schwartz, Kyra, 2010, Mind the Gap: Disentangling Credit and Liquidity in Risk Spreads,
working paper, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.

Strebulaev, Ilya, A. 2002, Many faces of liquidity and asset pricing: Evidence from the U.S.
Treasury securities market. Working paper, Stanford University.

Vayanos, Dimitri, 2004, Flight to quality, flight to liquidity and the pricing of risk, Working
paper, LSE.

Vayanos, Dimitri, and Pierre-Oliver Weill, 2008, A Search-Based Theory of the On-the-Run
Phenomenon, Journal of Finance 63, 1361-1398.

Vayanos, Dimitri, and Jean-Luc Vila. 2009. A preferred-habitat model of the term structure of
interest rates." Working paper.

Warga, Arthur, 1992, Bond returns, liquidity, and missing data, Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 27, 605-617.




                                              29
Table 1 – Issuance Analysis

Table 1 documents properties of the issuance cycle for the 10-year newly issued bond across 10
developed countries over the period 1998-2015. The represented countries are BE (Belgium), CA
(Canada), DE (Germany), ES (Spain), FR (France), GB (United Kingdom), IT (Italy), JP (Japan), NL
(Netherlands) and US (United States). Table 1A documents properties of the issuance cycle for the 10-
year bond, while Table 1B documents the properties of the reissuance cycle.

                                         Table 1A 10Yr Point Issuances
                         BE      CA         DE       ES       FR       GB       IT       JP       NL       US
Total Number             19       19         44       25       41       27       33      144       20       81
Avg. Issuance Cycle     364      363        152      281      164      253      205       45      369      104
Min Issuance Cycle      312      272         70       65       8        8        9        6       224       59
Max Issuance Cycle      413      546        224      497      270      1030     334       94      455      186
STD Issuance Cycle       19       57         40      131       72      263       72       22       51       33
First Date             Jan-98   Jan-98     Jan-98   Jan-98   Jan-98   Jan-98   Jan-98   Jan-98   Jan-98   Jan-93

                      Table 1B % of Total Amount Issued (10Yr, 1998:01 - 2015:06)
                       BE       CA          DE        ES       FR      GB        IT       JP      NL       US
First Issuance        33%       28%         36%      13%      20%      10%      27%      92%     39%      47%
Within 30D            35%       29%         45%      29%      27%      14%      39%      94%     40%      74%
Within 91D            48%       42%         90%      57%      44%      25%      61%      94%     54%      99%
Within 183D           62%       62%         99%      86%      65%      43%      88%      94%     73%      99%
Within 274D           79%       85%        100%      90%      71%      56%      93%      96%     82%      99%
Within 365D           89%       100%       100%      92%      72%      63%      93%      96%     85%      99%
Beyond 365D           11%       0%          0%       8%       28%      37%      7%       4%      15%       1%




                                                       30
Table 2 – Bid-Ask Spread Analysis

Table 2 summary statistics for the bid-ask spreads for the 10-year newly issued bond and average of two
latest old bonds across 10 developed countries over the period October 2013-2015. The represented
countries are BE (Belgium), CA (Canada), DE (Germany), ES (Spain), FR (France), GB (United
Kingdom), IT (Italy), JP (Japan), NL (Netherlands) and US (United States).

                                             BE             CA         DE           ES          FR
New bond average bid-ask spread (bps)        0.96           0.84      0.43         1.52        0.72
Old bond average bid-ask spread (bps)        1.14           1.00      0.37         1.75        0.75
Difference                                   -0.17          -0.16     0.07         -0.23       -0.03
                                            (-1.23)        (-2.67)   (5.75)       (-4.66)     (-1.61)
% New bond with higher bid-ask spread        41%            31%       60%          26%         34%
% Old bond with higher bid-ask spread        53%            59%       17%          69%         57%
Difference                                   -12%           -0.28     0.43         -0.43       -0.23
                                            (-1.20)        (-2.82)   (5.10)       (-4.63)     (-2.36)
# of Obs                                      91             91        91           91          91
                                             GB              IT        JP          NL           US
New bond average bid-ask spread (bps)        0.52           1.03      0.75         0.79        0.23
Old bond average bid-ask spread (bps)        0.55           1.21      0.74         0.82        0.28
Difference                                   -0.03          -0.18     0.01         -0.03       -0.05
                                            (-1.78)        (-3.06)   (0.20)       (-2.55)     (-4.43)
% New bond with higher bid-ask spread        20%            29%       26%          27%         14%
% Old bond with higher bid-ask spread        53%            69%       33%          47%         80%
Difference                                   -0.33          -0.41     -0.07        -0.20       -0.66
                                            (-3.98)        (-4.28)   (-0.83)      (-2.23)     (-8.76)
# of Obs                                      91             91        91           91          91




                                                      31
Table 3 – Yield Spreads

Table 3A documents summary statistics for the spread between the latest issued and likewise newly
issued 10-year bond across 10 developed countries over the period 1998-2015. The represented countries
are BE (Belgium), CA (Canada), DE (Germany), ES (Spain), FR (France), GB (United Kingdom), IT
(Italy), JP (Japan), NL (Netherlands) and US (United States). Table 3B reports pooled time-series
regressions of the spread on a local measure of the term structure slope, as well as estimates of duration
and convexity.

                                 Table 3A Summary Statistics of Yield Spreads
                 BE           CA       DE         ES            FR   GB          IT      JP        NL          US
# of Obs         912        912        912       912          912    912        912     912        912        1,173
Average         -10.1       -7.0       -2.9      -7.5         -5.9   -1.7       -6.6    -2.2       -9.1        0.8
Vol              2.5         1.4       1.0        4.0         1.9     2.1        3.1     2.1        1.7        1.4
Min             -43.2       -24.0     -10.4      -58.1       -22.8   -36.3      -41.9   -19.7      -22.1      -16.9
Max             11.2        16.0       8.6       29.8        12.2    48.5       13.6    26.0        1.4       17.1
5th %           -25.4       -15.1      -7.1      -18.8       -12.9   -19.7      -19.5   -7.3       -19.3      -4.7
95th %          -1.2          0.4      1.7       -0.4         -0.3   32.5        3.0    2.1        -1.1        8.5

                          Table 3B Yield Spread Explained by Other Variables
                                       Level                                             Change
Local Slope             0.85                               0.89               0.56                          0.57
                       (11.18)                           (15.38)             (8.17)                        (8.04)
Duration                               -17.84             -10.50                          -5.13             -2.89
                                       (-2.46)           (-3.60)                         (-1.97)           (-1.67)
Convexity                               1.13               0.35                           0.51              0.13
                                       (2.64)             (1.86)                         (2.44)            (0.92)
r2                      63%             21%                66%               21%           1%               21%
r2 net of FE            59%             6%                59%                21%           1%               21%




                                                           32
Table 4 – NI Spreads

Table 4A documents summary statistics for the NI-spread (the difference of yields between a hypothetical
bond priced by the older bond’ curve minus its newly issued counterpart), i.e., 𝑁𝐼 − 𝑠𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑 = 𝑦 ℎ𝑦𝑝 −
               𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 ℎ𝑦𝑝 −𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙
𝑦 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙 =                             ,     for the 10-year bond across 10 developed countries over the period
                𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 ℎ𝑦𝑝 ⋅𝑑𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
1998-2015. The represented countries are BE (Belgium), CA (Canada), DE (Germany), ES (Spain), FR
(France), GB (United Kingdom), IT (Italy), JP (Japan), NL (Netherlands) and US (United States). Table
4B reports pooled time-series regressions of the spread on a local measure of the term structure slope, as
well as estimates of duration and convexity.

                                          Table 4A Summary Statistics of NI Spreads
                      BE            CA         DE        ES            FR    GB           IT     JP        NL         US
# of Obs              912           912        912      912            912   912         912    912        912       1,173
Average               0.4           3.8        2.1      0.8            0.6   0.9         0.2    -0.4       3.1        4.8
Vol                   2.3           1.9        1.0      3.3            1.5   1.8         2.6    1.9        1.7        1.5
Min                  -22.8        -13.2       -4.0      -32.5       -11.6    -16.8      -29.9   -27.1      -7.2      -11.0
Max                  32.2         19.6        10.0      32.3        12.1     14.1       26.8     9.8       22.3      18.7
5th %                 -8.3         -2.7       -0.5       -8.5        -3.0     -4.1      -13.4    -3.6      -1.5       0.4
95th %                7.4         12.9         5.8      8.0            5.9   9.1         11.9   1.9        9.6       13.0
rho(1)               0.91         0.93        0.88      0.84         0.83    0.90        0.94   0.75       0.91      0.94
rho(4)               0.73         0.78        0.69      0.68         0.67    0.71        0.87   0.06       0.83      0.79
rho(12)              0.55         0.50        0.43      0.32         0.39    0.59        0.70   0.00       0.72      0.55
rho(24)              0.45         0.25        0.36      0.14         0.13    0.47        0.64   0.02       0.57      0.51

                                  Table 4B NI Spread Explained by Other Variables
                                               Level                                             Change
Local Slope                  -0.14                              -0.10                -0.38                        -0.37
                             (-1.90)                            (-1.82)              (-7.95)                      (-7.27)
Duration                                       -7.70             -8.53                            -0.36            -1.81
                                              (-2.86)           (-3.05)                          (-0.22)          (-1.11)
Convexity                                      0.16              0.24                             -0.19            0.06
                                              (0.87)            (1.34)                           (-1.46)          (0.46)
r2                            16%              21%               23%                  12%          2%              12%
r2 net of FE                   3%               1%                4%                  12%          2%              12%




                                                                  33
Table 5 – Correlation Between NI Spreads

Table 5A documents the correlation matrix for the NI-spread (the difference of yields between a
hypothetical bond priced by the older bonds’ curve minus its newly issued counterpart), i.e. 𝑁𝐼 −
                              𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 ℎ𝑦𝑝 −𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙
𝑠𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑 = 𝑦 ℎ𝑦𝑝 − 𝑦 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙 =                           ,   for the 10-year bond across 10 developed countries
                               𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 ℎ𝑦𝑝 ⋅𝑑𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
over the period 1998-2015. The represented countries are BE (Belgium), CA (Canada), DE (Germany),
ES (Spain), FR (France), GB (United Kingdom), IT (Italy), JP (Japan), NL (Netherlands) and US (United
States). Table 5B documents the first three principal components underlying the OTR-spread data over
the sample period.

                     Table 5A Correlation Matrix of Level of 10 Yr NI Spreads
           BE       CA         DE           ES             FR      GB       IT       JP       NL       US
BE         1.00     -0.08     -0.23        0.26           0.36    0.28     0.53     -0.19    0.22     0.35
CA        -0.08     1.00      0.29        0.02            0.07    0.03     -0.13    0.04     0.15     0.08
DE        -0.23     0.29      1.00        -0.10           -0.07   -0.04    -0.25    -0.03    0.04     0.01
ES        0.26      0.02      -0.10       1.00            0.17    0.04     0.47     -0.09    0.22     0.22
FR         0.36     0.07      -0.07        0.17           1.00    0.20     0.38     -0.15    0.39     0.25
GB         0.28     0.03      -0.04        0.04           0.20    1.00     0.42     -0.16    0.37     0.53
IT         0.53     -0.13     -0.25        0.47           0.38    0.42     1.00     -0.15    0.48     0.38
JP        -0.19     0.04      -0.03       -0.09           -0.15   -0.16    -0.15    1.00     -0.24    -0.26
NL         0.22     0.15       0.04        0.22           0.39    0.37     0.48     -0.24    1.00     0.35
US         0.35     0.08       0.01        0.22           0.25    0.53     0.38     -0.26    0.35     1.00

                   Table 5B Principal Component Analysis for 10 Yr NI Spreads
% Var      BE       CA         DE           ES             FR      GB       IT       JP       NL       US
43.6%     -0.40     0.04       0.05       -0.36           -0.12   -0.21    -0.74    0.07     -0.22    -0.24
12.9%     0.12      0.41       0.08       -0.63           0.09    0.44     -0.07    -0.08    0.23     0.37
12.6%      0.28     -0.75     -0.13       -0.54           -0.02   0.06     0.13     -0.01    -0.16    -0.10




                                                           34
Table 6 – Common Factor and Price Pressure

Table 6 documents the regression of the NI-spread (the difference of yields between a hypothetical 10-
year bond priced by the older bonds’ curve minus its newly issued counterpart), i.e. 𝑁𝐼 − 𝑠𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑 =
                      𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 ℎ𝑦𝑝 −𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙
𝑦 ℎ𝑦𝑝 − 𝑦 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙 =                            ,   on measures of a common liquidity factor and a flight to quality
                       𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 ℎ𝑦𝑝 ⋅𝑑𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
factor across 10 developed countries over the period 1998-2015. Specifically, we run variants of the
following regression model:
                                                           N
                                                                    
                      NI it     i Ft    CDS it  N1  CDS it    it
                                                          i 1     
where we model a common component to liquidity, Ft , by taking a median of the NI-spreads,
                                                              
Ft  medianNI it i  , and we choose  CDS it  N1  CDS it  as a measure of the relative credit
                                                      N


                                                     i        
quality across the N countries.

                1                2                3           4          5           6           7          8
Intercept      0.15             FE            0.61           FE         1.66         FE        0.15         FE
              (0.41)                         (2.05)                    (4.98)                  (0.49)
BE             0.94            1.41                                                             0.95       1.38
              (6.52)          (4.92)                                                           (6.70)     (5.11)
CA             1.17            0.50                                                             1.10       0.57
              (6.94)          (1.87)                                                           (8.34)     (2.26)
DE             0.46            0.00                                                             0.40       0.08
              (3.12)          (0.00)                                                           (3.20)     (0.51)
ES             0.83            1.08                                                             0.97       0.89
              (5.46)          (5.06)                                                           (6.40)     (5.43)
FR             0.55            0.69                                                             0.54       0.71
              (3.63)          (4.87)                                                           (3.71)     (4.95)
GB             0.86            1.08                                                            0.80        1.11
              (4.20)          (6.71)                                                          (3.80)      (6.55)
IT             1.51            2.38                                                            1.66        2.19
              (6.09)          (8.52)                                                          (7.89)      (8.88)
JP             -0.30           -0.26                                                           -0.26       -0.19
              (-2.26)         (-1.92)                                                         (-2.06)     (-1.33)
NL             1.54            1.35                                                             1.50       1.41
              (8.41)          (6.48)                                                           (7.80)     (6.74)
US             1.91            1.25                                                             1.82       1.33
              (6.67)          (5.66)                                                           (6.51)     (5.29)
CDS_i                                         -0.03         -0.02       -0.03       -0.02      -0.03       -0.02
                                             (-3.96)       (-3.65)     (-3.90)     (-2.90)    (-4.00)     (-3.06)
r2             27%             38%            13%           20%         8%          16%        35%         41%
# of Obs      9120             9120           6523          6523        9120       9120        9120        9120



                                                             35
Table 7 – Subsample Analysis

Table 7 documents the regression of the NI-spread (the difference of yields between a hypothetical 10-
year bond priced by the older bonds’ curve minus its newly issued counterpart), i.e., 𝑁𝐼 − 𝑠𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑 =
                      𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 ℎ𝑦𝑝 −𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙
𝑦 ℎ𝑦𝑝 − 𝑦 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙 =                            ,   on measures of a common liquidity factor and a flight to quality
                       𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 ℎ𝑦𝑝 ⋅𝑑𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
factor across 10 developed countries over two subperiods, pre-2008 and post 2008 over the sample
period 1998-2015. Specifically, we run variants of the following regression model:
                                                          N
                                                                   
                     NI it     i Ft    CDS it  N1  CDS it    it
                                                         i 1     
where we model a common component to liquidity, Ft , by taking a median of the NI-spreads,
                                                             
Ft  medianNI it i  , and we choose  CDS it  N  CDS it  as a measure of the relative credit
                                                     N
                                                   1

                                                    i        
quality across the N countries.

                        Table 7A Pre 2008: Common Factor and Price Pressure
                1                2                3           4           5           6           7           8
Intercept      0.44             FE            0.80            FE         2.53        FE          0.44        FE
              (1.82)                         (3.65)                     (6.61)                  (1.96)
BE             0.87            0.88                                                              0.83        0.88
              (6.94)          (6.79)                                                            (6.60)      (6.78)
CA             0.99            0.81                                                              0.90        0.80
              (9.78)          (5.77)                                                            (8.83)      (5.76)
DE             0.37            0.23                                                              0.34        0.22
              (3.07)          (2.21)                                                            (2.79)      (2.20)
ES             0.76            1.08                                                              0.73        1.08
              (5.29)         (10.26)                                                            (5.19)     (10.04)
FR             0.45            0.66                                                              0.42        0.66
              (2.85)          (3.65)                                                            (2.54)      (3.64)
GB             0.90            0.97                                                              0.82        0.96
              (4.86)          (5.09)                                                            (4.50)      (5.11)
IT             1.51           1.85                                                               1.57       1.84
              (6.87)         (10.84)                                                            (7.68)     (10.36)
JP             -0.43          -0.32                                                              -0.08      -0.29
              (-4.66)         (-2.29)                                                          (-0.37)     (-1.66)
NL             1.57            1.49                                                             1.57        1.49
              (9.50)          (7.95)                                                           (9.14)      (7.94)
US             1.97            1.33                                                             1.86        1.33
              (6.55)          (6.98)                                                           (6.67)      (7.01)
CDS_i                                         -0.19          -0.15      -0.33       -0.25       -0.14       -0.02
                                             (-3.14)        (-2.29)    (-4.19)     (-2.10)     (-1.98)     (-0.38)
r2             51%             56%             9%           22%         10%         22%         52%         56%
# of Obs       5210            5210           2613          2613        5210        5210        5210        5210


                                                              36
                      Table 7B Post 2008: Common Factor and Price Pressure
              1           2          3         4          5         6          7         8
Intercept    -0.05        FE        0.49       FE        0.49       FE        -0.05      FE
            (-0.08)                (1.06)               (1.06)               (-0.11)
BE           1.15        2.47                                                 1.32      2.46
            (2.75)      (3.50)                                               (3.27)    (3.71)
CA           2.23        0.72                                                 1.62      0.61
            (4.29)      (1.16)                                               (4.85)    (1.08)
DE           0.73        -0.32                                                0.13      -0.41
            (1.57)      (-2.04)                                              (0.37)    (-1.98)
ES           0.95        1.24                                                 2.57      1.58
            (1.31)      (1.92)                                               (3.52)    (3.85)
FR           0.98        1.14                                                 0.88      1.16
            (2.67)      (4.31)                                               (2.60)    (4.41)
GB           0.04        0.48                                                 -0.48     0.31
            (0.09)      (2.56)                                               (-1.09)   (1.58)
IT           1.06        2.98                                                 2.60      3.26
            (0.81)      (3.42)                                               (2.77)    (4.32)
JP           0.35        0.37                                                 0.13      0.37
            (1.45)      (3.67)                                               (0.54)    (4.12)
NL           0.84        0.34                                                 0.33      0.23
            (2.26)      (2.16)                                               (1.29)    (1.12)
US           0.95        -0.15                                                0.17      -0.29
            (1.79)      (-0.55)                                              (0.39)    (-0.79)
CDS_i                              -0.03      -0.02     -0.03      -0.02      -0.03     -0.03
                                  (-3.92)    (-3.18)   (-3.92)    (-3.18)    (-4.91)   (-3.85)
r2           5%          29%       14%        25%       14%        25%       23%       34%
# of Obs    3910         3910      3910       3910      3910       3910      3910      3910




                                               37
Table 8 – Crisis Analysis

Table 8 documents the regression of the NI-spread (the difference of yields between a hypothetical 10-
year bond priced by the older bonds’ curve minus its newly issued counterpart), i.e., 𝑁𝐼 − 𝑠𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑 =
                      𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 ℎ𝑦𝑝 −𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙
𝑦 ℎ𝑦𝑝 − 𝑦 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙 =                            ,   on measures of a common liquidity factor and a flight to quality
                       𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 ℎ𝑦𝑝 ⋅𝑑𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
factor across 10 developed countries over three sample periods, crises, pre-2007 crises and post 2007-
crises during 1998-2015. Specifically, we run variants of the following regression model:
                                                          N
                                                                   
                     NI it     i Ft    CDS it  N1  CDS it    it
                                                         i 1     
where we model a common component to liquidity, Ft , by taking a median of the NI-spreads,
                                                             
Ft  medianNI it i  , and we choose  CDS it  N  CDS it  as a measure of the relative credit
                                                     N
                                                   1

                                                    i        
quality across the N countries.

                          Table 8A All Crisis: Common Factor and Price Pressure
                1                2                3           4           5           6           7           8
Intercept      -0.05            FE            -0.18           FE         2.01        FE         -0.05        FE
              (-0.06)                        (-0.30)                    (3.24)                 (-0.08)
BE             0.91            1.58                                                              0.91        1.51
              (4.51)          (4.28)                                                            (4.93)     (4.60)
CA             1.00            0.38                                                              0.97       0.49
              (6.50)          (1.03)                                                            (7.77)     (1.51)
DE             0.43            -0.13                                                             0.41       -0.02
              (2.56)          (-1.02)                                                           (2.92)     (-0.21)
ES             0.83            0.97                                                              0.87       0.72
              (4.47)          (3.82)                                                            (5.60)     (3.81)
FR             0.66            0.84                                                              0.66        0.87
              (4.04)          (8.41)                                                            (4.62)      (8.57)
GB             0.85            1.02                                                              0.81        1.07
              (5.72)         (10.07)                                                            (7.07)      (9.28)
IT             1.66            2.74                                                              1.71        2.46
              (6.38)          (6.62)                                                            (7.10)      (8.24)
JP             -0.35           -0.34                                                             -0.29       -0.24
              (-2.09)        (-2.47)                                                           (-1.87)     (-1.61)
NL             1.69            1.38                                                             1.68         1.45
              (8.68)         (10.18)                                                           (9.35)      (10.53)
US             1.89            1.12                                                             1.84         1.25
              (6.18)          (6.61)                                                           (6.39)       (5.62)
CDS_i                                         -0.03          -0.03      -0.04       -0.03       -0.03       -0.02
                                             (-4.28)        (-4.16)    (-3.86)     (-3.11)     (-4.14)     (-3.64)
r2             31%             48%            20%           33%         12%         22%         42%         52%
# of Obs       3700            3700           2063          2063        3700        3700        3700        3700


                                                              38
                      Table 8B LTCM: Common Factor and Price Pressure
              1          2         3         4         5         6        7         8
Intercept    0.00        FE       4.42      FE        4.42      FE       0.86       FE
            (1.21)               (6.78)              (6.78)             (1.22)
BE           0.78       0.55                                             0.76      0.55
            (4.12)      (3.47)                                          (3.99)     (3.46)
CA           0.82        0.46                                            0.78       0.46
            (5.63)      (3.38)                                          (4.92)     (3.33)
DE           0.29        0.01                                            0.27       0.01
            (1.84)      (0.11)                                          (1.70)     (0.15)
ES           0.69        1.45                                            0.68       1.44
            (3.69)     (17.70)                                          (3.57)    (17.60)
FR           0.47       1.07                                             0.45      1.07
            (2.46)     (4.21)                                           (2.31)    (4.28)
GB           0.69       0.49                                             0.66      0.50
            (4.85)     (4.48)                                           (4.29)    (4.48)
IT           1.52       2.17                                             1.53      2.16
            (5.95)     (15.18)                                          (6.16)    (15.15)
JP           -0.56      -0.64                                            -0.40     -0.65
            (-3.60)    (-3.19)                                          (-1.74)   (-3.08)
NL           1.57       1.59                                             1.57      1.60
            (9.07)     (9.85)                                           (9.07)    (9.60)
US           1.82       0.94                                             1.78      0.94
            (7.12)     (2.54)                                           (7.43)    (2.56)
CDS_i                             -0.37     0.07     -0.37      0.07     -0.07     -0.02
                                 (-3.66)   (0.71)   (-3.66)    (0.71)   (-0.79)   (-0.31)
r2          54%         60%      12%       38%       12%       38%      55%        60%
# of Obs    1840        1840     1840      1840      1840      1840     1840       1840




                                            39
                      Table 8C Other Crises: Common Factor and Price Pressure
              1             2         3          4         5         6            7         8
Intercept    -0.33         FE        -0.36      FE        -0.36      FE          -0.33      FE
            (-0.37)                 (-0.55)              (-0.55)                (-0.52)
BE          -0.02         -0.36                                                  0.30     -0.11
            (-0.01)      (-1.04)                                                (0.34)    (-0.31)
CA           1.39         1.69                                                   0.92      1.29
            (1.29)       (2.81)                                                 (1.35)    (2.33)
DE           -0.28        -0.03                                                  -0.59     -0.31
            (-0.35)      (-0.24)                                                (-1.42)   (-1.54)
ES           0.02         0.00                                                   1.14      0.91
            (0.03)       (0.00)                                                 (1.19)    (1.57)
FR           1.31          1.29                                                  1.41      1.34
            (8.17)        (7.86)                                                (7.26)    (7.62)
GB           0.57          0.47                                                  0.00      0.04
            (1.06)        (1.64)                                                (0.00)    (0.12)
IT           0.89          0.41                                                  1.97      1.31
            (0.44)        (0.55)                                                (2.22)    (2.50)
JP           0.59          0.61                                                  0.37      0.42
            (7.62)       (6.42)                                                 (1.18)    (2.54)
NL           0.47         0.61                                                   0.09      0.31
            (0.64)       (1.88)                                                 (0.21)    (1.22)
US           -0.51        -0.23                                                  -1.17     -0.76
            (-0.59)      (-0.86)                                                (-2.56)   (-1.79)
CDS_i                                -0.03     -0.02      -0.03     -0.02        -0.04     -0.02
                                    (-4.27)   (-3.98)    (-4.27)   (-3.98)      (-4.38)   (-3.97)
r2           1%           34%        20%       38%        20%       38%         23%       40%
# of Obs    1860          1860       1860      1860       1860      1860        1860      1860




                                                40
Table 9 – Price Staleness and Lead-Lag

Table 9 documents the autocorrelation of changes in a hypothetical bond priced by the older bonds’ curve
and in its newly issued counterpart for the 10-year bond across 10 developed countries over the period
1998-2015. The represented countries are BE (Belgium), CA (Canada), DE (Germany), ES (Spain), FR
(France), GB (United Kingdom), IT (Italy), JP (Japan), NL (Netherlands) and US (United States).

                     Price Staleness and Lead-Lag between New and Old Bond
                      BE        CA        DE         ES       FR        GB         IT        JP       NL        US
New Bond rho(1)      -0.06     -0.02     -0.03     -0.09     -0.04     -0.07     -0.11      0.06     -0.04     -0.03
Old Bond rho(1)      -0.05     -0.06     -0.03     -0.06     -0.03     -0.06     -0.11      0.02     -0.04     -0.03
Difference            -0.01     0.03      0.00      -0.03     -0.01     -0.01     0.00      0.04      0.01      0.00
                     (-0.26)   (2.82)    (0.56)    (-1.60)   (-0.55)   (-0.81)   (0.00)    (1.04)    (0.56)    (-0.22)
New Bond lead        -0.06     -0.05     -0.03     -0.07     -0.03     -0.06     -0.09      0.06     -0.03     -0.03
Old Bond lead        -0.05     -0.02     -0.02     -0.07     -0.03     -0.05     -0.11      0.03     -0.03     -0.03
Difference            -0.01     -0.02     0.00      0.00      0.01      -0.01     0.02      0.03      0.00      0.00
                     (-0.69)   (-0.69)   (-0.69)   (-0.69)   (-0.69)   (-0.69)   (-0.69)   (-0.69)   (-0.69)   (-0.69)
# of Obs              910       910       910       910       910       910       910       910       910      1171




                                                       41
Table 10 – CDS and Flows

Table 10 documents the contemporaneous correlation pattern between the change in the cross-
                                                                N
                                                                          
sectionally demeaned CDS premium, i.e.,         CDSit  N1  CDSit         and net flows of sovereign
                                                                i        
government bonds across 10 developed countries from November 2005-2015. The data on net flows is
provided by State Street Corporation. For State Street data, each transaction in a country’s sovereign
government bonds are calculated as the difference in dollar value of buys minus sells at a given time t.
State Street then takes a 5-day exponential average of these net flows and converts these flows into a
percentile based on the last five years of data. The represented countries are BE (Belgium), CA
(Canada), DE (Germany), ES (Spain), FR (France), GB (United Kingdom), IT (Italy), JP (Japan), NL
(Netherlands) and US (United States). The table reports the correlation pattern using the State Street
data for 1-month, quarterly and semi-annual changes of the CDS premium and net flows.

                           Correlation of DCDS and State Street Net Flows
                BE        CA       DE        ES             FR       GB       IT     JP      NL      US
1 Month        -0.10     -0.03    -0.10    -0.20        0.01     -0.10    -0.24     -0.07   -0.17   -0.11
3 Month        -0.22     -0.05    -0.04    -0.29        -0.03    -0.12    -0.37     -0.11   -0.34   -0.15
6 Month        -0.34     -0.14    -0.12    -0.44        -0.04    -0.10    -0.51     -0.20   -0.34   -0.23




                                                       42
Table 11 – Common Factor, Flight to Quality and Net Flows

Table 11 investigates the relation between newly issued (NI) spreads, a common liquidity factor, a flight
to quality factor and sovereign government bond net flows. Table 11A documents the regression of the
NI-spread (the difference of yields between a hypothetical 10-year bond priced by the older bonds’ curve
                                                                                     𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 ℎ𝑦𝑝 −𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙
minus its newly issued counterpart), i.e. 𝑁𝐼 − 𝑠𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑 = 𝑦 ℎ𝑦𝑝 − 𝑦 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙 =                                     , on
                                                                                      𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 ℎ𝑦𝑝 ⋅𝑑𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
measures of a common liquidity factor, a flight to quality factor across 10 developed countries, and a
measure of net flows of the sovereign bond (from State Street Asssociates) over the period 2005-2015.
Specifically, we run variants of the following regression model:
                                                         N
                                                                         6
                    NI it     i Ft    CDS it  N1  CDS it     NFit  j   it
                                                        i 1          j  6

where we model a common component to liquidity, Ft , by taking a median of the NI-spreads (measured
                                                                                                         
                                                            
                                                                                             N
against the past 5-years of data), Ft  median NI it i , we choose  CDS it           1
                                                                                         N    CDS   it    as a
                                                                                            i            
measure of the relative credit quality (i.e., flight to quality) across the N countries (measured against the
past 5 years of data), and NFit  j a 5-day exponential average of the difference in dollar value of
buys minus sells of the sovereign bond at a given time t+j, converted into a percentile based on
the last five years of data. Table 11B reports a regression of the flight to quality factor against
the net flows factor.




                                                      43
Table 11A: Relating NI Spread to Common Liquidity, Flight to Quality, and Cumulative
Net Flows (+-6 Weeks)
               1          2         3                 4          5             6         7         8
Intercept    -1.91        FE      -0.11            FE          -1.81          FE       -1.37       FE
             (-2.10)              (-0.33)                      (-2.19)                 (-1.85)
BE                                                                                      2.34      2.28
                                                                                       (6.07)    (5.05)
CA                                                                                      1.70      1.86
                                                                                       (6.36)    (4.45)
DE                                                                                      0.23      0.07
                                                                                       (0.94)    (0.34)
ES                                                                                      0.80      1.28
                                                                                       (1.61)    (3.39)
FR                                                                                      0.82      0.90
                                                                                       (2.70)    (3.33)
GB                                                                                      0.86      0.66
                                                                                       (3.39)    (2.85)
IT                                                                                      1.89      2.26
                                                                                       (3.97)    (6.16)
JP                                                                                      0.26      0.24
                                                                                       (1.68)    (1.63)
NL                                                                                      0.52      0.29
                                                                                       (1.00)    (0.81)
US                                                                                      1.12      0.69
                                                                                       (3.42)    (2.61)
CDS_i                              -0.03         -0.03          -0.03        -0.03      -0.03     -0.03
                                  (-4.56)       (-4.87)        (-4.61)      (-4.80)    (-4.52)   (-4.95)
Flow_i        0.06       0.06                                   0.05         0.05       0.05      0.04
             (2.08)     (2.05)                                 (2.09)        (1.71)    (2.21)    (1.70)
r2             1%         2%      10%            13%           11%           14%       18%       21%
# of Obs      4830       4830     4830           4830          4830          4830      4830      4830


                       Table 11b Relating Net Flows to Flight to Quality
                                  Flows (-6W to +6W)                    Current (0W)
                       CDS_i                 -1.22                         -0.14
                       (x100)               (-1.55)                       (-2.03)
                       r2                    6%                             2%
                       # of Obs             4830                           4830




                                                          44
                                FIGURE 1: Newly Issued Bond Spreads
Figure 1 graphs the spread between the newly issued and latest issue likewise bond, as well as the New Issue (NI)-
spread (the difference between a hypothetical bond priced by the older bonds’ curve minus its newly issued
                                                       𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 ℎ𝑦𝑝 −𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙
counterpart), i.e., 𝑁𝐼 − 𝑠𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑 = 𝑦 ℎ𝑦𝑝 − 𝑦 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙 =                             , over the period 1998-2015. The spreads
                                                        𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 ℎ𝑦𝑝 ⋅𝑑𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
are graphed with the slope between the 2-year and 10-year government bond yields labelled on the right-hand side.
The represented countries are BD (Germany), BG (Belgium), CN (Canada), ES (Spain), FR (France), IT (Italy), JP
(japan), NL (Netherlands), UK (United Kingdom) and US (United States).




                                                           45
                       FIGURE 2: Cross-Sectional Pricing of New Issue Spreads

Figure 2 plots the average NI-spread for ten developed countries against (i) the factor loading of the NI-
spreads on a common liquidity factor, scaled by the average of the common liquidity factor, and (ii) the
above variable plus the average cross-sectionally demeaned CDS of the country, scaled by the pooled
regression coefficient. The period covers the 1998-2015 sample. The represented countries are Belgium,
Canada, Germany, Spain, France, United Kingdom, Italy, Japan, Netherlands and United States. The NI-
spread is defined as the difference of yields between a hypothetical 10-year bond priced by the older bonds’
                                                                                         𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 ℎ𝑦𝑝 −𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙
curve minus its newly issued counterpart), i.e. 𝑁𝐼 − 𝑠𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑 = 𝑦 ℎ𝑦𝑝 − 𝑦 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙 =                                ;   the
                                                                                          𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 ℎ𝑦𝑝 ⋅𝑑𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
common liquidity factor is taken as a median of the NI-spreads, medianNI it i  , and the cross-sectionally
                                     N
                                                   
demeaned CDS equals  CDS it 
                        
                                  1
                                  N    CDS
                                      i
                                              it    and is a measure of the relative credit quality across the N
                                                   
countries.




                                                            46
                              FIGURE 3: Crisis Period Identification

Figure 3 plots the crisis periods over the 1998-2015 sample. A crisis is defined as an event representing a
3 standard deviation move of the rolling 1-year standard deviation of weekly changes in the St. Louis Fed
Financial Stress Index index. Figure 3 plots the crisis periods over the full sample.




                                                    47
         FIGURE 4: Impulse Response of Shocks to NI-Spreads During Extreme Periods

Figure 4 presents the impulse response functions for a threshold autoregressive model of order 1. The
threshold autoregressive model (e.g., Tong and Lim (1980)) for the NI-spread represents a pooled time-
series across 10 developed countries with three thresholds – a low (i.e., <0 basis points), middle (i.e.
between 0 and 5 basis points), and high (i.e., greater than 5 basis points) range of NI-spreads. The NI-
spread for each country is defined as the difference of yields between a hypothetical 10-year bond
priced by the older bonds’ curve minus its newly issued counterpart), i.e., 𝑁𝐼 − 𝑠𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑 = 𝑦 ℎ𝑦𝑝 −
             𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 ℎ𝑦𝑝 −𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙
𝑦 𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑎𝑙 =                           .
              𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 ℎ𝑦𝑝 ⋅𝑑𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛




  1.00
                                                 TAR(1)
  0.80


  0.60


  0.40


  0.20


  0.00
         0   2   4    6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52

 -0.20

                                          0low      1mid       2high




                                                   48
