                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      MONETARY POLICY AND ASSET VALUATION

                                       Francesco Bianchi
                                         Martin Lettau
                                      Sydney C. Ludvigson

                                      Working Paper 22572
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w22572


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           August 2016, Revised January 2020




We thank Ian Dew-Becker, Emmanuel Farhi, Simon Gilchrist, Matteo Maggiori, Emi Nakamura,
Monika Piazzesi, Jon Steinsson, Andrea Tamoni, Harald Uhlig, and Michael Weber for helpful
comments and seminar participants at the Bundesbank, Columbia, HEC Montreal, NYU, UCL,
UCLA, the University of Texas at Austin, Minneapolis Fed, Indiana University, Carey –Johns
Hopkins University, the National Bank of Belgium, Booth –University of Chicago, the Workshop
on Monetary Policy, NY Fed, April 2017; the Financial Markets and Macroeconomic
Performance conference, Frankfurt, May 2017; the Developments in Empirical Monetary
economics Conference, FRB May 2017; the SED June 2017; the CCBS Research Forum on
Macrofinance, Bank of England June 2017, the Barcelona GSE Summer Symposium, June 2017;
the Computing in Economics and Finance conference, June 2017, Wolfe Research’s Global
Quantitative and Macro Investment Conference, November 2017, and the 2018 American
Economic Association meetings. We thank Paulo Manoel for excellent research assistance. Any
errors or omissions are the responsibility of the authors. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2016 by Francesco Bianchi, Martin Lettau, and Sydney C. Ludvigson. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Monetary Policy and Asset Valuation
Francesco Bianchi, Martin Lettau, and Sydney C. Ludvigson
NBER Working Paper No. 22572
August 2016, Revised January 2020
JEL No. E02,E4,E52,G12

                                          ABSTRACT

The U.S. economy is characterized by large, longer term regime shifts in asset values relative to
macroeconomic fundamentals. These movements coincide with shifts in the real federal funds
rate in excess of a measure of the natural rate of interest, and in equity market return premia. We
specify and estimate a novel DSGE model and find that the regime shifts coincide with equally
important shifts in the parameters of a monetary policy rule that have long-lasting effects on the
real rate of interest. Changes in the conduct of monetary policy also affect return premia, in the
direction consistent with a reach for yield.

Francesco Bianchi                                Sydney C. Ludvigson
Social Sciences Building, 201B                   Department of Economics
Department of Economics                          New York University
Duke University                                  19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
Box 90097                                        New York, NY 10002
Durham, NC 27708-0097                            and NBER
and CEPR                                         sydney.ludvigson@nyu.edu
and also NBER
francesco.bianchi@duke.edu

Martin Lettau
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
545 Student Services Bldg. #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and CEPR
and also NBER
lettau@haas.berkeley.edu
1         Introduction
There is growing evidence that the real values of long-term …nancial assets ‡uctuate sharply
in response to the actions and announcements of central banks. This includes the value of
the stock market, a perpetual asset that endures inde…nitely. But this creates a puzzle. Asset
pricing theories can generally rationalize such large responses only if market participants believe
that something related to the conduct of monetary policy will have a highly persistent in‡uence
on real variables.1 Yet the notion that monetary policy could have long-lived e¤ects on real
variables is contravened by an agglomeration of foundational New Keynesian macro theories,
which imply that monetary policy shocks should have only short-lived e¤ects on real variables.2
Empirical evidence appears consistent with this (Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005)).
But if this is so, how, why, and to what extent could monetary policy possibly in‡uence long-
lived assets?
        This paper presents new evidence on these questions. We …rst show that the U.S. economy
is characterized by quantitatively large, decades-long regime shifts in asset values relative to
macroeconomic fundamentals. These movements coincide with equally important regime shifts
in the level of the real federal funds rate in excess of a commonly used measure of the “natural”
rate of interest, a variable referred to hereafter as the monetary policy spread, or mps for
short. Regimes in which asset valuations are persistently high coincide with persistently low or
negative values for the mps, while regimes in which valuations are persistently low coincide with
persistently high values for the mps. The estimation identi…es two subperiods characterized by
low valuations and a high mps: 1978:Q4 to 2001:Q3, and 2006:Q2 to 2008:Q2. The …rst period
spans the Volcker disin‡ation and its aftermath, while the second follows 17 consecutive Federal
Reserve rate increases that left the nominal funds rate standing at 5.25% in June of 2006. All
other subperiods of the sample are identi…ed as high valuation/low mps regimes.
        Our second result is that the high valuation/low mps regimes coincide with lower equity
market return premia, consistent with a “reach for yield” in equity markets. Speci…cally, in a
switch from a high to low mps regime, the estimated present discounted value of future return
premia on the aggregate stock market, as well as that of several equity characteristic portfolios,
simultaneously fall to lower levels. Moreover, the return premia of evidently riskier, higher
Sharpe ratio portfolios, such as those that go long in value stocks or stocks that have recently
appreciated the most, fall more than those of evidently less risky, lower Sharpe ratio portfolios,
such as those that go long in growth stocks or stocks that have recently appreciated the least.
        Taken together, this evidence suggests that low frequency movements in short-term real
interest rates are directly linked to low frequency regime shifts in asset valuations and equity
    1
        We de…ne a “real variable” here as any non-nominal variable, including risk premia and credit spreads.
    2
        For a review of New Keynesian models, see Galí (2015).



                                                          1
return premia. But how much of these movements can be attributed to monetary policy? To
address this question, the second part of the paper presents a dynamic, stochastic, general
equilibrium (DSGE) model and estimation. Speci…cally, we develop a novel New Keynesian
framework that, unlike canonical New Keynesian models described above, has the potential to
generate highly persistent (though not permanent) departures from monetary neutrality. At the
same time, our framework nests several special cases in which monetary non-neutrality could
be small in magnitude, short-lived, or absent entirely, depending on parameter values. The
full framework is solved and all parameters and latent states freely estimated using Bayesian
methods, with the parameters of the policy rule estimated under ‡at priors. The estimation
uses data on in‡ation expectations from the Michigan Survey of Consumers (SOC), the nominal
federal funds rate, output growth, and in‡ation.
   Along most dimensions, the model we propose is isomorphic to the prototypical New Keyne-
sian model of Galí (2015), chapter 3. As in the prototypical model, this one has three Gaussian
shocks: a demand or preference shock, a shock to the natural level of output, and a monetary
policy shock. But we make two key modi…cations to this framework.
   First, unlike the prototypical model, we allow for regime changes in the conduct of mone-
tary policy. These take the form of shifts in the parameters of the nominal interest rate rule
that include both the in‡ation target and the activism coe¢ cients governing how strongly the
monetary authority responds to deviations of in‡ation from target and to economic growth.
Such changes in what we will call the conduct of monetary policy give rise to movements in
the nominal interest rate that are conceptually distinct from those generated by the mone-
tary policy shock, an innovation in the policy rate that is uncorrelated with in‡ation, economic
growth, and shifts in the policy rule parameters. Second, we allow the evolution of beliefs about
trend in‡ation to be potentially in‡uenced by both an adaptive learning component as well as
a signal about the central bank’s in‡ation target. For the adaptive learning component, we
assume a representative agent forms expectations about future in‡ation using a constant gain
learning algorithm, following the evidence using survey data established in Malmendier and
Nagel (2015). To ensure that model expectations evolve in a manner that closely aligns with
observed expectations, we map the learning algorithm into data by …ltering observations on
survey expectations of in‡ation over time. Overall perceived trend in‡ation is then a weighted
average of the trend implied by the constant gain learning rule and the central bank’s in‡ation
target. A weight of less than one on the target could arise either because the target is im-
perfectly observed, or because central bank announcements about the target are not viewed as
fully credible. Because the weights on the two terms are freely estimated, our approach allows
us to directly assess the importance of learning and imperfect information about the in‡ation
target.
   The results of estimating this model imply that the stance of monetary policy di¤ers

                                               2
markedly across the previously estimated valuation/mps regimes. Speci…cally, we …nd that
the high valuation/low mps subperiods coincide with what we will refer to as a dovish regime
characterized by a comparatively higher in‡ation target and less responsiveness to in‡ation rel-
ative to growth, while the low valuation/high mps subperiods coincide with a hawkish regime
characterized by a lower in‡ation target and greater responsiveness to in‡ation relative to
growth. As discussed below, the hawkish regime prevails in the Volcker years and during most
of Greenspan’s tenure at the Federal Reserve through the end of 2001. But our estimates imply
that, since the end of 2001, the conduct of monetary policy has been resolutely dovish.
    How important are these changes in the way monetary policy is conducted for real interest
rates and equity market risk premia? To address this question, we use our model estimates
to identify movements in real variables that are attributable solely to the conduct of mone-
tary policy, i.e., to regimes changes in the policy rule. Several results from this exercise are
noteworthy.
   First, the estimates imply that changes in the conduct of monetary policy generate large
and persistent ‡uctuations in the short-term real interest rate that last for decades. By con-
trast, monetary policy shocks have far more transitory e¤ects, consistent with the evidence in
Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005). Second, almost all of the downward trend in the
real interest rate observed since 1980 can be explained by regime changes in the conduct of
monetary policy. This occurs because the policy rule parameters exhibit a decisive shift toward
more hawkish values around the time of Volcker’s appointment, but then exhibit an equally
decisive shift back to more dovish values in the aftermath of the near collapse of Long Term
Capital Management, the tech bust in the stock market, and the 9/11 terrorist attacks. The
conduct of monetary policy has remained dovish since, with the exception of a brief interlude
from 2006:Q2-2008:Q2. Third, we distinguish the roles of regime changes in the in‡ation target
from those in the activism coe¢ cients and …nd that both are important. In particular, we show
that, if the in‡ation target had changed over time but there had been no coincident change
in the activism coe¢ cients, ‡uctuations in real rates and output growth would have been sub-
stantially dampened throughout the post-1980 period. Fourth, our estimate of perceived trend
in‡ation closely follows the adaptive learning rule, which plays a crucial role in the results.
Indeed, if perceived trend in‡ation is counterfactually set equal to the in‡ation target, regime
changes in the conduct of monetary policy are shown to have no a¤ect on the real interest rate.
Finally, we tie these results back to the estimates of equity return premia studied earlier and
…nd that all premia are strongly positively correlated with the component of the real interest
rate that is attributable solely to changes in the conduct of monetary policy, consistent with
a reach for yield. By contrast, the residual component of the real interest rate exhibits much
smaller correlations, reinforcing evidence of a distinct monetary policy role in equity premia
over time.

                                               3
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section discusses related literature.
Section 3 discusses the estimation of a joint Markov-switching system for asset valuations and
the monetary policy spread and investigates whether the high valuation/low mps regimes are
characterized by lower risk premia in equity market assets. Section 4 describes the DSGE
model, explains how it is solved and estimated, and presents results of that estimation. Section
5 concludes. A large amount of additional material, test results, and a detailed data description
have been placed in an Appendix for online publication.


2       Related Literature
The research in this paper touches on several di¤erent strands of literature that connect mon-
etary policy to movements in asset values. Although not focused speci…cally on announcement
e¤ects, our work is related to a growing body of evidence that …nds the values of long-term
…nancial assets respond to the actions and announcements of central banks.3 Economists have
proposed various explanations for these responses, including the revelation of private central
bank information and the response of risk premia. Yet no matter what the channel, asset
pricing models can typically only rationalize such large responses if something associated with
the announcement is expected to have a highly persistent in‡uence on real variables or risk
premia.4 It is unclear why the actions of central banks might have such prolonged e¤ects on
return premia but not on interest rates. Our work contributes to this literature by …nding
evidence of regime changes in the conduct of monetary policy that have long-lasting e¤ects
on both short-term interest rates and equity market return premia. One interpretation of the
evidence on central bank announcements is that the announcements are, in part, noisy signals
about the possibility of a regime change in the conduct of monetary policy.
    Our empirical …ndings also relate to a theoretical literature in which shifts downward in the
risk-free interest rate coincide with shifts downward in risk premia, as in those models that can
be broadly characterized as having a “reaching for yield” channel (e.g., Rajan (2006); Rajan
(2013); Diamond and Rajan (2012); Farhi and Tirole (2012); Drechsler, Savov, and Schnabl
(2014); Piazzesi and Schneider (2015); Acharya and Naqvi (2016); Coimbra and Rey (2017);
Hanson, Lucca, and Wright (2018)). Alternatively, a decline in real rates driven by monetary
policy could increase the fraction of wealth held by more risk tolerant investors, as in Kekre
    3
     See Cochrane and Piazzesi (2002), Hanson and Stein (2015), Gertler and Karadi (2015), Gilchrist, López-
Salido, and Zakrajšek (2015), Boyarchenko, Haddad, and Plosser (2016), Jarocinski and Karadi (2019), and
Cieslak and Schrimpf (2019). These studies follow on earlier work …nding a link between monetary policy
surprises and short-term assets in high frequency data (Cook (1989); Bernanke and Kuttner (2005); Gürkaynak,
Sack, and Swanson (2005)). A separate literature studies the timing of when premia in the aggregate stock
market are earned in weeks related to FOMC-cycle time (Lucca and Moench (2015), Cieslak, Morse, and
Vissing-Jorgensen (2015)).
   4
     For reviews of frontier asset pricing models, see Cochrane (2005) and Campbell (2017).


                                                     4
and Lenel (2019), driving down return premia. In this paper we use the terminology “reach
for yield” as short-hand for the phenomenon of declining risky asset return premia when real
interest rates decline that could occur for any reason (e.g., a representative agent who becomes
less risk averse or there is a shift in the composition of wealth owned by less risk averse agents).
Our …ndings contribute to this literature by showing that persistently high asset valuations and
persistently low return premia are associated with evidence of persistent regime changes in the
conduct of monetary policy.
   A separate body of theoretical work addresses the low and declining interest rates of recent
decades with implications for risk premia that are opposite to what would be consistent with a
reach for yield type phenomenon. In these theories, declining real rates are the result of shocks
that increase the fraction of wealth held by more risk averse or more pessimistic investors,
implying that risk premia rise rather than fall as interest rates decline (e.g., Barro and Mollerus
(2014); Caballero and Farhi (2014); Hall (2016)). Thus, asset valuations in these theories can
only be higher if the decline in the risk-free rate exceeds the rise in risk premia. We present
evidence from equity markets that the low interest rate regimes we document coincide with
lower equity market risk premia, consistent with theories that have a “reaching for yield”type
mechanism. Our …ndings for stock market returns in this regard are reminiscent of recent
evidence of reaching for yield in the Treasury market (e.g., Hanson and Stein (2015)), by U.S.
prime money funds (e.g., Di Maggio and Kacperczyk (2015)), and by U.S. corporate bond
mutual funds (Choi and Kronlund (2015)). The evidence in these papers pertains to heavily
intermediated asset classes. By contrast, our evidence pertains to equity market portfolios, an
asset class ostensibly held by retail investors and households, as well as intermediaries.
   Finally, our work is related to previous research that has found evidence of infrequent regime
changes in the parameters of an estimated monetary policy rule (e.g., Clarida, Gali, and Gertler
(2000); Lubik and Schorfheide (2004); Bianchi (2013)). Unlike this work, we use a more recent
sample and estimate whether there are joint regime changes in asset valuations and the mps that
coincide with regime shifts in the policy rule and risk premia. We also present new evidence,
vis-a-vis this literature, of changes in the policy rule parameters toward more dovish monetary
policy that occurred at beginning of the 21st century.
    This latter body of work also helps to motivate why we use regime switching over alternative
procedures such as e.g., slowly drifting means, to document joint variation in valuations and
policy rates. The papers cited in the previous paragraph use regimes to identify di¤erent
phases of US monetary history. It is quite natural to model changes in the conduct of monetary
policy as occurring with discrete regime changes. Di¤erent Chairs of the Federal Reserve bring
their own views and priorities to the conduct of monetary policy, suggesting that data on
policy interest rates is likely to be better described as being drawn from a mixture of distinct
distributions with infrequent transitions between them, rather than a single distribution where

                                                 5
a transition occurs each period. The regime-switching approach therefore helps us evaluate
a key hypothesis of the paper, namely whether longer run shifts in the conduct of monetary
policy are associated with changes in discount rates, valuations, and return premia.


3         Regimes in Valuations, Interest Rates, and Risk Pre-
          mia
This section describes how we model and estimate joint regimes in asset valuations and the mps
using a Markov-switching model, and how we evaluate whether these regimes are associated
with movements in risk premia. Before discussing the Markov-switching estimation, we begin
by presenting some preliminary evidence that helps motivate the evidence for long-lived regimes
in these variables.

3.1        Motivating Evidence
Figure 1 plots the behavior over time of a key instrument of monetary policy, namely the real
federal funds rate, measured for the purposes of this plot as the nominal rate minus a four
quarter moving average of in‡ation. The left panel plots this series along with an estimate of
the natural real interest rate, from Laubach and Williams (2003). The natural rate of interest
measures the component of the real rate whose ‡uctuations cannot be attributed to monetary
policy.5 The …gure shows that there are important lower-frequency ‡uctuations in the real
federal funds rate over the full sample, but little long-term trend. By contrast, the natural rate
of interest exhibits a clear downward trend over the entire sample. The right panel of the …gure
plots the spread between the real funds rate and the Laubach and Williams (2003) natural rate
of interest, a variable we refer to as the monetary policy spread. Denote the time t value of
this spread mpst .6 The data are quarterly and span the sample 1961:Q1-2017:Q3.7 While there
is no secular trend downward in real interest rates over the full sample, there is, however, a
noticeable downward trend in both the real interest rate and the mps since about 1980, a point
we come back to below.
        Next, Table 1 reports the correlations between the real interest rate or the mps and dif-
ferent asset valuation metrics. These correlations are reported for the raw series, and for
    5
     Such estimates involve theoretical restrictions on parameters of this component of real rates. In Laubach
and Williams (2003) these restrictions amount to estimates of the level of the real rate that consistent with no
change in in‡ation.
   6
     mpst is computed as
                                      F F Rt (Expected In‡ation)t rt ;
where F F R is the nominal federal funds rate and where expected in‡ation is a four quarter moving average of
in‡ation. rt is the natural rate of interest from Laubach and Williams. The quarterly nominal funds rate is the
average of monthly values of the e¤ective federal funds rate.
   7
     The 1961 start date is dictated by the availabililty of the natural rate of interest measure.

                                                       6
components of the raw series that retain ‡uctuations with “medium” term cycles, de…ned to
be cycles that take between 8 and 50 years to complete, and “business”cycles, de…ned to take
between 1.5 and 8 years. Panel A reports these correlations with                cayt , the negative of the
log consumption-wealth variable of Lettau and Ludvigson (2001) (LL hereafter), one of the
broadest asset valuation metrics available. With cayt , asset values are measured relative to
two macroeconomic fundamentals: log consumption “ct ” and log labor income “yt .” The “at ”
is total household net worth, which is highly correlated with the return on the aggregate stock
market. We use       cayt to put asset values in the numerator, and refer to it simply as a “wealth”
ratio. Columns B-D consider alternative valuation ratios each of which has some measure of
stock market wealth in the numerator. Panel B uses the Shiller price-earnings ratio8 , Panel C
uses the price-dividend ratio for the corporate sector, and Panel D uses the price-earnings ratio
for the corporate sector.
    Several results in Table 1 stand out. First, correlations between the valuation ratios and
either the real funds rate or the mps are all negative at medium-term frequencies. Thus, over
cycles of 8-50 years, persistently high valuations tend to coincide with indicators of monetary
policy that are persistently more accommodative. By contrast, the correlations are all positive
at business cycle frequencies and generally weaker in absolute terms.
    Second, in all cases, the absolute correlation between the valuations and the mps is greater
than that between valuations and the real interest rate itself. Thus, purging the funds rate of the
component estimated to be unrelated to monetary policy leads to greater negative comovement,
which is suggestive that monetary policy as opposed to real rates per se play a role in this
correlation.
       Third, the largest absolute correlation is with       cayt , which has a -0.83 correlation with
the real interest rate and a -0.84 correlation with the mps at medium-term frequencies. This
is followed by correlations of -0.49 and -0.60, respectively, with the corporate sector price-
dividend ratio, -0.19 and -0.30 with the Shiller price-earnings ratio, and -0.20 and -0.30 with
the corporate sector price-earnings ratio. This …nding, namely that lower frequency movements
in cayt are more highly correlated in absolute terms with short-term interest rates than are
other valuation ratios, is consistent with prior evidence that cayt picks up more variation in
discount rates than do stock market valuation ratios (Lettau and Ludvigson (2005)). This
occurs due to the o¤setting e¤ects of ‡uctuations in measures of expected stock market cash
‡ow growth on stock market valuation ratios that have little in‡uence on cayt .9 That is, some
variation in expected stock market returns appears to be positively correlated with expected
growth in stock market cash ‡ows, but not with expected growth in ct or yt : We observe this
   8
     http://www.multpl.com/shiller-pe/
   9
     A similar …nding occurs using other valuation metrics when they are measured relative to macro fundamen-
tals. See Greenwald, Lettau, and Ludvigson (2019).



                                                     7
mechanism at work in the current data in Panel E of Table 1. At medium-term frequencies,
decreases in the real interest rate or mps, which tend to drive stock market valuation ratios up,
are associated with increases in the earnings share of output, which tend to drive them down.
Since cayt is not as subject to this type of confounding cash ‡ow e¤ect, and since discount rate
movements are at the core of what we investigate in this study, we use cayt as a measure of
valuations in our formal econometric analysis. We discuss this estimation next.

3.2       Markov-Switching Estimation
This section presents results for a joint Markov-switching model of breaks in the mean of cay
and an instrument of monetary policy. As a cleaner indicator of monetary policy, we use the
mps rather than the real federal funds rate, in order to purge the later of the trending natural
rate component that has nothing to do with monetary policy. We …rst describe an econometric
model of regime switches in the mean of cayt . We then introduce a similar relation for the mps.
Finally, we explain how we jointly estimate regime changes in the means of the two variables.
   The log valuation variable cayt is derived from an approximate formula for the log con-
sumption to aggregate (human and non-human) wealth ratio, and its relationship with future
growth rates of at and/or future growth rates of ct and yt can be motivated from an aggregated
household budget constraint.10 An approximate expression linking ct , at , and yt to expected
future returns to asset wealth, consumption growth, and labor income growth may be derived
to yield
                                                 X
                                                 1
                                                         i
             cayt   ct   a at    y yt     + Et           w   ((1           ) ra;t+i       ct+i +        yt+1+i ) ;
                                                 i=1

where is the steady state ratio of human wealth to asset wealth and ra;t is the log return to
asset (non-human) wealth. Theory typically implies that ct ; a t ; and yt should be cointegrated,
or that the linear combination of variables in cayt should be covariance stationary.
       In the standard estimation without regime shifts in any parameters, the above stationary
linear combination of ct ; a t ; and yt may be written

                                caytF C   ct      a at          y yt   =        +   FC
                                                                                    t ;                              (1)

                                                                                                   FC
where the parameters to be estimated are           ,       a,   and        y.   The residual       t    is the mean zero
stationary linear combination of these data, referred to as the cointegrating residual. Note that
 FC
 t     is not in general an i.i.d. shock. The superscript “F C” stands for “…xed coe¢ cients” to
underscore the fact that no parameters in this relation are time-varying.
  10
    This formula is derived under several assumptions described in LL and elaborated on in Lettau and Lud-
vigson (2010). If labor income is modeled as the dividend paid to human capital, we get the formulation
below.


                                                       8
         In this paper, we estimate a Markov-switching version of this variable, analogously written
as
                                              caytM S              ct           a at                     y yt   =       t
                                                                                                                            + ct ;                                  (2)
                c                2
where           t        N (0;   M S ).   The intercept term,                                t
                                                                                                 , is a time-varying mean that depends on the
existence of a latent state variable,                         t,   presumed to follow a two-state Markov-switching process
with transition matrix H. Thus                            t
                                                                  assumes one of two discrete values,                                    1   or       2.   The choice
of two regimes is not crucial, but provides a readily interpretable way to organize the data into
a low and a high valuation regimes. The residual ct is a stationary, continuous-valued random
variable by assumption. The slope coe¢ cients                                                        a   and        y   are analogous to          a   and    y   in the
…xed coe¢ cient regression (1). They are denoted di¤erently to underscore the point that the
coe¢ cients in (1) and (2) are not the same, just as the parameters and t ; and the residuals
 FC
 t  and ct are not the same. Because our procedure jointly recovers the slope coe¢ cients a
and        y,   the timing of regime changes, and, as an implication, the decomposition of caytM S into
                    c
     t
         and        t,   all three statistical objects can di¤er.
  We combine the estimation of changes in the mean of caytM S with an isomorphic model for
mpst to estimate a joint Markov-switching model with synchronized regimes. Speci…cally, we
assume that regime changes in the mean of caytM S coincide with regime changes in the mean of
the mps:
                                                                    mpst = r t + rt ;                                                                               (3)
where rt    N (0; 2r ). Unlike caytM S ; mpst is an observed variable. Thus, in this case we only
need to estimate the Markov-switching intercept coe¢ cient r t : It is worth emphasizing that the
same latent state variable,                  t,   is presumed to follow a two-state Markov-switching process with
transition matrix H; controls both changes in                                                    t
                                                                                                         and r t . Thus the regimes are synchronized
across the two means.
   The econometric model may be succinctly stated as a Markov-switching regression system
with synchronized regimes:
                                                                                                                        c
                                                   ct =                 t
                                                                            +        a at         +        y yt   +     t
                                                                                 r
                                             mpst = r t +                        t
                                                      c                              2                     r                    2
                                                      t            N 0;              MS              ;     t        N 0;        r


where           t   is a latent variable that follows a Markov-switching process with transition matrix H.
Denote the set of parameters to be estimated collectively with the vector
                                                                                                 2              2           0 0
                                                  =       t
                                                              ;    a;       y; r     t
                                                                                         ;       MS;            r ; vec (H)          :

    We use Bayesian methods with ‡at priors to estimate the model parameters in (2) and
(3) over the period 1961:Q1-2017:Q3. The sequence t = f 1 ; :::; T g of regimes in place at

                                                                                         9
each point is unobservable and needs to be inferred jointly with the other parameters of the
model. Estimates of t and r t are formed by weighting their two estimated values by their
state probabilities at each point in time. Let T be the sample size used in the estimation and
                                                                                                                               i
let the vector of observations as of time t be denoted Z t . Let P (                               t   = ijZ T ; )             tjT   denote
the probability that          t   = i, for i = 1; 2, based on information that can be extracted from the
whole sample and knowledge of the parameters . We refer to these as the smoothed regime
probabilities. We may decompose caytM S into two components, a discrete-valued time-varying
mean and a continuous-valued random variable:

                                        caytM S = ct         a at    +      y yt   =   t   +   c
                                                                                               t                                        (4)
                                                  P2         i
                                              t =    i=1     tjT      i:                                                                (5)

thus     is the probability-weighted average of the Markov-switching means. An analogous
          t
                                                               P
bifurcation exists for mpst , where r t may be computed as rt = 2i=1 itjT ri .
       The posterior distribution of the empirical model (2) and (3) and the corresponding regime
probabilities itjt and itjT are obtained by computing the likelihood using the Hamilton …lter
(Hamilton (1994)), and combining it with priors. Since we use ‡at priors, the posterior coincides
with the likelihood. Our estimate of caytM S and its decomposition into                                       t   and   c
                                                                                                                        t,   and of mpst
                r
into rt and     t,   use the posterior mode of the parameter vector                          and the corresponding regime
probabilities. Uncertainty about the parameters, or about any transformation of the model
parameters, is characterized using a Gibbs sampling algorithm. The full statement of the
procedure and sampling algorithm is given in the Appendix.
       The variable caytM S may be interpreted as log inverse asset valuation ratios, akin to a log
dividend-price ratio as opposed to log price-dividend ratio. For brevity, we refer to caytM S as
an inverse “wealth” ratio, or equivalently de…ne the log wealth ratio as caytM S = [ ct + t ].
Thus, a high         i   corresponds to a low wealth ratio, since ct                   a at            y yt   is high whenever at is
                                                       c             FC
low relative to ct            y yt .   In population   t   and       t     are mean zero random variables, thus the
intercept term t gives the mean of the inverse wealth ratios.11
    Table 2 reports the parameter estimates, while Figure 2 reports the probability of regime 1
over time for the Markov-switching intercepts                    t
                                                                     and r t based on the posterior mode parameter
estimates.
    The results show that the sample is divided into three subperiods characterized by the two
regimes for and r: Regime 1 is a high =high r regime with posterior mode point estimates
equal to b 1 =           0:7239 and rb1 = 0:0111. The posterior mode estimates for the low                                           =low r
regime 2 are ^ 2 =           0:7500 and rb2 =      0:0252: Since a high                    regime for cay corresponds to a
  11
    In a …nite sample, M t
                           S
                             and F
                                 t
                                   C
                                     are not necessarily mean zero because of the leads and lags of the …rst dif-
ferences included in the DLS regression used to correct for …nite sample biases–see the Appendix. In population
these variables are mean-zero by de…nition.


                                                             10
low valuation ratio, we refer to high regime 1 as the low asset valuation/high mps regime,
and low regime 2 as the high asset valuation/low mps regime.
      The overall sample is divided into regime subperiods using the most likely estimated regime
                                                    T 12
sequence, a T -dimensional vector denoted             .    Table 3 shows the regime subperiods based
on this de…nition. The low asset valuation/high mps regime prevails for a prolonged period of
time from 1978:Q4 to 2001:Q3, during which the smoothed probability that = ^ 1 and r = rb1
is very close to unity. By contrast, the pre-1978 and most of the post-2001 subsample are high
asset valuation/low mps regimes, where the probability that                 =   1   and r = rb1 is virtually
0. The low valuation/high mps regime brie‡y reappears from 2006:Q1 to 2008:Q2 following a
string of 17 target federal funds rate hikes by the Federal Reserve that began on June 30, 2004
and ended with the nominal rate standing at 5.25% on the 29th of June 2006. The target funds
rate target remained above 4% until January 2008, when it was lowered to 3%.
      Table 2 reports summary statistics for the di¤erences ^ 1              ^ 2 and rb1    rb2 , along with
percentiles of their posterior distributions. The 90% credible sets for ^ 1 ^ 2 and rb1 rb2 are
non-zero and positive, indicating that the data favor changes in the mean of the inverse wealth
ratio and the mps. The two regimes are stationary but persistent, as indicated by the estimated
diagonal elements of the transition matrix H, also reported in Table 2.
   To give a visual impression of the properties of these regimes, Figure 3 plots caytM S and
the mps over time. Also plotted as horizontal lines are the values      t and r t that arise in

each regime over the sample. The …gure shows that the wealth ratio               caytM S ‡uctuates around
two distinct means in …ve separate periods of the sample, a high mean in the early part of
the sample, a low mean in the middle, a low mean in the shorter subperiod from 2006:Q1
to 2008:Q2, and a high mean again at the end of the sample. The mps is a mirror image,
‡uctuating around a low mean in the early part of the sample, a high mean in the middle, and,
with the exception of 2006:Q1 to 2008:Q2, a low mean the latter part of the sample.
   Several narrative “events”in monetary history are labeled in the mps plot of Figure 3. The
…rst occurrence of the high asset valuation/low mps regime from 1961:Q1 to 1978:Q3 coincides
with the run-up of in‡ation in the 1960s and 1970s and low real interest rates. Researchers
have concluded that monetary policy failed to react aggressively to in‡ation during those years
(Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (2000); Lubik and Schorfheide (2004); Sims and Zha (2006); Bianchi
(2013)). This is labeled the “Burns Accommodation,” after Arthur Burns who chaired the
Federal Reserve Board over much of this subperiod. Real interest rates increased signi…cantly
during the “Volcker disin‡ation”and remained high for a prolonged period of time, coinciding
with low valuations and high mps. The beginning of second occurrence of the high asset
valuation/low mps regime is labeled the “Greenspan Put,” in Figure 3 after the perceived
attempt of Chairman Greenspan to prop up securities markets in the wake of the IT bust, a
 12
      The Appendix describes how the most likely regime sequence is computed from the …ltered probabilities.


                                                      11
recession, and the aftermath of 9/11, by lowering interest rates and (allegedly) resulting in a
perception of put protection on asset prices. The high valuation/low mps subperiod at the
end of the sample overlaps with the explicit forward guidance “low-for-long” policies under
Chairman Bernanke that promised in 2011 to keep interest rates at ultra low levels for an
extended period of time, possibly longer than that warranted by a 2% in‡ation objective.

3.3     Reaching for Yield?
A persistently low mpst is associated with persistently high asset valuations. A natural question
is whether a low mps a¤ects only the riskless real interest rate, or whether it also prompts
investors to “reach for yield,” (RFY) thereby driving the return premium component of the
discount simultaneously rate down, further stimulating risky asset valuations.13 We begin with
a loglinear framework to illustrate how interest rate regimes could be revealed in return premia
in a cross-section.

3.3.1    A Loglinear Framework

One way to assess the possibility of RFY is to exploit di¤erences across assets. A change in
discount rates driven by the riskless rate alone in‡uences all assets in the same way, regardless of
their riskiness. By contrast, RFY implies that, as investors attempt to shift portfolio allocations
toward riskier/higher return assets in low interest rate environments, return premia adjust.
Thus a change in discount rates accompanied by RFY will have pricing e¤ects that di¤er across
assets, depending on the riskiness of the asset. As interest rates move from high to low, RFY
implies a greater increase in the market value, relative to fundamentals, of higher return/higher
Sharpe ratio assets than it does for lower return/lower Sharpe ratio assets. Equivalently, risk
premia should fall more for riskier assets. We investigate this possibility here, using data on
the market portfolios and equity characteristic stock portfolios that exhibit large cross-sectional
variation in return premia. An extension of the approach is also used to study the behavior of
the risk premium on the aggregate stock market, as explained below.
   To motivate the analysis, consider a log-linearization that follows Vuolteenaho (2000) and
constructs earnings from book-market and return data using clean surplus accounting. Let Bt
denote book value and Mt denote market value, and let the logarithm of the book-market ratio
log (Bt =Mt ) be denoted       t.    Vuolteenaho (2000) shows that                t   of an asset or portfolio can be
decomposed as:
                              P1      j
                                                        P1        j
                                                                                  P1        j
                      t   =    j=0        Et rt+1+j +    j=0          Et ft+1+j       j=0       Et et+1+j         (6)
  13
    In what follows we use the terms “risk”premia and “return”premia interchangeably to refer to the expected
return on an asset in excess of the risk-free rate. We remain agnostic as to whether the observed premia are
attributable to genuine covariance with systematic risk factors or mispricing, or both.


                                                             12
where < 1 is a parameter, and rt+1+j ; ft+1+j ; and et+1+j stand for log excess return, log risk-
free rate, and log earnings, respectively.14 In other words, the logarithm of the book-market
ratio    t   depends on the present discounted value (PDV) of expected excess returns (risk premia),
expected risk-free rates, and expected earnings.
       Given two portfolios x and y; the spread in their book-market ratios,                                                  x;t       y;t ;   is given
   15
by:
                                         P1        j
                                                                                                 P1         j
                    x;t        y;t   =       j=0       Et (rx;t+1+j      ry;t+1+j )                  j=0        Et ex;t+1+j         ey;t+1+j
                |         {z    }        |                    {z                 }               |                    {z                        }
          Spread in BM ratios                 PDV of spread in risk premia                           PDV of spread in expected earnings

Note that the risk-free rate has no a¤ect on this spread, since all portfolios are a¤ected in
the same way by the risk-free rate. Instead only the risk premium di¤erential and expected
earnings di¤erential a¤ect the book-market spread. Since RFY pertains only to the return
premium di¤erential, we adjust the book-market spread for the spread in expected earnings to
isolate the return premium di¤erential:
                        P1 j                        P
            x;t   y;t +  j=0 Et ex;t+1+j ey;t+1+j = 1  j=0
                                                            j
                                                              Et (rx;t+1+j ry;t+1+j )    (7)
          |                  {z                  } |                 {z            }
                    Spread in BM ratios adjusted for earnings         ex;t ey;t                  PDV of the spread in risk premia

The above expression shows that the spread in book-market ratios adjusted for expected future
earnings is equal to the PDV of the spread in expected excess returns, or risk premia.
       Denote the adjusted (for expected earnings) book-market ratio for portfolio x in regime i
with a tilde as
                                                   ei         i          P1         j        i
                                                       x;t    x;t    +    j=0           Et ex;t+1+j :
Let x denote a high return premia portfolio while y denotes a low return premia portfolio.
Reaching for yield implies that, in a shift from a high (i = 1) to low (i = 2) interest rate
                                                                                1
regime, the adjusted book-market ratio of x should fall more than y, implying e      e2
                                                                                                                                       x;t          x;t

 e1          e2       > 0, or that the di¤erence-in-di¤erence of adjusted book-market ratios should be
  y;t         y;t
positive across regimes:
                                                       e1     e1           e2            e2          > 0:                                                 (8)
                                                        x;t    y;t            x;t          y;t

Thus RFY implies that the spread in the adjusted book-market ratios between the high re-
turn/high risk portfolio and the low return/low risk portfolio should be greater in regime 1
than in regime 2. Equivalently, in a switch from a high to low interest rate regime, the PDV of
risk premia on the high return premium portfolio should fall more than that of the low return
premium portfolio.
  14
     Speci…cally, e is the log of 1 plus the earnings-book ratio, adjusted for approximation error. See Vuolteenaho
(2000).
  15
     This derivation follows Cohen, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2003) and imposes the approximation that is
constant across portfolios. Cohen, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2003) …nd that the approximation error generated
by this assumption is small.

                                                                         13
3.3.2     Risk Premia Spreads on Equity Portfolios

We now investigate empirically whether the spread in adjusted book-market ratios between
assets with di¤erent risk/return pro…les is statistically di¤erent across the two regimes. To
do so, we need to estimate the risk-premia on these portfolios across the regimes. For this,
we estimate a Markov-switching vector autoregression (MS-VAR) using portfolio data. The
parameters of the MS-VAR are permitted to potentially undergo structural shifts, but we
impose the previously estimated regime sequence T for the conditional means of cay M S and
the mps on the MS-VAR while allowing the parameters characterizing the di¤erent regimes as
well as the transition matrix to be freely estimated. Note that the objective of this exercise
is to establish whether risk premia di¤er across the two previously estimated asset valuation-
policy rate regimes. We therefore deliberately “tie our hands” by forcing the regime sequence
for the MS-VAR to correspond to breaks in                t
                                                             and r t . There is no implication that risk
premia must necessarily show evidence of structural change. All parameters other than the
regime sequence are freely estimated and could in principle show no shift across the previously
estimated regimes.
   MS-VARs can be used to estimate the di¤erence-in-di¤erence (8) for any two stock portfolios
                                                                              P
with di¤erent average return premia, or used to compute the PDV of risk premia 1j=0
                                                                                     j
                                                                                       Et rt+1+j
for any one asset such the aggregate stock market portfolio in excess of the short-term interest
rate. We do both exercises here.
      We present results on how the di¤erence-in-di¤erence has behaved over time and across
our regimes using data on stock market portfolios that exhibit large cross-sectional variation
in return premia. Speci…cally, we use the equity return data available from Kenneth French’s
Dartmouth website on portfolios formed from double-sorting all stocks in the AMEX, NYSE,
NASDAQ into categories on the basis of …ve size categories and …ve BM categories, and alter-
natively single-sorting into 10 momentum categories based on recent past return performance.16
We then use CRSP/Compustat to construct the BM ratios of the corresponding portfolios. It
is well known that high BM portfolios earn much higher average returns than low BM port-
folios, exhibiting a value-spread, especially in the small size quintiles. Along the momentum
dimension, recent past winner stocks earn much higher returns than recent past losers. These
statistical facts are evident from Table 4, which reports sample statistics for returns on two
value spread portfolios–those long in the extreme value portfolio (highest BM ratio) and short
in the extreme growth portfolio (lowest BM ratio) while being in the smallest and second small-
est size quintile. The same is reported for a momentum spread portfolio–the portfolio that is
long in the extreme winner portfolio (M10) and short in the extreme loser portfolio (M1). The
annualized Sharpe ratio for the smallest value spread portfolio is 0.60 with an annualized mean
 16
      http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html



                                                    14
return of 10%. Similarly, the momentum spread portfolio has an annualized Sharpe ratio of 0.63
and annualized mean return of over 15%. Both of these strategies have much higher annualized
Sharpe ratios and average return premia than the CRSP value-weighted stock market return in
excess of the three-month Treasury bill return, where the corresponding numbers are 0.36 and
6%, respectively.
   We estimate a single MS-VAR for the two value spread portfolios and the momentum spread
portfolio along with other data that are predictor variables for the returns on these portfolios,
chosen on the basis of an Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) selection procedure. The variables
included in the MS-VAR are: (a) the momentum return spread, i.e., the di¤erence between the
excess return of the extreme winner (M10) portfolio and the excess return of the extreme loser
(M1) portfolio; (b) the value return spread (S1), i.e., the di¤erence between the excess return of
the small (size 1) high BM portfolio and the excess return of the small (size 1) low BM portfolio;
(c) the value return spread (S2), i.e., the di¤erence between the excess return of the size 2 high
BM portfolio and the excess return of the small size 2 low BM portfolio; (d) the momentum BM
spread: the di¤erence between the logarithm of the BM ratio of the M10 and M1 portfolios; (e)
the value BM spread (S1): The di¤erence between the logarithm of the BM ratio of the small
(size quintile 1) high book-market portfolio and the logarithm of the BM ratio of the small
(size 1) low book-market portfolio; (f) the value BM spread (S2): the di¤erence between the
logarithm of the BM ratio of the size quintile 2 high book-market portfolio and the logarithm
of the BM ratio of the size 2 low book-market portfolio; (g) the real federal funds rate (nominal
federal funds rate minus in‡ation); (h) the excess return on the small value portfolio.17 The
sample for this estimation is 1964:Q1-2017:Q3.18 We follow a similar procedure to form an
                                                               P
estimate of the PDV of risk premia on the overall stock market, 1 j=0
                                                                      j
                                                                        Et rt+1+j , but estimate
a separate MS-VAR for this purpose because the relevant predictor variables are di¤erent from
those using the equity-characteristic portfolios.19
  17
     The BM spreads are included because they represent the natural valuation ratios for the portfolio return
spreads that we are trying to predict (Cohen, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2003)). The real FFR and the excess
return on the small value portfolio are selected based on the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) among a set
of possible additional regressors. The …ve Fama/French factors (Fama and French (2015)) are considered as
possible additional regressors, but not selected based on the AIC. The Online Appendix provides additional
details on the variable selection procedure.
  The data on BM ratios for individual portfolios are constructed from CRSP and Compustat exactly as the
Fama-French portfolio returns are constructed. We mimic the selection and breakpoints of this construction
and compute the book-market ratio of each portfolio.
  18
     This is shorter than the sample used previously because reliable data for book-market ratios are not available
prior to 1964:Q1.
  19
     The MS-VAR speci…cation for the market risk premium includes the following variables: (a) the market
excess return, computed as the di¤erence in the CRSP value-weighted stock market return (including dividend
redistributions) and the three-month Treasury bill rate; (b) cay M S ; (c) following Campbell and Vuolteenaho
(2004), the small stock value spread (log-di¤erence in the book to market ratio of the S1 value and S1 growth
portfolio); (d) the SMB factor from Fama and French; (e) the HML factor from Fama and French. These
variables are included because they improve the AIC criterion.


                                                        15
   To exploit the heterogeneity across these portfolios, we begin by computing the regime
average values of the adjusted BM spreads between the high and low return premia portfolios,
 i     i    i                                                  i
e     e    e , for each regime i. The regime average value of e is de…ned as the expected
 xy       x    y                                                     xy
value of exy;t , conditional on being in regime i today and on the variables of the VAR being
equal to their conditional steady state mean values for regime i. The Appendix gives formal
expressions for the regime average, and explains how they are computed from the MS-VAR
parameters.
                                                                 i
      Table 5 reports the median and 68% credible sets for exy , computed from each draw of
the VAR parameters from the posterior distribution. The high (x) and low (y) return premia
portfolios along the BM dimension are always the extreme value (highest BM) and the extreme
growth portfolio (lowest BM), respectively, in each size category. Likewise, the high and low
return premia portfolios along the momentum dimension are always the extreme winner (M10)
and extreme loser portfolio (M1). For the market risk premium, x is the market return and
y is the risk-free rate. The third row reports the analogous values for the regime average of
the di¤erence-in-di¤erence of the PDV of risk premia between the high and low return premia
                                                        1    1
portfolios across the two regimes, i.e., the di¤erence ex;t ey;t   e2   e2 , as implied by
                                                                    x;t   y;t
the MS-VAR estimates. The last row reports the posterior probability that risk premia decline
in the low mps regime, computed as the percentage of draws from the posterior distribution of
regime averages for which risk premia are lower in regime 2 than in regime 1. To interpret the
table, keep in mind that regime 1 is the low asset valuation/high interest rate regime, while
regime 2 is the high asset valuation/low interest rate regime.
                                                                            i
   Table 5 shows that the median values of the adjusted BM spreads exy between the high
and low return premia portfolios are positive in both regime 1 and regime 2. This is not
surprising because portfolios that have higher return premia should have lower market-to-book
values, holding …xed expected earnings. Ostensively riskier portfolios have a higher PDV return
premium on average, regardless of the regime (see (7)). More signi…cantly, the spreads are larger
in the low valuation/high mps regime 1 than in the high valuation/low mps regime 2, implying
that the di¤erence-in-di¤erence (“di¤-in-di¤”) across regimes is always positive. In a shift from
high to low mps regime, the adjusted book-market ratios of high return/high risk portfolios
fall more than do those of low return/low risk portfolios. Put di¤erently, the return premia
of evidently riskier/higher return assets decline more in environments with persistently high
aggregate wealth ratios and low policy interest rates than do less risky/lower return assets.
      The third row of Table 5 reports the 68% posterior credible intervals in parentheses for
the di¤-in-di¤. Although the 68% posterior credible sets include negative values for the BM
spreads and the market risk premium (though not the momentum spread), this does not imply
that negative values are likely. The posterior distribution of the di¤-in-di¤ displays substantial


                                               16
negative skewness and, as a consequence, the posterior probability assigned to positive values,
i.e., to a decline in premia during the high valuation/low mps subperiods, is quite high in
all cases: 81%, 90%, 70%, and 64%; for the market premium, the momentum spread, the S1
BM spread, and the S2 BM spread, respectively. The odds that premia decline in the high
valuation/low mps regime is over 4 to 1 for the market premium, over 9 to 1 for the momentum
spread, over 2.3 to 1 and 1.8 to 1 for the S1 and S2 BM spreads, respectively. In short, the mass
of probability overwhelmingly favors one particular interpretation, namely that return premia
are lower rather than higher in the high valuation/low mps subperiods, consistent with a reach
for yield.
    We also estimate the PDV of risk premia as it evolves over the sample, estimated as the
time t VAR forecasts, i.e. conditional expected values, of the PDV on the right-hand-side of
(7).20 Given the posterior distribution of the VAR parameters, these forecasts have their own
posterior distribution. Figure 4 reports the median values of these forecasts as solid (blue)
lines, while the regime averages are indicated by the dashed (red) lines. Although the risk
premia are volatile, it is evident that they ‡uctuate around distinct means across the regimes.
The portfolio estimated risk premia reach lows or near-lows in the post-millennial period, after
shooting up brie‡y in the aftermath of the …nancial crisis of 2007-2008. Estimated risk premia
return to low levels in the post-crisis ZLB period. These results are supportive of a channel
that implies an increased appetite for risk-taking in low interest rate environments.


4      MS-DSGE Model
The foregoing results suggest that persistent low real interest rate environments characterized
by low or negative monetary policy spreads are associated with high asset valuations and
lower equity return premia. But, as discussed, macro models and macro estimates imply that
monetary policy shocks have at most short-run e¤ects on the real economy. This raises the
question: could these …ndings be attributed to monetary policy, and if so why and how?

4.1     Model Description
To address these questions, we construct and estimate a New-Keynesian Markov-switching,
dynamic, stochastic, general equilibrium (MS-DSGE) model. As we show below, this model
has the capacity to exhibit long-lasting (though not permanent) e¤ects of monetary policy on
the real economy due to two distinctive features: sticky expectations and regime changes in the
conduct of monetary policy. But the framework nests several special cases in which monetary
non-neutrality could be small in magnitude, short-lived, or absent entirely. Thus the extent
  20
    The expectation Et ( ) E ( jIt ), computed as above where It includes knowledge of the regime in place at
time t, Z t , and the VAR parameters for each regime.


                                                     17
to which the model exhibits long-lasting real e¤ects depends on parameters that are freely
estimated.
    Outside of these two distinctive features, the model we propose is isomorphic to the proto-
typical New Keynesian model of Galí (2015), Chapter 3.
   The behavior of households is summarized by a linearized Euler equation for a representative
agent taking the form
                                          h                   i
                             e t (yt+1 )
                        yt = E             it Ee t ( t+1 ) rss + dt                         (9)

                                                                              et (
where yt is detrended log output, it is the short-term nominal interest rate, E                                    t+1 )   is expected
in‡ation from the point of view of agents in the model, rss is the steady state real interest rate,
and dt is a demand shock that follows an AR(1) process dt = d dt 1 + d "d ; "d N (0; 1). The
parameter is the inverse of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of the representative
household.
    The relation between in‡ation and the output gap is controlled by a New-Keynesian Phillips
curve:
                                  t     t
                                              et [
                                            = E           t+1        t]   +       yt   1   yt                                    (10)
                                                                                                  1

where    t
             e [ t jIt ] denotes the perceived long term value of in‡ation that depends on It ; the
             E
information available to agents at time t. We discuss the way expectations are formed below.
The parameter     denotes the slope of the Phillips curve and depends on the extent of nominal
rigidities in the economy. The variable yt denotes the natural level of output de…ned as the
level that would prevail absent nominal rigidities. Thus, yt 1 yt 1 is the output gap at time
t   1. We assume an AR(1) process for : yt =                     y   yt   1   +    y   "y ; " y       N (0; 1) :
    The central bank obeys the following nominal interest rate rule:
                                             h                                      i
            it    rss + Tt   = 1        i; t   ; t    t
                                                         T
                                                          t
                                                             +     y; t (y t y t 1 )                                             (11)
                                       h                  i
                                 + i; t it 1     rss + Tt + i "i ; "i N (0; 1) :

The rule implies that the central bank responds to deviations of in‡ation from the target and
to detrended output growth. An important feature of this policy rule, and a departure from
the prototypical model, is that it allows for regime shifts in the in‡ation target Tt and in the
activism coe¢ cients    ;   t
                                ; and       y;   t
                                                     that govern how strongly the central bank responds to de-
viation from the target and to economic growth. The rule also allows for potential regime shifts
in the autocorrelation coe¢ cient i; t : These coe¢ cients are modeled as following a Markov-
switching process governed by the discrete random variable                                 t    and will be discussed below.
Note the interest rate rule is written in deviations from the steady state conditional on being in
a particular regime dictated by t . This means that, once in‡ation reaches the desired target,
the economy stabilizes around it, absent shocks.

                                                                18
    Expectations about in‡ation are formed using a learning algorithm as follows. First, we
follow Malmendier and Nagel (2015) (MN) and assume that agents form conditional expecta-
tions about in‡ation using an autoregressive process,                                t   =        +         t 1   +    t:   We further assume
that agents must learn about the parameter ; while they have invariant beliefs about the au-
toregressive parameter .21 Learning implies that, each period, agents form a belief, e t ; about
  that is updated over time. Updating not only a¤ects beliefs about next period in‡ation, it
also a¤ects beliefs about long-term trend in‡ation. De…ne perceived trend in‡ation to be the
limh!1 Ee t [ t+h ] and denote it by t : Given the presumed autoregressive process that agents use
to form expectations about in‡ation,    t is equal to unconditional mean of in‡ation under the
                                      e
agent’s subjective measure, i.e., t = E [ t ] = (1    ) 1 e t . Taken together, these assumptions
imply that agents’expectations of one step ahead in‡ation, E     e t [ t+1 ] ; is a weighted average of
perceived trend in‡ation and current in‡ation:

                                    et [
                                    E      t+1 ]   = et +              t   = (1          )   t   +      t:                                      (12)

       The evolution of beliefs about e t and                      t       potentially re‡ects both an adaptive learning
component as well as a signal about the central bank’s in‡ation target. For the adaptive learning
component, we follow evidence in MN that the University of Michigan Survey of Consumers
(SOC) mean in‡ation forecast is well described by a constant gain learning algorithm. For the
signal component, we assume that beliefs could be partly shaped by additional information the
agent receives about the current in‡ation target. This signal could re‡ect the opinion of experts
(as in MN) or a credible central bank announcement. Combining these two yields updating
rules for e t and    t   that are a weighted averages of two terms:

                                2                                                    3
                                                                                                      h                     i
                            T   6                                                      7          T                    T
            et =     1          4et        1+ (     t          t 1              e t 1 )5 +             (1         )                             (13)
                                 |                      {z                           }                                 t

                                                        e CG
                                                          t
                                2                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                    h       i
                            T   6                              1                                                       7        T       T
             t   =   1          4 t    1   + (1            )       (       t        t 1          (1         )   t 1 )5   +                      (14)
                                 |                                             {z                                     }                 t
                                                                               CG
                                                                               t



The …rst terms in square brackets, e CG
                                     t  and                            CG
                                                                       t ;      are the recursive updating rules implied by
constant gain learning, where               is the constant gain parameter that governs how much last
period’s beliefs e t 1 and t 1 are updated given new information, t . (The Appendix provides
additional details on constant gain learning.) The second terms in square brackets captures the
  21
    In principle one could introduce learning about as well. We forgo doing this in order to keep the estimation
tractable, since the most important learning aspects in the model involve those parameters such as that bear
most closely on trend in‡ation.


                                                                   19
                                                                                    T                  T
e¤ect of the signal about the current in‡ation target                               t
                                                                                        . If                = 1; the signal is completely
informative and the agent’s belief about trend in‡ation is the same as the in‡ation target. If
  T
    = 0, the signal is completely uninformative and the agent’s belief about trend in‡ation
depends only on the adaptive learning algorithm. Overall perceived trend in‡ation is therefore
a weighted average of the trend implied by the constant gain learning rule and the central
bank’s in‡ation target. A weight of less than one on the target could arise either because the
target is imperfectly observed, or because central bank announcements about the target are not
                                                                           T
viewed as fully credible. Note that the parameter                              is closely related to the speed with which
                                                                                T
the agent learns about a new in‡ation target. Since                                 is freely estimated, we can empirically
assess the magnitude of this speed and its role in macroeconomic ‡uctuations.
   Agents form expectations about detrended output using a simple backward looking rule:
                                               e t (yt+1 ) = yt 1 :
                                               E                                                                                                         (15)

Unlike in‡ation, agents do not perceive a moving mean for detrended output. This assumption
is consistent with the equilibrium of the model implying that the central bank cannot have a
permanent e¤ect on real activity. The Online Appendix proves that monetary neutrality holds
in the very long run.
                                                           et [
   Using equations (12), (14), and (15), we substitute out E                                                t+1 ] ;           t;
                                                                                                                                       e t (yt+1 ) in the
                                                                                                                                   and E
model equations (9), (10), and (11) to obtain the following system of equations:

  1. Real activity
                          yt = yt      1         [it              t            (1        )     t            rss ] + dt :

  2. Phillips curve:
                                       t   =     t   +                         yt   1         yt       1    :
                                                         1
  3. Monetary policy rule with changes in target:
                                              h                                                                                                  i
                          T                                                                    T
             it    rss + t     = 1       i; t     ; t    t                                         t
                                                                                                           +         y;   t
                                                                                                                               (yt      yt 1 )
                                         h                                                     i
                                                                                         T
                                  + i; t it 1       rss +                                 t
                                                                                                       +        i "i ;    "i         N (0; 1) :

  4. Law of motion for dt :
                                   dt =        d dt 1    +        d "d ;       "d        N (0; 1) :

  5. Law of motion for yt :

                                 yt =      y    yt   1   +    y       "y ; "y                 N (0; 1) :

  6. Perceived trend in‡ation:
                          T                                  1                                                                            T   T
                t   = 1          t 1   + (1              )        (    t                t 1            (1           )     t 1)        +          t
                                                                                                                                                     :

                                                             20
4.2            MS-DSGE Estimation
We estimate the model using Bayesian methods. Parameter uncertainty is characterized using
a random walk Metropolis–Hastings algorithm. The parameters of the policy rule, Tt ; ; t ;
      y;   t
               and   i;   t
                              ; are permitted to switch between two regimes according to a Markov-switching
process. Since we are interested in whether the previously estimated regimes characterized
by persistently high (low) valuations and low (high) mps could be attributable to monetary
policy, we force the regime sequence for the policy rule parameters to correspond to that for
  t
       and r     t
                     reported in Table 3. But the parameters characterizing the policy regimes as well
as the transition matrix are freely estimated.22 Note that there is no implication from this
procedure that the parameters of the policy rule must necessarily show evidence of structural
change. Indeed, the estimation uses ‡at priors for all policy rule parameters, so not only are
the parameters permitted to show no shift across the valuation/mps regimes, there is no prior
imposed that predisposes the estimates to implying that they should shift.
   As data, we use four observable series: real per-capita gross domestic product (GDP) growth,
in‡ation, the nominal federal funds rate (FFR), and the mean in‡ation expectation from the
SOC. By using in‡ation expectations, we ask the model to generate a realistic behavior for
in‡ation expectations. Speci…cally, we map the perceived law of motion of in‡ation into the
Michigan survey. Since we have only three shocks to match four observable variables, we allow
for observation errors on all shocks.
       The sample spans the period 1961:Q1 to 2017:Q3, in line with our estimates for the regimes
in the means of cay and the mps. We use the full sample of data, including observations from
the zero lower bound (ZLB) period. The Appendix shows that our …ndings on the long-lasting
real e¤ects of changes in the conduct of monetary policy are robust to replacing the FFR either
with an estimated shadow rate, or with the one-year Treasury bill rate. The reason for this is
that the policy rule regime changes we uncover are not mainly tied to the ZLB period.
    The Appendix also provides a detailed description of the data, the model solution, and
estimation.

4.3            MS-DSGE Estimation Results
Table 6 reports the prior and posterior distributions for the model parameters. For the policy
rule parameter estimates for Tt ;    ; t;  y; t and i; t , where we use ‡at priors, a key …nd-
ing is that the previously estimated regime subperiods (given in Table 3) are associated with
quantitatively large changes in the estimated policy rule. Regime 1, which is the low valua-
                                                                                                     T
tion/high mps regime is a hawkish policy regime characterized by a low in‡ation target                t
                                                                                                          and
                                  T
  22
    We use the regime sequence ^ = f^1 ; :::; ^T g that is most likely to have occurred, given our estimated
posterior mode parameter values for . See the Appendix for details.


                                                            21
strong activism ; t against deviations of in‡ation from the target relative to activism y; t
on growth. Regime 2, which is the high valuation/low mps regime is a comparatively dovish
regime characterized by an in‡ation target that is signi…cantly higher and activism against
in‡ation that is signi…cantly lower. In fact, for regime 2, the 90% credible set for                 ;   t
                                                                                                             includes
1, the threshold generally associated with the “Taylor principle” (Taylor (1993)), which pre-
scribes that the central bank should raise nominal rates by more than one-for-one in response
to deviations of in‡ation from target thereby raising the real rate and reducing in‡ationary
pressure. The activism coe¢ cient           y;   t
                                                     for output growth and the autoregressive parameter
 i;   t
       are more similar across the two regimes.
      These …ndings indicate that the policy rule parameters shifted to hawkish values in 1978:Q4
around the time of Volcker’s appointment, consistent with an older empirical literature (e.g.,
Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (2000)). But we …nd here that, starting 2001:Q4, there was a
decisive shift back to the dovish policy rule that has, with the exception of a brief interlude
from 2006:Q2-2008:Q2, remained in place to the end of our sample in 2017:Q3.
      Shifts in the policy rule parameters across the two regimes are large in magnitude. Table 7
reports the posterior distribution for the di¤erences in the parameters across regimes. The mode
of the distribution of the di¤erence in the quarterly in‡ation targets across is around 2%: This
large value implies a di¤erence in the annualized in‡ation target across regimes of almost 8%.
The 90% credible set also indicates strong statistical evidence in favor of a quantitatively large
di¤erence in the in‡ation target across the two regimes. Similarly, the posterior distribution for
the di¤erence in the in‡ation activism coe¢ cient ; t is centered on 1:2 with posterior credible
sets that bounded well away from zero, con…rming evidence of a change in the degree of activism
aimed at stabilizing in‡ation around the desired target. Finally, the posterior distributions for
the di¤erence in activism      y;   t
                                        on growth and in the autoregressive parameter       i;   t
                                                                                                         show only
weak evidence of change in these parameters. Thus, overall, we can conclude that the two
regimes present evidence of sizable shifts across the previously estimated regimes in the relative
importance of in‡ation and economic growth in the policy rule and a large shift in the tolerable
level of in‡ation.
   For the non-policy-rule parameters, it is worth emphasizing that the estimates imply a very
high level of inertia in in‡ation expectations. The constant gain parameter controlling the
speed with which beliefs about long-term in‡ation are updated with new information on in‡ation
                                                                      T
is estimated to be quite low. Furthermore, the parameter                  controlling the information ‡ow
about the central bank target is estimated to be very low. Taken together, these …ndings imply
that agents revise their beliefs about long term in‡ation only very slowly over time and mostly
based on past realizations of in‡ation rather than on the in‡ation target itself.
      Figure 5 shows how the model-implied series track their empirical counterparts. In general,
observation errors play little to no role in the dynamics of the model implied series. Most

                                                         22
important for the application here, the dynamics of the model-implied series for one-period
in‡ation expectations tracks the SOC series virtually without error. This is relevant since
in‡ation expectations play a key role in the model’s predictions, as we show below. Figure
5 underscores the extent to which those predictions are predicated on empirically relevant
expectations of in‡ation. The other model-implied series also track their empirical counterparts
fairly closely. In particular, since the model …ts the FFR and in‡ation expectations well, it also
…ts the real rate as measured by the di¤erence in the two. For in‡ation, there are a handful of
high-frequency spikes that the model is not well positioned to capture. A richer model could
account for these spikes, but since the scope of our investigation is a study of lower frequency
shifts in the policy rule, we do not view this as a important drawback of the framework. We
now ask what these estimates imply for how monetary policy a¤ects real interest rates and risk
premia.

4.3.1     The Conduct of Monetary Policy and the Real Interest Rate

To investigate the importance of changes in the conduct of monetary policy in driving real
interest rates over our sample, we consider a number of simulations presented in several …gures
below. All …gures present the values of the variables at the estimated posterior mode parameter
values.
   Figure 6 shows the results of a simulation in which the observables and estimated state
vector are taken as they were at the beginning of our sample with all Gaussian shocks are shut
down, so that the only source of variation in the variables arises from changes in the conduct
of monetary policy, i.e., from changes in the policy rule parameters. The simulation therefore
isolates the contribution of changes in the in‡ation target and policy rule activism coe¢ cients to
‡uctuations in aggregate variables. Note that these isolated movements are the only ones other
than the policy shock that the model stipulates can be purely the result of the behavior of the
monetary authority. Monetary policy also a¤ects the propagation of the two non-policy shocks,
as well as the policy shock itself, but these e¤ects are, by contrast to changes in the policy rule,
not solely the result of changes monetary policy. The portion of movements in macro variables
that can be directly associated with changes in the conduct of monetary policy are shown
in blue (solid) lines in Figure 6. The …gure also considers two counterfactual simulations to
analyze the relative importance of changes in the target and changes in the activism coe¢ cients.
The orange (dashed) line assumes that monetary policy starts under the dovish regime and no
subsequent regime change occurs. The black (dotted) line assumes that changes in the target
occurred, but that the slope coe¢ cients in the policy rule coe¢ cients always remain as in the
dovish, high in‡ation target regime.
   A series of noteworthy results emerge from these exercises. First, if the central bank had
always maintained a high target with low response to deviations of in‡ation from the target,

                                                23
the economy would not have experienced the drop in in‡ation that occurred in the early 1980s.
Instead, in‡ation would have kept increasing. What is more relevant and less obvious is the
behavior of the real federal funds rate. The right panel of Figure 6 shows that changes in the
conduct of monetary policy generate ‡uctuations in the real interest rate that lasts for decades.
Comparing the estimated case with the orange dashed line that counterfactually assumes no
policy rule changes occurred in our sample, it is evident that the real FFR would have been
substantially more stable without the policy rule changes.
   Figure 6 also shows that large, persistent swings in short-term interest rates driven by the
conduct of monetary policy were the outcome not only of shifts in the in‡ation target, but
also of regime changes in the activism coe¢ cients of the policy rule. This may be observed
by comparing the black dotted line, which shows a counterfactual in which the in‡ation target
changes but there are no accompanying changes in the activism coe¢ cients, with the baseline
estimation shown in the blue solid line. Comparing the two, we see that the sharp increases
in real rates associated with Volcker would have been far smaller had the activism coe¢ cients
remained constant. This happens because the hawkish regime exhibits both a lower in‡ation
target and increased activism against deviations from the target. This combination–a lower
target and aggressive action to quickly reach the lower target–generates a greater increase in
the real interest rate than what a lower target alone would imply. So in the counterfactual
simulation where the in‡ation target changes but the activism coe¢ cients do not, the increase
in the real FFR is signi…cantly smaller and this comes at the cost for the central bank of having
to take longer to rein in in‡ation and in‡ation expectations. A similar result holds in the short
hawkish regime that precedes the Great Recession.
   Figure 6 also shows that shifts to hawkish regimes under Volcker and in the pre-Great
Recession subperiod contributed not only to sharp increases in real rates in those episodes but
also to sharp contractions in output growth during the recessions that followed. In both cases
the results show that these regimes with lower in‡ation targets, especially because they were
coupled with more aggressive responses to deviations from the target, contributed to sharp
contractions in real output.
    The next …gure investigates how important changes in the conduct of monetary policy were
in generating the secular decline in real interest rates observed since 1980. For this purpose,
we begin a simulation with the economy as it was in 1980:Q1, when in‡ation had reached its
peak in our sample but just before the real interest rate reached its peak, which occurred in
1980:Q3. To isolate the e¤ects of changes in the monetary policy rule, we set all Gaussian
shocks after 1980:Q1 to zero. Thus, the simulation again focuses on the estimated portion of
movements in the macroeconomic variables that can be directly associated with changes in the
conduct of monetary policy, this time starting with the economy as it was right after Volcker
was appointed. These movements are shown in blue (solid) lines in Figure 7. The actual values

                                               24
for each series are shown in red (dashed) lines. The right panel of Figure 7 shows that the
sharp run-up in real rates in the 1980s, and almost all of its downward trend since that time,
is estimated to be attributable to changes in the conduct of monetary policy. Changes in the
conduct of monetary policy do not, however, track the higher frequency ‡uctuations in the real
rate. For example, there is a sharp transitory decline in real rates right after the Great Recession
that is not associated with a shift in the policy rule parameters, but is instead attributed to a
combination of the model’s Gaussian shocks.
   Figure 8 explains the role of learning in generating the persistent movements in the real
interest rate. For this purpose, we consider an alternative counterfactual simulation in which
agents receive a perfect signal about the central bank’s in‡ation target, in contrast to what the
                                                                                             T
parameter estimates actually imply. As explained above, this corresponds to the case             = 1:
                                                                                 T
This value is highly counterfactual, since the estimated parameter value of ^ = 0:013 implies
that expectations of trend in‡ation as implied by the SOC data place virtually no weight on the
actual target. Under the counterfactual scenario, the perceived trend value of in‡ation coincides
in every period with the actual in‡ation target t = Tt . In both the counterfactual and the
baseline, the observables and estimated state vector are taken as they were at the beginning of
our sample with all Gaussian shocks shut down, so that the only source of variation is changes
in the conduct of monetary policy. The solid blue line is again the baseline estimated portion
of movements in the macroeconomic variables that can be directly associated with changes
in the conduct of monetary policy in full model, while the dashed line corresponds to the
counterfactual case with perfect information about the central bank’s target.
   Figure 8 shows that learning is crucial to the long-lasting e¤ects of monetary policy changes
on the real interest rate. In the counterfactual economy, in‡ation jumps immediately to the
new target and we do not observe any e¤ect on the real interest rate. In‡ation jumps in the
counterfactual case because the central bank does not have to “convince”agents about the new
desired level of in‡ation. Thus it is the interaction between changes in the anti-in‡ationary
stance of the central bank and sticky expectations that generates long-lasting ‡uctuations in
the real interest rate.

4.3.2   The Dynamic E¤ects of Policy Rule Changes Versus Policy Shocks

Given the above results, it is of interest to compare the dynamic e¤ects of a monetary policy
shock with those of a monetary policy regime change. To do so, Figure 9 presents two sets of
estimated impulse response functions. In the top row, we assume that the economy is initially
in the dovish regime and consider the case of the monetary authority attempting to curb
in‡ation, as exempli…ed by the Volcker disin‡ation. The blue solid line in the top row reports
responses to a two standard deviation contractionary (i.e., positive) monetary policy shock and
no policy rule regime change. The black dashed line in the top row reports impulse responses

                                                25
to a regime change from the dovish to the hawkish regime, with all Gaussian shocks (including
the monetary policy shock) set to zero. The …gure shows that monetary policy shocks are
comparatively short-lasting, consistent with evidence in Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans
(2005). By contrast, the e¤ects of a regime change in the policy rule are long-lived and last
for many decades. This occurs because of the high degree of stickiness in in‡ation expectations
implied by the model estimates. When the central bank curbs in‡ation, it lowers the in‡ation
target and simultaneously moves aggressively toward that goal by intensifying its response to
deviations from the target. But because in‡ation expectations are sticky, the sharp increase in
the real interest rate that results remains elevated for decades.
   Because the model is nonlinear, the duration of these e¤ects can di¤er depending on whether
we begin in a dovish or hawkish regime. So in the lower row of Figure 9 we now assume that the
economy is initially in the hawkish regime and we consider the case of the monetary authority
attempting to lift in‡ation, as exempli…ed by the post Great Recession era. In this case, the
blue solid line shows the impulse responses to a two standard deviation expansionary (i.e.,
negative) monetary policy shock and no regime change in the conduct of monetary policy. The
black dashed line shows responses to a regime shift from the hawkish to the dovish regime,
with all Gaussian shocks set to zero. We again observe that the e¤ects on the real interest rate
of a policy rule regime change are extremely long lived and are even more persistent than the
curbing in‡ation case. The reason is that, under the dovish regime, the estimated policy rule
implies that the central bank responds less aggressively to deviations of in‡ation and output
from their targets as indicated by the estimated activism coe¢ cients ; t and        y; t , which
are smaller in the dovish regime. Thus, when the central bank seeks to lift in‡ation as opposed
to curb it, it does so more gradually than in the hawkish regime. The result is that the real
interest rate remains perturbed from its steady state for longer following a shift to the dovish
monetary policy regime compared to a shift to the hawkish regime.
  It should be emphasized that in either the lifting or curbing in‡ation case, the e¤ects on
the real rate of a pure regime change in the conduct of monetary policy are extremely long
lived, lasting more than 90 years in both cases, in sharp contrast to a monetary policy shock.
The reason monetary policy shocks have more short-lived e¤ects is because, even in the dovish
regime, the activism coe¢ cient ; t is still large enough to allow the central bank to quickly
stabilize the real rate in response to any shock that moves in‡ation away from target, including
in response to monetary policy shocks. (This coe¢ cient is larger still in the hawkish regime,
implying even faster stabilization.) By contrast, it is a truism that there is no reason for the
central bank to stabilize an intentional change in the stance of monetary policy. It follows
that the extent to which regime changes in monetary policy persist in their real e¤ects depends
entirely on the speed with which agents adapt their expectations about long-term in‡ation.
Our …nding that agent’s expectations adapt very slowly over time implies that changes in the

                                               26
conduct of monetary policy have e¤ects that last for many decades.

4.3.3    Dovish Monetary Policy and Reach for Yield in Equity?

Finally, we return to the question of whether a regime shift to the dovish monetary policy
rule is associated with a shift in equity market return premia. Figure 10 plots the present
discounted value of expected excess returns for the portfolios analyzed in Section 3.3 (dashed
line, right axis) together with the identi…ed component of the real interest rate that we estimate
is attributable solely to regime changes in the monetary policy rule (solid line, left axis). The
Figure exhibits a noticeable positive comovement between the two series, suggesting that when
monetary policy is dovish and the real interest rate is consequently low, expected excess returns
are also lower, consistent with a reach for yield.
   To con…rm this visual impression, the second column of Table 8 reports the correlation
between the PDV of excess returns of the di¤erent equity characteristic portfolios and the
identi…ed component of the real interest rate driven solely by changes in the policy rule, denoted
RIRtM P R in the table. This correlation is highly positive, equal to 0.88 for the momentum
spread, 0.82 for the market excess return, 0.75 for the value spread in the small size quintile, and
0.70 for the value spread in the second smallest size quintile. Thus, the conditional risk premium
on the market and on several equity characteristic portfolios all exhibit evidence consistent with
a reach-for-yield in response to the long-lasting e¤ects of changes in the conduct of monetary
policy. The table shows that correlation of premia with RIRtM P R is systematically larger than
that with the residual component of the real interest rate, RIRt         RIRtM P R , and thus also
larger than with the real interest rate itself (RIRt ). This shows that shifts in the monetary
policy stance play an important role in generating the positive correlation between premia and
the real interest rate, but that other movements in the real rate do not have this property.
This may be because persistent low or high interest rate environments driven by shifts in the
conduct of monetary policy have e¤ects that last for decades, in contrast to movements in real
rates driven by other factors. Indeed, there is no evidence consistent with a reach for yield
when considering the interest rates movements driven by any of the Gaussian shocks, which
have e¤ects that are far more transitory than those associated with changes in the conduct of
monetary policy.


5       Conclusion
The evidence in this paper shows that the U.S. economy is characterized by large, longer term
regime shifts in asset values relative to macroeconomic fundamentals that arise concurrently
with equally important shifts in the level of the short-term real interest rate in excess of a
commonly used measure of the “natural”rate of interest, a variable we refer to as the monetary

                                                27
policy spread, mps. The results identify two subperiods of the sample characterized by low
valuations and a high mps: the period 1978:Q4 to 2001:Q3, and the period 2006:Q2 to 2008:Q2.
The …rst subperiod of the sample spans the Volcker disin‡ation and its aftermath, while the
second subperiod follows 17 consecutive Federal Reserve rate increases that left the nominal
funds rate standing at 5.25% in June of 2006. All other subperiods, including the entire period
of the sample after the Great Recession, are identi…ed as high valuation/low mps regimes. We
further document that the high valuation/low mps regimes are associated with lower equity
market return premia, consistent with a reach for yield.
   To investigate what part of these …ndings could be attributable to monetary policy, we solve
and estimate a New Keynesian Markov-switching DSGE model with two distinctive features:
adaptive learning in in‡ation expectations augmented by a possible signal about the in‡ation
target, and regime shifts in the conduct of monetary policy, measured as time-variation in
the parameters of an interest rate rule. The overall learning rule is mapped into in‡ation
expectations data from the University of Michigan Survey of Consumers and …ts the actual
expectations series with negligible error.
   Estimates of this model imply that the conduct of monetary policy di¤ered markedly across
the valuation/mps subperiods, with the high valuation/low mps subperiods coincident with a
dovish policy rule characterized by a comparatively higher in‡ation target and less responsive-
ness in the estimated policy rule to in‡ation relative to growth.
   We use estimates from the DSGE model to identify movements in the real variables that
are attributable solely to the conduct of monetary policy. Several …ndings are noteworthy.
First, regime changes in the conduct of monetary policy generate persistent ‡uctuations in the
short-term real interest rate that last for decades. By contrast, monetary policy shocks have far
more transitory e¤ects. Second, the estimates imply that virtually all of the downward trend in
the real interest rate observed since the early 1980s can be attributed to regime changes in the
conduct of monetary policy. This occurs because the policy rule parameters exhibit a decisive
shift toward more hawkish values around the time of Volcker’s appointment to the Federal
Reserve, but then exhibit an equally decisive shift back to dovish values in the aftermath of
9/11. They have remained there since, with the exception of a brief interlude from 2006:Q2-
2008:Q2. Third, the estimates imply that perceived trend in‡ation closely follows an adaptive
learning rule and thus adjusts very slowly to signals about changes in the in‡ation target.
This plays a crucial role in the results. Indeed, if perceived trend in‡ation is counterfactually
set to equal the estimated in‡ation target, regime changes in the conduct of monetary policy
have no a¤ect on real interest rates. Finally, conditional return premia on the market and on
several equity characteristic portfolios are all strongly positively correlated with the component
of the short-term real interest rate attributable to changes in the conduct of monetary policy,
consistent with a reach for yield type phenomenon. By contrast, ‡uctuations in the more

                                               28
transitory residual component of the real rate are not associated with important changes in
equity return premia.




                                            29
References
Acharya, V. V., and H. Naqvi (2016): “On reaching for yield and the coexistence of bubbles
 and negative bubbles,”Available at SSRN 2618973.

Andrews, D. (1991): “Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix
 Estimation,”Econometrica, 59, 817–858.

Barro, R. J., and A. Mollerus (2014): “Safe assets,” National Bureau of Economic Re-
  search No. w20652.

Bernanke, B. S., and K. N. Kuttner (2005): “What Explains the Stock Market’s Reaction
  to Federal Reserve Policy?,”Journal of Finance.

Bianchi, F. (2013): “Regime Switches, Agents’Beliefs, and Post-World War II U.S. Macro-
  economic Dynamics,”The Review of Economic Studies, 80(2), 463–490.

          (2016): “Methods for measuring expectations and uncertainty in Markov-switching
  models,”Journal of Econometrics, 190(1), 79–99.

Black, F. (1995): “Interest rates as options,”the Journal of Finance, 50(5), 1371–1376.

Boyarchenko, N., V. Haddad, and M. C. Plosser (2016): “The Federal Reserve and
  market con…dence,”.

Caballero, R. J., and E. Farhi (2014): “The Safety Trap,” Discussion paper, National
  Bureau of Economic Research No. w19927.

Campbell, J. Y. (2017): Financial decisions and markets: a course in asset pricing. Princeton
  University Press.

Campbell, J. Y., and T. Vuolteenaho (2004): “Bad Beta, Good Beta,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 94(5), 1249–1275.

Choi, J., and M. Kronlund (2015): “Reaching for yield or playing it safe? Risk taking by
  bond mutual funds,”Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2669465.

Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005): “Nominal Rigidities and
  the Dynamic E¤ects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 113(1),
  1–45.

Cieslak, A., A. Morse, and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2015): “Stock returns over the FOMC
  cycle,”Available at SSRN 2687614.
Cieslak, A., and A. Schrimpf (2019): “Non-monetary news in central bank communica-
  tion,”Journal of International Economics, 118, 293–315.

Clarida, R., J. Gali, and M. Gertler (2000): “Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic
  Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(1), 147–180.

Cochrane, J. H. (2005): Asset Pricing, Revised Edition. Princeton University Press, Prince-
 ton, NJ.

Cochrane, J. H., and M. Piazzesi (2002): “The fed and interest rates-a high-frequency
  identi…cation,”AEA Papers and Proceedings, 92(2), 90–95.

Cohen, R. B., C. Polk, and T. Vuolteenaho (2003): “The value spread,” The Journal
 of Finance, 58(2), 609–641.

Coimbra, N., and H. Rey (2017): “Financial cycles with heterogeneous intermediaries,”
  Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Cook, T. a. H. (1989): “The e¤ect of changes in the federal funds rate target on market
 interest rates in the 1970s,”Journal of Monetary Economics, 24(3), 331–351.

Costa, O., M. Fragoso, and R. Marques (2004): Discrete-Time Markov Jump Linear
  Systems. Springer, New York.

Di Maggio, M., and M. T. Kacperczyk (2015): “The unintended consequences of the zero
  lower bound policy,”Columbia Business School Research Paper.

Diamond, D. W., and R. G. Rajan (2012): “Illiquid banks, …nancial stability, and interest
  rate policy,”Journal of Political Economy, 120(3), 552–591.

Drechsler, I., A. Savov, and P. Schnabl (2014): “A model of monetary policy and risk
 premia,”National Bureau of Economic Research No. w20141.

Evans, G., and S. Honkapohja (2001): Learning and Expectations In Macroeconomics.
  Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Fama, E. F., and K. R. French (2015): “A …ve-factor asset pricing model,” Journal of
  Financial Economics, 116(1), 1–22.

Farhi, E., and J. Tirole (2012): “Collective moral hazard, maturity mismatch, and systemic
  bailouts,”The American Economic Review, 102(1), 60–93.

Galí, J. (2015): Monetary policy, in‡ation, and the business cycle: an introduction to the new
 Keynesian framework and its applications. Princeton University Press.
Gertler, M., and P. Karadi (2015): “Monetary policy surprises, credit costs, and economic
 activity,”American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7(1), 44–76.

Geweke, J. F. (1992): “Evaluating the Accuracy of Sampling-Based Approaches to the Cal-
  culation of Posterior Moments,”Bayesian Statistics, 4, 169–193.

Gilchrist, S., D. López-Salido, and E. Zakrajšek (2015): “Monetary policy and real
  borrowing costs at the zero lower bound,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
  7(1), 77–109.

Greenwald, D., M. Lettau, and S. C. Ludvigson (2019): “How the Wealth Was Won:
  Factors Shares as Market Fundamentals,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
  Paper No. 25769.

Gürkaynak, R. S., B. Sack, and E. Swanson (2005): “The sensitivity of long-term in-
  terest rates to economic news: evidence and implications for macroeconomic models,” The
  American Economic Review, 95(1), 425–436.

Hall, R. E. (2016): “Understanding the Decline in the Safe Real Interest Rate,” National
  Bureau of Economic Research No. w22196.

Hamilton, J. D. (1994): Time Series Analysis. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NY.

Hanson, S. G., D. O. Lucca, and J. H. Wright (2018): “Interest Rate Conundrums in
  the 21st Century,”Discussion paper, unpublished working paper.

Hanson, S. G., and J. C. Stein (2015): “Monetary policy and long-term real rates,”Journal
  of Financial Economics, 115(3), 429–448.

Jarocinski, M., and P. Karadi (2019): “Deconstructing monetary policy surprises: the role
  of information shocks,”American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics forthcoming.

Kekre, R., and M. Lenel (2019): “Monetary Policy, Redistribution, and Risk Premia,”
 Unpublished paper, Booth School of Business, University of Chicago.

Kim, C.-J., and C. R. Nelson (1999): State-Space Models with Regime Switching. The MIT
  Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Laubach, T., and J. C. Williams (2003): “Measuring the natural rate of interest,”Review
  of Economics and Statistics, 85(4), 1063–1070.

Lettau, M., and S. C. Ludvigson (2001): “Consumption, Aggregate Wealth and Expected
  Stock Returns,”Journal of Finance, 56(3), 815–849.
        (2005): “Expected Returns and Expected Dividend Growth,” Journal of Financial
  Economics, 76, 583–626.

        (2010): “Measuring and Modeling Variation in the Risk-Return Tradeo¤,”in Handbook
  of Financial Econometrics, ed. by Y. Ait-Sahalia, and L. P. Hansen, vol. 1, pp. 617–90.
  Elsevier Science B.V., North Holland, Amsterdam.

Lubik, T. A., and F. Schorfheide (2004): “Testing for indeterminacy: an application to
  US monetary policy,”American Economic Review, pp. 190–217.

Lucca, D. O., and E. Moench (2015): “The Pre-FOMC Announcement Drift,”The Journal
  of Finance, 70(1), 329–371.

Malmendier, U., and S. Nagel (2015): “Learning from in‡ation experiences,” The Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 131(1), 53–87.

Newey, W. K., and K. D. West (1987): “A Simple, Positive Semide…nite, Heteroskedasticity
  and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix,”Econometrica, 55, 703–708.

Park, J. Y., and M. Ogaki (1991): “Inference in Cointegrated Models using VAR prewhiten-
  ing to estimate Shortrun Dynamics,”Rochester Center for Economic Research Working Paper
  No. 281, University of Rochester.

Phillips, P., and S. Ouliaris (1990): “Asymptotic Properties of Residual Based Tests for
  Cointegration,”Econometrica, 58, 165–193.

Piazzesi, M., and M. Schneider (2015): “Payments, credit and asset prices,”Unpublished
  manuscript, Stanford University.

Raftery, A., and S. Lewis (1992): “How many iterations in the Gibbs sampler?,”Bayesian
 Statistics, 4, 763–773.

Rajan, R. G. (2006): “Has …nance made the world riskier?,”European Financial Management,
 12(4), 499–533.

        (2013): “A step in the dark: unconventional monetary policy after the crisis,”Andrew
  Crockett Memorial Lecture, BIS, Basel, 23.

Sims, C. A., and T. Zha (2006): “Were There Regime Switches in US Monetary Policy?,”
  American Economic Review, 91(1), 54–81.

Stock, J. H., and M. W. Watson (1993): “A Simple Estimator of Cointegrating Vectors in
  Higher Order Integrated Systems,”Econometrica, 61, 783–820.
Taylor, J. B. (1993): “Discretion versus policy rules in practice,” in Carnegie-Rochester
  Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39, pp. 195–214.

Vuolteenaho, T. (2000): “Understanding the Aggregate Book-Market Ratio and its Impli-
  cations to Current Equity-Premium Expectations,”Unpublished paper, Harvard University.

Wu, J. C., and F. D. Xia (2016): “Measuring the macroeconomic impact of monetary policy
  at the zero lower bound,”Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 48(2-3), 253–291.
Tables and Figures

                                             Overall Medium Business
                              Panel A: Correlations with cayt
                   Real interest rate           0:41       0:83      0:25
                   Monetary policy spread       0:52       0:84      0:16
                         Panel B: Correlations with Shiller PE ratio
                   Real interest rate           0:30       0:19      0:22
                   Monetary policy spread       0:13       0:30      0:18
                         Panel C: Correlations with Corp. PD ratio
                   Real interest rate           0:22       0:49      0:22
                   Monetary policy spread       0:25       0:60      0:19
                         Panel D: Correlations with Corp. PE ratio
                   Real interest rate           0:28       0:20      0:39
                   Monetary policy spread       0:04       0:30      0:29
                      Panel E: Correlations with Earnings-NVA ratio
                   Real interest rate           0:54       0:38      0:27
                   Monetary policy spread       0:35       0:46      0:16

Table 1: Results under “Medium”use series …ltered to retain ‡uctuations with cycles between
8 and 50 years; “Business”retains cycles x, 1:5 x 8 years. r is from Laubach and Williams
(2003). Monetary policy spread = F F Rt Expected In‡ationt rt , where expected in‡ation
is a four period moving average of in‡ation. Corp. PD ratio is the ratio of market equity (ME)
to net dividends for the corporate sector from the Flow of Funds. Corp. PE ratio is the ratio
of ME to after-tax pro…ts of the corporate sector. NVA is net-value-added for the non…nancial
corporate sector. The sample spans 1961:Q1-2017:Q3.
                    Parameter           Mode        Mean           5%        95%
                      1                 0:7239      0:7121        0:7796     0:6465
                      2                 0:7500      0:7376        0:8034     0:6717
                    r1                  0:0111      0:0132        0:0097     0:0165
                    r2                  0:0252      0:0244        0:0266     0:0222
                      1        2        0:0262      0:0255        0:0212     0:0296
                    r1    r2            0:0363      0:0376        0:0342     0:0411
                      a                 0:2762      0:2721        0:2414     0:3014
                      y                 0:7619      0:7657        0:7286     0:8042
                      c                 0:0128      0:0143        0:0130     0:0157
                      r                 0:0141      0:0135        0:0123     0:0150
                    H11                 0:9793      0:9696        0:9306     0:9943
                    H22                 0:9830      0:9785        0:9539     0:9950

                                     Parameter Estimates: cay F C
                                                       a          y
                                        0:8132 0:2048 0:8551
                                        (0:0448)   (0:0186)   (0:0233)


Table 2: Parameter estimates. The top panel reports posterior modes, means, and 90% error
bands of the parameters of the Markov-switching cointegrating relation. Flat priors are used
on all parameters of the model. The lower panel reports parameter estimates for the …xed
coe¢ cient cointegrating relation. Standard errors are in parantheses. The sample is quarterly
and spans the period 1961:Q1 to 2017:Q3.




          1961Q1-1978Q3            1978Q4-2001Q3     2001Q4-2006Q1         2006Q2-2008Q2   2008Q3-2017Q3
 Regime    HV/LMPS (2)              LV/HMPS (1)       HV/LMPS (2)           LV/HMPS (1)     HV/LMPS (2)

Table 3: Estimated regime sequence. The table reports the most likely regime sequence based
on the posterior mode estimates. HV/LMPS: High-Valuation/Low Monetary Policy Spread
regime (Regime 1). LV/HMPS: High-Valuation/Low Monetary Policy Spread regime (Regime
2).
                        Annualized Sharpe Ratios and Mean Returns
                   Portfolio   SR     Mean Portfolio     SR     Mean
                   Market    0.3665 0.0623 V-G (S1) 0:5966 0:0994
                   W-L       0.6261 0.1517 V-G (S2) 0:3279 0:0545

Table 4: The table reports annualized Sharpe ratios, "SR," and mean returns, "Mean," for the
stock market and di¤erent portfolios. The Sharpe ratio is de…ned to be the unconditional mean
return divided by the standard deviation of the portfolio return. The long-short portfolios "V-
G" are the value-growth portfolios in a given size quintile, S1=smallest, S2= second smallest.
long-short portfolios "W-L" are the winner-loser portfolio. For each size category, the return
of the V-G portfolio portfolio return is the di¤erence between the return on the extreme value
(highest BM ratio) and the return of the extreme growth portfolio (lowest BM ratio). The
return of the W-L portfolio return is the di¤erence in returns between the extreme winner
(M10) and the extreme loser (M1). All returns are computed at quarterly frequencies but the
Sharpe ratios and mean returns are reported in annualized units. The sample spans the period
1964:Q1-2017:Q3.




            Breaks in Market Premium and Book-Market Ratio Spreads
                          Market      W-L    Val-Gr (S1) Val-Gr (S2)
            Regime 1      1:5896     4:0432    2:6647      1:4875
                            (0:8960;2:2558)    (2:8912;5:2514)   (1:7120;3:6701)    (0:6118;2:4214)
            Regime 2           1:2848             3:4000            2:4460             1:3577
                            (0:5652;1:9219)    (2:2660;4:5196)   (1:6679;3:2698)    (0:6063;2:1193)
            Di¤-in-Di¤         0:2987             0:6011            0:1958             0:1251
                            ( 0:0367;0:7089)   (0:1462;1:2409)   ( 0:1865;0:6593)   ( 0:2431;0:5429)
            Prob. decline        0:81              0:90               0:70               0:64
             Odds ratio          4.26              9.00               2.33               1.78

Table 5: The …rst two rows report the regime averages for the present discounted value of mar-
ket expected excess returns and the spread in the present discounted value of portfolio expected
excess returns. The columns labeled "Val-Gr" report the spreads for portfolios sorted along the
book-market dimension, in a given size category (extreme value minus extreme growth). The
columns labeled "W-L" report the spreads for portfolios sorted along the recent past return
performance dimension (extreme winner minus extreme loser). The row labeled "Di¤-in-Di¤"
reports the di¤erence between these spreads across the two wealth ratio/interest rate regimes.
The numbers in each cell are the median values of the statistic from the posterior distribution
while in parentheses we report 68% posterior credible sets. The last row reports the probability
that premia decline when moving from the low valuation regime to the high valuation regime.
These probabilities are obtained by computing the fraction of draws from the posterior distri-
bution for which the premia under the high valuation regime are lower than the premia under
the low valuation regime.
                                 M ode              M ean      5%      95% T ype    P ara1     P ara2
             T
             1                   0:8516             0:8411   0:7038   0:9642 U         0         10
                 ;1              2:3164             2:8146   1:9184   4:2444 U         0         10
             i;1                 0:8913             0:9080   0:8597   0:9494 B        0:5        0:2
                 y;1             2:6387             3:6663   1:9532   6:2615 U         0         10
             T
             2                   2:8794             2:9040   2:7017   3:1626 U         0         10
                 ;2              1:1089             1:1146   0:8266   1:4120 U         0         10
             i;2                 0:8978             0:9264   0:8579   0:9804 B        0:5        0:2
                 y;2             1:2320             2:6661   0:8990   6:5637 U         0         10
                                 0:0017             0:0019   0:0008   0:0032 B       0:05       0:02
             T
                                 0:0132             0:0131   0:0110   0:0152 B        0:2        0:1
                                 0:7970             1:1462   0:5406   2:0439 G         2          1
                                 0:9062             0:9008   0:8048   0:9696 B        0:9       0:05
                                 0:7696             0:7156   0:5270   0:8909 B        0:8        0:1
                                 0:0343             0:0317   0:0143   0:0520 G        0:4        0:2
             d                   0:7589             0:8208   0:6731   0:9368 B        0:5        0:2
             y                   0:9457             0:9177   0:8474   0:9695 B        0:5        0:2
                                 0:8057             0:8041   0:7924   0:8149 B        0:5        0:2
            rss                  0:2540             0:3002   0:1210   0:5581 G        0:5       0:25
              yss                0:3738             0:4126   0:3427   0:4912 G        0:5        0:2
             d                   0:6033             0:6569   0:5431   0:7987 U         0         10
             i                   0:1865             0:1950   0:1782   0:2153 U         0         10
             y                   2:7349             3:7875   2:1213   7:4099 U         0         10
             oe; GDP             0:2897             0:2857   0:2339   0:3366 U         0         10
             oe;IN F L           1:2294             1:2514   1:1557   1:3547 U         0         10
             oe;F F R            0:0000             0:0006   0:0000   0:0015 U         0         10
             oe;EXP              0:0686             0:0696   0:0517   0:0853 U         0         10

Table 6: This table reports the posterior mode, mean, and 90N stands Normal, G for Gaussian,
and B for Beta, U for Uniform. For the Beta, Normanl, and Gaussian distributions, the …rst
parameter and second parameter correspond to mean and standard deviation, respectively. For
the uniform distribution they correspond to the lower and upper bound. The sample spans the
period 1961:Q1-2017:Q3.



                                                       M ode     M ean      5%        95%
                        T          T
                        1          2                   2:0278    2:0629    2:4647     1:7533
                            ;1           ;2            1:2074    1:7001    0:6990     3:1387
                        i;1        i;2                 0:0065    0:0184    0:0911     0:0576
                            y;1               y;2      1:4067    1:0001    3:3289     4:4279

Table 7: This table reports the posterior mode, mean, and 90monetary policy rule parameters
across the two regimes. The sample spans the period 1961:Q1-2017:Q3.
                                              RIRt   RIRtM P R   RIRtRES
                       Market Excess Return   0:43     0:82        0:09
                       Momentum Spread        0:52     0:88        0:18
                       Value Spread (S1)      0:51     0:75        0:23
                       Value Spread (S2)      0:46     0:70        0:20

Table 8: Corr. between PDV of market risk premium (rp) or portfolio rp spreads with
RIRtM P R vs. movements in real rates driven by Gaussian shocks (RIRtRES ). Market is the
PDV of the market rp, Momentum W-L is the PDV of the di¤erence in the Winner-Loser risk
premia; Value Spread is the PDV of the di¤erence in the High-Low book-market ratio portfolios
in the smallest (S1) and next to smallest (S2) size quintiles. RIRt is de…ned as FFR minus
expected in‡ation (based on the model). The sample spans 1961:Q1 - 2017:Q3.
                   Real Interest Rate                                             Monetary Policy Spread
0.08                                Real Interest Rate
                                    r*                            0.04

0.06
                                                                  0.02


0.04
                                                                     0


0.02                                                             -0.02


   0                                                             -0.04


-0.02                                                            -0.06



-0.04                                                            -0.08
          1970     1980     1990     2000     2010                           1970     1980     1990     2000     2010




   Figure 1: The real interest rate is the di¤erence between the nominal federal funds rate (F F R) and expected in‡ation, where
   expected in‡ation is computed as a four quarter moving average of in‡ation. The monetary policy spread is de…ned as M P St
   F F Rt Expected Inf lationt rt ., where rt is the natural rate of interest from Laubach and Williams (2003). The sample spans
   the period 1961:Q1-2017:Q3.
                        Smoothed probability of the low valuation/high MPS regime
   1


 0.8


 0.6


 0.4


 0.2


   0
           1965      1970      1975      1980      1985     1990      1995      2000      2005      2010      2015


Figure 2: Smoothed probabilities of the low asset valuation/high monetary policy spread regime. The sample is quarterly and
spans the period 1961:Q1 to 2017:Q3.
                        Wealth Ratio ( - cay MS )                                 Monetary Policy Spread

                                                                                                       Volcker disinflation
           0.77
                                                                    0.04

           0.76
                                                                    0.02
           0.75

           0.74                                                        0

           0.73
                                                                   -0.02
           0.72                                                                        Greenspan put

                                                                   -0.04
           0.71
                                                                                             Bernanke low for long

            0.7                                                    -0.06                     Burns accommodation

           0.69
                    1970   1980    1990    2000     2010                       1970   1980      1990      2000       2010
                             Low Valuation Regime      High Valuation Regime      Regime average            Data

Figure 3: Figure plots the wealth ratio ( cay M S ) and the monetary policy spread M P St F F Rt Expected Inf lationt rt :
The series for rt is from Laubach andWilliams (2003). The solid line corresponds to the estimated mean at the posterior mode.
The sample spans 1961:Q1-2017:Q4.
                Market Excess Return                                                   Momentum Spread
1.8                                                                  4.2
                                                                       4
1.6
                                                                     3.8

1.4                                                                  3.6
                                                                     3.4
1.2                                                                  3.2
      1970      1980      1990      2000      2010                          1970      1980      1990      2000      2010

                  Value Spread (S1)                                                     Value Spread (S2)
                                                                     1.7

2.8                                                                  1.6

                                                                     1.5
2.6
                                                                     1.4
2.4
                                                                     1.3
      1970      1980      1990      2000      2010                          1970      1980      1990      2000      2010




 Figure 4: Evolution of Risk Premia. The …gure reports the evolution of the PDV of risk premia for the stock market and
 three di¤erent spread portfolios. The blue solid line reports the evolution of the risk premia over time, while the red dashed line
 corresponds to the conditional steady state of the PDV based on the regime in place. Both are computed by taking into account
 the possibility of regime changes. The sample spans the period 1964:Q1-2017:Q3.
                       GDP growth                                                          Inflation

  10                                            Model                                                           Model
                                                Data               10                                           Data
   5                                                                5
   0                                                                0
  -5                                                               -5

          1970     1980     1990     2000    2010                          1970     1980     1990      2000   2010

                           FFR                                                       Expected Inflation
                                                                   12
                                                Model                                                           Model
  15
                                                Data               10                                           Data

  10                                                                8

                                                                    6
   5
                                                                    4

                                                                    2
          1970     1980     1990     2000    2010                          1970     1980     1990      2000   2010




Figure 5: The …gure reports the model implied series and the corresponding observed series. Expected in‡ation comes from the
Michigan Survey of Consumers. The di¤erence is due to observation errors. The sample spans 1961:Q1 - 2017:Q3.
               GDP growth                                     Inflation                               Real Interest Rate
   5                                          11

 4.5                                          10                                            3

   4                                           9
                                                                                          2.5
 3.5                                           8

   3                                           7                                            2

 2.5                                           6
                                                                                          1.5
   2                                           5
                                                                                            1
 1.5                                           4

   1                                           3                                          0.5

 0.5                                           2
                                                                                            0
        1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                    1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                       1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
         Hawkish regime      Dovish regime     Only policy rule changes   No policy rule changes       Only changes in Inflation Target



Figure 6: The blue line corresponds to the ‡uctuations generated by changes in both the target and the slope coe¢ cients. The
orange line assumes that monetary policy starts under the Dovish regime and no regime change occurs. Finally, the black dotted
line assumes that changes in the target occurred, but that the slope coe¢ cients in the Taylor rule coe¢ cients always remain as in
the Dovish-high target regime.
                 Inflation                                             FFR                                          Real Interest Rate
                                                                                                       10
  15                 Volcker disinflation                              Volcker disinflation                                  Volcker disinflation
                                                 16
                                                                                                        8
                                                 14
  10
                                                 12                                                     6


   5                                             10                                                     4

                                                     8
                                                                                                        2
   0
                                                     6
                                                                                                        0
                                                     4
  -5
                                                     2                                                 -2


       1980   1990     2000     2010                     1980   1990       2000     2010                     1980     1990     2000      2010
                                    Hawkish regime         Dovish regime          Only policy rule changes          Data



Figure 7: The Volcker disin‡ation. We start the economy as it was in 1980:Q1 and remove all Gaussian shocks that occured after
that period, but keep the estimated regime sequence. The dashed line corresponds to the data. The real interest rate is computed
as the di¤erence between the FFR and expected in‡ation. Expected in‡ation is obtained based on the model solution.
               GDP growth                                   Inflation                             Real Interest Rate
   5
                                             11
 4.5                                                                                    3
                                             10
   4
                                              9
                                                                                      2.5
 3.5
                                              8
   3                                                                                    2
                                              7

 2.5
                                              6
                                                                                      1.5
   2                                          5

 1.5                                          4                                         1

   1                                          3
                                                                                      0.5
 0.5                                          2

        1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                   1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                   1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
                                  Hawkish regime      Dovish regime     Learning     Target is known



Figure 8: Perfect information about the target. The blue solid line shows estimated ‡uctuations generated only by changes in
the policy rule (in‡ation target and slope coe¢ cients) when agents learn about trend in‡ation. The orange dashed line shows a
counterfactual in which the policy rule shifts but agents observe the in‡ation target. Dovish regime has a high target T and low
activism against deviations from the target T . Hawkish regime has a low T and high activism against deviations from T . The
sample spans 1961:Q1 - 2017:Q3.
                                    GDP growth                                          Inflation                                      Real Interest Rate
                         1.5                                                                                               5
Curbing inflation




                                                                      10
                          1                                                                                                4
                                                                       8
                         0.5                                                                                               3

                          0                                            6                                                   2

                    -0.5
                               20      40        60         80                   20         40        60        80                    20      40      60    80


                                                                                                                           1

                          2
     Lifting inflation




                                                                       8
                                                                                                                          0.5
                         1.8
                                                                       6
                         1.6
                                                                                                                           0
                                                                       4
                         1.4
                               20      40        60         80                   20         40        60        80                    20      40      60    80
                                                      Response to policy shock        Response to change in policy rule         Regime mean



         Figure 9: Top row: Curbing in‡ation. The economy is initially in the Dovish regime. The blue solid line presents the evolution
         of the macro variables in response to a two standard deviation contractionary monetary policy shock and no regime change. The
         black dashed line presents the evolution of the macro variables in response to a regime change from the Dovish regime to the
         Hawkish regime. Lower row: Lifting in‡ation. The economy is initially in the Hawkish regime. The blue solid line presents
         the evolution of the macro variables in response to a two standard deviation expansionary monetary policy shock and no regime
         change. The black dashed line presents the evolution of the macro variables in response to a regime change from the Hawkish
         regime to the Dovish regime.
                    Market Excess Return                                                                Momentum Spread
                                                       1.8                                                                          4.2




                                                             PDV Excess Returns




                                                                                                                                          PDV Excess Returns
         3                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                    4
                                                       1.6
RIRMPR




                                                                                  RIRMPR
         2                                                                                 2                                        3.8

                                                       1.4                                                                          3.6
         1                                                                                 1                                        3.4
                                                       1.2                                                                          3.2
             1970   1980   1990     2000     2010                                              1970   1980   1990     2000   2010

                      Value Spread (S1)                                                                 Value Spread (S2)
                                                                                                                                    1.7



                                                             PDV Excess Returns




                                                                                                                                          PDV Excess Returns
         3                                                                                 3
                                                       2.8                                                                          1.6
RIRMPR




                                                                                  RIRMPR
         2                                                                                 2                                        1.5
                                                       2.6

         1                                                                                 1                                        1.4
                                                       2.4
                                                                                                                                    1.3
             1970   1980   1990     2000     2010                                              1970   1980   1990     2000   2010




Figure 10: Excess returns and policy rule changes. The …gure reports the time series of the present discounted value of expected
excess returns for di¤erent portfolios (dashed line, right axis) together with ‡uctuations of the real interest rate due to changes in
the monetary policy rule (solid line, left axis).
Appendix for Online Publication
Data Appendix
This appendix describes the data used in this study.
   CONSUMPTION
   Consumption is measured as either total personal consumption expenditure or expenditure
on nondurables and services, excluding shoes and clothing. The quarterly data are seasonally
adjusted at annual rates, in billions of chain-weighted 2005 dollars. The components are chain-
weighted together, and this series is scaled up so that the sample mean matches the sample mean
of total personal consumption expenditures. Our source is the U.S. Department of Commerce,
Bureau of Economic Analysis.
   LABOR INCOME
   Labor income is de…ned as wages and salaries + transfer payments + employer contri-
butions for employee pensions and insurance - employee contributions for social insurance -
taxes. Taxes are de…ned as [ wages and salaries/(wages and salaries + proprietors’income with
IVA and CCADJ + rental income + personal dividends + personal interest income)] times
personal current taxes, where IVA is inventory valuation and CCADJ is capital consumption
adjustments. The quarterly data are in current dollars. Our source is the Bureau of Economic
Analysis.
  POPULATION
   A measure of population is created by dividing real total disposable income by real per
capita disposable income. Our source is the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
   WEALTH
   Total wealth is household net worth in billions of current dollars, measured at the end of
the period. A break-down of net worth into its major components is given in the table be-
low. Stock market wealth includes direct household holdings, mutual fund holdings, holdings of
private and public pension plans, personal trusts, and insurance companies. Nonstock wealth
includes tangible/real estate wealth, nonstock …nancial assets (all deposits, open market paper,
U.S. Treasuries and Agency securities, municipal securities, corporate and foreign bonds and
mortgages), and also includes ownership of privately traded companies in noncorporate equity,
and other. Subtracted o¤ are liabilities, including mortgage loans and loans made under home
equity lines of credit and secured by junior liens, installment consumer debt and other. Wealth
is measured at the end of the period. A timing convention for wealth is needed because the
level of consumption is a ‡ow during the quarter rather than a point-in-time estimate as is
wealth (consumption data are time-averaged). If we think of a given quarter’s consumption
data as measuring spending at the beginning of the quarter, then wealth for the quarter should


                                               1
be measured at the beginning of the period. If we think of the consumption data as measuring
spending at the end of the quarter, then wealth for the quarter should be measured at the end of
the period. None of our main …ndings discussed below (estimates of the cointegrating parame-
ters, error-correction speci…cation, or permanent-transitory decomposition) are sensitive to this
timing convention. Given our …nding that most of the variation in wealth is not associated with
consumption, this timing convention is conservative in that the use of end-of-period wealth pro-
duces a higher contemporaneous correlation between consumption growth and wealth growth.
Our source is the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. A complete description
of these data may be found at http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/Z1/Current/.
    CRSP PRICE-DIVIDEND RATIO
   The stock price is measured using the Center for Research on Securities Pricing (CRSP)
value-weighted stock market index covering stocks on the NASDAQ, AMEX, and NYSE. The
data are monthly. The stock market price is the price of a portfolio that does not reinvest
dividends. The CRSP dataset consists of vwretx(t) = (Pt =Pt 1 ) 1, the return on a portfolio
that doesn’t pay dividends, and vwretdt = (Pt + Dt ) =Pt          1, the return on a portfolio that
does pay dividends. The stock price index we use is the price Ptx of a portfolio that does not
reinvest dividends, which can be computed iteratively as
                                    x
                                  Pt+1 = Ptx (1 + vwretxt+1 ) ;

where P0x = 1. Dividends on this portfolio that does not reinvest are computed as

                                Dt = Ptx 1 (vwretdt   vwretxt ) :

The above give monthly returns, dividends and prices. The annual log return is the sum of the
12 monthly log returns over the year. We create annual log dividend growth rates by summing
the log di¤erences over the 12 months in the year: dt+12 dt = dt+12 dt+11 + dt+11 dt+10 +
   + dt+1    dt : The annual log price-dividend ratio is created by summing dividends in levels
over the year to obtain an annual dividend in levels, DtA , where t denotes a year hear. The
annual observation on Ptx is taken to be the last monthly price observation of the year, PtAx .
The annual log price-dividend ratio is ln PtAx =DtA . Note that this value for dividend growth
is only used to compute the CRSP price-dividend ratio on this hypothetical portfolio. When
we investigate the behavior of stock market dividend growth in the MS-VAR, we use actual
dividend data from all …rms on NYSE, NASDAQ, and AMEX. See the data description for
MS-VARs below.
   FLOW OF FUNDS EQUITY PAYOUT, DIVIDENDS, PRICE
   Flow of Funds payout is measured as “Net dividends plus net repurchases”and is computed
using the Flow of Funds Table F.103 (non…nancial corporate business sector) by subtracting Net
Equity Issuance (FA103164103) from Net Dividends (FA106121075). We de…ne net repurchases

                                               2
to be repurchases net of share issuance, so net repurchases is the negative of net equity issuance.
Net dividends consists of payments in cash or other assets, excluding the corporation’s own
stock, made by corporations located in the United States and abroad to stockholders who
are U.S. residents. The payments are netted against dividends received by U.S. corporations,
thereby providing a measure of the dividends paid by U.S. corporations to other sectors. The
price used for FOF price-dividend and price-payout ratios is “Equity,”the ‡ow of funds measure
of equities (LM103164103).
   PRICE DEFLATOR FOR CONSUMPTION AND ASSET WEALTH
    The nominal after-tax labor income and wealth data are de‡ated by the personal consump-
tion expenditure chain-type de‡ator (2005=100), seasonally adjusted. In principle, one would
like a measure of the price de‡ator for total ‡ow consumption here. Since this variable is
unobservable, we use the total expenditure de‡ator as a proxy. Our source is the Bureau of
Economic Analysis.
   DATA FOR MS-VAR TO ESTIMATE RISK PREMIA
   The variables included in the MS-VAR for the equity characteristics portfolio data are: (a)
the momentum return spread, i.e., the di¤erence between the excess return of the extreme
winner (M10) portfolio and the excess return of the extreme loser (M1) portfolio; (b) the value
return spread (S1), i.e., the di¤erence between the excess return of the small (size 1) high
BM portfolio and the excess return of the small (size 1) low BM portfolio; (c) the value return
spread (S2), i.e., the di¤erence between the excess return of the size 2 high BM portfolio and the
excess return of the small size 2 low BM portfolio; (d) the momentum BM spread: the di¤erence
between the logarithm of the BM ratio of the M10 and M1 portfolios; (e) the value BM spread
(S1): The di¤erence between the logarithm of the BM ratio of the small (size quintile 1) high
book-market portfolio and the logarithm of the BM ratio of the small (size 1) low book-market
portfolio; (f) the value BM spread (S2): the di¤erence between the logarithm of the BM ratio
of the size quintile 2 high book-market portfolio and the logarithm of the BM ratio of the size
2 low book-market portfolio; (g) the real FFR (FFR minus in‡ation); (h) the excess return on
the small value portfolio. We then use CRSP/Compustat to construct the BM ratios of the
corresponding portfolios. PROVIDE DETAILS HERE.
   The MS-VAR speci…cation for the market risk premium includes the following variables:
(a) the market excess return, computed as the di¤erence in the CRSP value-weighted stock
market return (including dividend redistributions) and the three-month Treasury bill rate; (b)
 cay M S ; (c) the small stock value spread (log-di¤erence in the book to market ratio of the
S1 value and S1 growth portfolio); (d) the SMB factor from Fama and French; (e) the HML
factor from Fama and French. These variables are obtained from Kenneth French’s Dartmouth
webpage.
   DATA FOR MS-DSGE ESTIMATION

                                                3
   In‡ation expectations are taken from the mean in‡ation forecasts of one year ahead in‡ation,
provided by the University of Michigan Survey of Consumers. Our data sources for output
growth are the NIPA tables constructed by the Bureau of Economic Analysis and the St. Louis
Fed. Real GDP per capita is obtained by dividing nominal GDP (NIPA 1.1.5, line 1) by the
GDP de‡ator (NIPA 1.1.4, line 1) and population. Population is measured as Civilian Non-
institutional Population (CNP16OV) and downloaded from FRED, a website maintained by the
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. In‡ation is measured as the quarter-to-quarter log-change
of CPI. Both the CPI and the FFR series are downloaded from FRED, a website maintained by
the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Expected in‡ation is the mean of the one-year-ahead
expected in‡ation based on the Michigan survey. All variables are annualized.


Computing cay M S
Let z t be a 3 1 vector of data on ct ; at ; and yt ; and k leads and k lags of                                 at and      yt and let Z t
= (z t ; z t 1 ; :::; z 1 ) be a vector containing all observations obtained through date t. To estimate
the parameters of this stationary linear combination we modify the standard …xed coe¢ cient
dynamic least squares regression (DLS–Stock and Watson (1993)) regression to allow for shifts
in the intercept      t
                          :

                                                              X
                                                              k                          X
                                                                                         k
                                                                                                                 c c
                    ct =      t
                                  +    a at   +    y yt   +          ba;i at+i +               by;i yt+i +        "t                (A1)
                                                              i= k                      i= k


where "t     N (0; 1) :23 The parameters of the econometric model include the cointegrating para-
                                                                                  0
meters and additional slope coe¢ cients                       =       a;   y; b       , where b = (ba; k ; ::; ba;k ; by; k ; ::; by;k )0 ,
the two intercept values          1   and     2,   the standard deviation of the residual , and the transition
probabilities contained in the matrix H.
   We combine the estimation of changes in the mean of caytM S with an isomorphic model for
the monetary policy spread. Speci…cally, we assume that regime changes in the mean of caytM S
coincide with regime changes in the mean of the mps:

                                                          mpst = r t + rt ;                                                         (A2)

where rt     N (0; 2r ). Importantly, unlike caytM S ; mpst is an observed variable. Thus, in
this case we only need to conduct inference about the MS intercept coe¢ cient r t : It is worth
emphasizing that the same latent state variable,                           t,   presumed to follow a two-state Markov-
switching process with transition matrix H; controls both changes in                                        t
                                                                                                                and r t .
  23
    The DLS regression controls for leads and lags of the right-hand-side variables to adjust for the ine¢ ciencies
attributable to regressor endogeneity that arise in …nite samples.



                                                                     4
      The model can then be summarized as follows:
                                                                           X
                                                                           k                               X
                                                                                                           k
                                                                                                                                      c c
                        ct =        t
                                        +    a at   +       y yt      +              ba;i at+i +                       by;i yt+i +     "t
                                                                           i= k                            i= k
                                            r r
                     mpst = r t +             t
                            c                       r
                            t    N (0; 1) ;         t       N (0; 1)

where t is a hidden variable that follows a Markov-switching process with transition matrix
                                                                      0
H. Collect all model parameters into a vector = r t ; r ; ; t ; c ; H . The model can be
thought as a multivariate regression with regime changes in which some of the parameters are
restricted to zero.
   Our estimate of caytM S is based on the posterior mode of the parameter vector      and the
corresponding regime probabilities. Collect the conditional probabilities itjt = p( t = ijY t ; )
for i = 1; ::; m into an m              1 vector                tjt   = p( t jY t ; ). The …ltered probabilities re‡ect the
probability of a regime conditional on the data up to time t,                                                    tjt   = p( t jY t ; ), for t = 1; :::; T ,
and are part of the output obtained computing the likelihood function associated with the
parameter vector = r t ; r ; ; t ; ; H . They can be obtained using the following recursive
algorithm given by the Hamilton …lter:
                                                                                     tjt 1       t
                                                          tjt         =                                                                                     (A3)
                                                                           10         tjt 1          t
                                                    t+1jt             = H          tjt


where     t   is a vector whose j-th element contains the conditional density p(ct ; mpst j                                                 t   = j; xM;t ; xF;t ; ),
i.e.,
                                                                                             "                                                                            #
                                                      1                   1                      [ct        ( j xM;t + xF;t )]2                 [mpst        rj xM;t ]2
p(ct ; mpst j   t   = j; xM;t ; xF;t ; ) = p                      p                  exp                                                                                      ;
                                            2              c;2        2        r;2                               2 c;2                                  2   r;2

                                                                                                                                                            (A4)
the symbol            denotes element by element multiplication, and 1 is a vector with all elements
equal to 1. To initialize the recursive calculation we need an assumption on the distribution of
 0.   We assume that the two regimes have equal probabilities: p( 0 = 1) = :5 = p( 0 = 2):
      The smoothed probabilities re‡ect all the information that can be extracted from the whole
data sample,          tjT   = p( t jY T ; ). The …nal term,                              T jT    is returned with the …nal step of the
…ltering algorithm. Then, a recursive algorithm can be implemented to derive the other prob-
abilities:
                                            tjT   =       tjt             H0       t+1jT     ( )         t+1jt

where ( ) denotes element by element division.
    In using the DLS regression (A1) to estimate cointegrating parameters, we lose 6 leads and
6 lags. For estimates of caytF C , we take the estimated coe¢ cients and we apply them to the

                                                                               5
whole sample. To extend our estimates of caytM S over the full sample, we can likewise apply the
parameter estimates to the whole sample but we need an estimate of the regime probabilities
in the …rst 6 and last 6 observations of the full sample. For this we run the Hamilton …lter
from period from              5 to T + 6 as follows. When starting at -5, we assume no lagged values are
available and the DLS regression omits all lags, but all leads are included. When at t = 4 we
assume only one lag is available and the DLS regression includes only one lag, and so on, until
we reach t = 0 when all lags are included. Proceeding forward when t = T + 1 is reached we
assume all lags are available and all leads except one are available, when t = T + 2, we assume
all lags and all leads but two are available, etc. Smoothed probabilities are then computed with
standard methods as they only involve the …ltered probabilities and the transition matrix H.


Gibbs Sampling Algorithm
This appendix describes the Bayesian methods used to characterize uncertainty in the regres-
sion parameters. To simplify notation, we denote the vector containing all variables whose
coe¢ cients are allowed to vary over time xM;t , while xF;t is used to denote the vector containing
all the variables whose coe¢ cients are kept constant. We then obtain:
                                                                                                       c c
                                                      ct =               t
                                                                             xM;t + xF;t +              "t                             (A5)
                                                                                       r r
                                                mpst = r t xM;t +                       "t                                             (A6)

where, in our case, = a ;                       y ; ba; k ; :::; ba;+k ; by; k ; :::; by;+k            and the vector xM;t is unidimen-
sional and always equal to 1:
   Suppose the Gibbs sampling algorithm has reached the n th iteration. We then have draws
                   r                    c                     T                   T
for r   t ;n
               ;   n;   n;   t ;n
                                    ;   n;   Hn , and         n;   where          n   =f    1;n ;   2;n ;..., T;n g   denotes a draw for the
whole regime sequence. The parameters for equations (A5) and (A6) can be drawn separately,
while the regime sequence Tn requires a joint evaluation of the Hamilton …lter. Finally, the
transition matrix Hn is drawn conditionally on the regime sequence.
   Speci…cally, the sampling algorithm is described as follows.
                                                              c               T
   1. Sampling               n+1 :      Given      t ;n
                                                          ;   n;   and        n   we transform the data:
                                                     ct                x
                                                                   t ;n M;t
                                                                                      xF;t
                                              e
                                              ct =                 c
                                                                                  =     c
                                                                                                    et + "t :
                                                                                             + "t = x
                                                                   n                    n

        The above is a regression with …xed coe¢ cients                                             and standardized residual shocks.
        Standard Bayesian methods may be used to draw the coe¢ cients of the regression. We
        assume a Normal conjugate prior          N (B ;0 ; V                                  ;0 )),   so that the conditional (on       t ;n
                                                                                                                                                ;
         c       T
         n ; and n ) posterior distribution is given by


                                                                   n+1         N (B    ;T ; V ;T )


                                                                              6
                                                      1                                        h                         i
  with V ;T = V               1    e0 X
                                  +X  e
                                    and B ;T = V ;T                                             V     1            e 0 e        e = (e
                                                                                                                 + XF C ; where C              cT ) 0
                                                                                                                                     c1 ; :::; e
                             ;0      F F                                                             ;0 B ;0

  and XeF = (xF;1 ; :::; xF;T ) and B ;0 and V 1 control the priors for the …xed coe¢ cients
                               0
                                               ;0
  of the regression. Keeping in mind that the residuals have been normalized to have unit
                                                                                      1
  variance, with ‡at priors, B                        ;0    = 0 and V                ;0       = 0 and B            ;T    and V   ;T   coincide with the
  maximum likelihood estimates, conditional on the other parameters.
                                                                                         c             T
2. Sampling           i;n+1       for i = 1; 2: Given                 n+1 ;              n;   and      n   we transform the data:
                                           ct              n+1 xF;t                  xM;t
                                    e
                                    ct =                    c
                                                                      =          t            c
                                                                                                  + "t =           t
                                                                                                                       eM;t + "t :
                                                                                                                       x
                                                            n                                 n

  The above regression has standardized shocks and Markov-switching coe¢ cients in the
                                                T
  transformed data. Using                       n    we can group all the observations that pertain to the same
  regime i. Given the prior i   N (B i ;0 ; V i ;0 )) for i = 1; 2 we use standard Bayesian
  methods to draw i from the conditional (on n+1 ; cn ; and Tn ) posterior distribution:

                                                    i;n+1        N (B         i ;T
                                                                                     ;V          ) for i = 1; 2
                                                                                              i ;T

                                                                 1                                    h                        i
                      1
  where V i ;T = V i ;0 +Xe0 X e        and B i ;T                                                         1
                                                                                              = V i ;T V i ;0          e0 C
                                                                                                              B i ;0 + X              ei and
                                                                                                                             ei where C
                            M;i M;i                                                                                      M;i
  eM;i collect all the observations for the transformed data for which regime i is in place.
  X
                                    1
  The parameters B i ;0 and V i ;0     control the priors for the MS coe¢ cients of the regression:
                                                                                        1
   i   N (B i ;0 ; V i ;0 ) for i = 1; 2: With ‡at priors, we have B i ;0 = 0 and V i ;0  = 0 and
  B    i ;T
              and V   i ;T
                             coincide with the maximum likelihood estimates, conditional on the other
  parameters.
                                                                      r                   T
3. Sampling ri;n+1 for i = 1; 2: Given                                n   and             n    we transform the data:
                                                          mpst                xM;t
                                      gt =
                                      mps                    r
                                                                     =r   t          r
                                                                                              + "t =         t
                                                                                                                 eM;t + "rt :
                                                                                                                 x
                                                             n                       n

  The above regression has standardized shocks and Markov-switching coe¢ cients in the
  transformed data. Using Tn we can group all the observations that pertain to the same
  regime i. Given the prior ri   N (Bri ;0 ; Vri ;0 )) for i = 1; 2 we use standard Bayesian
                                                                                     r               T
  methods to draw ri from the conditional (                                          i   and         n)    posterior distribution:

                                                ri;n+1           N (Bri ;T ; Vri ;T ) for i = 1; 2
                                                                 1                        h                     i
                           e0 X
  where Vri ;T = Vri ;01 + X    e                                                                       e0 R
                                                                   and Bri ;T = Vri ;T Vri ;01 Bri ;0 + X     ei where R
                                                                                                                       ei and
                             M;i M;i                                                                      r;i
  er;i collect all the observations for the transformed data for which regime i is in place.
  X
  The parameters Bri ;0 and Vri ;01 control the priors for the MS coe¢ cients of the regression:
  ri          N (Bri ;0 ; Vri ;0 ) for i = 1; 2: With ‡at priors, we have Bri ;0 = 0 and Vri ;01 = 0 and
  Bri ;T and Vri ;T coincide with the maximum likelihood estimates, conditional on the other
  parameters.

                                                                          7
                c                                                  T
4. Sampling     n+1 :   Given      n+1 ;     t ;n+1
                                                      ; and        n   we can compute the residuals of the regres-
   sion:
                                                                                             c
                                    e
                                    ct = ct            n+1 xF;t            t
                                                                               xM;t =            "t :

   With the prior that c has an inverse gamma distribution,                                             c
                                                                                                                 IG (Q0 ; v0 ) ; we use
   Bayesian methods to draw cn+1 from the conditional (on n+1 ;                                             t ;n+1
                                                                                                                   ; and Tn ) posterior
   inverse gamma distribution:

                         n+1       IG (QcT ; vT ) ; vT = T + v0 ; QT = Q0 + E c0 E c

   where E c is a vector containing the residuals; T is the sample size, and Q0 and v0 control
   the priors for the standard deviation of the innovations: c IG (Q0 ; v0 ) : The mean of a
   random variable with distribution c IG (QcT ; vTc ) is QT =vT . With ‡at priors we have
                                                          c
   Q0 = 0 and v0 = 0, and the mean of                         is therefore (E c0 E c ) =T , which coincides with the
                                                                               c
   standard maximum likelihood (MLE) estimate of                                   , conditional on the other parameters.
                r                                     T
5. Sampling     n+1 :   Given r     t ;n+1
                                             and      n   we can compute the residuals of the regression:

                                                                                       r r
                                        g t = mpst
                                        mps                            r t xM;t =       "t :

                               r                                                                        r
   With the prior that             has an inverse gamma distribution,                                           IG (Q0 ; v0 ) ; we use
                                      r                                                                          T
   Bayesian methods to draw           n+1    from the conditional (on r                      t ;n+1
                                                                                                        and      n)   posterior inverse
   gamma distribution:

                         n+1       IG (QrT ; vT ) ; vT = T + v0 ; QrT = Q0 + E r0 E r

   where E is a vector containing the residuals; T is the sample size, and Q0 and v0 control
                                                                                         r
   the priors for the standard deviation of the innovations:                                        IG (Q0 ; v0 ) : The mean of a
                                                   r
   random variable with distribution                          IG (QrT ; vTr )       is QrT =vTr .       With ‡at priors we have
   Q0 = 0 and v0 = 0, and the mean of r is therefore (E E ) =T , which coincides with the
                                                                                      r0 r

   maximum likelihood (MLE) estimate of r , conditional on the other parameters.

6. Sampling Tn+1 : Given r t ;n ; rn ; n ; t ;n ; cn ; and Hn , we can treat equations (A5) and
   (A6) as a multivariate regression in which some parameters are restricted to zero. This
   allows to obtain …ltered probabilities for the regimes using the …lter described in Hamilton
   (1994). Following Kim and Nelson (1999) we then use a Multi-Move Gibbs sampling to
                                   T
   draw a regime sequence          n+1 .

                                                                                                        T
7. Sampling Hn+1 : Given the draws for the MS state variables                                           n+1 ,   the posterior for the
   transition probabilities does not depend on other parameters of the model and follows a



                                                               8
       Dirichlet distribution if we assume a prior Dirichlet distribution.24 For each column of
       Hn+1 the posterior distribution is given by:

                                    Hn+1 (:; i)    D(aii +    ii;n+1 ; aij   +   ij;n+1 )

                                                                                                             T
       where    ij;n+1   denotes the number of transitions from state i to state j based on                  n+1 ,
       while aii and aij the corresponding priors. With ‡at priors, we have aii = 0 and aij = 0:

   8. If r + 1 < R; where R is the desired number of draws, go to step 1, otherwise stop.

   These steps are repeated until convergence to the posterior distribution is reached. We check
convergence by using the Raftery-Lewis Diagnostics for each parameter in the chain. See section
below. We use the draws obtained with the Gibbs sampling algorithm to characterize parameter
uncertainty in Table 2. The Gibbs sampling algorithm is used to generate a distribution for the
di¤erence between the two means in the same manner it is used to generate a distribution for
any parameter. For each draw from the joint distribution of the model parameters, we compute
the di¤erence and store it. We may then compute means and/or medians, and error bands, as
for any other parameter of interest.

Convergence Checks

The 90% credible sets are obtained making 2,000,000 draws from the posterior using the Gibbs
sampling algorithm. One in every one thousand draws is retained. We check convergence using
the methods suggested by Raftery and Lewis (1992) and Geweke (1992). For Raftery and
Lewis (1992) checks, we target 90% credible sets, with a 1% accuracy to be achieved with a
95% minimum probability. We initialize the Gibbs sampling algorithm making a draw around
the posterior mode. Sims and Zha (2006) point out that in Markov-switching models it is
important to …rst …nd the posterior mode and then use it as a starting point for the MCMC
algorithm due to the fact that the likelihood can have multiple peaks. The tables below pertain
to convergence of the Gibbs sampling algorithm.


Book-to-Market Ratio
We use the methods and assumptions of the previous subsection to obtain the present value
decomposition of the book to market ratio. Consider an MS-VAR:

                                         Zt = c t + A t Zt    1   + V t "t
  24
   The Dirichlet distribution is a generalization of the beta distribution that allows one to potentially consider
more than 2 regimes. See e.g., Sims and Zha (2006).



                                                        9
where Zt is a column vector containing n variables observable at time t and t = 1; :::; m, with
m the number of regimes, evolves following the transition matrix H. If the MS-VAR has more
than one lag, the companion form can be used to recast the model as illustrated above.
   De…ne the column vectors qt and t :
                      h 0             i0
                                                                                                                                                      m 0
                  qt = qt1 ; :::; qtm0 ; qti = E0 Zt 1                                                t =i
                                                                                                              ;        t   =         1
                                                                                                                                     t ; :::;         t     ;

where it = P0 ( t = i) and 1 t =i is an indicator variable that is equal to 1 when regime i is in
place and zero otherwise. The law of motion for qet = [qt0 ; 0t ]0 is then given by

                                                                     qt                     CH                    qt       1
                                                                            =
                                                                       t                     H                     t 1
                                                                | {z }           |         {z  }
                                                                     qet                    e

                                             0
where       t   =[      1;t ; :::;   m;t ]       ;    = bdiag (A1 ; :::; Am ) H; and C = bdiag (c1 ; :::; cm ). Recall that:
                                                                                    2           3
                                                                X
                                                                m
                                                     E0 (Zt ) =   qti = wqt ; w = 4In ; :::; In 5
                                                                                     | {z }
                                                                           i=1                                                 m

   To compute the present value decomposition of the book-to-market ratio, de…ne:
                                                  i
                                                 qt+sjt = Et Zt+s 1                        t =i
                                                                                                     = E Zt+s 1                    t =i
                                                                                                                                          jIt
                                                       10x = [0; :::1; :::0; 0; 0]0 ; mn = m n

where It contains all the information that agents have at time t, including the probability of
                                           i
being in one of the m regimes. Note that qtjt = Zt it :
   Now consider the formula from Vuolteenaho (1999):
                                         P1                j
                                                                                 P1             j
                                                                                                                               P1               j
                                 t   =           j=0           Et rt+1+j +            j=0           Et ft+1+j                       j=0             Et et+1+j

Given that our goal is to assess if assets with di¤erent risk pro…les are a¤ected di¤erently by
the breaks in the long-term interest rates, we are going to focus on the di¤erence between the
book-to-market ratios. Speci…cally, given two portfolios x and y; we are interested in how the
di¤erence in their book-to-market ratios,                                            x;t          y;t ;   varies across the two regimes:
                                           P1                  j
                                                                                                                               P1               j
            x;t         y;t      =                   j=0           Et (rx;t+1+j            ry;t+1+j )                              j=0              Et ex;t+1+j      ey;t+1+j
        |         {z     }                 |                              {z                       }                           |                          {z                    }
   Spread in BM ratios                PDV of the di¤erence in expected excess returns                                      PDV of the di¤erence in expected earnings

If then we want to correct the spread in BM ratios by taking into account expected earnings,
we have:
                                 P1          j
                                                                                                          P1               j
         x;t           y;t   +       j=0         Et ex;t+1+j                 ey;t+1+j =                       j=0              Et (rx;t+1+j                 ry;t+1+j )          (A7)
     |                                           {z                                  }                    |                           {z                            }
                   Spread in BM ratios corrected for earnings                                        PDV of the expected spread in excess returns


                                                                                           10
   The spread in excess returns, rxy;t   rx;t ry;t . Then the right hand side of (A7) can be
computed as:
          P1 j                      P1 j 0
             j=0 Et (rxy;t+1+j ) =     j=0   1rxy wqt+1+jjt
                                                                                           1                                                1
                                                         = 10rxy w (I                  )       qtjt + C (I                  H)                  H   tjt   :

Therefore, we have:
exy;t ex;t ey;t + P1                     j
                                             Et ex;t+1+j            ey;t+1+j = 10rxy w (I                       )       1
                                                                                                                                qtjt + C (I                   H)   1
                                                                                                                                                                       H   tjt
                    j=0
       |                                     {z                             }
                    Spread in BM ratios corrected for earnings
                                                                                                                                                                   (A8)
where we have used exy;t to de…ne the spread in BM ratios corrected for earnings.
      Similar formulas are used to compute risk premia for the individual portfolios. The premium
for a portfolio z coincides with the present discounted value of its excess returns:
                  P1 j
     premiaz;t       j=0  Et (rz;t+1+j ) = 10rz w (I  ) 1 qtjt + C (I      H) 1 H tjt ;                                                                            (A9)
     | {z } |              {z         }
         Premia             PDV of excess returns

where    10rz   is a vector used to extract the PDV of excess returns from a vector containing the
PDV of all variables included in the VAR.

Regime Average We also compute the regime average value of exy;t . The regime average is
de…ned as:
                                  i
                                 e               10rxy w (I          )   1
                                                                                     q i + C (I        H)   1
                                                                                                                H           i
                                  xy

where      i    = 1i and q i          [0; :::;      i ; :::; 0]   is a column vector that contains the conditional steady
state of for the mean value of Zt conditional on being in regime i; i.e., Ei (Zt ) =                                                                               i   =
                1
(In Ai ) ci ; and zero otherwise. Recall that the conditional steady state, i ; is a vector
that contains the expected value of Zt conditional on being in regime i. Therefore, the vector
captures the values to which the variables of the VAR converge if regime i is in place forever.
Although none of our regimes are estimated to be absorbing states, this is still a good approx-
imation for regimes that can be expected to persist for prolonged periods of time. Note that
 i
e is computed by conditioning on the economy being initially at Zt = and in regime i, but
 xy                                                                                                                                 i
taking into account that there might be regime changes in the future. Therefore, we can also
              i
think about exy as the expected value of exy;t , conditional on being in regime i today and on
the variables of the VAR being equal to the conditional steady state mean values for regime i.
Formally:
                                                      i
                                                     e     = E exy;t j               = i; Zt =         :                                                       (A10)
                                                      xy                         t                 i

      Similarly, we can compute the regime average value of risk premia for an individual portfolio
z, premiaz;t :
                                             i                               1                                      1
                             premiaz                10rz w (I            )            q i + C (I           H)           H       i       :                      (A11)

                                                                             11
   Formulas (A8), (A9), (A10), and (A11) are used in the paper to produce Figure 4 and Table
5. For each draw of the VAR parameters from the posterior distribution, we can compute the
evolution of exy;t and individual portfolio premiaz;t ; by using (A8) and (A9). Thus, we obtain
a posterior distribution for exy;t and premiaz;t : The medians of these posterior distributions are
reported as the blue solid lines in Figure 4. Similarly, for each draw of the VAR coe¢ cients, we
          i                        1     2                                                i
compute e and the di¤erence e
              xy                      xy
                                        e : Thus, we obtain a posterior distribution for e and
                                            xy                                                 xy
                        1    2                                         i             i
for the di¤erence exy       e . The medians of the distribution of e and
                             xy                                     xy         premiaz   for i = 1; 2;
are reported in Figure 4 (red dashed line). Table 5 reports the median and the 68% posterior
                                            i
credible sets both for the distribution of exy ; for i = 1; 2, and for the di¤erence in these across
              1     2
regimes, exy       e : Finally, the last row of Table 5 reports the percentage of draws for which
                    xy
 1       2                       1         2
e       e     > 0 and premiaz        premiaz > 0 as the probability that risk premia are lower in
 xy      xy
the high asset valuation/low interest rate regime than they are in the low asset valuation/high
interest rate regime.


Variable Selection for VARs to Compute PDV of Risk Premia
We start with a series of …xed regressors that are relevant for predicting market excess returns
or the return of the spread portfolios. To limit the size of the MS-VAR, we then use the
Akaike information criterion (AIC) to decide whether to include some additional regressors.
Speci…cally, we compute the AIC for the equation(s) that correspond(s) to the return(s) that
we are trying to predict. We then choose the speci…cation that minimizes the AIC.
   Here are the details:

     1. MS-VAR for the Market excess return:
       Fixed regressors (all lagged): Market excess return, inverse valuation ratio based on cay M S .
       The inverse valuation ratio is included because it represents a measure of asset valuation
       that can predict future stock market returns. Note that given that we are conditioning to
       the regime sequence obtained when estimating cay M S ; the intercept for the corresponding
       equation will adjust in a way to re‡ect the low frequency breaks identi…ed above.
       Possible additional variables to be chosen for the estimation based on the AIC: Value
       (small) spread (log-di¤erence in the book to market ratio of the small value portfolios
       and the book to market ratio of the small growth portfolios), Real FFR, term yield
       spread, four of the …ve Fama and French factors (SMB, HML, RMW, CMA), cay (based
       on PCE, available on Martin Lettau’s website.) Note that we do not include the market
       excess return from Fama and French (MKTMINRF) as a possible additional regressor
       because our dependant variable is the excess market return itself. Therefore, this variable
       is automatically included in the MS-VAR.

                                                   12
  Additional regressors selected based on the AIC: Value Spread, and SMB and HML factors
  from Fama and French.

2. MS-VAR for (a) Momentum return spread: The di¤erence between the excess return of the
  extreme winner (M10) portfolio and the excess return of the extreme loser (M1) portfolio;
  (b) Value return spread (S1): The di¤erence between the excess return of the small (size
  1) high BM portfolio and the excess return of the small (size 1) low BM portfolio; (c)
  Value return spread (S2): The di¤erence between the excess return of the size 2 high BM
  portfolio and the excess return of the small size 2 low BM portfolio.
  Fixed regressors (all lagged): (a) Momentum return spread; (b) Value return spread (S1);
  (c) Value return spread (S2); (d) Momentum BM spread: The di¤erence between the
  logarithm of the BM ratio of the extreme winner (M10) portfolio and the logarithm of the
  BM ratio of the extreme loser (M1) portfolio; (e) Value BM spread (S1): The di¤erence
  between the logarithm of the BM ratio of the small (size quintile 1) high book-market
  portfolio and the logarithm of the BM ratio of the small (size 1) low book-market portfolio;
  (f) Value BM spread (S2): The di¤erence between the logarithm of the BM ratio of the
  size quintile 2 high book-market portfolio and the logarithm of the BM ratio of the size
  2 low book-market portfolio.
  Possible additional variables to be chosen for the estimation based on the AIC: Real FFR
  computed as the di¤erence between FFR and In‡ation, excess return of small growth
  portfolio, excess return of small value portfolio, …ve Fama-French factors (SMB, HML,
  RMW, CMA, MKTMINRF.)
  Additional regressors selected based on the AIC: Real FFR and excess return of the small
  value portfolio.




                                           13
Most Likely Regime Sequence
In this appendix we provide details on how to compute the most likely regime sequence. This
most likely regime sequence is based on our estimates for the breaks in cay M S and mps, and is
taken as given in the portfolio MS-VAR and the MS-DSGE estimation. Speci…cally, we choose
the particular regime sequence Tn = f^1;n ; :::; ^T;n g that is most likely to have occurred, given
our estimated posterior mode parameter values for . This sequence is computed as follows.
First, we run Hamilton’s …lter to get the vector of …ltered probabilities tjt ; t = 1; 2; :::; T . The
Hamilton …lter can be expressed iteratively as


                                                                    tjt 1          t
                                                tjt   =
                                                           10         tjt 1            t
                                             t+1jt    = H           tjt


where t is a vector whose j-th element contains the conditional density p(ct j t = j; xM;t ; xF;t ; ),
the symbol     denotes element by element multiplication, and 1 is a vector with all elements
equal to 1. The …nal term,        T jT   is returned with the …nal step of the …ltering algorithm. Then,
a recursive algorithm can be implemented to derive the other smoothed probabilities:

                                     tjT   =    tjt       H0        t+1jT    ( )           t+1jt


where ( ) denotes element by element division. To choose the regime sequence most likely to
have occurred given our parameter estimates, consider the recursion in the next to last period
t = T 1:
                                T 1jT    =     T 1jT 1         H0           T jT   ( )       T jT 1    :

We …rst take    T jT   from the Hamilton …lter and choose the regime that is associated with the
largest probability, i.e., if     T jT   = (:9; :1), where the …rst element corresponds to the proba-
bility of regime 1, we select ^T = 1, indicating that we are in regime 1 in period T: We now
update T jT = (1; 0) and plug into the right-hand-side above along with the estimated …ltered
probabilities for T 1jT 1 ; T jT 1 and estimated transition matrix H to get T 1jT on the left-
hand-side. Now we repeat the same procedure by choosing the regime for T 1 that has the
largest probability at T 1, e.g., if T 1jT = (:2; :8) we select ^T 1 = 2, indicating that we are
in regime 2 in period T          1; we then update to                      T 1jT    = (0; 1), which is used again on the
right-hand-side now

                            T 2jT   =      T 2jT 2         H0             T 1jT    ( )       T 1jT 2       :

                                                                                                               T
We proceed in this manner until we have a most likely regime sequence                                              for the entire sample
t = 1; 2; :::; T . Two aspects of this procedure are worth noting. First, it fails if the updated

                                                               14
probabilities are exactly (:5; :5). Mathematically this is virtually zero. Second, note that this
procedure allows us to choose the most likely regime sequence by using the recursive formula
above to update the …ltered probabilities sequentially from T to time t = 1. This allows us
to take into account the time dependence in the regime sequence as dictated by the transition
probabilities.


Estimation of the MS-VAR
In this appendix we provide details on the estimation of the MS-VAR. Given that we take the
regime sequence as given, we need only estimate the transition matrix and the parameters of
the MS-VAR across the two regimes. The model is estimated by using Bayesian methods with
‡at priors on all parameters. As a …rst step, we group all the observations that belong to the
same regime. Conditional on a regime, we have a …xed coe¢ cients VAR. We can then follow
standard procedures to make draws for the VAR parameters as follows.
   Rewrite the VAR as

                                     Y       =           XA    t
                                                                       + " ;   t   = 1; 2
                                     T n                                T n
                                                       (T k)(k n)

                                      "t               N 0;        t

                                                                                                                                0
where Y = [Z1; :::; ZT ]0 ; the t-th row of X is Xt = 1; Zt0 1 ; Zt0                    2   ,A   t
                                                                                                      = c t ; A1; t ; A2;   t
                                                                                                                                    , the
                                                          0
t-th row of " is "t , and where          t
                                             = V t V t : If we specify a Normal-Wishart prior for A                             t
                                                                                                                                     and
V t:
                                                   1
                                                  t
                                                              W S0 1 =v0 ; v0
                                                                                             1
                              vec A t j        t
                                                              N vec (B0 ) ;         t
                                                                                        N0
                 1
where E       t
                     = S0 1 ; the posterior distribution is still in the Normal-Wishart family and is
given by
                                                   1
                                               t
                                                              W ST 1 =vT ; vT
                              vec A t j       t
                                                              N vec (BT ) ;         t
                                                                                        NT 1

Using the estimated regime sequence Tn we can group all the observations that pertain to the
same regime i. Therefore the parameters of the posterior are computed as

              vT = Ti + v0 ;       NT = Xi0 Xi + N0
             BT = NT 1                        bM LE
                               N0 B0 + Xi0 Xi B
                         v0      Ti b         1               bM LE       b0
                                                                               0
                                                                                                  bM LE           b0
              ST =          S0 +      M LE +                  B           B        N0 NT 1 Xi0 Xi B               B
                         vT      vT          vT
           bM LE = (X 0 Xi )                              1                                  0
                                     (Xi0 Yi ) ; b M LE =                         bM LE                     bM LE ;
                                 1
           B         i                                       Yi                Xi B              Yi      Xi B
                                                          Ti

                                                                15
where Ti ; Yi ; Xi denote the number and sample of observations in regime i. We choose ‡at priors
(v0 = 0; N0 = 0) so the expressions above coincide with the MLE estimates using observations
in regime i:
                                                         bM LE ; ST = b M LE :
                            vT = Ti ; NT = Xi0 Xi ; BT = B

Armed with these parameters in each regime, we can make draws from the posterior distribu-
               1
tions for     t
                   and A t in regime i to characterize parameter uncertainty about these parameters.
                                                                                                                T
       Given that we condition the MS-VAR estimates on the most likely regime sequence,                         n,
for cay M S , it is still of interest to estimate the elements of the transition probability matrix
for the MS-VAR parameters, HA , conditional on this regime sequence. Because we impose
                                                                                  T
this regime sequence, the posterior of HA only depends on                         n   and does not depend on other
parameters of the model. The posterior has a Dirichlet distribution if we assume a prior Dirichlet
distribution.25 For each column of HA the posterior distribution is given by:

                                  HA (:; i)    D(aii +    ii;r+1 ; aij       +   ij;r+1 )


where ij;r+1 denotes the number of transitions from regime i to regime j based on Tn , while
aii and aij the corresponding priors. With ‡at priors, we have aii = 0 and aij = 0: Armed with
this posterior distribution, we can characterize uncertainty about HA : Note that the posterior
HA will be in general di¤erent from the posterior distribution of H because the former is based
on a particular regime sequence Tn , while the latter re‡ects the entire posterior distribution for
 T                                      A
 n . The estimated transition matrix H can in turn be used to compute expectations taking
into account the possibility of regime change (see the next subsection).


MS-DSGE Model
This section reports technical details about the MS-DSGE model.

Evolution of beliefs

This subsection describes the evolution of beliefs. We …rst describe the standard constant gain
learning algorithm. We then introduce the signal about the current in‡ation target.

Constant Gain Adaptive Learning Suppose that agents believe that in‡ation evolves
according to an AR(1) process:
                                              t   =   +     t 1   +      t                                  (A12)
  25
   The Dirichlet distribution is a generalization of the beta distribution that allows one to potentially consider
more than 2 regimes. See e.g., Sims and Zha (2006).




                                                       16
Perceived trend in‡ation                   t
                                                                    et (
                                               is de…ned as the lim E                                           t+h ),       which equals the unconditional mean
                                                                                   h!1
            e ( t ). Taking expectations on both sides of equation A12 we …nd,
of in‡ation E
                                  e ( t) =
                                  E                    e ( t ) => E
                                                     + E          e ( t) =                                               t    = e t = (1             );

where we plug in the value of e t that agents perceive at t as the last step. Thus, the AR(1)
process implies a one-to-one mapping between the perceived constant e t and perceived trend
in‡ation t :
   Individuals estimate b                       ( ; )0 from past data following

                                               Rt = Rt             1   +            t       xt 1 x0t            1        Rt        1
                                                                                                1
                                               bt = bt             1   +        t Rt                xt      1       t        b0t 1 xt    1                              (A13)
                            0
where xt = (1;            t) .   The recursion is started at some point in the distant past. The sequence
of gains 0 <          t   < 1 determines the degree of updating cohort s applies when faced with an
in‡ation surprise at time t. For                      t   = 1=t the algorithm represents a recursive formulation of an
ordinary least squares estimation that uses all available data until time t with equal weights
(see Evans and Honkapohja (2001)). For constant t , it represents a constant-gain learning
algorithm with exponentially decaying weights.
     The previous speci…cation simpli…es if we assume that agents are only uncertain about the
long term value of in‡ation, but not its persistence. If agents only learn about                                                                                      and the
recursion has started in the distant pass we have:

                                                Rt = 1 if Rt                        1       =1                                                                          (A14)
                                                   et = et             1       +        t   (       t               t 1            et 1)                                (A15)

To see the above, note that if                      were known, the agent would estimate                                                             by running a regression
of     t        t 1   on a constant, or a vector or ones. So xt = 1 in every period and Rt = Rt                                                                            1   +
 t   xt 1 x0t   1     Rt    1    = Rt = Rt                 1   +           t   (1           Rt 1 ) : Starting value for R = R0 => R1 =
R0 + (1 R0 ). Continuing to iterate, this converges to 1 no matter what R0 as long as
0 < t < 1. Set xt = R1 = 1 in (A13) to get (A15).
     With constant gain learning, the variable                                              t   is a constant parameter that we denote . This
implies:
                                                   et = et         1   + (                  t                   t 1          et 1) :                                    (A16)
Hereafter we assume that learning is constant gain. Using the relation between                                                                                 t   and e t ; we
get:

                                      e t = (1                 )       t   =>
                       (1         )    t       = (1            )       t 1      + (                     t               t 1        (1        )   t 1)     =>
                                                                                                    1
                                       t       =     t 1   + (1                             )           (   t                t 1        (1       )    t 1) ;            (A17)

                                                                                            17
where the second equation above follows from (A16).

Signal About the In‡ation Target In our model, we combine the constant gain learning
algorithm described above with a signal about the central bank’s in‡ation target, thereby
allowing beliefs to be partly shaped by additional information the agent receives about the
target. This signal could re‡ect the opinion of experts (as in MN), or a credible central bank
announcement. If we use e CG t   and CGt   to denote the beliefs implied by the constant gain
learning described above, we obtain modi…ed updating rules for e t and                                                       t   that are a weighted
averages of two terms:

                             2                                                                3
                                                                                                           h                     i
                         T   6                                                          7             T                      T
        et =      1          4et       1   + (    t          t 1                 e t 1 )5 +                 (1           )           :
                               |                      {z                              }                                      t

                                                      e CG
                                                        t
                             2                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                             h       i
                         T   6                               1                                                              7            T       T
          t   =   1          4       t 1   + (1          )       (       t                t 1     (1             )   t   1 )5 +                          :
                                 |                                           {z                                           }                      t
                                                                             CG
                                                                             t


The …rst terms in square brackets, e CG
                                     t  and                          CG
                                                                     t ;          are the recursive updating rules implied by
constant gain learning as in (A16) and (A17). These terms are combined with two terms that
                                                                                   T
involve the central bank’s current in‡ation target                                    t
                                                                                          . Note that, since e t = (1                                )       t   under
                                                                 T
the autoregressive model, the term (1      ) t is simply the value of e t that would arise if
       T       T
 t =    t
          . If   = 1; the signal is completely informative and the agent’s belief about trend
                                                                             T
in‡ation is the same as the in‡ation target. If                                   = 0, the signal is completely uninformative
and the agent’s belief about trend in‡ation depends only on the learning algorithm. Thus,
the resulting laws of motion for the beliefs are a weighted average of what would arise under
constant gain learning and a term re‡ecting information about the current in‡ation target.

5.0.4   Expected in‡ation

Expected in‡ation from the point of view of the agents in the model is formed based on equation
A12 and their beliefs about the constant ; i.e., e t . Speci…cally, we have
                             et [
                             E        t+1 ]   = et +                 t

                             et [
                             E        t+2 ]   = et + et +                         2
                                                                                          t

                             et [
                             E        t+3 ]   = et + et +                         2
                                                                                      et +        3
                                                                                                       t

                             et [
                             E        t+4 ]   = et + et +                         2
                                                                                      et +        3
                                                                                                      et +       4
                                                                                                                     t


where, in line with the learning literature, we have assumed that agents do not take into account
that their beliefs might change in the future (i.e., they do not have anticipated utility).

                                                                 18
   Cumulative in‡ation over the next year is:


               et [
               E      t;t+4 ]   =            4+3 +2                 2
                                                                        +        3
                                                                                     et +                     +        2
                                                                                                                           +       3
                                                                                                                                       +         4
                                                                                                                                                          t
                                                                    2            3                                                      2             3       4
                                =            4+3 +2                     +            (1                   )    t    +          +             +            +       t


where in the second row we have used the fact that                                                    t   = e t = (1                    ) : The general formulas are:
                                  et [ t+h ] = e t + e t + ::: + h 1 e t +
                                  E                                                                                                     h
                                                                                                                                             t

                                 et [ t;t+h ] = (1=h) Ph E
                                 E                          e
                                                        i=1 t [ t+i ]

   Using matrix algebra, we can express the perceived law of motion for in‡ation as:
                                              et                        1 0                   et                           0
                                                                =                                             +
                                                  t+1                   1                         t                        t+1

This is equivalent to:
                                              t                         1            0                    t                    0
                                                            =                                                      +
                                             t+1                    1                                     t                    t+1
                                                                |           {z           }| {z }
                                                                                                  e       St

where once again we have used                           t   = e t = (1                   ) and the matrix e                                          is used to extract both
in‡ation   t   and the perceived long term in‡ation                                                       t   from the state vector St . The latter
formulation is used for the solution of the model since it is                                                              t   rather than e t that appears in
the state space representation of the model. It follows that
                                  et [
                                  E           t;t+h ]       =e          (I               )    1
                                                                                                          I         4
                                                                                                                           (e St )

where the vector e is used to extract in‡ation.

Long-run Monetary Neutrality

In a model with rational expectations, the relation between in‡ation and the output gap is
controlled by a New-Keynesian Phillips curve:

                                         t         t   = Et [           t+1              t]   +                yt   1          yt      1

where t denotes the long term value of in‡ation that depends on the central bank’s in‡ation
target. The parameter denotes the slope of the Phillips curve and depends on the extent
of nominal rigidities in the economy. Taking the unconditional expectation on both sides, we
have:

                                E[   t            t]        =       E[       t+1              t]      + E yt                   1        yt   1

                         E [ t]          E [ t] =                   E [ t]                   E [ t ] + E yt                         1        yt       1

                                                  0 =               E yt         1           yt       1


                                                                                 19
where we have used the fact that                                 t   = E [ t ]. Therefore, we have: E yt                                                                            1       = E [yt 1 ] = 0:
   With learning, long-term neutrality still holds:

                                    t                t           =                [       t                   t]       +                    yt    1           yt   1

                                    E [ t] = E [ t] +                                                                               E yt              1           yt   1
                                                                                                          1
                                                     0 =                      E yt                    1           yt           1


where we have used the fact that                                 t   = E [ t ]. Therefore, we have: E yt                                                                            1       = E [yt 1 ] = 0:

Solution and Estimation of the Model

We can rewrite the system of equations as:


                    yt =        yt           1               [it                      t               (1                       )        t        r] + dt                                                    (A18)
                    t   =       t   +                                    yt       1               yt          1                                                                                             (A19)
                                                 1
                                                                 h                                                                                                           i
                T                                                                                             T
     it   r+    t
                        =       1                i;      t                ;   t
                                                                                              t                    t
                                                                                                                               +                 y;   t
                                                                                                                                                        (yt            yt 1 )                               (A20)
                                                 h                                                         i
                                                                                                  T
                                +       i;   t
                                                     it      1                r+                      t
                                                                                                                  +                i "i;t                                                                   (A21)
                rt      =           (1= ) yt                                  yt          1               dt + r                                                                                            (A22)
                yt      =       y       yt       1       +           y   "y   ;t                                                                                                                            (A23)
                                                     T                                                                         1                                                                        T   T
                    t   =       1                                    t 1      + (1                                 )               (        t             t 1              (1           )    t 1)   +       (A24)
                                                                                                                                                                                                            t

                    dt =        d dt 1               +           d "d;t                                                                                                                                     (A25)

   State space and parameter vectors
                                                                                      c
   De…ne the parameter vectors                                   t
                                                                     and                  t
                                                                                                  as
                                                                                                                                                              T                     0
                            t
                                =   ; ; ; ;                                           ;   t
                                                                                              ;               y;       t
                                                                                                                           ;       i;   t
                                                                                                                                            ;    y    ;           ; ; ;         d
                                  h         i0
                        c            T
                            t
                                =     t
                                        ; r

and the state vector St and the vector of Gaussian shocks "t as
                                                                                                                                                 0
                                             St = [yt ; yt ;                                      t ; it ; rt ;                     t ; dt ]
                                                                                                                   0
                                             "t =                        "i;t ; "yt ; "d;t ; "t                                                  N (0; I)

   Let the matrix Q = diag ( i ;                             y   ;       d)   be a square matrix with the shock standard deviations
on the main diagonal. Conditional on each regime, the system of equations can be rewritten
using matrix notation:
                                                                                              c
                                    0                t
                                                             St =             c                   t
                                                                                                          +                1                t
                                                                                                                                                 St       1   + Q"t

                                                                                                      20
                                               c
Note that the vector                  c            t
                                                           includes the in‡ation target for the corresponding regime.
    Inverting the matrix                      0            t
                                                                   ; we obtain the solution of the model as MSVAR:
                                                                      c
                                              St = C                      t
                                                                              ;           t
                                                                                                  + T(            t
                                                                                                                      )St     1   + R(            t
                                                                                                                                                      )Q"t

            c                             1                          c                                                    1                                                                        1
where C         t
                    ;   t
                             =        0                t       c         t
                                                                                  ; T(                t
                                                                                                          )=          0           t       1           t
                                                                                                                                                           ; and R(                t
                                                                                                                                                                                       )=      0           t
                                                                                                                                                                                                               :
  The solution of the model can be combined with an observation equation to estimate the
model. Given that we know the regime sequence, we can estimate the model with a standard
Kalman …lter algorithm. The only caveat is that the associated transition equation varies over
time. We thus have the following state space representation:


                                                                                                              0
                                          Xt = D + Z [St0 ; yt 1 ] + U vt                                                                                                                              (A26)
                                                                              c
                                              St = C                              t
                                                                                      ;       t
                                                                                                      + T(            t
                                                                                                                          )St     1   + R(            t
                                                                                                                                                          )Q"t                                         (A27)
                                              vt                   N (0; I)                                                                                                                            (A28)

where vt is a vector of observation errors and U is a diagonal matrix with the standard deviations
of the observation errors on the main diagonal. As said before, we condition on a regime
sequence   t;       so the transition equation (A27) in at each point in time is known.
    In our estimation, we use four observables: Real GDP per capita growth, In‡ation, Federal
Funds rate, and the mean of the Michigan survey one-year-ahead in‡ation forecasts. All vari-
ables are annualized. We have observation errors on all variables because we have 3 shocks for
four observables.
   Thus, the vector Xt is                      de…ned as:
2                3 2                                 3 2                                                                                                                                                           3 2     3
       GDP                                     GDP                                                                                         4yt            4yt      1                                                   vty
6 Inf lation 7 6                                0    7 6                                                                                              4 t                                                          7 6 vt 7
6                7=6                                 7+6                                                                                                                                                           7+6 f 7
4     FFR        5 4                            0    5 4                                                                                              4it                                                          5 4 vt 5
                                                                                                                          2       3                                                    2       3       4
  E (Inf lation)                                0         4+3 +2                                                              +        (1              ) t+                    +           +       +           t       vte
where in the last row we have used the fact that expectations for an agent in the model is:


                    et [
                    E       t;t+4 ]       =                4+3 +2                         2
                                                                                              +           3
                                                                                                              et +                +    2
                                                                                                                                              +       3
                                                                                                                                                          +     4
                                                                                                                                                                           t
                                                                                          2               3                                                2           3           4
                                          =                4+3 +2                             +               (1              )   t   +           +            +           +               t


    The mapping from the variables of the model to the observables can be written using matrix
algebra. The vector D is then:                                                                    2               3
                                                                                                              GDP
                                                                                6                              0  7
                                                                              D=6
                                                                                4
                                                                                                                  7:
                                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                               0

                                                                                                          21
   The matrix Z is then:
         2                                                                                                         3
            4 0                     0                 0    0     0   0           0                               4
         6 0 0                      4                 0    0     0   0           0                              0 7
     Z=6 4 0 0
                                                                                                                   7
                                    0                 4    0     0   0           0                              0 5
                                  2     3       4
            0 0      +              +       +         0    0     0   0    4+3 +2 2+            3
                                                                                                   (1   )       0

Note that the matrix Z loads detrended output (yt ) and lagged detrended output (yt 1 ).
   The likelihood is computed with the Kalman …lter and then combined with a prior distribu-
tion for the parameters to obtain the posterior. As a …rst step, a block algorithm is used to …nd
the posterior mode, while a Metropolis-Hastings algorithm is used to draw from the posterior
distribution.
    Draws from the posterior are obtained using a standard Metropolis-Hastings algorithm
initialized around the posterior mode. When working with models whose posterior distribution
is very complicated in shape it is very important to …nd the posterior mode. Here are the key
steps of the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm:

      Step 1: Draw a new set of parameters from the proposal distribution: #                                N    n 1; c

                                  m                                  m 1
      Step 2: Compute         (       ; #) = min p (#) =p                   ; 1 where p ( ) is the posterior evalu-
      ated at .
                                                                     m                    m
      Step 3: Accept the new parameter and set                           = # if u <   (       ; #) where u       U ([0; 1]),
                      m           m 1
      otherwise set       =

      Step 4: If m    nsim ; stop. Otherwise, go back to step 1

   The matrix corresponds to the inverse of the Hessian computed at the posterior mode
 . The parameter c is set to obtain an acceptance rate of around 30%. We use four chains of
540; 000 draws each (1 every 200 draws is saved). Convergence is checked by using the Brooks-
Gelman-Rubin potential reduction scale factor using within and between variances based on
the four multiple chains used in the paper.
   The only aspect of the estimation that it is not traditional is that the transition equation
(A27) varies over time. However, given that we estimate the model …xing the regime sequence,
we can easily modify the standard Kalman …lter to handle this change. Speci…cally, the modi…ed
Kalman …lter is described as follows.
   Given a sequence of regimes T =                  1 ::: T ;   the Kalman …lter involves the following steps for
each t = 1:::T :




                                                                22
     1. Prediction:

                                                                                    c
                                     Stjt            1        = C                       t
                                                                                            ;       t
                                                                                                            + T(                     t
                                                                                                                                         )St     1jt 1                                              (A29)
                                     Ptjt            1        = T(                  t
                                                                                        )Pt         1jt 1 T (                    t
                                                                                                                                     )0 + R(              t
                                                                                                                                                              )Q2 R(      t
                                                                                                                                                                              )0                    (A30)
                                          tjt 1               = Xt                      Xtjt            1   = Xt                         D        Z           Stjt   1                              (A31)
                                         ftjt        1        = ZPtjt 1 Z 0 + U 2                                                                                                                   (A32)

     2. Updating

                                                                        Stjt = Stjt                                 1   + Kt              tjt 1                                                     (A33)
                                                                        Ptjt = Ptjt                                 1            Kt ZPtjt             1                                             (A34)

       where Kt = Ptjt 1 Z 0 ftjt1 1 is the Kalman gain.

     The log-likelihood ln L is then obtained as:
                                                         PT                                                                  PT                  0         1
                          ln L =                 :5           t=1       ln 2 ftjt                       1               :5               t=1     tjt 1 ftjt 1 tjt 1 :


     Details about the solution. The matrices used to write the model in state space form are
described below.
Equations:


                  yt =     yt        1               [it                    t           (1                  )       t            r] + dt
                  t   =     t   +                              yt       1           yt          1                                                                                                   (A35)
                                         1
                                                         h                                                                                                                                      i
              T                                                                                 T                                                     T
it      r+    t
                      =    1              i;     t              ;   t
                                                                                t                   t
                                                                                                            +                ;   t
                                                                                                                                             t            t
                                                                                                                                                                +        y;   t
                                                                                                                                                                                (yt    yt 1 )       (A36)
                                          h                                                     i
                                                                                    T
                          +     i;   t
                                              it     1              r+                  t
                                                                                                    +           i "i;t                                                                              (A37)
              yt      =    y    yt        1      +        y   "y    ;t                                                                                                                              (A38)
                                             T                                                              1                                                                          T   T
                  t   =    1                              t 1       + (1                            )           (       t                 t 1         (1             )   t 1)      +       t
                                                                                                                                                                                                + (A39)
                                                                                                                                                                                                   " ;t
                  dt =     d dt 1            +           d "d;t                                                                                                                                     (A40)

We get:




                                                                                                        23
                                               yt = y t                       1                    it +                             t   + (1                           )       t    + r + dt
                                                     t       =       t   +                                 yt          1                                       yt        1
                                                                                  1                                                     1
                                               T                                                                                                                                            T
                               it       (r +    t
                                                    ) = (1                            i;   t
                                                                                               )           ;   t
                                                                                                                        t               (1                i;   t
                                                                                                                                                                   )           ;    t           t
                                                                                                                                                                                                        T
                                                                 + (1                      i;      t
                                                                                                       )           ;    t
                                                                                                                                    t        (1                 i;     t
                                                                                                                                                                           )            ;   t               t

                                                                 + (1                      i;      t
                                                                                                       )            y;          t
                                                                                                                                    yt            (1                i;     t
                                                                                                                                                                               )            y;          t
                                                                                                                                                                                                            yt          1
                                                                                                                                                  T
                                                                 +           i;   t
                                                                                      it       1               i;      t
                                                                                                                            (r +                  t
                                                                                                                                                      )
                                                                 +           i i;t

                                               yt =               y yt 1               +            y          y ;t
                                                                                      T                                                       T                                         1
                                                     t       = (1                          )       t 1         + (1                               ) (1                         )                    t
                                                                                           T                                             1
                                                                         (1                        ) (1                             )                 t 1
                                                                                           T                                             1
                                                                         (1                        ) (1                             ) (1                        )          t 1
                                                                             T        T
                                                                 +                     t
                                                                                           +                           ;t

                                               dt =               d dt 1               +            d d;t


Equations with state variables at t on the LHS, everything else on the RHS, and re-ordered to
match the state variable vector:



                                             yt + it                                  t                 (1                          )    t            dt = y t                      1       + r
                                                                                                                                                      yt =                 y yt 1               +                   y       y ;t

                                                                                                                                         t                t   =+                                            yt          1                             yt      1
                                                                                                                                                                             1                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          T
it   (1   i;   t
                   )   ;   t
                                    t   (1      i;       t
                                                             )    ;      t
                                                                                  t        (1                      i;       t
                                                                                                                                )            y;   t
                                                                                                                                                      yt =                   (1                     i;          t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    )        ;   t        t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          T
                                                                                                                                                                             (1                         i;      t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    )        ;    t           t

                                                                                                                                                                             (1                         i;      t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    )            y;   t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          yt      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      T
                                                                                                                                                                    +              i;   t
                                                                                                                                                                                            it          1                   i;    t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (r +            t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  T
                                                                                                                                                                    +              i i;t         + (r +                               t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          )
                                                                                                    T                                             1                                         T
                                                                 t            (1                           ) (1                          )                t   = (1                                  )           t 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                        T                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                             (1                                 ) (1                      )               t 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                        T
                                                                                                                                                                             (1                                 ) (1                      ) 1 (1                  )   t 1
                                                                                                                                                                                   T        T
                                                                                                                                                                    +                           t
                                                                                                                                                                                                        +                        ;t

                                                                                                                                                      dt =                 d dt 1               +                   d d;t




                                                                                                           24
Goal: matrix form with                        0 St        =           C      +            1 St 1        + Q t.                 0    and           1   are 6              6 matrices.                   C   is 6         1.
  is 6 4.
                                                                                           0
State variables: St = [yt ; yt ;                              t ; it ;       t ; dt ]          .
Stochastic variables: Q = diag( i ;                                              y    ;            ;   d ).

First,       0,   which is for the time t state variables on the LHS. Empty cells are zero.

                   2                                                                                                                                                                                      3
                                             yt                                  yt                                   t                           it                           t                       dt
              6        yt                    1                                                                                                                            (1               )            1 7
              6                                                                                                                                                                                           7
              6        yt                                                        1                                                                                                                        7
              6                                                                                                                                                                                           7
              6                                                                                                       1                                                        1                          7
         0   =6
              6
                         t                                                                                                                                                                                7
                                                                                                                                                                                                          7
              6         it    (1             i;   t
                                                      )          y;   t
                                                                                                        (1           )i;   t        ;   t
                                                                                                                                                      1             (1     i;      t
                                                                                                                                                                                       )       ;   t      7
              6                                                                                    (1         T
                                                                                                                  ) (1                  )    1
                                                                                                                                                                           1                              7
              6          t                                                                                                                                                                                7
              4         dt                                                                                                                                                                             1 5


Next,        1,   which is for the time t                                    1 state variables on the RHS. Empty cells are zero.

         2                                                                                                                                                                                                              3
                              yt       1                              yt         1                                    t 1                                 it    1                      t 1                 dt       1
       6      yt                                                                                                                                                                                                        7
       6                                                                                                                                                                                                                7
       6      yt                                                                                                                                                                                                        7
       6                                                                     y                                                                                                                                          7
       6                                                                                                                                                                                                                7
       6          t           1                                          1                                                                                                                                              7
  1   =6                                                                                                                                                                                                                7
       6      it         (1       i;     )        y;                                                                                                       i;                                                           7
       6                               t                  t                                                                                                     t                                                       7
       6          t                                                                                (1         T
                                                                                                                  ) (1                  )    1
                                                                                                                                                                     (1            T
                                                                                                                                                                                       )(1             )                7
       6                                                                                                                                                                                                                7
       4      dt                                                                                                                                                                                                d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5


  inserts the stochastic processes into each of the equations. Empty cells are zero.
                                                                                 2                                                                3
                                                                                                       i;t    y ;t             ;t           d;t
                                                                          6               yt                                                      7
                                                                          6                                                                       7
                                                                          6               yt                                                      7
                                                                          6                                       y                               7
                                                                          6                                                                       7
                                                                         =6
                                                                          6
                                                                                           t                                                      7
                                                                                                                                                  7
                                                                          6               it            i                                         7
                                                                          6                                                                       7
                                                                          6                t                                                      7
                                                                          4               dt                                                 d
                                                                                                                                                  5


Finally,          C    collects all of the leftover constant terms on the RHS.




                                                                                                             25
                            2                                                    3
                              yt                         r
                            6 yt                        0                         7
                            6                                                     7
                            6 t                         0                         7
                       C   =6
                            6 it (1                   T
                                                                                  7
                                                                                  7
                            6            i;   t
                                                )[r + t (1       ;   t   ;   t
                                                                               )] 7
                            4 t                        T   T                      5
                                                             t
                                dt                     0

5.0.5   ZLB Robustness checks for MS-DSGE

In this appendix, we conduct two robustness checks to verify that our results are not distorted
by the time spent at the zero lower bound (ZLB) in the aftermath of the …nancial crisis. First,
we re-estimate our MS-DSGE model using the Wu-Xia (Wu and Xia (2016)) shadow rate.
Second, we use the one-year Treasury yield instead of the federal funds rate in our estimation.
The shadow rate is downloaded from Professor Wu’s website, while the one-year Treasury yield
is downloaded from FRED. The …gures presented in this appendix show that the main result
of the paper are not a¤ected by using these alternative measures for the interest rate.
   In the Wu and Xia model, the short-term interest rate is the maximum of the shadow federal
funds rate and the lower bound on interest rates. Wu and Xia set this lower bound to 25 basis
points because that was the rate paid on both required and excess reserve balances during the
December 16, 2008, to December 15, 2015, period when the Federal Open Market Committee
(FOMC) set the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 25 basis points. On December
16, 2015, the FOMC increased the rate paid on reserve balances to 50 basis points and the
target range for the federal funds rate to 25 to 50 basis points. Once the lower bound is not
binding anymore, the shadow rate coincides with the actual FFR.
   The results of Wu and Xia are based on a multivariate version of the shadow rate term
structure model (SRTSM) introduced by Black (1995). In the SRTSM, the observed short term
rate is the maximum between a lower bound and the shadow rate. The shadow rate, in turn,
is an a¢ ne function of a vector of state variables that follow a VAR process. Absent the lower
bound, the model would be fully linear. Thus, the lower bound introduces a non-linearity in
the mapping from the factors to the observed short term interest rate. The key idea behind
the model and the work of Wu and Xia is that by observing the behavior of forward rates at
di¤erent maturities, the researcher can back out a measure of the shadow short term interest
rate. In other words, forward rates re‡ect the overall monetary policy stance and can be used
to recover the implicit behavior of the shadow interest rate.




                                                 26
                               GDP growth                                                     Inflation

       10                                            Model                                                         Model
                                                     Data              10                                          Data
        5                                                               5
        0                                                               0
       -5                                                              -5


               1970     1980      1990      2000   2010                        1970    1980     1990      2000   2010

                            Shadow FFR                                                   Expected Inflation
27




                                                                       12
       15                                            Model                                                         Model
                                                     Data              10                                          Data
       10                                                               8

        5                                                               6

                                                                        4
        0
                                                                        2
               1970     1980      1990      2000   2010                        1970    1980     1990      2000   2010




     Figure A.1: Shadow rate estimates of the MS-DSGE model. The …gure reports the model implied series and the
     corresponding observed series. Expected in‡ation comes from the Michigan Survey of Consumers. The di¤erence is due to
     observation errors. The sample spans 1961:Q1 - 2017:Q3. Results are based on estimates obtained replacing the FFR with the
     Wu-Xia shadow rate when the ZLB is binding.
                    GDP growth                                     Inflation                               Real Interest Rate
                                                  11                                           3.5
        5
                                                  10
      4.5                                                                                        3

        4                                          9
                                                                                               2.5
      3.5                                          8

                                                                                                 2
        3                                          7

      2.5                                          6                                           1.5
28




        2                                          5
                                                                                                 1
      1.5                                          4
                                                                                               0.5
        1                                          3

      0.5                                          2                                             0

             1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                   1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                        1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
              Hawkish regime      Dovish regime     Only policy rule changes   No policy rule changes       Only changes in Inflation Target



     Figure A.2: Shadow rate estimates of the MS-DSGE model. The blue line corresponds to the ‡uctuations generated
     by changes in both the target and the slope coe¢ cients. The orange line assumes that monetary policy starts under the Dovish
     regime and no regime change occurs. Finally, the black dotted line assumes that changes in the target occurred, but that the
     slope coe¢ cients in the Taylor rule coe¢ cients always remain as in the Dovish-high target regime. Results are based on estimates
     obtained replacing the FFR with the Wu-Xia shadow rate when the ZLB is binding.
                     Inflation                                       Shadow FFR                                          Real Interest Rate
                                                                                                            10
       15                 Volcker disinflation        16                    Volcker disinflation                                  Volcker disinflation

                                                                                                             8
                                                      14

       10                                             12                                                     6

                                                      10
                                                                                                             4
        5                                                 8
                                                                                                             2
29




                                                          6
        0
                                                          4                                                  0
                                                          2
       -5                                                                                                   -2
                                                          0

                                                      -2                                                    -4

            1980   1990     2000     2010                     1980   1990       2000     2010                     1980     1990     2000      2010
                                         Hawkish regime         Dovish regime          Only policy rule changes          Data



     Figure A.3: Shadow rate estimates of the MS-DSGE model. The Volcker disin‡ation. We start the economy as it was in
     1980:Q1 and remove all Gaussian shocks that occured after that period, but keep the estimated regime sequence. The dashed line
     corresponds to the data. The real interest rate is computed as the di¤erence between the FFR and expected in‡ation. Expected
     in‡ation is obtained based on the model solution. Results are based on estimates obtained replacing the FFR with the Wu-Xia
     shadow rate when the ZLB is binding.
                    GDP growth                                   Inflation                             Real Interest Rate
                                                                                            3.5
        5                                         11

      4.5                                         10                                         3

        4                                          9
                                                                                            2.5
      3.5                                          8

        3                                                                                    2
                                                   7

      2.5                                          6
30




                                                                                            1.5
        2                                          5
                                                                                             1
      1.5                                          4

        1                                          3                                        0.5

      0.5                                          2
                                                                                             0
             1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                   1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                   1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
                                       Hawkish regime      Dovish regime     Learning     Target is known



     Figure A.4: Shadow rate estimates of the MS-DSGE model. Perfect information about the target. The blue solid line
     shows estimated ‡uctuations generated only by changes in the policy rule (in‡ation target and slope coe¢ cients) when agents
     learn about trend in‡ation. The orange dashed line shows a counterfactual in which the policy rule shifts but agents observe the
     in‡ation target. Dovish regime has a high target T and low activism against deviations from the target T . Hawkish regime has
     a low T and high activism against deviations from T . The sample spans 1961:Q1 - 2017:Q3. Results are based on estimates
     obtained replacing the FFR with the Wu-Xia shadow rate when the ZLB is binding.
                                    GDP growth                                          Inflation                                       Real Interest Rate

                         1.5
     Curbing inflation



                                                                      10                                                    5
                          1                                                                                                 4
                                                                       8
                         0.5                                                                                                3

                          0                                            6                                                    2


                               20      40        60        80                    20         40        60        80                     20      40      60    80


                                                                                                                            1
                          2
     Lifting inflation




                                                                       8
                                                                                                                          0.5
31




                         1.8
                                                                       6                                                    0
                         1.6

                                                                       4                                                  -0.5
                         1.4
                               20      40        60        80                    20         40        60        80                     20      40      60    80
                                                      Response to policy shock        Response to change in policy rule          Regime mean


         Figure A.5: Shadow rate estimates of the MS-DSGE model. Top row: Curbing in‡ation. The economy is initially
         in the Dovish regime. The blue solid line presents the evolution of the macro variables in response to a two standard deviation
         contractionary monetary policy shock and no regime change. The black dashed line presents the evolution of the macro variables
         in response to a regime change from the Dovish regime to the Hawkish regime. Lower row: Lifting in‡ation. The economy is
         initially in the Hawkish regime. The blue solid line presents the evolution of the macro variables in response to a two standard
         deviation expansionary monetary policy shock and no regime change. The black dashed line presents the evolution of the macro
         variables in response to a regime change from the Hawkish regime to the Dovish regime. Results are based on estimates obtained
         replacing the FFR with the Wu-Xia shadow rate when the ZLB is binding.
                          Market Excess Return                                                                Momentum Spread
                                                            1.8                                                                           4.2




                                                                  PDV Excess Returns




                                                                                                                                                PDV Excess Returns
               3                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                          4
                                                            1.6
     RIR MPR




                                                                                       RIR MPR
               2                                                                                 2                                        3.8

                                                            1.4                                                                           3.6
               1                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                          3.4
                                                            1.2                                                                           3.2
               0                                                                                 0
                   1970   1980   1990    2000     2010                                               1970   1980   1990     2000   2010

                            Value Spread (S1)                                                                 Value Spread (S2)
32




                                                                                                                                          1.7



                                                                  PDV Excess Returns




                                                                                                                                                PDV Excess Returns
               3                                                                                 3
                                                            2.8                                                                           1.6
     RIR MPR




                                                                                       RIR MPR
               2                                                                                 2                                        1.5
                                                            2.6
               1                                                                                 1                                        1.4
                                                            2.4
                                                                                                                                          1.3
               0                                                                                 0
                   1970   1980   1990    2000     2010                                               1970   1980   1990     2000   2010




     Figure A.6: Shadow rate estimates of the MS-DSGE model. Excess returns and policy rule changes. The …gure reports
     the time series of the present discounted value of expected excess returns for di¤erent portfolios (dashed line, right axis) together
     with ‡uctuations of the real interest rate due to changes in the monetary policy rule (solid line, left axis). Results are based on
     estimates obtained replacing the FFR with the Wu-Xia shadow rate when the ZLB is binding.
                               GDP growth                                                      Inflation

       10                                            Model                                                          Model
                                                     Data              10                                           Data
        5
                                                                        5
        0                                                               0
       -5                                                               -5


               1970     1980      1990      2000   2010                         1970    1980     1990      2000   2010

                           One-year yield                                                Expected Inflation
33




       15                                                              12
                                                     Model                                                          Model
                                                     Data              10                                           Data

       10                                                               8

                                                                        6
        5
                                                                        4

                                                                        2
               1970     1980      1990      2000   2010                         1970    1980     1990      2000   2010




     Figure A.7: One-year yield estimates of the MS-DSGE model. The …gure reports the model implied series and the
     corresponding observed series. Expected in‡ation comes from the Michigan Survey of Consumers. The di¤erence is due to
     observation errors. The sample spans 1961:Q1 - 2017:Q3. Results are based on estimates obtained using the one-year treasury
     yield instead of the FFR.
                    GDP growth                                     Inflation                               Real Interest Rate
                                                  11                                           3.5
      5.5
                                                  10
        5                                                                                        3
                                                   9
      4.5
                                                                                               2.5
        4                                          8

      3.5                                          7                                             2

        3                                          6
34




                                                                                               1.5
      2.5                                          5
                                                                                                 1
        2                                          4

      1.5                                          3                                           0.5

        1                                          2
                                                                                                 0
             1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                   1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                        1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
              Hawkish regime      Dovish regime     Only policy rule changes   No policy rule changes       Only changes in Inflation Target



     Figure A.8: One-year yield estimates of the MS-DSGE model. The blue line corresponds to the ‡uctuations generated
     by changes in both the target and the slope coe¢ cients. The orange line assumes that monetary policy starts under the Dovish
     regime and no regime change occurs. Finally, the black dotted line assumes that changes in the target occurred, but that the
     slope coe¢ cients in the Taylor rule coe¢ cients always remain as in the Dovish-high target regime. Results are based on estimates
     obtained using the one-year treasury yield instead of the FFR.
                      Inflation                                      One-year yield                                      Real Interest Rate
                                                      16
       15                 Volcker disinflation                              Volcker disinflation                                  Volcker disinflation
                                                      14                                                     8


       10                                             12
                                                                                                             6

                                                      10
                                                                                                             4
        5
                                                          8
35




                                                                                                             2
        0                                                 6

                                                                                                             0
                                                          4
       -5
                                                                                                            -2
                                                          2



            1980   1990     2000     2010                     1980   1990       2000     2010                     1980     1990     2000      2010
                                         Hawkish regime         Dovish regime          Only policy rule changes          Data



     Figure A.9: One-year yield estimates of the MS-DSGE model. The Volcker disin‡ation. We start the economy as it
     was in 1980:Q1 and remove all Gaussian shocks that occured after that period, but keep the estimated regime sequence. The
     dashed line corresponds to the data. The real interest rate is computed as the di¤erence between the FFR and expected in‡ation.
     Expected in‡ation is obtained based on the model solution. Results are based on estimates obtained using the one-year treasury
     yield instead of the FFR.
                    GDP growth                                   Inflation                              Real Interest Rate
                                                                                            3.5
      5.5                                         11

        5                                         10                                          3
      4.5                                          9
                                                                                            2.5
        4                                          8

      3.5                                          7                                          2

        3
36




                                                   6
                                                                                            1.5
      2.5                                          5

        2                                          4                                          1

      1.5                                          3
                                                                                            0.5
        1                                          2

             1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                   1970 1980 1990 2000 2010                    1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
                                       Hawkish regime      Dovish regime     Learning      Target is known



     Figure A.10: One-year yield estimates of the MS-DSGE model. Perfect information about the target. The blue solid
     line shows estimated ‡uctuations generated only by changes in the policy rule (in‡ation target and slope coe¢ cients) when agents
     learn about trend in‡ation. The orange dashed line shows a counterfactual in which the policy rule shifts but agents observe the
     in‡ation target. Dovish regime has a high target T and low activism against deviations from the target T . Hawkish regime has
     a low T and high activism against deviations from T . The sample spans 1961:Q1 - 2017:Q3. Results are based on estimates
     obtained using the one-year treasury yield instead of the FFR.
                                    GDP growth                                          Inflation                                       Real Interest Rate
                                                                                                                            6
                         1.5
     Curbing inflation




                                                                      10
                                                                                                                            4
                          1
                                                                       8

                         0.5                                           6                                                    2


                               20      40        60        80                    20         40        60        80                     20      40      60    80


                         1.9
                                                                                                                          0.8
                                                                       8
     Lifting inflation




                         1.8                                                                                              0.6
37




                                                                                                                          0.4
                         1.7                                           6
                                                                                                                          0.2
                         1.6                                                                                                0
                                                                       4                                                  -0.2
                         1.5
                               20      40        60        80                    20         40        60        80                     20      40      60    80
                                                      Response to policy shock        Response to change in policy rule          Regime mean


         Figure A.11: One-year yield estimates of the MS-DSGE model. Top row: Curbing in‡ation. The economy is initially
         in the Dovish regime. The blue solid line presents the evolution of the macro variables in response to a two standard deviation
         contractionary monetary policy shock and no regime change. The black dashed line presents the evolution of the macro variables
         in response to a regime change from the Dovish regime to the Hawkish regime. Lower row: Lifting in‡ation. The economy is
         initially in the Hawkish regime. The blue solid line presents the evolution of the macro variables in response to a two standard
         deviation expansionary monetary policy shock and no regime change. The black dashed line presents the evolution of the macro
         variables in response to a regime change from the Hawkish regime to the Dovish regime. Results are based on estimates obtained
         using the one-year treasury yield instead of the FFR.
                          Market Excess Return                                                               Momentum Spread
                                                           1.8                                                                           4.2




                                                                 PDV Excess Returns




                                                                                                                                               PDV Excess Returns
               3                                                                                3                                        4
                                                           1.6
     RIR MPR




                                                                                      RIR MPR
                                                                                                                                         3.8
               2                                                                                2
                                                           1.4                                                                           3.6
               1                                                                                1                                        3.4
                                                           1.2                                                                           3.2
                   1970   1980   1990    2000    2010                                               1970   1980   1990     2000   2010

                            Value Spread (S1)                                                                Value Spread (S2)
38




                                                                                                                                         1.7



                                                                 PDV Excess Returns




                                                                                                                                               PDV Excess Returns
               3                                           2.8                                  3
                                                                                                                                         1.6
     RIR MPR




                                                                                      RIR MPR
               2                                                                                2                                        1.5
                                                           2.6
                                                                                                                                         1.4
               1                                                                                1
                                                           2.4
                                                                                                                                         1.3
                   1970   1980   1990    2000    2010                                               1970   1980   1990     2000   2010




     Figure A.12: One-year yield estimates of the MS-DSGE model. Excess returns and policy rule changes. The …gure
     reports the time series of the present discounted value of expected excess returns for di¤erent portfolios (dashed line, right axis)
     together with ‡uctuations of the real interest rate due to changes in the monetary policy rule (solid line, left axis). Results are
     based on estimates obtained using the one-year treasury yield instead of the FFR.
Conditional Expectations and Economic Uncertainty
In this appendix we explain how expectations and economic uncertainty are computed for
variables in the MS-VAR. More details can be found in Bianchi (2016). Consider the following
…rst-order MS-VAR:
                                       Zt = c t + A t Zt          1   + V t "t , "t               N (0; I)                                    (A41)
and suppose that we are interested in E0 (Zt ) = E (Zt jI0 ) with I0 being the information set
available at time 0. Note that the …rst-order VAR is not restrictive because any VAR with
l > 1 lags can be rewritten as above by using the …rst-order companion form, and the methods
below applied to the companion form.
   Let n be the number of variables in the VAR of the previous Appendix section. Let m be
the number of Markov-switching states. De…ne the mn                                           1 column vector qt as:
                                                                                      0
                                                         qt = qt10 ; :::; qtm0
                                                    mn 1

where the individual n            1 vectors qti = E0 Zt 1                  t =i
                                                                                    E Zt 1              t =i
                                                                                                               jI0 and 1      t =i
                                                                                                                                     is an indicator
variable that is one when regime i is in place and zero otherwise. Note that:

                                         qti = E0 Zt 1         t =i
                                                                      = E0 (Zt j          t   = i)       i
                                                                                                         t

        i
where   t   = P0 (   t   = i) = P (      t   = ijI0 ). Therefore we can express                                t   = E0 (Zt ) as:
                                                               Pm i
                                                t = E0 (Zt ) =    i=1 qt = wqt

where the matrix          w     = [In ; :::; In ] is obtained placing side by side m n-dimensional identity
                         n mn
matrices. Then the following proposition holds:

Proposition 1 Consider a Markov-switching model whose law of motion can be described by
                                                                    P
(A41) and de…ne qti = E0 Zt 1 t =i for i = 1:::m. Then qtj = cj jt + m       i
                                                                     i=1 Aj qt 1 hji :

    It is then straightforward to compute expectations conditional on the information available
at a particular point in time. Suppose we are interested in t+sjt Et (Zt+s ), i.e. the expected
value for the vector Zt+s conditional on the information set available at time t. If we de…ne:
                                                           10            m0                   0
                                                 qt+sjt = qt+sjt ; :::; qt+sjt
       i                                                                i                           i
where qt+sjt = Et Zt+s 1        t =i
                                        = Et (Zt+s j       t   = i)     t+sjt ,   where             t+sjt          P(   t   = ijIt ), we have

                                                 t+sjt   = Et (Zt+s ) = wqt+sjt ;                                                             (A42)

where for s     1, qt+sjt evolves as:

                                               qt+sjt = C             t+sjt   + qt+s              1jt                                         (A43)
                                                t+sjt     = H         t+s 1jt                                                                 (A44)

                                                                      39
                    h                           i0
                        1               m
with    t+sjt   =       t+sjt ; :::;    t+sjt        ;      = bdiag (A1 ; :::; Am ) (H                   In ) ; and C               = bdiag (c1 ; :::; cm ) ;
                                                                                                                             mn m
where e.g., c1 is the n                1 vector of constants in regime 1,                                    represents the Kronecker product
and bdiag is a matrix operator that takes a sequence of matrices and use them to construct a
block diagonal matrix.
      Similar formulas hold for the second moments. Before proceeding, let us de…ne the vec-
torization operator ' (X) that takes the matrix X as an input and returns a column vector
stacking the columns of the matrix X on top of one another. We will also make use of the
following result: ' (X1 X2 X3 ) = (X30 X1 ) ' (X2 ).
      De…ne the vector n2 m                 1 column vector Qt as:
                                                                                                0
                                                                  Qt = Q10        m0
                                                                        t ; :::; Qt


where the n2             1 vector Qit is given by Qit = ' E0 Zt Zt0 1                                         t =i
                                                                                                                      . This implies that we can
compute the vectorized matrix of second moments Mt = ' [E0 (Zt Zt0 )] as:
                                                                                     Pm
                                            Mt = ' [E0 (Zt Zt0 )] =                      i=1   Qit = W Qt

where the matrix W = [In2 ; :::; In2 ] is obtained placing side by side m n2 -dimensional identity
matrices. We can then state the following proposition:

Proposition 2 Consider a Markov-switching model whose law of motion can be described
by (A41) and de…ne Qith = ' E0 Zt Zt0 1it =i ; qti =h E0 Zt 1 t =i ; and it =
                                                                            i P0 ( t = i) ; for
                 j           d             j   P  m  dj Q + DAC
i = 1:::m. Then Qt = cc bj + V V j ' [Ik ] t +       AA    i       \j q  i
                                                                                         bj =
                                                                             hji ; where cc                  t 1                 t 1
                                                                                     i=1

(cj            d
        cj ) ; V V j = (Vj                    dj = (Aj
                                       Vj ) ; AA                                      \j = (Aj
                                                                           Aj ) ; and DAC                               cj ) + (cj       Aj ) :

      It is then straightforward to compute the evolution of second moments conditional on the
                                                                                           0
information available at a particular point in time. Suppose we are interested in Et Zt+s Zt+s ,
i.e. the second moment of the vector Zt+s conditional on the information available at time t.
If we de…ne:
                                                                                                         0
                                                           Qt+sjt = Q10            m0
                                                                     t+sjt ; :::; Qt+sjt

where Qit+sjt = ' Et Zt+s Zt+s
                           0
                               1                         t =i
                                                                               0
                                                                  = ' Et Zt+s Zt+s j                t   =i           i
                                                                                                                     t+sjt ,
                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                               we obtain ' Et Zt+s Zt+s         =
W Qt+sjt :Using matrix algebra we obtain:

                                  Qt+sjt =                      Qt+s     1jt
                                                                                 \ t+s
                                                                               + DACq           1jt     + Vcc        t+sjt                           (A45)
                                   qt+sjt = C                    t+sjt   + qt+s      1jt ;     t+sjt    =H           t+s 1jt :                       (A46)

where
                                                                                   h         i
                        d1 ; :::; AA
                = bdiag(AA        dm )(H                               In2 ), Vcc = Vd    b ; cc
                                                                                      V + cc   b = bdiag(cc
                                                                                                         b 1 ; :::; cc
                                                                                                                    b m );
       d
       V           d
         V = bdiag(V                    d
                     V 1 ' [Ik ] ; :::; V               \ = bdiag(DAC
                                          V m ' [Ik ]); DAC       \1 ; :::; DAC
                                                                            \m )(H                                                                In ):

                                                                                40
   With the …rst and second moments at hand, it is then possible to compute the variance s
periods ahead conditional on the information available at time t:
                                                                                0
                               ' [Vt (Zt+s )] = Mt+sjt ' t+sjt                  t+sjt       ;                            (A47)
                                        P
where Mt+sjt                    0
                  = ' Et Zt+s Zt+s    = m        i
                                            i=1 Qt+sjt = W Qt+sjt :
       To report estimates of (A42) and (A47) we proceed as follows. Note that                          t+sjt   = Et (Zt+s ) =
wqt+sjt and Mt+sjt depend only on qt+sjt and Qt+sjt . Furthermore we can express (A43)-(A44)
and (A45)-(A46) in a compact form as
                                                   2                 3
                                                        \ VccH
                                                        DAC
                      et+sjt = e s Q
                      Q             etjt where e = 4           CH 5 ;                      (A48)
                                                                H
                h                     i0                                   h                i0
        e           0    0       0                                  e         0    0     0
where Qt+sjt = Qt+sjt ; qt+sjt ; t+sjt . Armed with starting values Qtjt = Qtjt ; qtjt ; tjt we
                                                                                      0
can then compute (A42) and (A47) using (A48). To obtain                               tjt       recall that we assume that
It includes knowledge of the regime in place at time t, the data up to time t; Z t , and the
VAR parameters for each regime. Given that we assume knowledge of the current regime,
 i
 tjt     P(   = ijIt ) can only assume two values, 0 or 1. As a result 0tjt will be (1; 0) or (0; 1). As
              t
                                     h            i0
                                 0
a result, and given Zt 2 It , qtjt      10
                                    = qtjt    20
                                           ; qtjt     with qtjt i
                                                                     Et (Zt j t = i) itjt , will be [Zt0 1; Zt0 0]0
                                             h               i0
or [Zt0 0; Zt0 1]0 . Analogously, Q0tjt = Q10     tjt ; Q20
                                                         tjt     with Qitjt    ' (Et (Zt Zt0 j t = i)) itjt will be
                                 0                                         0
 ' (Zt Zt0 1)0 ; ' (Zt Zt0 0)0       or ' (Zt Zt0 0)0 ; ' (Zt Zt0 1)0 .


Mean Square Stability
We consider the following MS-VAR model with n variables and m = 2 regimes:

                         Zt = c t + A1; t Zt     1   + A2; t Zt   2   + V t "t , "t         N (0; I)                     (A49)

where Zt is an n         1 vector of variables, c       t
                                                            is an n      1 vector of constants, Al;             t
                                                                                                                    for l = 1; 2
is an n       n matrix of coe¢ cients, V t V 0t is an n           n covariance matrix for the n                     1 vector of
shocks "t . The process t controls the regime that is in place at time t and evolves based on
the transition matrix H.
       When estimating the MS-VAR we require the model to be mean square stable. Mean square
stability is de…ned as follows:

De…nition 1 An n-dimensional process Zt is mean square stable if and only if there exists an
n-vector and an n2 -vector M such that:
    1) limt!1 E0 [Zt ] =
    2) limt!1 E0 [Zt Zt0 ] = M
for any initial Z0 and 0 .

                                                            41
   Mean-square-stability requires that …rst and second moments converge as the time horizon
goes to 1. Under the assumptions that the Markov-switching process t is ergodic and that
the innovation process "t is asymptotically covariance stationary, Costa, Fragoso, and Marques
(2004) show that a multivariate Markov-switching model as the one described by (A49) is mean-
square stable if and only if it is asymptotically covariance stationary. Both conditions hold for
the models studied in this paper and are usually veri…ed in economic models.
   Costa, Fragoso, and Marques (2004) show that in order to establish MSS of a process
such as the one described by (A49), it is enough to check MSS stability of the correspondent
homogeneous process: Zt = A t Zt 1 : In this case, formulas for the evolution of …rst and second
moments simplify substantially: qt = qt 1 and Qt = Qt 1 : Let r (X) be the operator that
given a square matrix X computes its largest eigenvalue. We then have:

Proposition 3 A Markov-switching process whose law of motion can be described by (A49) is
mean square stable if and only if r ( ) < 1.

   Mean square stability allows us to compute …nite measures of uncertainty as the time horizon
goes to in…nity. Mean square stability also implies that shocks do not have permanent e¤ects
on the variables included in the MSVAR.


Conditional Steady State
Consider a MS-VAR:
                                   Zt = c t + A t Zt      1   + V t "t

where Zt is a column vector containing n variables observable at time t and    t   = 1; :::; m, with
m the number of regimes, evolves following the transition matrix H. If the MS-VAR has more
than one lag, the companion form can be used to recast the model as illustrated above.
   The conditional steady state for the mean corresponds to the expected value for the vector
Zt conditional on being in a particular regime. This is computed by imposing that a certain
regime is in place forever:

                                                                     1
                                 Ei (Zt ) =   i   = (In       Ai )       ci                  (A50)

where In is an identity matrix with the appropriate size. Note that unless the VAR coe¢ cients
imply very slow moving dynamics, after a switch from regime j to regime i, the variables
of the VAR will converge (in expectation) to Ei (Zt ) over a …nite horizon. If there are no
further switches, we can then expect the variables to ‡uctuate around Ei (Zt ). Therefore, the
conditional steady states for the mean can also be thought as the values to which the variables
converge if regime i is in place for a long enough period of time.


                                                  42
    The conditional steady state for the standard deviation corresponds to the standard devi-
ation for the vector Zt conditional on being in a particular regime. The conditional standard
deviations for the elements in Zt are computed by taking the square root of the main diagonal
elements of the covariance matrix Vi (Zt ) obtained imposing that a certain regime is in place
forever:

                                                            1
                          ' (Vi (Zt )) = (In2   Ai   Ai )       ' V t V 0t              (A51)

where In2 is an identity matrix with the appropriate size,    denotes the Kronecker product,
and the vectorization operator ' (X) takes a matrix X as an input and returns a column vector
stacking the columns of the matrix X on top of one another.




                                                43
